IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024 2633

 Secure Attack Detection Framework for Hierarchical
 6G-Enabled Internet of Vehicles
 Hichem Sedjelmaci , Member, IEEE, Nesrine Kaaniche , Aymen Boudguiga,
 and Nirwan Ansari , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The Sixth Generation Heterogeneous Network (6G
HetNet) is a global interconnected system that serves a myriad
variety of applications and services across multiple domains such
as satellite, air, ground, and underwater networks. It provides a
platform for the development of novel Internet of Things (IoT)
applications and services, particularly for the Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), which encompasses all devices involved in intra-vehicle and
inter-vehicle communications. However, this evolution towards a
unified and huge cellular infrastructure creates new security challenges that require an intelligent attack detection framework to
safeguard the network against cyber-security threats. This article
proposes a hierarchical attack detection framework for 6G-enabled
IoV. This framework relies on the processing capacities of edge
nodes to satisfy the main 6G Key Performance Indicators (KPIs),
such as trustworthiness, latency, connectivity, data rate and energy consumption. Federated Learning (FL) and non-cooperative
gaming are used to train attack models and improve the detection
process over time. The cooperative detection process based on FL is
executed by security entities, IoV devices, edge servers and Security
Information and Event Management (SIEM) to improve the detection accuracy over time. To harden the security of the proposed
attack detection framework, a robust Stackelberg security game
is developed to identify malicious IoV devices and edge servers,
and select suitable IoV devices and edge servers to participate in
the training and attack detection processes. The identification and
selection process mainly relies on computing a reputation score Fig. 1. Architecture of 6G Enabled Networks.
based on the activities of these IoV devices and edge servers. As
compared to current security monitoring and detection solutions,
our framework balances detection accuracy and reduced network
overhead, specifically as the system scales up, i.e., when the ma- satellite and underwater networks, as presented in Fig. 1. As
licious traffic is high. In addition, it mitigates threats from both such the 6G network will encompass the following heterogeexternal and internal adversaries.
 neous domains: a) The underwater network will interconnect
 Index Terms—6G, Internet of Vehicles (IoV), Federated underwater devices such as wireless sensor nodes, underwater
Learning (FL), Stackelberg Game, Intrusion and attacks detection. drones and submarines [1], [2], [3]. b) The ground network will
 interconnect static and mobile nodes such as industry 5.0 sen-
 I. INTRODUCTION sors, actuators and processes, smart meters, and vehicles. These
 ELECOMMUNICATION operators envision the 6G Het- distributed IoT devices will use TeraHertz (THz) and millimeter
T Net architecture to extend the 5G network by adding Wave (mmWave) communications [2]. c) The air network will
 interconnect flying devices, such as airplanes, Unmanned Aerial
 Manuscript received 10 November 2022; revised 18 April 2023 and 30 June Vehicles (UAVs) and drones [1], [4]. To prevent disconnections
2023; accepted 16 September 2023. Date of publication 22 September 2023; date and hence reduce the end-end network delay, the flying devices
of current version 13 February 2024. The review of this article was coordinated will establish wireless communication links with the devices
by Dr. Qing Yang. (Corresponding author: Hichem Sedjelmaci.)
 Hichem Sedjelmaci is with Ericsson R&D Security, 91300 Massy Palaiseau, deployed in the underwater and ground areas. d) The satellite
France (e-mail: hichem.sedjelmaci@ericsson.com). network will offer a variety of safety and infotainment ser-
 Nesrine Kaaniche is with SAMOVAR Télécom SudParis, Institut Polytech- vices such as weather forecast, system navigation and television
nique de Paris, 91120 Palaisea, France (e-mail: kaaniche.nesrine@telecomsudparis.eu). broadcasting. The main purpose of incorporating the satellite
 Aymen Boudguiga is with the Université Paris-Saclay CEA-List, 91120 network in the 6G architecture is to enhance data broadcasting
Palaiseau, France (e-mail: Aymen.Boudguiga@cea.fr). and forwarding at a large scale, while guaranteeing a high and
 Nirwan Ansari is with the Advanced Networking Lab., New Jersey Institute
of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102 USA (e-mail: nirwan.ansari@njit.edu). reliable quality of service in a disaster-recovery communications
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2023.3317940 network [5].
 0018-9545 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 Some recent works have already discussed the main building networks in terms of attack detection accuracy and network
blocks of the 6G architecture [3], [6], [7]. Letaief et al. [7] intro- overhead.
duced a roadmap for 6G deployment and a set of AI-enabled use The remainder of this article is organized are follows. Seccases for 6G, targeting mainly QoS improvement. Gui et al. [3] tion II reviews the related works and introduces security and
described four communication services that will be supported functional requirements and Section III details the adversary
by the 6G architecture: Massive Low Latency Machine Type model. Section IV presents the proposed intrusion detection
communication (MLLMT), Mobile Broad Bandwidth and Low framework. Section V discusses the implementation results of
Latency communication (MBBLL), Massive Broad Bandwidth the IoV use case before concluding in Section VI.
Machine Type communication (MBBMT) and 6G-Lite. 6G-Lite
is dedicated for Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems II. CYBER SECURITY IN 6G WIRELESS NETWORKS
(C-ITS) and Internet of Vehicles (IoV). Mao et al. [6] highlighted the main characteristics of 6G-enabled IoT applications. In this section, we present state-of-the-art security solutions
Note that in this work, we will be considering the use-case to protect the 6G network from attackers. The advantage and
of 6G-enabled Internet of Vehicles (IoV) as a particular sce- weakness of each solution is highlighted.
nario of IoT. [6] investigated and analysed the use of Machine
Learning (ML) algorithms for adapting radio resources from A. Application and Data Levels
high-frequency bands to short-range ones. Li et al. [2] conceived a blockchain solution to secure the AI
 As it will interconnect a huge number of heterogeneous applications of the 6G network from tampering threats using
devices and transport an ever-growing amount of data, the a reputation metric. This solution relies on four components:
6G architecture will raise new cyber-security challenges. For distributed edge servers, a blockchain module, a trusted entity,
example, new breaches originating from the malicious use of and users’ equipment. These components cooperate together to
virtualization functions targeting network functions employed prevent external attacks. Mousa et al. [14] proposed an authenfor QoS improvement [8]. Indeed, 6G threats will target the tication scheme based on robust public key encryption to secure
edge intelligence and intelligent network management [9] (e.g., the 6G wireless network from external attacks, such as man
threats related to critical infrastructures and SDN/NFV) via the in the middle and spoofing attacks. The user equipment, base
adoption of old attacks such as Denial of Services (DoS), man in station, and authentication server run the authentication protocol
the middle, or deception attacks [10]. Fortunately, integrating AI and only the authenticated equipment is allowed to join the
models by design in 6G will not only enhance network manage- network. In the security analysis, they proved that their scheme
ment capabilities but will also serve to provide self-monitoring is robust against network attacks, while being lightweight.
and self-healing from new threats [11]. In fact, by pushing AI Li et al. [15] developed an efficient edge caching system for 6G
elements the closest possible to data-owners or devices to reduce architecture to thwart attacks targeting data confidentiality. This
latency, 6G will indirectly provide a way to integrate efficiently caching system relies on physical layer security mechanisms
intrusion detection systems using deep or collaborative learning. and a probabilistic caching model. Although the aforementioned
 AI-based intrusion detection systems in practice often rely on security mechanisms [2], [14], [15] are robust against external
hybrid detection techniques [12], [13]. These systems combine threats, they fail to detect internal attacks, such as infected virtual
detection rules (i.e., signatures) defined by security experts and networking functions, and compromised fog and cloud servers.
machine learning techniques such as deep learning, reinforcement learning and Federated Learning (FL) [13]. As compared
to conventional attack detection techniques, AI-based intrusion B. Network Level
detection systems can potentially identify unknown attacks with Stergiou et al. [16] presented a novel approach to protect 6G
high accuracy, and reduce the number of false positives and false wireless networks from attacks targeting IoT, cloud computing,
negatives. In this article, we propose a novel attack detection and fog devices. They have proposed a data management mechaframework specifically designed for hierarchical 6G networks, nism that employs a cache decision system to reduce end-to-end
with a focus on the IoV use-case. Our framework relies on latency and ensure energy efficiency. This system is monitored
two levels of FL involving a set of distributed IoV devices and by both centralized cloud and distributed edge servers, to detect
edge servers, and a centralized security system (e.g.,Security and prevent known attacks through different edge points. On
Information and Event Management (SIEM)). The goal of our the other hand, Liu et al. [17] applied FL algorithms in 6G
framework is to detect both internal and external attacks on the communications to address privacy concerns. They introduced
IoV network, while satisfying the main 6G Key Performance three defense modules: an aggregation algorithm to collabo-
Indicators (KPIs), which include latency, connectivity degree, ratively aggregate updates, a reputation framework to select
energy consumption, and data rate. Furthermore, to improve the relevant and honest entities, and a detection system. However,
detection rate, both IoV devices and edge servers run a security their solution has not been evaluated through simulations. Mao
game based on the Stackelberg approach. This non-cooperative et al. [6] developed an intrusion detection system that uses
game involves a leader (i.e., a security agent) and a follower (i.e., Kalman filters to detect attackers that target the energy consumpan attacker), and only allows trusted IoV devices and trusted tion of IoT devices. They assessed the trade-off between energy
edge servers to participate in network monitoring. According to consumption and quality of service, and demonstrated that their
experimental results, our framework outperforms state-of-the- simulated solution ensures low computation overhead and high
art solutions for intrusion detection solutions in 6G wireless network throughput. Nevertheless, their detection system has
SEDJELMACI et al.: SECURE ATTACK DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR HIERARCHICAL 6G-ENABLED INTERNET OF VEHICLES 2635

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON AMONG DIFFERENT CYBERSECURITY SOLUTIONS FOR 6G-ENABLED IOT APPLICATIONS

not been evaluated against attacks that occur in constrained IoT driving the implementation of mission-critical applications in
networks, namely, targeting connectivity and network latency. 6G-enabled IoV, as explained in [1]. Furthermore, given dif-
Finally, Zhou et al. [18] addressed task offloading in the context ferent personalized needs of vehicles for computing-intensive
of 6G networks. They have proposed a multi-layer solution that applications, how to utilize heterogeneous computing resources
provides efficient data computation and transmission, and secure in 6G networks to ensure personalized QoE for vehicles has
computation services at the user’s side. Their approach includes become a challenge. In the context of 6G edge computing
a quantitative security analysis model to assess the trust level of offloading, QoE depends on the computation overhead. The
the task offloading model implemented by user equipment. proposed security architecture utilizes QoE to address the security concerns associated with offloading and computation tasks.
C. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Furthermore, the trustworthiness of the edge nodes and IoV
 devices is taken into consideration during the offloading and
 Table I presents a comparison among the current cyber secucomputation process. The QoE metric is inherently integrated
rity solutions applied in the 6G architecture in terms of attack
 into the task offloading procedure, in conjunction with the trust
detection performances and their impact on the main 6G KPIs.
 metric that reflects the level of trust for both the IoV device and
In the following, we highlight the main considered 6G KPIs and
 the edge server.
examples of attacks impacting those KPIs.
 r Energy: Various network attacks can target energyconstrained devices in a 6G network. The resource exhaus- III. SECURITY MODEL
 tion attack is an example of these attacks, which consists In this work, we consider a Dolev and Yao attacker model [20].
 of forcing the victim device to perform computationally That is, the attacker is able to Read, Drop and Send valid
 expensive tasks that leads to its energy depletion. messages. A Read action refers to receiving or intercepting
 r Connectivity degree: The connectivity degree is considered messages. Meanwhile, a Send action refers to forging and reas a main KPI of MBBMT services because the distributed playing messages. A Drop action refers to filtering. In practice,
 IoT devices in MBBMT require a massive connectivity in we consider two types of adversaries defined as follows:
 order to share and process a huge amount of data [6]. Mao r External adversaries — malicious entities that seek to
 et al. [6] noticed that positioning accuracy could be one of hijack main security properties such as data confidentiality
 the parameters used to enhance the quality of connectivity or integrity, as well as network service availability. They
 in the 6G network. However, positioning accuracy can be may also include other form of attacks, such as the one
 the target of GPS spoofing attack [19]. aiming to deteriorate the featured 6G KPIs, by increasing
 r Network Latency: Intelligent transportation systems such latency, exhausting network resources, generating overas vehicular ad-hoc network and drones network are ones of head, or increasing the energy footprint (e.g., altering the
 the 6G-Lite scenarios, where the latency is a main KPI. Re- signal strength intensities). Examples of external attacks
 mote cyber-attacks can target network latency by infecting include DoS, man in the middle, black hole, eavesdropping
 mobile devices (such as automotive and drone nodes). Once and poisoning. Some of these attacks can be targeting 6G
 infected, they start running unnecessary computations and virtualisation functions, network configuration modules
 sharing extra information which increases the end-to end and AI algorithms for QoS management.
 network latency. r Internal adversaries — malicious IoV devices and malir Data rate: Augmented reality and virtual reality are main cious edge servers. Legitimate devices can become ma-
 MBBLL applications of 6G-enabled IoT network. To licious after the installation of a malware or a fake
 achieve a high quality of service and high quality of update. Once infected, malicious devices will target netexperience, the data rate and latency should be taken work configuration and ML configuration [9]. In addition,
 into account [6]. However, attacks such as Black Hole they can start misbehaving by dropping neighbours packets
 and Selective forwarding attacks drop relevant network and injecting malicious messages.
 packets, thus leading to a rapid decrease of data rate, and Both external and internal adversaries are capable of exesubsequently causing an increase on the network latency. cuting known and unknown attacks. In a known attack, the
 Several other KPIs are important in the context of the Internet adversary exhibits a known malicious action defined by an
of Vehicles (IoV). In addition to energy, connectivity, latency, attack signature. They refer to the security threats that have
and data rate, the Quality of Experience (QoE) is another indictor already been identified within the security community. In this
2636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 r IoV devices are denoted by D. Two kinds of IoV devices
 are defined, Cluster Member (CM) and Cluster Head (CH)
 devices. Each CH manages a set of CMs, and is elected by
 different members, according to its performances indicators and its Maliciousness Degree (MD). For more details
 on how to compute the MD for the IoV network, we refer
 readers to Reference [21]. The MD and aforementioned
 6G’s KPIs are the main selectors for the CH’s election. For
 example, the device that exhibits a low MD (as compared
 to its neighboring devices), while considering the 6G’s
 KPIs will be elected as CH. The latter runs the hierarchical
 FL-security framework (as explained in Section IV-A.2) to
 detect the malicious CM, located within its neighborhood.
 When a malicious CM is detected, an Alert message is
 sent from the monitoring CH to SIEM (through the edge
 server) for further investigation. This Alert message con-
Fig. 2. FL-based defense architecture. tains the identity of the malicious CM, and the values of its
 KPIs. Note that the CH could also act as a malicious device.
 Consequently, to overcome this security issue, CM devices
context, known attacks may include traditional attack vectors,
 monitor the behavior of their CH by running a rule-based
such as malware, phishing, denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, and
 attack detection technique. In our security architecture as
ransomware. However, in an unknown attack, also known as a
 illustrated in Fig. 2, the CH responsible for managing its
zero-day exploit attack, the adversary launches an attack that has
 set of cluster members is ideally located within the range
not been executed before (i.e., new malicious action) or at least
 of an edge server. However, in cases when the CH is not
has not reported yet. These attacks are often more difficult to
 within the range of the edge server, a cluster head election
defend against because there is no existing knowledge for them.
 is launched to select a new CH close to the edge (i.e., a
To protect against unknown attacks, the security model should
 device that has a high connectivity degree). Furthermore,
include measures for identifying and responding to security the device with a lower malicious degree (as compared to
incidents. By addressing both known and unknown attacks in
 its neighboring devices), while taking into account the 6G’s
the security model, we establish a proactive approach to securing
 KPIs, particularly the connectivity degree, will be elected
the system against a range of potential threats.
 as the new CH.
 r Edge Server is denoted by E. It is a powerful device that
 IV. DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR HIERARCHICAL IOV monitors the behavior of CH located within its range. It
 NETWORKS IN THE 6G ERA also analyzes the Alert messages received from the CH
 In this section, we propose a cyber-detection framework for device to confirm or refute the malicious behaviors of
the 6G network. It prevents the occurrence of internal and suspected CM devices. The edge device runs an attack
external threats, e.g., attacks targeting wireless communica- detection technique using the FL algorithm (as explained in
tions and private data. The proposed framework leverages a Section IV-A.2). The edge server sends a Report message
collaborative monitoring and detection performed by security to SIEM for further investigation in order to provide final
entities deployed in a hierarchical way within the network. In decisions (i.e., confirm or reject the malicious behavior of
the following subsections, we first introduce the considered a suspected CM and CH). This Report message contains
architecture by presenting the involved entities and detailing the identities of suspected CHs and CMs, and their related
the attack detection process (Section IV-A). Then, we present a KPIs and MDs.
 r SIEM is denoted by S. It is a trusted cloud server that
new trust model based on a non-cooperative game (relying on
the Stackelberg security game) for the detection of non-trusted monitors the behaviors of distributed edge servers to detect
security entities (Section IV-B). malicious ones. In addition, it analyzes the Alert and
 Report messages to verify the malicious behaviors of
 suspected CMs and CHs. First, S performs the aggregation
A. Architecture process, which consists of aggregating all the relevant
 Our solution applies federated learning between all the in- information (MDs and KPIs) related to suspected Es, CHs
volved security entities to train attack detection models to detect and CMs. Then, the updated values of MDs and KPIs are
malicious behaviors at different levels of the network architec- used as inputs for the FL algorithm to accurately detect
ture. malicious Es, CHs and CMs.
 1) Entities: Our solution relies on three types of security 2) Hierarchical FL-Security Framework Workflow: FL inentities for securing the network from attackers: IoV devices, troduced by Google in 2016 [22], is a collaborative machine
edge devices and a Security Information and Event Manage- learning approach that enables multiple clients to collectively
ment (SIEM), as illustrated in Fig. 2. These entities collaborate train a shared model without revealing their sensitive local data
together during the monitoring and detection process as follows: to a central aggregation server. In FL, each client trains its own
SEDJELMACI et al.: SECURE ATTACK DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR HIERARCHICAL 6G-ENABLED INTERNET OF VEHICLES 2637

machine learning model locally by using its own data. After- a symmetric encryption scheme and a signature mechanism
wards, the resulting model weights are transmitted to an aggre- to ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the exchanged
gation server. The server then combines all the clients’ models, data between devices. We rely on the Advanced Encryption
typically by averaging their weights. Finally, the updated global Standard (AES) as a symmetric encryption scheme, which is
model is distributed back to all the clients. This iterative training a well-established block-cipher. The communicating parties
process is repeated multiple times. FL is intriguing because within the same cluster share the same encryption key k. Before
it safeguards the confidentiality of clients’ sensitive data by sharing data with CH, each cluster member CMl encrypts
keeping them undisclosed. Moreover, it allows for the expansion them as Cl = EncAES (Dl , k) where l = {1, . . . , m }, m is
of the training dataset since the dataset for training the global the number of CMs whithin a particular cluster, and Dl is the
model can be perceived as an aggregation of all the clients’ collected data by CMl . Then, the enciphered data Cl will be
datasets. FL has found effective applications in various domains, signed by CMl , using an asymmetric encryption scheme such
such as facilitating collaborative training of disease detection as Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) [23]
models among hospitals without exposing patient health data and its private key denoted by skCMl . The resulting signature
or enabling security companies to collaborate on training threat is σCMl . A lightweight alternative to the signature is computdetection models while maintaining the privacy of their attack ing a Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) on Cl .
repositories and logs. Computing HMAC requires sharing a symmetric key between
 We present in this section our FL-based framework for intru- CMl and CH. The edge level includes different edge servers
sion detection in a hierarchical 6G-IoV network (Fig. 2). Es connected to the SIEM. Es share models’ updates and relay
 The FL algorithm based on an unsupervised approach is Alert and Report messages that include sensitive informadivided into three phases: clustering, training and detection. tion that can enable external adversaries to conduct various
During the clustering process, a trusted and reliable CH device attacks [24], [25] such as membership inference attacks, reconis elected based on the monitored MDs and KPIs. It corresponds struction and inversion attacks, etc. To mitigate these issues, our
to the CM that presents a low MD with interesting KPIs (i.e., framework proposes the same combination of encryption and
low energy consumption and network latency; high connectivity signatures schemes, as in the IoV level, applied at each edge
degree and data rate). The elected CHs share their training server E. This combination guarantees the confidentiality and
models and the list of malicious CMs with their neighboring integrity of exchanged data.
edge server. For the training process, we assume that, at time t,
all the CHs and their associated CMs possess the same global B. Stackelberg Game for the Detection of Non-Trusted Devices
training model ψt , which is also shared with the edge servers.
We denote by: The proposed framework relies on a Stackelberg security
 r ψti the global model at E, where i = {1, . . . , m} and m is game [26] to identify malicious CHs and Es. It is a nonthe total number of involved edge servers, cooperative game between the leader player (a security agent)
 r ψtj the global model at CH, where j = {1, . . . , m } and and the follower player (an opponent agent, i.e., attacker) [26].
 m is the number of CHs located within the range of each The principle of the Stackelberg security game entails the leader
 edge server. player aiming to detect the maximum number of opponent
 First, each CH gathers data from its associated CMs. Then, agents, and the follower player setting to launch attacks without
 j
it trains a local model ψt+1 . Next, CH uploads its local training being detected by the security agents.
 j 1) Security Game Definition: As detailed in Section IV, the
model ψt+1 ’s updates to the edge server E. E aggregates the local
 CH is elected based on its MD and KPIs. However, the MD value
training models of its CHs to obtain the updated global training
 i i can be altered and cannot be considered as reliable. Thereby, to
model ψt+1 . Afterwards, S receives the ψt+1 ’s updates from
 elect the most trusted CHs and edge servers E, two security
Es, and aggregates them to obtain a global model. The latter is
 games are set-up: (i) E and CH play respectively the roles of
also trained with S’s local data to obtain the final global model
 leader and follower players, where the goal of the leader is to
ψt+1 . At the end of this iteration, ψt+1 is shared with all the
 detect the non-trusted CH, and (ii) the SIEM S and edge server E
framework’s entities.
 play respectively the roles of leader and follower players, where
 During the detection phase, the updated training model ψt+1
 the goal of the leader is to detect the non-trusted server.
(i.e., anomaly detection model) is used by CHs and E to detect CH E
 The Stackelberg security games are denoted by: {θ(i,t) , θ(i,t) ,
malicious behaviors and monitor their respective targets. Alert E S
and Report messages are sent to S for further investigation and θ(i,t) , θ(i,t) }, where i ∈ {1, . . . , I} and I is the maximum num-
 CH E E S
verification. ber of iterations considered in the game; θ(i,t) , θ(i,t) , θ(i,t) , θ(i,t)
 The proposed framework consists of a two-layer system that correspond to the follower CH, the leader edge E, the follower
gathers heterogeneous entities with different trust levels. The edge E, and the leader SIEM S, respectively.
IoV layer involves several groups of CMs, where each group In the following, we denote by φ1i (t), φ2i (t), φ3i (t) and φ4i (t),
is managed by a selected CH, as explained in Section IV. The the number of malicious entities and i is the ith iteration of the
exchanged data flows between CMs and CH include sensitive game: φ1i (t) is the number of malicious CHs that are located in
information such as logs information, alerts, etc..., that may the neighborhood of leader edge server E, φ2i (t) corresponds to
expose the vulnerabilities of the vehicles’ devices. In order the number of malicious CHs detected by leader edge server,
to avoid this issue, our framework proposes a combination of φ3i (t) is the number of malicious edge servers that are located
2638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

in the neighborhood of leader SIEM S, φ4i (t) is the number of Similar to E, we, hereafter, express both the reward and the cost
malicious edge servers detected by the leader SIEM. of the SIEM S, as follows:
 In addition, we refer to the pure strategies of the differ- S S
 R(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)) = D(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
ent leader and follower players by Si1 (t), Si2 (t), Si3 (t) and
Si4 (t), where i is the ith iteration of the game. These strate- S
 − [F(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
gies are represented by Si1 (t) = s1i (t) ∈ φ1i (t), Si2 (t) = s2i (t) ∈
 S
φ2i (t), Si3 (t) = s3i (t) ∈ φ3i (t) and Si4 (t) = s4i (t) ∈ φ4i (t), where + F(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))], (5)
s1i (t), s2i (t), s3i (t) and s4i (t) correspond respectively to a mali- S S
 C(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)) = α3 .O(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
cious behavior executed by a CH node, a malicious CH detected
by E, a malicious behavior executed by an edge server, and a S
 − α4 .O(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)), (6)
malicious edge server detected by S.
 S S S
 To evaluate the success of different security games, we con- D(i,t) , F(i,t) and F(i,t) ∈ [0, 1] correspond respectively to the
sider p1i as the probability of follower CH adopting the strategy detection rate of a malicious edge server, false positive rate and
 S
s1i (t), p2i as the probability of the leader edge adopting the false negative rate. C(i,t) ∈ [0, 1] is the required computation
strategy s2i (t), p3i as the probability of the follower E adopting the and communication overheads to accurately detect the malicious
strategy s3i (t), and p4i as the probability of the leader S adopt- behaviors of edge server, where α3 , α4 ∈ [0, 1]. In the following,
   we denote by F and L the follower and the leader players,
ing the strategy s4i (t). Note that Ii=1 p1i = 1, Ii=1 p2i = 1,
I I respectively.
 i=1 pi = 1, and i=1 pi = 1.
 3 4
 F
 2) Utility: The utility functions of the leader and follower U(i,t) F
 (SiF (t), SiL (t)) = R(i,t) (SiF (t), SiL (t))
players depend on their rewards and required costs. Leaders’
 F
rewards correspond to the detection accuracy of both mali- − C(i,t) (SiF (t), SiL (t)), (7)
cious CHs and Es, and the leaders’ costs are the amounts of
 Here, SiF (t) could be either Si1 (t) or Si3 (t), while SiL (t) could
computation and communication overheads required by leader
 be either Si2 (t) or Si4 (t).
players to reach a high detection accuracy. Followers’ rewards
are the attacks success rates of both malicious CHs and Es, while E
 RF = CH(i,t) = − R(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)), (8)
followers’ costs are the required computation overhead required
by both malicious CHs and Es to initiate attacks without being
 S
 RF = E(i,t) = − R(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)), (9)
detected by leaders. The utility functions of leader and follower F
 C(i,t) F
 (SiF (t), SiL (t)) = β.O(i,t) (SiF (t), SiL (t)), (10)
players are defined in (1), (4), and (7), respectively.
 F
 E
 U(i,t) E
 (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) = R(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) where O(i,t) is the computed overhead generated by a malicious
 follower player (i.e., either a malicious CH or a malicious E) to
 E
 − C(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)), (1) execute malicious behaviors without being detected by the leader
 E E
 player (i.e., edge server E or SIEM S). Note that β ∈ [0, 1] is
where R(i,t) and C(i,t) correspond to the reward and the gen- the weight parameter.
erated cost of the leader edge server, respectively, which are 3) Stackelberg Security Equilibrium Solution: In order to
computed according to (2). reach an equilibrium, we first recall that the strategies of leader
 E S
 E
 R(i,t) E
 (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) = D(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) players, θ(i,t) and θ(i,t) , depend on the strategies of follower
 CH E
 E players, θ(i,t) and θ(i,t) , at each iteration i and subsequent
 − [F(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) iterations I, and vice-versa. Thus, as shown in [27], the Stackel-
 E berg equilibrium is determined, recursively. The optimal utility
 + F(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t))], (2)
 functions of the players at the equilibrium point are defined as
 E E E
D(i,t) is the detection rate of malicious CH, and F(i,t) and F(i,t) min and max functions below.
correspond respectively to the false positive and false negative ∗E
 U(i,t) (Si∗2 (t), Si∗1 (t)) = max min E
 Q1 .U(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)),
rates against a legitimate CH, calculated by the edge server. Note pi
 2 1 pi
 E E E
that D(i,t) , F(i,t) and F(i,t) ∈ [0, 1]. (11)
 E E
 C(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) = α1 .O(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) ∗S
 U(i,t) (Si∗4 (t), Si∗3 (t)) = max min S
 Q2 .U(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)),
 p4i p3i
 E
 − α2 .O(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)), (3) (12)
OE and OE are respectively the computation and communi- ∗F
 U(i,t) F
 (Si∗F (t), Si∗L (t)) = max min QF .U(i,t) (SiF (t), SiL (t)),
cation overheads generated by the edge server to detect accu- pF
 i pLi

rately the malicious behaviors of a monitored CH. Note that (13)
 E
C(i,t) ∈ [0, 1] and the weights α1 and α2 are in [0,1].
 where Q1 = p2i .p1i and Q2 = p4i .p3i . In (13), when SiF (t) is
 S
 U(i,t) S
 (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)) = R(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)) Si1 (t), SiL (t) will be Si2 (t). Hence, pF 1 L
 i = pi , pi = pi and Q =
 2 F
 F L
 pi .pi = Q . In addition, when Si (t) is Si (t), Si (t) will be
 1 2 1 3
 S
 − C(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)), (4) Si4 (t). Hence, pF 3 L 4 F
 i = pi , pi = pi and Q = pi .pi = Q .
 3 4 2
SEDJELMACI et al.: SECURE ATTACK DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR HIERARCHICAL 6G-ENABLED INTERNET OF VEHICLES 2639

 The total utility functions of the leader and follower players
 Algorithm 1: Algorithm for Detection of Non-Trusted Deare computed as shown in (14)–(16).
 vices (CH and Edge Server E).
 UTE otal (Si2 (t), Si1 (t))
  I
 
 ∗E
 =Q . 1
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗2 (t + 1), Si∗1 (t + 1))
 i=1
 I
 
 
 E
 + U(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) , (14)
 i=1

 U S T otal (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
  I
 
 ∗S
 =Q . 2
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗4 (t + 1), Si∗3 (t + 1))
 i=1
 I
 
 
 S
 + U(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)) , (15)
 i=1

 UTFotal (SiF (t), SiL (t))
  I
 
 F ∗F
 =Q . U(i,t+1) (Si∗F (t + 1), Si∗L (t + 1))
 i=1
 I
 
 
 F
 + U(i,t) (SiF (t), SiL (t)) , (16)
 i=1
 E S
As shown in (17) and (18), the leader players, θ(i,t) and θ(i,t) ,
aim to maximize their total utility functions, while considering
the best responses from follower players (as defined in (16)).
 ∀S  i (t), ∀p i , max UTE otal (Si2 (t), S  i (t))
 1 1 1
 min
 1
 (17)
 2 pi pi

such that:  I
 
  I ≤Q . 2 ∗S
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗4 (t + 1), Si∗3 (t + 1))
 
 ∗E
 Q .1
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗2 (t + 1), Si∗1 (t + 1)) i=1
 i=1 I
 
 
 I
  + S
 U(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
 
 E
 + U (i,t) (Si (t), Si (t))
 2 1 i=1
 i=1
  I where Q2 = p4i .p 3i and p 3i ≥ p3i .
  In this Stackelberg security game, the leader players, θ(i,t) E
 ≤ Q1 . ∗E
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗2 (t + 1), Si∗1 (t + 1)) S
 i=1
 and θ(i,t) , aim to determine the optimal strategies of follower
 I
  CH
 players, θ(i,t) E
 and θ(i,t) , defined as Si∗1 (t) and Si∗3 (t) by solving
 
 E
 + U(i,t) (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) (17) and (18).
 i=1
 Non-cooperative games are considered between the follower
 and leader players, since the leader players aim to maximize
 1
where Q = p2i .p 1i and p 1i ≥ p1 i . their utility functions, while minimizing the utility functions
 of their opponents (i.e., malicious CH and malicious edge
 ∀S  i (t), ∀p i , max UTS otal (Si4 (t), S  i (t))
 3 3 3
 min (18)
 4 pi
 3
 p i server E), and vice-versa. The goal of the leader players,
 E S
 θ(i,t) and θ(i,t) , is to predict the future strategies of malisuch that:
  I cious CH and malicious edge server E, defined as Si∗1 (t) and
  Si∗3 (t). Therefore, as shown in Algorithm 1, the CH and edge
 ∗S
 Q .2
 U(i,t+1) (Si∗4 (t + 1), Si∗3 (t + 1))
 server are categorized as non-trusted devices when their utility
 i=1
  functions, UTE otal (Si2 (t), Si1 (t)) and UTS otal (Si4 (t), Si3 (t)), reach
 I
 
 S maxp2i minp 1i UTE otal (Si2 (t), S  1i (t)) and maxp4i minp 3i UTS otal
 + U(i,t) (Si4 (t), Si3 (t))
 i=1 (Si4 (t), S  3i (t)), respectively. In this case, the malicious CH and
2640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 Fig. 4. Robustness of the proposed framework.

 Fig. 5. Detection accuracy of the proposed framework.

 A. Simulation Results
 For our experiments, we simulate a set of distributed devices
 that play the role of IoV nodes (e.g., ground vehicles, drones and
 underwater vehicles). The total number of distributed devices
 is equal to 40 nodes. At the beginning of our simulation, we
 randomly set the values of the main KPIs (e.g., data rate, latency,
 energy consumption, and connectivity degree).
 The FL algorithm trains a feed-forward neural network with
 47 inputs and 2 hidden layers, each with 20 and 10 neurons,
 respectively. The considered loss function is the cross-entropy.
 The number of iterations for FL training varies from 5 to 50
 iterations. The learning rate is equal to 0.01. The batches sizes
Fig. 3. Flowchart of the attack detection process. of CH, edge server E and the SIEM S are equal respectively to
 5, 30 and 60. We used the network attack data set introduced
 in [28], which includes nine types of network attacks and one
 normal traffic behavior. This data set contains 175341 training
malicious edge server E will be deprecated from the network, and and 82332 testing records. It corresponds to the real IoT attacks
only the trusted devices (CHs and edge servers) will afterwards that may be performed against the radio access network (for
participate in the monitoring and attack detection process. example, of a 6G network).
 Fig. 3 illustrates the interaction between the hierarchical Relevant features and data points used for training the model
security framework and the security game to accurately detect and inferencing are extracted from the network attack data
malicious IoV devices and malicious edge servers. set [28]. Basically, the main features used during the training
 and attack detection process include the total source bytes,
 destination bytes, the number of source packets, the number
 of destination packets, protocol types, the number of packets
 V. CASE STUDY dropped and forwarded, the number of normal and abnormal
 The 6G-enabled IoV network involves a set of underwater, records, and the number of unique source/destination IP adunderground and air sub-networks as described in Fig 1. The dresses.
IoV network is characterized by the high mobility of IoV de- 1) Stackelberg Security Game: As illustrated in Fig. 4, we
vices. Main KPIs of IoV are the latency, the data rate and the analyze the security performance of the proposed detection
connectivity degree [3]. framework with and without activating the Stackelberg security
SEDJELMACI et al.: SECURE ATTACK DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR HIERARCHICAL 6G-ENABLED INTERNET OF VEHICLES 2641

Fig. 6. Hierarchical vs Centralized detection framework.

game. Specifically, we compute the robustness metric, which is where the follower CH launches an attack, and the leader
defined as the attack detection rate minus the false positive rate. edge detects this attack; or when the follower edge server runs
The duration of the game varies from 2 seconds to 10 seconds, an attack and the leader SIEM detects this malicious behavduring which the leader and follower players interact between ior. In addition, our cooperative attack detection is improved
each other to increase their utility functions and decrease the by the inputs of the different devices at different hierarchical
utility function of their opponents. The leader players aims to levels.
determine the optimal strategies for each follower player and 4) Computation Overheads: As shown in Fig. 6(c), we vary
execute their specific strategies to increase their utility functions the amount of malicious traffic from 10% to 45% and analyze
over time. At the end of each game duration, we compute the computation overhead generated by our proposed solution
the mean value of the robustness metric by summing up the and the centralized detection frameworks from the state-ofrobustness values of the leader players and dividing it by the the-art [15], [16]. As illustrated in Fig. 6(c), the centralized
total number of leader players. It is apparent from Fig. 4 that detection framework requires a high computation overhead to
by activating the proposed Stackelberg game to monitor the achieve a high accuracy detection, specifically when the amount
suspected devices and hence detect the non-trusted devices, of malicious traffic is close to 45%. This is mainly due to huge
the mean robustness metric increases, specifically when the amount of data collected at the centralized node (e.g., SIEM) to
game duration reaches 10 seconds. This is in contrast the case carry out the training and attack detection process. However, in
where the Stackelberg security game is not activated, which our proposed solution, a low computation overhead is required
results in a high false positive rate against the legitimate follower to prevent the occurrence of internal and external adversaries.
players (CHs and Es). Indeed, to accelerate the attack detection process at the IoV and
 2) Detection Accuracy: We define the detection accuracy as edge levels, two detection layers (at IoV devices, edge devices
the metric, computed by dividing the number of trusted IoV and SIEM) are combined together.
clusters by the total number of IoV clusters. The trusted IoV
clusters are the clusters where CHs have the lowest MDs (as
compared to their neighbors CMs) and satisfy the network VI. CONCLUSION
requirement KPIs. The number of iterations varies from 5 to Provisioning applications and services for the emerging 6G
50 iterations as illustrated in Fig. 5. At each iteration, the FL network has drawn much attention from IT and telecommunialgorithm and Stackelberg game are executed at the IoV and cations operators. However, ensuring efficient security mechedger levels, and cover the clustering, training and detection anisms in the context of 6G architectures remains largely unprocess as explained in Section IV. explored. In this research work, we have proposed a new col-
 Fig. 5 shows that the detection accuracy increases with re- laborative cyber security framework, based on a multi-level FL
spect to the number of iterations during the training. Indeed, algorithm and Stackelberg security games, to secure 6G-enabled
the FL based cooperative detection reduces the false positives IoV networks from attacks that target the main KPIs of 6G archiand false negatives. Meanwhile, the Stackelberg security game tectures. Specifically, we have proposed a concrete construction
detects accurately the suspected CH or edge server that exhibits of a hierarchical attack detection framework that leverages the
malicious behaviors. processing capabilities of IoV nodes, edge servers and SIEM.
 3) Detection and False Positive Rates: As compared to cur- The proposed attack detection framework presents a crucial step
rent centralized attack detection frameworks for 6G such as [15], in the research and development of cyber security and AI systems
[16], the proposed detection system shows a high detection rate in emerging 6G-enabled IoV networks, and is expected to benefit
and low false positive rate when analyzing attack detection rates. the academic and industrial communities.
This is especially true when the amount of malicious traffic Our future work will focus on evaluating alternative ML
reaches 45% (of all data traffic), as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). models and integrating the proposed solution into dynamic
The proposed solution achieves a high level of security by environments to demonstrate the versatility of the proposed
monitoring the suspected behaviors of CHs and edge servers methodology in ever-evolving settings. In addition, we will
using the Stackelberg game. Equilibrium states are reached explore the use of fully homomorphic encryption as discussed
2642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

by [29], [30], [31], [32] to make the intrusion detection more [15] S. Li, W. Sun, H. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Physical layer security for edge
privacy-preserving. However, using homomorphic encryption caching in 6G networks,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2020,
 pp. 1–6.
will require the adaptation of the used models and may result in [16] C. L. Stergiou, K. E. Psannis, and B. B. Gupta, “IoT-based Big Data secure
a loss of accuracy, and we will carefully evaluate this trade-off management in the fog over a 6G wireless network,” IEEE Internet Things
in our future research. J., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5164–5171, Apr. 2021.
 [17] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato, “Federated learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods, and future
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT directions,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118, Sep. 2020.
 [18] H. Zhou, H.-F. Li, and R. Yuan, “Task offloading strategy of 6G hetero-
 This work is an extended and enhanced version of the con- geneous edge-cloud computing model considering mass customization
ference article that has been presented at IEEE ICC 2022 in mode collaborative manufacturing environment,” Math. Problems Eng. J.,
 pp. 1–8, 2020.
Seoul [33]. [19] H. Wen, P. Yih-Ru Huang, J. Dyer, A. Archinal, and J. Fagan, “Countermeasures for GPS signal spoofing,” in Proc. 18th Int. Tech. Meeting Satell.
 REFERENCES Division Inst. Navigation, 2005, pp. 1285–1290.
 [20] D. Dolev and A. Yao, “On the security of public key protocols,” IEEE
 [1] W. Liu, S. Zhang, and N. Ansari, “Joint laser charging and DBS placement Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 198–208, Mar. 1983.
 for drone-assisted edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, [21] H. Sedjelmaci and S. M. Senouci, “An accurate and efficient collaborative
 no. 1, pp. 780–789, Jan. 2022. intrusion detection framework to secure vehicular networks,” Comput.
 [2] W. Li, Z. Su, R. Li, K. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Blockchain-based data Elect. Eng., vol. 43, pp. 33–47, 2015.
 security for artificial intelligence applications in 6G networks,” IEEE [22] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
 Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 31–37, Nov./Dec. 2020. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, no. 1/2, pp. 1–210, 2021.
 [3] G. Gui, M. Liu, F. Tang, N. Kato, and F. Adachi, “6G: Opening new [23] A. Abidi, B. Bouallegue, and F. Kahri, “Implementation of elliptic curve
 horizons for integration of comfort, security, and intelligence,” IEEE digital signature algorithm (ECDSA),” in Proc. Glob. Summit Comput. Inf.
 Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 126–132, Oct. 2020. Technol., 2014, pp. 1–6.
 [4] Y. Hui et al., “Secure and personalized edge computing services in 6G [24] M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr, “Comprehensive privacy analysis
 heterogeneous vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 8, of deep learning: Passive and active white-box inference attacks against
 pp. 5920–5931, Apr. 2022. centralized and federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
 [5] M. Giordani and M. Zorzi, “Satellite communication at millimeter waves: 2019, pp. 739–753.
 A key enabler of the 6G era,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. [25] R. Shokri, Auditing Data Privacy for Machine Learning. Berkeley, CA,
 Commun., 2020, pp. 383–388. USA: USENIX Association, 2022.
 [6] B. Mao, Y. Kawamoto, and N. Kato, “AI-based joint optimization of QoS [26] L. An, A. Chakrabortty, and A. Duel-Hallen, “A Stackelberg security
 and security for 6G energy harvesting Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet investment game for voltage stability of power systems,” in Proc. IEEE
 Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7032–7042, Aug. 2020. 59th Conf. Decis. Control, 2020, pp. 3359–3364.
 [7] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “The roadmap [27] N. Abuzainab and W. Saad, “Dynamic connectivity game for adversarial
 to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, internet of battlefield things systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5,
 no. 8, pp. 84–90, Aug. 2019. no. 1, pp. 378–390, Feb. 2018.
 [8] M. Wang, T. Zhu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Yu, and W. Zhou, “Security and [28] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 privacy in 6G networks: New areas and new challenges,” Digit. Commun. network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 Netw., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 281–291, 2020. Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
 [9] P. Porambage, G. Gür, D. P. Moya Osorio, M. Livanage, and M. Ylianttila, [29] L. Sgaglione et al., “Privacy preserving intrusion detection via homo-
 “6G security challenges and potential solutions,” in Proc. IEEE Joint Eur. morphic encryption,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Enabling Technol.:
 Conf. Netw. Commun. 6G Summit, 2021, pp. 622–627. Infrastructure Collaborative Enterprises, 2019, pp. 321–326.
[10] C. Benzaid and T. Taleb, “ZSM security: Threat surface and best practices,” [30] L. Coppolino, S. D’Antonio, V. Formicola, G. Mazzeo, and L. Ro-
 IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 124–133, May/Jun. 2020. mano, “VISE: Combining Intel SGX and homomorphic encryption for
[11] P. Porambage, G. Gür, D. P. M. Osorio, M. Liyanage, A. Gurtov, and cloud industrial control systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 70, no. 5,
 M. Ylianttila, “The roadmap to 6G security and privacy,” IEEE Open J. pp. 711–724, May 2021.
 Commun. Soc., vol. 2, pp. 1094–1122, 2021. [31] L. Sgaglione and G. Mazzeo, “A GDPR-compliant approach to real-time
[12] S. Kaur and M. Singh, “Hybrid intrusion detection and signature generation processing of sensitive data,” in Proc. Intell. Interactive Multimedia Syst.
 using deep recurrent neural networks,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, Serv., 2019, pp. 43–52.
 no. 12, pp. 7859–7877, 2020. [32] A. Boudguiga, O. Stan, H. Sedjelmaci, and S. Carpov, “Homomorphic
[13] N. Kaaniche, A. Boudguiga, and G. Gonzalez-Granadillo, “Efficient hy- encryption at work for private analysis of security logs,” in Proc. 6th Int.
 brid model for intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Secur. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 515–523.
 Cryptography, 2022, pp. 694–700. [33] H. Sedjelmaci, N. Kheir, A. Boudguiga, and N. Kaaniche, “Cooperative
[14] A. Al Mousa, M. Al Qomri, S. Al Hajri, and R. Zagrouba, “Utilizing the and smart attacks detection systems in 6G-enabled Internet of Things,” in
 eSIM for public key cryptography: A network security solution for 6G,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 5238–5243.
 in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Comput. Inf. Sci., 2020, pp. 1–6.