IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024 1155

 Self-Supervised Deep Clustering Method for
 Detecting Abnormal Data of Wastewater
 Treatment Process
 Honggui Han , Senior Member, IEEE, Meiting Sun, Fangyu Li , Zezhong Liu, and Chen Wang

 Abstract—In wastewater treatment process (WWTP), I. INTRODUCTION
abnormal data seriously reduce data quality rendering the
 ASTEWATER treatment process (WWTP) plays an esapplication techniques impractical. The implementation of
abnormal data detection is challenging due to the nonlinear
nature of WWTP. Typically, constructing an accurate
 W sential role in removing the organic wastes and producing the renewable water source [1]. With recent progress in
anomaly detector requires large amounts of labeled data, advanced techniques, WWTP has been equipped with various
which is difficult in practice. Thus, a self-supervised
memory enhanced deep clustering method (SMEL) is sensors and transmission equipment for collecting, transmitting,
proposed to detect abnormal data without using any labels. and storing time series. These time series, implying the operation
First, a self-supervised deep clustering network, combining status of WWTP, have strong nonlinearity and time-varying
stacked autoencoders and the clustering algorithm, characteristic. To improve effluent quality and guarantee stable
leverages unlabeled data to extract nonlinear features and operation, it is necessary to analyze the data generated by the
capture the normal pattern. Second, an adaptive weight
objective function, jointly optimizing the reconstruct error treatment process and obtain the relevant information about its
and clustering error, is designed to obtain a robust clus- operation status [2].
tering structure. Third, double memory enhanced modules, Abnormal data of WWTP, which are caused by various reaconsisting of a centroid memory and a score memory, sons, have been an inevitable problem [3]. Specifically, abnormal
are presented to enhance training stability and detection data are caused by working condition faults or transmission
accuracy. Finally, experiments on three WWTP datasets
show that SMEL achieves the highest detection accuracy. faults, among which working condition faults have been widely
 studied. Abnormal data in WWTP caused by transmission faults
 Index Terms—Abnormal data detection, adaptive weight are rarely mentioned. The article mainly focuses on the transobjective function, double memory enhanced modules,
 mission faults, such as the disturbance of unstable current,
self-supervised deep clustering network, wastewater treatment process (WWTP). sensor faults, communication losses, and changed environment.
 Abnormal data are significantly different from or inconsistent
 with the normal existing data. The existence of abnormal data
 makes the distribution of training data deviate, which results
 in the model unable to extract normal features [4]. Moreover,
 as WWTP demands stability and reliability, maintainers need to
 detect abnormal operations and implement specific maintenance
 Manuscript received 26 December 2022; revised 11 March 2023; operations [5]. Thus, to detect abnormal data, one straightforaccepted 8 April 2023. Date of publication 20 April 2023; date of current ward idea is that abnormal data detection method is used.
version 19 January 2024. This work was supported by National Key Re- In the past few decades, the existing abnormal data detection
search and Development Project under Grants 2022YFB3305800-5, National Science Foundation of China under Grants 62125301, 61890930- studies can be broadly divided into three categories: statistical-
5, 61903010, and 62021003, Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist Pro- based, model-based, and clustering-based approaches. The
gram under Grant BJJWZYJH01201910005020, and in part by the statistical-based method assumes that the data follow a predeter-
Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant KZ202110005009, and
Youth Beijing Scholar under Grant 037. (Corresponding author: Honggui mined distribution or probability model and identifies abnormal
Han.) Paper no. TII-22-5195. values that deviate from such distribution or are in the region
 Honggui Han, Meiting Sun, and Fangyu Li are with the Faculty of low probability [6], [7], [8]. These statistical-based methof Information Technology, the Beijing Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Intelligent System, and the Engineering Re- ods always assume the normal data follow a certain of data
search Center of Digital Community, Ministry of Education, Beijing distribution. Nevertheless, we cannot always have this kind of
University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: rechardhan@ prior data distribution knowledge in practice, especially for high
sina.com; smtmary@163.com; fangyu.li@bjut.edu.cn).
 Zezhong Liu and Chen Wang are with the Beijing Aerospace Smart dimensional real data sets. For clustering-based methods, these
Manufacturing Technology Development Company Ltd, Beijing 100124, methods calculate the corresponding anomaly scores based on
China (e-mail: liuzezhng0017@qq.com; whxxhc0913@sina.com). the density information of the data point and its neighboring
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3268777. data and finally compare the value with a preset threshold to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3268777 determine whether the data are abnormal [9], [10], [11]. The

 1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1156 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

clustering-based methods have two main limitations. First, these from audio streams. Lin et al. [23] proposed a density clustering
methods assume that the shape and form of the clusters are algorithm employed on pretrained deep features to detect unconconsidered. Second, as the number of dimensions of the data strained face images. Although the detection performances were
increases, the detection performances of these methods decrease. improved in [22] and [23], they performed feature extraction,
As a promising method, the model-based methods, which use independent of the clustering task. The feature distribution in
a predictive model to characterize the normal data and then the extracted feature space cannot be well clustered to detect
detect abnormal values as deviations from the model, have been abnormal data. To conquer the problem, Xie et al. [24] integrated
studied in recent years [12], [13]. Shakiba et al. [14] addressed a deep neural network with clustering method, instead of only
fault diagnosis for transmission lines using the convolutional using the deep network to detect abnormal data. Yang et al.
neural network. The data used in [14] were generated due to [25] designed an joint objective function including a network
device faults. However, the abnormal data studied in this article reconstruction loss and a clustering loss to perform clustering
are caused by transmission faults due to the unstable working and network training simultaneously. Similarity, Song et al. [26]
environment. Although the above model-based methods have took advantage of the coupling nature of clustering and outlier
achieved good results in abnormal data detection, these methods detection to design a deep clustering based fair outlier detection
rely too much on manually setting of attribute relationship. method. However, these deep clustering methods have two main
Human intervention is more serious, limiting its robustness and drawbacks. First, the centroid of the clustering layer is randomly
generalization ability. In addition, these methods are shallowly initialized before each iteration, resulting in training instability.
structured, limiting their learning and classification capabilities. Second, the threshold of anomaly score is manually set, making
Since WWTP data are complex with nonlinearity and time- it unable to adapt to the change of data distribution.
varying characteristic, these methods may not be flexible and Motivated by the above analysis, the article proposes a selfaccurate enough. supervised memory enhanced deep clustering method (SMEL)
 As a part of model-based methods, deep learning methods to detect abnormal data of WWTP. The proposed SMEL comwith the strong ability in nonlinear extraction and data model- bines the advantages of clustering methods and deep learning
ing have obtained great achievements in the field of abnormal methods. Compared with the traditional clustering-based methdata detection. Patnaik et al. [15] combined the convolutional ods, the proposed SMEL does not require the assumption of
network and the long short-term memory network to construct a the shape of the clusters and can capture the nonlinear characsupervised data extraction system for detecting automated web teristic of WWTP data through nonlinear dimension reduction.
page. Pan et al. [16] proposed a multiscale analysis method for Compared with the deep learning-based methods, the proposed
rolling bearing fault diagnosis by integrating the inner product SMEL is a self-supervised method, which does not require a
for capturing feature and the kernels with different sizes for great quantity of labeled data in the training process. The main
generating better performances. Yu et al. [17] presented a novel contributions are summarized as follows.
deep common spatial pattern model to transform data into an- 1) A self-supervised deep clustering network is proposed
other mapping with data of different categories. These categories for efficiently capturing nonlinear representations and
have maximal differences in their measures of dispersion. How- automatically detecting abnormal data without using any
ever, the performance of feature extraction was not satisfactory. labels.
Luo et al. [18] adopted stacked recurrent neural networks to 2) An adaptive weight objective function is developed to obdetect anomalies by iteratively updating the spare coefficients. tain a robust clustering structure by adopting the adaptive
However, it demanded a robust mechanism to generate large weight mechanism.
reconstruction error on the anomalies. Wang et al. [19] presented 3) Double memory enhanced modules are designed to ena stacked autoencoders (SAE) model for fault classification hance training stability and detection accuracy by adto address the problem of deep features contain information dressing the problems of initial centroid randomization
unrelated to faults. Hu et al. [20] utilized a stacked sparse and abnormal score threshold presetting.
autoencoders model to learn generic driving behavior features The rest of this article is organized as follows. The problem
and introduced the dropout technology to avoid overfitting. In formulation is presented in Section II. The proposed SMEL is
[21], a convolutional deep neural network was presented for designed in details in Section III. The proposed SMEL is tested
one-class classification. In the method, the labeled data from an on two benchmark datasets and a real WWTP dataset to manifest
unrelated task were utilized to perform feature learning. Though its performances in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this
much progress has been done for abnormal data detection, most article.
of the existing works always assume that training data are labeled
for building the abnormal data detection model or classifier.
However, it is difficult and time-consuming to obtain a great
quantity of labeled data required in the training process. II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
 To detect abnormal data without using any labels, the in- Different from typical supervised detection problem, abnortegration of clustering-based and deep learning method has mal data detection for WWTP faces two challenges. One is
been considered as a promising solution. Lu and Hanjalic [22] that obtaining data with anomaly labels is difficult and timepresented a context-dependent scaling factors based spectral consuming, resulting in the existing supervised learning methclustering method that was utilized to detect acoustic events ods infeasible. The other is that WWTP data are multivariate
HAN et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP CLUSTERING METHOD FOR DETECTING ABNORMAL DATA OF WWTP 1157

 TABLE I
 LIST OF ACRONYMS

 Fig. 1. Overall architecture of the proposed SMEL. (Top) original data
 X are collected from WWTP through various sensors. (Middle) The
 original data X are fed to the self-supervised deep clustering network to
 obtain feature points ZL/2 . The score memory module provides pseudolabels Is-1 for the encoder layer and the decoder layer to perform backtime series with strong nonlinearity and time-varying charac- propagation and then updates feature points and new pseudo-labels
teristic. Thus, this article focuses on constructing a deep neural Is . The centroid memory module is updated by storing the involved
 centroids usn . (Bottom) the adaptive weight objective function is utilized
network to extract data characteristics without using labels. The to optimize the self-supervised deep clustering network.
network can robustly capture the normal pattern and effectively
detect abnormal data of WWTP. The acronyms used in the article
are given in Table I. Once the detection model is determined, the anomaly score
 Consider a matrix X = [x1 , . . . , xT ]T ∈ RT ×N for a multi- e(xi ) of the instance xi can be computed as
variate time series that collected from N sensors with T time
steps. Each instance xi ∈ RN is a N-dimensional vector. To e(xi ) = F ( I| θ, xi ) − un 2 (4)
detect whether the instance xi is abnormal, the data X are utilized
 where un is the centroid of normal cluster. The higher e(xi )
to robustly capture the normal pattern and mark the labels.
 is, the more likely it is that the instance xi is an abnormal
 Thus, the global objective function of detection task becomes
 data. To automatically identify abnormal data, the threshold ε is
 arg min F ( I, θ| X) (1) given adaptively, as shown in Section III-D. When the anomaly
 I,θ score e(xi ) exceeds the given threshold ε, the instance xi is
where F(·) is the objective function, I = [I1 , I2 , . . . , IT ] de- identified as abnormal and labeled Ii as 1, otherwise labeled
notes the clustering ids for all instances, and θ is the network Ii as 0.
parameters for representations. In such case, if we hold one in
{I, θ} to be fixed, the objective function is decomposed into two III. METHOD
alternating steps as A. Architecture of the Proposed SMEL
 arg min F ( I| θ, X) (2) The overall architecture of the proposed SMEL is presented
 I
 in Fig. 1 and is composed of three parts: a self-supervised deep
 arg min F ( θ| I, X). (3) clustering network; an adaptive weight objective function; and
 θ
 double enhanced memory modules.
 From the above formulations, it is shown that (2) is a conven- Specifically, original data X with the shape of RT ×N are
tional clustering problem based on fixed parameters θ, and (3) collected though N sensors installed in WWTP and are fed into
is a supervised feature representation learning process based on the deep clustering network along the temporal dimension. The
the cluster labels I. self-supervised deep clustering network includes an encoder
1158 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

layer, a clustering layer, and a decoder layer. The instance xi L/2
 The local density ρi of each feature point zi is defined as
is fed into the encoder layer to extract the nonlinear feature
 T
 
representation. The clustering layer captures the robust normal
pattern through several iterations. The decoder layer is applied ρi = χ(dij − dc ), (6)
 j=1
to reconstruct input instance. To optimize the parameters of the
self-supervised deep clustering network, the adaptive weight where χ(·) is an indicator function. χ(x) = 1, if x<0; otherwise,
objective function is designed by integrating the reconstruc- χ(x) = 0. dc is a cutoff distance and dij is the Euclidean distance
tion error and the clustering error. The function is utilized to between each two feature points as
  
realize the constraint of feature learning making the clustering L/2 L/2  L/2 L/2 
structure more suitable for anomaly detection. Meanwhile, to dij = d(zi , zj ) = zi − zj  . (7)
enhance training stability and detection accuracy, double mem- L/2
 The delta distance δ i between the feature point zi and any
ory enhanced modules, consisting of a centroid memory and
 other feature points with higher density is defined as
a score memory, are proposed through building up recurrent ⎧
connections with the clustering layer and caching the cluster ⎨ min (dij ), if ∃j s.t.ρj > ρi
 j:ρj >ρi
centroids and feature representations, respectively. The centroid δi = . (8)
 ⎩max(dij ), otherwise
memory module generates a centroid before each iteration by j
calculating historical clustering centroid. The score memory
 When the local density ρi and the delta distance δ i for each
module is applied to calculate anomaly score thresholds and
 feature point have been calculated, the feature points with a high
assign anomaly labels.
 ρi and high δ i are considered as cluster centers. In real WWTP
 dataset, the number of normal data is much larger than the
 number of abnormal data. Thus, the proposed SMEL selects the
B. Self-Supervised Deep Clustering Network centroid un ∈ RL/2×1 with the highest density as the centroid
 The self-supervised deep clustering network consists of three of normal cluster and the centroid ub ∈ RL/2×1 with the lowest
components: an encoder layer (for dimension reduction and density as the centroid of abnormal cluster. After finding the
feature extraction), a clustering layer (for feature clustering cluster centers, each remaining feature point is assigned to the
and abnormal data detection), and a decoder layer (for data same cluster as its nearest neighbor of higher density. We mark
reconstruction). The collected WWTP data X ∈ RT ×N are fed the ids of the normal clustering and the abnormal clustering to
into the self-supervised deep clustering network composed of L 0 and 1, respectively.
+ 1 layers that perform L nonlinear projections, where L is an 3) Decoder Layer: The last (L/2) layers are decoders, which
even number. are applied to reconstruct the instance xi from the latent space.
 
 1) Encoder Layer: The first (L/2) hidden layers are encoders, For decoders, the output of the l th layer is compute by
   l
which are utilized for compressing each instance xi into the  l  l
 zli = g W zli −1 + b ∈ RN (9)
latent space. For encoders, the output feature of the lth layer is
 
computed by where l = (L/2) + 1, (L/2) + 2, …, L indexes the layers of
   
 the decoder, W l is the weight matrix from (l −1)th layer to the
    
 l
 l l th layer, and b is the bias of the l th layer. In this article, the
 zli = f (Wl xi + bl ) ∈ RN (5) weight W is equivalent to the transposition of the weight matrix
 
 W . The nonlinear activation function g(·) can be same as f(·)
 or another different nonlinear function. Thus, the corresponding
where l = 1, 2, . . . , (L/2) indexes the layers of encoders, Wl
 reconstruction of instance xi is computed by
and bl are the weight matrix from the (l-1)th layer to the lth layer  
 L L
and the bias vector of the lth layer, respectively, and Nl is the x̂i = g W zL i +b ∈ RN . (10)
latent space dimension of lth layer. f(·) is a nonlinear activation
function. Thus, for T given instances, the output matrix of the The output matrix of the decoder layer X̂ =
encoder layer Z L/2 L/2 L/2 L/2 T
 = [z1 , z2 , . . . , zT ] ∈ RT ×L/2 is the [x̂1 , x̂2 , . . . , x̂T ]T ∈ RT ×N is the corresponding reconstruction
 L/2
desired feature representation of original data X. The matrix Z of data X.
is fed to the clustering layer for capturing the normal pattern. Remark 1: The self-supervised deep clustering network has
 2) Clustering Layer: The (L/2) layer serves as the latent powerful capabilities on feature extraction and data representafeature space and is shared by the encoder layer and the decoder tion since encoders and decoders have strong nonlinear mapping
layer. Taking the real WWTP dataset without any labels into characteristic. Meanwhile, the clustering layer captures the norconsideration, the clustering layer needs to obtain the normal mal pattern without requiring any labels, which is conducive to
pattern in a self-supervised way. Therefore, the density peak WWTP automatic detection.
clustering algorithm is selected [27]. The core idea in the density
peak clustering algorithm is to calculate the local density ρi of C. Adaptive Weight Objective Function
 L/2
each feature points zi and the delta distance δ i of high-density 1) Joint Objective Function: Taking the reciprocal relationfeature points. ship between abnormal data and clustering into account, the
HAN et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP CLUSTERING METHOD FOR DETECTING ABNORMAL DATA OF WWTP 1159

degree of abnormality for each instance is associated with the
distance to normal cluster centroid. An adaptive weight mechanism is proposed to enhance the effectiveness of abnormal
data detection by re-emphasizing the contributions of possible
normal data while mitigating negative impacts of abnormal
data. Specifically, feature points close to the centroid of normal
category are assigned higher weights while those far away
from centroids, identified as potential abnormal candidates, are
assigned lower weights. Thus, an adaptive weight ŵi of the
 L/2
feature point zi is calculated as
 Fig. 2. Architecture of the memory module.
 L/2
 exp(d(zi , un ))
 ŵi = 1 − T L/2
 . (11)
 i=1 exp(d(zi , un )) which separates feature points by alternately updating cluster
 ×1
 centroids U and ids I. After the pretraining stage, the den-
 The vector ŵ = [ŵ1 , ŵ2 , . . . , ŵT ] ∈ RT denotes the adap- sity peak clustering is used to initialize the cluster centroid
tive weights of all feature points ZL/2 . The adaptive weight U0 = [u0n , u0b ] ∈ RL/2×2 . The clustering centroid is stored to
mechanism enables the normal data with high weights to capture a centroid memory module, which aims to provide the centroid
the intrinsic cluster structure and guarantees the performance of Us = [usn , usb ] ∈ RL/2×2 for the subsequent iteration processes,
abnormal data detection. as shown in Section III-D. usn is the centroid of the normal
 To extract the suitable clustering structure and robustly detect cluster at the sth iteration. In each iteration, each feature point is
abnormal data, the joint objective function with the adaptive assigned with a pseudolabel Iis and is stored into a score memory
weight mechanism is proposed to realize the constraint of detec- module, as shown in Section III-D.
tion objective on feature extraction. Based on three components When U and I are fixed, we read pseudo-labels from the score
of the self-supervised deep clustering network, the objective memory module. Thus, (12) is expressed as
function is formally stated as    
    
     arg min X̂−X+α ŵT ×(ZL/2 −IUT ) , s.t.Ii ∈ {0, 1}.
     W ,b
arg min X̂ − X+α ŵT ×(ZL/2 −IUT ), s.t.Ii ∈ {0, 1} (14)
Wl ,bl ,I,U
 J1 J2 The objective can be interpreted as the objective of supervised
 (12) learning for the encoders and decoders. Because it is clusterwhere U = [un , ub ] ∈ RL/2×2 denotes the clustering centroids specific, it can build a robust clustering structure for abnormal
of which each column represents one cluster centroid, I ∈ RT ×2 data detection.
denotes the indicator matrix of which each row denotes the Remark 2: By optimizing the adaptive weight objective funcbinary label, and α is tradeoff parameter between the recon- tion, the proposed SMEL enhances the sensitivity to the noise
struction error and the cluster error. J1 and J2 are designed for and obtains a robust clustering structure because the learning of
different goals. J1 is the mean absolute error term to ensure the the clustering layer is more concerned with the normal pattern
minimum reconstruction error which avoiding the trap of trivial rather than just blindly minimizing the reconstruction error.
solutions by nonlinear dimensionality reduction. J2 is a clustering regularization aiming to discover the clustering-friendly D. Double Memory Enhanced Modules
latent space.
 To enhance training stability and detection accuracy, double
 2) Objective Function Optimization: The optimization promemory enhanced modules, consisting of a centroid memory
cess includes two stages: pretraining stage and fine-tuning stage.
 and a score memory, are developed. The centroid memory mod-
The pretraining stage minimizes the reconstruction loss of enule stores the cluster centroid of each iteration process, while the
coders and decoders by using stochastic gradient descent and
 score memory module stores feature points and pseudo-labels
backpropagation to obtain feature points of original data X.
 of the entire dataset. Pseudolabels and network parameters are
Since the training of encoders and decoders is not clusteringupdated alternately during uninterrupted iterations. A memory
specific, thus the feature points are not necessarily suitable for
 enhanced module, including a feature extractor If , a memory
abnormal data detection.
 block Mb, a generalization process G, and an output feature Of ,
 In the fine-tuning stage, we alternately optimize (12) with
 was first designed in [28]. The generalization process G updates
respect Wl , bl , I, and U to obtain a robust clustering structure.
 the memory block Mb with the input feature If during training
Since the network parameters have been determined after preprocess. The output feature Of is a new feature rebuilt by the
training, (12) is identical to the objective of clustering algorithm
 memory block Mb. The architecture of the memory module is
expect for the parameters to optimize. The objective is expressed
 shown in Fig. 2.
as
 1) Centroid Memory Module: The centroid memory module
    
     CM ∈ RM ×L/2 is designed to record the involved centroids, inarg min X̂−X +α ŵT ×(ZL/2 −IUT ) , s.t.Ii ∈ {0, 1}
 I,U cluding those in which new centroids join and those from which
 (13) old centroids leave. Compared with the random initialization
1160 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

of centroid, the centroid memory module provides the mean
 Algorithm 1: Self-Supervised Memory Enhanced Deep
feature of the involved centroids for each iteration. The centroid
 Clustering.
preserves the historical clustering information and improves the
clustering efficiency. Specifically, the centroid memory module Input: Original data X, Hyper-parameter α, Maximum
with M units builds up a recurrent connection with the clustering iterations S, Centroid memory module units M
layer, stores cluster centroids to memory block in a dynamic Output: The network parameters θ, The centroid usn
way, and produces the centroid of each iteration via a liner 1: Pretrain the parameters of stacked autoencoders for
   

combination of memory units. When the number of centroids Wl , W l , bl , bl
reaches M, the output feature serves as the centroid of the next 2: Initialize U0 , I0 by deploying density peak clustering
iteration as on f(xi ), i.e., the output the pretrained encoder
 3: Store the centroid U0 to the centroid memory module
 M s−M
 m=0 U CM
 Us = (15)
 M 4: for s = 1 to S do
 L/2
where Us−M is the clustering centroids of the (s-M)th iteration. 5: Calculate the weight ŵi of each feature point zi
When the number of centroids does not reach M, the centroid is via (11)
    

calculated via the density peak clustering algorithm. 6: Update parameters Wl , W l , bl , b l by optimizing
 2) Score Memory Module: The score memory module (14) with stochastic gradient descent
SM ∈ RT ×(L/2+2) is designed to provide pseudo-labels for 7: if len(CM)<M
performing back-propagation to update the encoders and de- 8: Update Us by deploying density peak clustering
coders. Specifically, the score memory module with T unites 9: else
builds up recurrent connections with the encoder layer and the 10: Update Us via (15)
centroid memory module, respectively. The module is updated 11: end if
by updating the feature points from the encoder layer and is 12: Store centroid Us to the centroid memory module
assigned new pseudo-labels by calculating anomaly score. 13: Update pseudo-labels Is via (16)–(21)
 In each iteration, the feature points from the encoder layer 14: Store pseudo-labels to the score memory module
and the centroid from the centroid memory module are utilized SM
to calculate the anomaly scores and mark the pseudolabels. The 15: if convergence condition is met then
 L/2 16: Stop training
anomaly score e(zi ) is calculated as
 17: end if
  2
 L/2  L/2  18: end for
 e(zi ) = zi − usn  (16)
 19: return The network parameters θ, The centroid usn
where usn is the centroid of the normal cluster in the sth iteration.
To judge the abnormal degree of feature points, the anomaly
score thresholds εmax and εmin are calculated as
 The score memory module stores feature points and corre-
 εmax = μ + 3σ (17) sponding pseudolabels to provide supervision information for
 performing back-propagation of encoders and decoders. The
 εmin = μ − 3σ (18) pseudolabels are marked by comparing each anomaly score and
where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of abnormal the adaptive thresholds. So far, the detailed procedure of the
scores, respectively, which are calculated as proposed SMEL can be summarized as Algorithm 1.
 T
 1 L/2
 μ= e(zi ) (19) IV. EXPERIMENTS
 T i=1
  A. Experimental Settings
 1 T  L/2 2
 σ= e(zi ) − μ . (20) 1) Datasets: To verify the effectiveness of the proposed
 T i=1
 SMEL, two commonly-used datasets and a real dataset are
 L/2
 When the anomaly score e(zi ) exceeds thresholds εmin or selected. The detailed information of three datasets is given in
 L/2 Table II. Note that abnormal data are a small part of a dataset,
εmax , the feature point zi is judged to be abnormal and marks
 s
its anomaly label Ii as 1. Otherwise, the anomaly label Iis is which is consistent with the actual phenomenon.
marked as 0. The criteria are as a) ST: The storm dataset contained 1335 instances and
 ⎧ L/2
 10 attributes at a 15-min interval. The dataset was obtained
 ⎨1, if e(zi ) ≤ εmin
 ⎪ from the benchmark simulation model no.1 (BSM1). BSM1 was
 L/2
 Iis = 0, if εmin < e(zi ) < εmax . (21) proposed by the international water association task group and
 ⎪
 ⎩ is considered as a recognized platform in field of wastewater
 L/2
 1, if e(zi ) ≥ εmax
 treatment.
 Remark 3: The centroid memory module stores the clustering b) RA: The rain dataset consists of 10 attributes and 1335
centroid to solve the problem of initial centroid randomization. instances at a 15-min interval and is selected from BSM1.
HAN et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP CLUSTERING METHOD FOR DETECTING ABNORMAL DATA OF WWTP 1161

 TABLE II These data reflect the operation status of the actual WWTP,
 CHARACTERISTICS OF DATASETS
 such as sensor faults, communication losses, and changed
 environment.
 2) Baseline Methods: Clustering-based methods including
 clustering-based on local outlier factor (CBLOF) [29] and clustering with outlier removal (COR) [30], model-based methods
 including isolation forest (iForest) [31], lightweight online detection of anomalies (LODA) [32], one-class support vector
 machine (OCSVM) [33], and autoencoder (AE) [34], and deep
 clustering methods including deep embedded clustering (DEC)
 [24] and improved deep embedded clustering (IDEC) [35] are
 chosen as baseline methods. All the codes are implemented by
 Python 3.9. In practice, the parameters of these anomaly detection methods are set as follows: for iForest, the subsampling size
 and the tree number are 256 and 100, respectively; the number
 of clusters for CBLOF and COR are set to be 2; for LODA, the
 number of bins and random cuts are 10 and 100, respectively;
 the radial basis function of OCSVM is set to be 0.5; for AE,
 DEC, and IDEC, the hidden neuron structures are 16-8-8-16,
 the maximum iteration epoch are set to be 250, and the learning
 rate is 0.1; for the proposed SMEL, three fully-connected layers
 are set and the network structure for training the QH dataset is set
 to be 12-9-6-9-12 and the network structures for training the ST
 and RA datasets are set to be 8-6-4-6-8. The maximum iteration
 epoch is set to be 250. The learning rate of the cluster layer is set
 to be 0.001 and the learning rates of the encoders and decoders
 are set as 0.1. During evaluation process, the mean and standard
 deviation for all methods by repeating their experiments on 20
 random seeds.
 3) Evaluation Criteria: For quantitatively evaluating the detection performance, accuracy (Acc), F-measure (F1 ), balanced
 accuracy (BA), Fowlkes–Mallows (FM), receiver operating
 characteristic (ROC), and area under curve (AUC) are selected.
 The definitions of five metrics are list.
 a) Acc: The metric is the proportion of the correct pre-
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of Qinghe wastewater treatment plant. diction in all prediction samples as
 TP + TN
 Acc = (22)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 c) QH: As a large-scale dataset, QH dataset was collected from a wastewater treatment plant located in Qinghe where TP, TN, FP, and FN are true positive, true negative, false
Beijing, China over a 25-day period every 15 mins. The dataset positive, and false negative, respectively.
consists of 28 attributes and 8000 instances. As shown in b) F1 : It is a harmonic mean of precision and recall as
Fig. 3, collection of the QH dataset is implemented through 2TP
 F1 = . (23)
deploying sensors on all the key process units, such as chemical 2TP + FP + FN
oxygen demand (COD), ammonia nitrogen (NH4 N), dissolved c) BA: It indicates the average of recall and the equivoxygen (DO), nitrate nitrogen (NO3 N), potential of hydrogen alent of recall calculated with respect to the category of non-
(PH), and so on. Then, the acquisition instrument is utilized anomalous values as
to transmit data to the industrial computer. Finally, the in-  
 1 TP TN
dustrial computer provides data visualization and implements BA = × + . (24)
actuator control decisions if necessary. The complete dataset 2 TP + FN TN + FP
is stored to a secured database that can be accessed by the d) FM: It is defined as the geometric mean of precision
industrial partners and the research team through the indus- and recall. FM is defined by
trial computer. The data visualization in Fig. 3 shows that TP
NO3 N time series has periodic trend to some extent. For DO FM =  . (25)
 (TP + FP) × (TP + FN)
time series, the data are relatively stable during the first 500
hours and then fluctuated sharply. PH, COD, and NH4 N obvi- e) ROC: ROC curve is a graph consisting of the false
ously contain abnormal values presenting random characteristic. positive rate (FPR) on the x-axis and the true positive rate
1162 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE III
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF ANOMALY DETECTION ON THREE DATASETS FOR ALL METHODS

(TPR) on the y-axis, where TPR = TP/(TP + FN) and FPR TABLE IV
 ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT MODULES ON THREE DATASETS
= TP/(FP + TN). FPR and TPR are calculated and plotted at
various threshold settings of the confidence score of the detection
outputs.
 f) AUC: It reflects the performance of the classification
model. The closer AUC value is to 1, the better the classification
is.

B. Experimental Results
 1) Comparison of Detection Results: The results of the ST
dataset are shown in the first section of Table III. Generally,
the neural network based methods outperform the nonneural
network based methods in most metrics. The relatively low
F1 for iForest and LODA come with a price with high Acc,
which means that many instances that do not contain outliers OCSVM, AE, and DEC have poor anomaly detection perforare mistakenly considered as outliers. On average, the proposed mances. Compared with Fig. 4(e) and (f), the curve of anomaly
SMEL achieves the best results for Acc, F1 , BA, and FM, score produced by the proposed SMEL is similar to the original
showing good detection performance overall in comparison to time series. The result demonstrates that the proposed SMEL
eight baseline methods. For the RA dataset, it can be noticed in shows relatively superior detection performance than IDEC.
the middle of Table III. The proposed SMEL achieves the highest Furthermore, in the shaded regions, the proposed SMEL is well
accuracy on all metrics, demonstrating the model functionality. aligned with the original anomaly dimension. The main reason
Moreover, the efficacy of the proposed SMEL is satisfactory as is that the adaptive weight mechanism assigns lower weights to
well with the corresponding FM rate arriving at up to 81%. these feature points far away from normal centroid. After several
 2) Visualization of Detection Results: To further investigate iterations, the anormal scores of abnormal data are higher than
the detection performance of the proposed SMEL in detail, the the threshold εmax .
anomaly scores on the best five methods under the ST dataset 3) Analysis of Different Modules in SMEL: To evaluate our
are shown in Fig. 4. For the proposed SMEL, the mean value design choices, the effect of each module in the proposed SMEL
and standard deviation of the anomaly score are 0.117 and 0.156, is studies by removing model components. Specifically, we
respectively. Therefore, anomaly score thresholds εmax and εmin remove the adaptive weight mechanism (no weight), and double
are calculated as 0.585 and −0.351, respectively. Moreover, the memory modules (no memory), respectively.
original values shown in Fig. 4(a) are all positive. Due to the In the first ablation experiment, the proposed SMEL has larger
space limitation, only one positive cutting threshold is shown in Acc, F1 , BA, and FM meaning it has better detection perforthe article. mance, as given in Table IV. The adaptive weight mechanism
 The anomaly scores of OCSVM, AE, and DEC in Fig. 4 are effectively eliminates impact of abnormal data on the extraction
not stable and contain many false negatives, which indicates that of normal pattern.
HAN et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP CLUSTERING METHOD FOR DETECTING ABNORMAL DATA OF WWTP 1163

Fig. 4. Visualization of anomaly scores on the ST dataset on the best five methods. The shaded regions represent anomaly periods. The red
dash line is the cutting threshold of abnormal data. (a) the anomaly dimension. (b) One-class support vector machine. (c) Autoencoders. (d) Deep
embedded clustering. (e) Improved deep embedded clustering. (f) Self-supervised memory enhanced deep clustering method.

Fig. 5. ROC curves on three WWTP datasets. (a) ST. (b) RA. (c) QH.

 In the second ablation experiment, the model with all com- and LODA are around [0.3, 0.65] on three datasets. Furthermore,
ponents achieves the best results in for every modification on the ROC curves of the proposed SMEL under three WWTP
almost all metrics. The only exception is BA metric for the datasets show that TPR values quickly reach 0.9, 0.9, and 0.8,
RA dataset. Acc values of the proposed SMEL under three respectively, during the process of continuously reducing the
WWTP datasets are higher, which means the proposed SMEL threshold. These results show that the self-supervised deep clushas good classification performance. In sum, double memory tering network is more robust than other comparison methods.
modules help the proposed SMEL to learn more useful features 5) Evaluation on the Clustering Performance: To validate
and improve the performance of anomaly detection. the effectiveness of the clustering layer, the t-distributed stochas-
 4) Evaluation on Self-Supervised Deep Clustering Network: tic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) is utilized to visualize the latent
To evaluate the performance of the self-supervised deep- space in different iterations. Due to the page limitation, we only
clustering network, the standard ROC curve and AUC are used. show the feature distribution under the ST dataset in Fig. 6. The
By changing the threshold, ROC curves and AUC values on three black points denote the normal feature points and the blue points
WWTP datasets are obtained, as shown in Fig. 5. denote the abnormal feature points.
 The proposed SMEL clearly outperforms the other eight The distribution of feature points in Fig. 6(a) is relatively
methods. For the ST and RA datasets, AUC values of AE, IDEC, discrete and all feature points are marked abnormal, implying
and DEC are all above 0.9. For QH dataset, AUC values of AE, the difficulty of the anomaly detection. As the training process
IDEC, and DEC are all above 0.7. While AUC values of COR goes, say at the 70th epoch, most feature points have crowded
1164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 6. t-SNE visualization of embedded features on ST dataset. The black points denote the normal feature points and the blue points denote
the abnormal feature points.

Fig. 7. Robustness of the memory size. Fig. 8. Average running time on three WWTP datasets.

together and formed the normal cluster. At the 140th epoch,
feature points reach stability, which clearly distinguishes between normal features and abnormal features and obtains the
centroid of the normal cluster. The phenomenon indicates that
the clustering layer can obtain the normal pattern by iteratively
updating cluster centroids.
 6) Parameter Sensitivity Analysis: Finally, we also conduct
experiments on three WWTP datasets to investigate the sensitivity of the memory size M and the hyperparameter α.
 Acc values of the proposed SMEL with different memory
size on three WWTP datasets are shown in Fig. 7. Obviously,
Acc values with the memory module are higher than those Fig. 9. Hyperparameter α on three WWTP datasets.
without memory modules. It proves again the effectiveness of
the memory module. Moreover, the proposed SMEL has the best
detection performance when the memory size M is set be to 14. Thus, the proposed SMEL can be extended to online detection
And with an increasing the memory size M, the performance for WWTP.
of the proposed SMEL shows a relatively stable trend. Given The detection performances with different hyperparameter
a suitable memory size M, the proposed SMEL can robustly α under three WWTP dataset are shown in Fig. 9. For three
produce plausible results. WWTP datasets, when α = 0, Acc equals 0.948, 0.759, and
 The average running time for detecting each instance is pre- 0.712, respectively. With the increase of α, Acc gradually insented in Fig. 8. The proposed SMEL averagely takes 0.032 creases. When α = 0.5, the proposed SMEL obtains the highest
seconds for abnormal detection of one instance. In addition, with Acc under the ST and QH datasets. And when α = 0.6, the
an increasing the memory size M, the average running time varies proposed SMEL obtains the highest Acc under the RA dataset.
by about 0.005 s, which induces little additional computation Thereafter, when α increases, Acc gradually decreases. These
time. Compared to remove the memory module, the proposed results indicate that the parameter α plays a balance role between
SMEL boosts the overall performances by a large margin while reconstruction error and clustering error. When α is set to be
introducing acceptable running time. In addition, the running a large value, the proposed SMEL will have an unsatisfactory
time is much less than the specific interval, normally 15 min. performance due to poor reconstruction.
HAN et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP CLUSTERING METHOD FOR DETECTING ABNORMAL DATA OF WWTP 1165

 V. CONCLUSION [15] S. K. Patnaik, C. N. Babu, and M. Bhave, “Intelligent and adaptive web data
 extraction system using convolutional and long short-term memory deep
 In this article, a self-supervised memory enhanced deep clus- learning networks,” Big Data Mining Analytics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 279–297,
tering method (SMEL), including a self-supervised deep cluster- 2021.
 [16] T. Pan, J. Chen, Z. Zhou, C. Wang, and S. He, “A novel deep learning
ing network, an adaptive weight objective function, and double network via multiscale inner product with locally connected feature exmemory enhanced modules, was proposed for detecting abnor- traction for intelligent fault detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 15,
mal data in WWTP without using any labels. The self-supervised no. 9, pp. 5119–5128, Sep. 2019.
 [17] N. Yu, R. Yang, and M. Huang, “Deep common spatial pattern based motor
deep clustering network with the adaptive weight objective imagery classification with improved objective function,” Int. J. Netw. Dyn.
function projected time series into a latent subspace to extract Intell., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 73–84, 2022.
nonlinear structure and iteratively updated the clustering layer [18] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
 detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
to obtain the normal pattern by taking into the negative impact Vis., 2017, pp. 341–349.
of noise account. Furthermore, the double memory enhanced [19] Y. Wang, H. Yang, X. Yuan, Y. A. Shardt, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Deep
modules were used to produce the centroids before each iteration learning for fault-relevant feature extraction and fault classification with
 stacked supervised auto-encoder,” J. Process Control, vol. 92, pp. 79–89,
for enhancing training stability and provide pseudo-labels for 2020.
updating the parameters of encoders and decoders. Experimental [20] J. Hu, X. Zhang, and S. Maybank, “Abnormal driving detection with
results demonstrated that the proposed SMEL achieved superior normalized driving behavior data: A deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 6943–6951, Jul. 2020.
anomaly detection accuracy over eight competitors under three [21] P. Perera and V. M. Patel, “Learning deep features for one-class classi-
WWTP datasets, and obtained an acceptable running time that fication,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 5450–5463,
was much less than the specific interval, facilitating the promo- Nov. 2019.
 [22] L. Lu and A. Hanjalic, “Audio keywords discovery for text-like audio
tion of online abnormal detection scenarios. In the future, we content analysis and retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 10, no. 1,
plan to extend our work in two directions. First, we will extend pp. 74–85, Jan. 2008.
the deep clustering algorithm to online scenarios for WWTP. [23] W.-A. Lin, J.-C. Chen, C. D. Castillo, and R. Chellappa, “Deep density
 clustering of unconstrained faces,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Second, an optimization strategy will be designed to improve Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 8128–8137.
detection efficiency. [24] J. Xie, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “Unsupervised deep embedding for
 clustering analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016, pp. 478–487.
 REFERENCES [25] B. Yang, X. Fu, N. D. Sidiropoulos, and M. Hong, “Towards k-meansfriendly spaces: Simultaneous deep learning and clustering,” in Proc. Int.
 [1] H. Han, H. Liu, J. Li, and J. Qiao, “Cooperative fuzzy-neural control for
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3861–3870.
 wastewater treatment process,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 9,
 [26] H. Song, P. Li, and H. Liu, “Deep clustering based fair outlier detection,”
 pp. 5971–5981, Sep. 2021.
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
 [2] H. Han, M. Sun, H. Han, X. Wu, and J. Qiao, “Univariate imputation
 pp. 1481–1489.
 method for recovering missing data in wastewater treatment process,”
 [27] T. Qiu and Y.-J. Li, “Fast LDP-MST: An efficient density-peak-based
 Chin. J. Chem. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 1–12, 2022.
 clustering method for large-size datasets,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 [3] J. Geng, C. Yang, Y. Li, L. Lan, and Q. Luo, “MPA-RNN: A novel attentionvol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4767–4780, May 2023.
 based recurrent neural networks for total nitrogen prediction,” IEEE Trans.
 [28] J. Weston, S. Chopra, and A. Bordes, “Memory networks,” Proc. 3rd Int.
 Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 6516–6525, Oct. 2022.
 Conf. Learn. Represent, 2015, pp. 1–15.
 [4] S. Heo, K. Nam, J. Loy-Benitez, and C. Yoo, “Data-driven hybrid model for
 [29] Z. He, X. Xu, and S. Deng, “Discovering cluster-based local outliers,”
 forecasting wastewater influent loads based on multimodal and ensemble
 Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 24, no. 9-10, pp. 1641–1650, 2003.
 deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 6925–6934,
 [30] H. Liu, J. Li, Y. Wu, and Y. Fu, “Clustering with outlier removal,” IEEE
 Oct. 2021.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2369–2379, Jun. 2021.
 [5] H. Han, M. Sun, X. Wu, and F. Li, “Double-cycle weighted imputation
 [31] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
 method for wastewater treatment process data with multiple missing
 Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 patterns,” Sci. China Technol. Sci., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 2967–2978,
 [32] T. Pevný, “Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies,” Mach.
 2022.
 Learn., vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 275–304, 2016.
 [6] P. J. Rousseeuw and M. Hubert, “Robust statistics for outlier detection,” Wi-
 [33] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and R. C.
 ley Interdiscipl. Rev., Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 73–79,
 Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,”
 2011.
 Neural Computation, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, 2001.
 [7] S. Hido, Y. Tsuboi, H. Kashima, M. Sugiyama, and T. Kanamori, “Sta-
 [34] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection using
 tistical outlier detection using direct density ratio estimation,” Knowl. Inf.
 reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18,
 Syst., vol. 26, pp. 309–336, 2011.
 2015.
 [8] C. Feng, C. T. Lu, and A. P. Boedihardjo, “GLS-SOD: A generalized local
 [35] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering
 statistical approach for spatial outlier detection,” in Proc. ACM Sigkdd Int.
 with local structure preservation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2010, pp. 1–10.
 2017, pp. 1753–1759.
 [9] R. J. Campello, D. Moulavi, A. Zimek, and J. Sander, “Hierarchical density
 estimates for data clustering, visualization, and outlier detection,” ACM Honggui Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–51, 2015. the B.S. degree in automatic from the Civil Avia-
[10] L. Zhang, J. Zhao, and W. Li, “Online and unsupervised anomaly detection tion University of China, Tianjin, China, in 2005,
 for streaming data using an array of sliding windows and PDDs,” IEEE and the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in control the-
 Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 2284–2289, Apr. 2021. ory and control engineering from the Beijing
[11] X. Xu, Y. Lei, and Z. Li, “An incorrect data detection method for big data University of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2007
 cleaning of machinery condition monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., and 2011, respectively.
 vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2326–2336, Mar. 2020. Since 2011, he has been with Beijing Uni-
[12] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn., versity of Technology, where he is currently a
 vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004. Professor. His current research interests include
[13] G. K. Vishwakarma, C. Paul, and A. M. Elsawah, “A hybrid feedforward neural networks, fuzzy systems, intelligent sysneural network algorithm for detecting outliers in non-stationary multi- tems, modeling and control in process systems, and civil and environvariate time series,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 184, 2021, Art. no. 115545. mental engineering.
[14] F. M. Shakiba, M. Shojaee, S. M. Azizi, and M. Zhou, “Real-time sensing Dr. Han is currently an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS
 and fault diagnosis for transmission lines,” Int. J. Netw. Dyn. Intell., vol. 1, ON CYBERNETICS, International Journal of Fuzzy System, and Science
 no. 1, pp. 36–47, 2022. China: Technological Sciences.
1166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 Meiting Sun received the B.E. degree in elec- Zezhong Liu received the B.S. degree in airtronic information science and technology and craft design and engineering from the Norththe M.E. degree in electronic science and tech- western Polytechnical University, XiAn, China,
 nology from the Yanshan University, Qinhuang- in 2016.
 dao, China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively. She He is currently with the Beijing Aerospace
 is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in Smart Manufacturing Technology Development
 control science and engineering with the Beijing Co., Ltd., Beijing, China. He is mainly respon-
 University of Technology, Beijing, China. sible for the marketing of industrial Internet and
 Her current research interests include neural intelligent manufacturing related fields.
 networks and data processing.

 Fangyu Li received the B.S. degree in automation from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in
 2009, the M.E. degree in control engineering
 from the Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
 2013, and Ph.D. degree in geophysics from the
 University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA, in
 2017, respectively. Chen Wang received the B.S. degree in vehicle
 From 2017 to 2020, he was a Postdoctoral engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technol-
 Fellow with the College of Engineering, Univer- ogy, Harbin, China, in 2008, the MS. degree in
 sity of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. From 2020 to business administration in 2016 from the Beijing
 2021, he was a tenure-track Assistant Professor Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, where he
with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kennesaw is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
State University, Marietta, GA, USA. He is currently a Full Professor energy and climate economy.
and a Ph.D. supervisor with the Faculty of Information Technology, He is currently a Technical Director with the
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interests Beijing Aerospace Smart Manufacturing Techinclude complex signal processing, quantitative interpretation, machine nology Development Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
learning, deep learning, distributed computing, Internet of things, and His current research interests include Industrial
cyber-physical systems. Internet platform and intelligent manufacturing related fields.