IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024 1223

 Self-Supervised Learning and Multisource
 Heterogeneous Information Fusion Based Quality
 Anomaly Detection for Heavy-Plate Shape
 Datong Li , Jun Lu, Tongkang Zhang, and Jinliang Ding , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Plate shape quality anomaly detection suffers from demonstrated by comparing it with other advanced algorithms.
the problems of less labeled and multisource heterogeneous The proposed approach can be extended to other heavy-plate
(MSH) data due to the complex production process with quality anomaly detection problems with less labeled and MSH
multi-process and multi-equipment. To address these problems, data.
this paper proposes a self-supervised learning framework based
on MSH contrastive learning (MSH-CL). In the proposed frame- Index Terms— Heavy-plate, plate shape, multisource heterogework, an encoder is designed to extract the MSH information, neous data, information fusion, self-supervised learning.
which contains an MSH feature extract network (MSH-FEN)
and an MSH feature fusion network (MSH-FFN). In MSH-FEN,
 I. I NTRODUCTION
a two-pathway CNN network is employed to extract the MSH
feature. Then, a cross-MSH (CMSH) data fusion strategy based
on the attention mechanism is designed to characterize the relationship between the MSH data in the MSH-FFN. The learning
 H EAVY-PLATE has been widely applied in ships, chemicals, buildings, etc. In the past few decades, studies
 on the issues of the heavy-plate production process have
process consists of two phases, namely the self-supervised feature
learning phase based on the contrastive learning (CL) and the received extensive attention, such as feedback control [1],
supervised fine-tuning phase. The former phase is responsible operation optimization [2], and production scheduling [3],
for training the encoder with massive unlabeled data. Then, [4]. Recently, researchers have attached the importance of the
a classifier followed by the encoder is built with less labeled data problem of heavy-plate quality anomaly detection because of
in the supervised fine-tuning phase, which is applied to plate
shape quality anomaly detection. Finally, the experiments are
 the strict requirements of the contract. Generally, the quality of
carried out on the real-world data set collected from a heavy-plate heavy-plate includes five major indicators, namely shape, size,
production process. The experimental results demonstrate the performance, surface, and internal quality. Among them, the
effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach. plate shape is one of the most important and complex quality
 indicators and is closely related to the production process.
 Note to Practitioners—This paper focuses on the problem of
shape quality anomaly detection for the heavy-plate production
 Currently, the plate shape quality is determined by manually
process, which is crucial to steel-making. However, the most evaluating the final quality control (FQC) image obtained from
quality-relevant data-driven modeling approaches suffer from the a shape meter at the end of the production process, resulting in
problem of requiring massive labeled data. In addition, the data an unavoidable time delay. Therefore, detecting the plate shape
generated in the practice heavy-plate production process have the quality conveniently and accurately is of great significance to
characteristics of multisource heterogeneous (MSH). Motivated
by the challenge of the less labeled and MSH data modeling, this
 heavy-plate production.
paper proposed a self-supervised feature learning approach to The plate shape quality is difficult to detect, because the
learn a feature encoder to model the MSH data. Then, fine-tuning production process consists of multi-equipment, and has the
is used to obtain the model to detect the plate shape quality. In the characteristics of small batch and multi-variety. Therefore, it is
feature encoder, a cross-MSH (CMSH) data fusion strategy is hard to establish an accurate mechanism model. In modern
proposed. Finally, the effectiveness of the proposed approach is
 industries, a large amount of data has been collected from the
 Manuscript received 27 November 2022; revised 28 February 2023; actual production process, and the quality of products genaccepted 25 March 2023. Date of publication 17 April 2023; date of current erally can be reflected by process variables. The data-driven
version 9 April 2024. This article was recommended for publication by
Associate Editor X. Dai and Editor P. Zhou upon evaluation of the reviewers’ methods are more flexible than mechanism models [5]. Therecomments. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research fore, these methods have been widely used to address the
and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3304700, in part by issues in the industrial field, such as fault diagnosis [6], [7],
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61988101 and
Grant 62203100, and in part by the Central Government Guides Local Sci- process monitoring [8] and soft sensor [9], [10], which are
ence and Technology Development Funds under Grant 2022JH6/100100055. also available for quality prediction [11], [12], [13], [14].
(Corresponding authors: Jinliang Ding; Jun Lu.) For example, Lu and Ding [15] proposed a novel stochastic
 The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for
Process Industries, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China (e-mail: configuration network with iterative learning using privileged
dtongl@163.com; junluchn@hotmail.com; tkzhang@stumail.neu.edu.cn; jld- information for the plate shape quality detection based on the
ing@mail.neu.edu.cn). process data.
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2023.3265649. The aforementioned methods depend decisively on massive
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2023.3265649 labeled data, which require extensive manual annotation. How-
 1545-5955 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

ever, it is always difficult to obtain the labels of heavy-plate data features are extracted by different models. Besides,
quality, since only a part of the plates will be detected by Zhou et al. [26] use the deep learning method to extract the
the shape meter. Thus, the production process data present the features of multisource information and directly concatenate
less labeled characteristic. In addition, the multi-equipment the features of different branches as the final representation.
involved in the heavy-plate production process leads to the However, they did not consider the correlation between MSH
diverse data sources. Moreover, the size of the steel plates data.
will change with the slabs, and the sampling frequency and Contrastive learning (CL) has become a popular
the running speed of roller also vary with different production self-supervised representation learning framework in
processes. As a result, the data structures collected from the recent years and achieved outstanding performance in
actual production process of steel plates exhibit multisource multiple computer vision tasks [27], [28], [29], [30]. In the
heterogeneous (MSH) characteristic. Therefore, the above CL framework, a feature encoder is learned using data
imperfect attributes of the process data pose the following augmentation and contrastive loss to obtain the latent codes
challenges for detecting the heavy-plate quality: of the samples. Then, the encoder is used in downstream
 tasks. The contrastive loss expects to repulse negative sample
 1) Less labeled data. Most data-driven methods for induspairs while attracting the positive pairs. In [28], a sample CL
 trial process modeling require a lot of labeled data,
 framework, named SimCLR, is proposed, which combines
 which is often hard to acquire. Therefore, an intricate
 the multiple data augmentation methods and a nonlinear
 problem is how to use the massive unlabeled process
 projector to obtain the feature representation. The above
 data to assist in building a data-driven model to detect
 studies indicate that such a CL learning paradigm can obtain
 the heavy-plate shape.
 more reasonable feature representations. It is essential to
 2) MSH process data. It is challenging to extract the
 design corresponding data augmentation according to the
 features of the data with MSH characteristic. Thus,
 characteristics of the actual problem, which will influence
 another difficult task is designing an effective feature
 the model preferences [29]. In recent studies, the CL has
 extraction and fusion approach for MSH data.
 been used to deal with industrial data modeling issues. For
 Recently, many researchers have paid attention to the above example, contrastive loss is used as a regularization term to
challenges. For example, Bao et al. [16] proposed a co-training train a soft sensing model [31]. As far as we know, CL is not
partial least squares (PLS) for developing semi-supervised adopted to solve both the problems of less labeled and MSH
soft sensors. Two PLS models are trained on two sufficient data for industrial data-driven modeling.
and redundant views using the iterative learning procedure To this end, this paper proposes a novel multisource
for augmenting the training set, respectively. On this basis, heterogeneous contrastive learning (MSH-CL) framework,
two new regressors are constructed for soft sensing. How- which is a typical self-supervised representation learning
ever, when the labeled data is insufficient, the correctness paradigm, to detect the abnormal quality of heavy-plate
of the labels obtained by such an iterative method cannot shape. The contributions of this paper are summarized as
be guaranteed, which will degrade the performance of the follows:
learner model. With the development of pre-training trick and
transfer learning, the fine-tuning strategy is another candidate
 1) The MSH-CL framework is designed to handle the
for solving the problem of less labeled data. For example,
 issues of less labeled and MSH data by incorporating
Yuan et al. [17] presented a stacked autoencoder based quality
 CL learning, and multiple components are developed.
prediction model with fine-tuning strategy. However, they did
 2) An MSH feature encoder (MSHFE) that consists of
not consider the MSH problem in real-world industrial data.
 an MSH feature extract network (MSH-FEN) and an
Because in the pre-training stage, the encoder must be trained
 MSH feature fusion network (MSH-FFN) is developed
by calculating the reconstruction error between the decoded
 to extract the MSH information.
and original data. Thus, it is difficult to establish an encoder
 3) In the MSH-FEN, a two-pathway network is developed
to model MSH data. More detailed methods of modeling the
 to extract the feature of MSH data. After that, in the
less labeled industrial process data can be found in [18].
 MSH-FFN, an attention mechanism based cross-MSH
 The MSH process data is present in many modern industries,
 (CMSH) data fusion strategy is presented to characterize
which also received much concerns [19], [20], [21], [22],
 the relationship between the MSH data.
[23]. To model the MSH data, for example, the heteroge-
 4) The effectiveness of the proposed approach is verified
neous data are transformed into linguistic 2-tuples, but the
 on the real-world data collected from the heavy-plate
high-dimensional data obtained in the sensor is not taken
 production process.
into account [24]. Yuan et al. [20] develop a comprehensive
decision-making framework with multi-source heterogeneous
data for selecting the most appropriate distributed energy The rest of this article is organized as follows. First, the prosystem composition schemes. Pan and Zhang [21] present cess of heavy-plate production is described in Section II. Then,
a predictive method to accurately estimate building energy the framework of quality anomaly detection for heavy-plate
consumption by learning MSH data collected from buildings. shape is presented in Section III. In Section IV, the experimen-
Furthermore, Bu et al. [25] constructed a method for operating tal results are presented and discussed. Finally, the conclusion
performance assessment based on MSH data, the multi-source is given in Section V.
LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION 1225

Fig. 1. The primary production process of heavy-plate.

 II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
 The shape quality is highly relevant to the heavy-plate
production process [32]. In this section, the primary process
of heavy-plate production is first briefly described. Then, the
relationship between the process and the plate shape, and the
characteristics of the production process data are introduced.

A. Description of Heavy-Plate Production Process
 The production of heavy-plate is relatively complicated,
which includes multiple processes. A practical production
process of heavy-plate in Eastern China is shown in Fig. 1,
which mainly consists of reheating, rolling, cooling and hot
leveling process.
 The reheating process contains preheating section, heating
section I, heating section II and soaking section in the heating
furnace. The steel slab enters the heating furnace and is Fig. 2. The common shape quality of the heavy-plate. (a) The schematic
 diagram of plate shape qualities. (1) The normal shape quality. (2) The
first heated to the target rolling temperature in the reheating abnormal shape quality of the wave. (3) and (4) present the abnormal quality
process. The following process behind the reheating process of the warpage. (b) A real-world case of the abnormal heavy-plate shape.
is the rolling process, which contains a rough mill and a finish
mill, and processes the heated slab through the three stages of
forming, widening and finishing rolling. It is rolled repeatedly
to produce a steel plate that meets the required size and shape.
Subsequently, the cooling process follows the rolling process,
which contains an accelerated cooling device that can reduce
the temperature of the plate rapidly and accurately. The steel
plate is sent into the cooling process, and the plate temperature
is dropped rapidly to satisfy the designed finish cooling temperature and the requirements of low-temperature toughness,
strength, and welding performance. The hot leveling process
that contains a hot roller leveler is set behind the cooling
process, and the cooled plate is straightened to a certain extent
 Fig. 3. The schematic diagram of the MSH data collected from the
in this process. Therefore, the shape quality of the heavy-plate heavy-plate production process. (a) The real number data. (b) The one-diis mainly related to the processes mentioned above. mensional data. (c) The two-dimensional data. (d) The three-dimensional data.

B. Description of the Heavy-Plate Shape Quality and Data
Characteristics The common qualities of the heavy-plate shape are shown in
 The shape quality of a heavy-plate can be defined by Fig. 2. However, acquiring labels of heavy-plate shape quality
the flatness, rectangularity and plate crown. Without loss of is commonly expensive, which is one of the challenging
generality, the abnormal shape quality is essentially caused problems.
by the uneven distribution of the internal stress of the steel The essential to building a heavy-plate shape quality
plate. The significant factors influencing the shape in the anomaly detection model is to establish the corresponding relaproduction process are the temperature and the rolling force, tionship between the process variables and the final plate shape
such as the uniformity of the temperature of the slab, the quality. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the production
uneven internal stress caused by the rolling mill, the plate process and process variables of the heavy-plate and select
temperature uniformity before and after cooling, and so on. appropriate process variables.
1226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Since heavy-plate production involves multiple processes 1) Data Cleaning: The process data collected from
and equipments, the data structure is various and com- real-world industries should be cleaned first due to the complicated, which presents the MSH characteristic. On the plex production environment, and the sample containing the
one hand, the data structures of intra-sample x can be null value will be eliminated.
simply divided into four categories: the real number data 2) Data Preprocessing: After data cleaning, the MSH data
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , one-dimensional data y1 , y2 , . . . , ya , two- examples should be preprocessed before modeling. As the
dimensional data z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , and three-dimensional data analysis in Section II-B, the MSH data in heavy-plate
v1 , v2 , . . . , vc , as shown in Fig. 3. For example, the statistics production can be divided into two parts. First, the
of the temperature of plate surface, roller table, environment, real number variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn are set as a vector
and other indicators are the real number data; the temperature x 1d = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ], where x 1d ∈ R1×n , n is the number
of start cooling, finish cooling, and other indicators acquired of variables. The linear interpolation is employed as the
by sensors are the one-dimensional data; the temperature of preprocessing approach to deal with the remaining variables
finish cooling, heating furnace and other indicators acquired y1 , y2 , . . . , ya , z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , v1 , v2 , . . . , vc . The examples
by sensors are shown as the two-dimensional data; the rolling of preprocessed data after interpolation are shown in
force, roll bending force, torque and other indicators are Fig. 5. The y1 , y2 , . . . , ya are preprocessed to y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ ,
present as the three-dimensional data. Thus, the real number where is the 1×m vector, m is the data length after
data is commonly the key process variable, and the difference preprocessing. The z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , v1 , v2 , . . . , vc are flattened
in the data dimension is caused by the different types of and then linearly interpolated to a 1×m vector, where the
sensors and the manufacturing process. On the other hand, data after preprocessing are z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′ .
the data length of inter-samples is also different due to the Then, y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ , z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′
distinct plate lengths and rolling speeds. Therefore, another are concatenated as a matrix X 2d =
considerable challenge is how to deal with the MSH process [y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ , z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′ ]⊤ , where
data. X 2d ∈ Rv×m , v = a + b + c is the number of variables.
 Meanwhile, by analyzing the influence of each process on The preprocessing approach adopted in this paper makes
the plate shape quality and the data characteristics of the the MSH data convenient to deal with and extract the feature.
relevant variables, the process variables related to the plate Meanwhile, an MSH data example x is divided into two parts,
shape are screened out. Then, the corresponding anomaly x 1d and X 2d , which can maintain the MSH characteristics of
detection model of the plate shape quality can be built using the original data to a certain extent.
the process data.
 B. Multisource Heterogeneous Contrastive Learning
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 The schematic diagram of the MSH-CL framework is shown
 The overall structure of the proposed MSH-CL based self- in the right part of Fig. 4. In order to detect shape quality
supervised representation learning approach for the shape with less labeled data, the proposed approach consists of two
quality anomaly detection of heavy-plate is described in learning phases: CL and fine-tuning, and a detecting phase:
Fig. 4. First, the data is collected from the heavy-plate quality anomaly detection.
production process and the shape quality-relevant variables are 1) CL Phase: This phase is proposed to train a feature
selected. Then, the selected data are cleaned and preprocessed encoder f θ (·) with massive unlabeled data to latent code the
before training process. After that, the proposed MSH-CL is MSH data. Fig. 6 shows the detailed architecture of CL in this
adopted to build the quality anomaly detection model for the paper, which is a Siamese network with shared weights θ. The
heavy-plate shape. It contains two learning phases, namely the two branches are identical, and each branch is comprised of an
CL phase and the fine-tuning phase, and one quality anomaly MSHFE f θ (·) and a nonlinear projector unit gθ (·). The added
detection phase. The CL phase aims to learn an MSHFE with projector gθ (·) is a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which can
massive unlabeled data. Then, the trained MSHFE is used to improve the feature representation performance of the encoder
build the detection model with the less labeled data in the f θ (·) [28].
fine-tuning phase. Finally, the trained model is implemented The data augmentation Aug(·) is critical in CL and will
to detect the shape quality. This section mainly introduces affect the discriminative ability of quality features mined
the data cleaning and preprocessing method, the MSH-CL from process data. A sample x is augmented to produce two
framework that includes an MSH-FEN and an MSH-FFN, and difference views xv1 , xv2 , which create similarity relations for
the implementation process for quality anomaly detection of the contrastive loss and define invariants that the model should
plate shape. learn. Furthermore, data augmentation for CL should not
 change the semantic information of the sample x. However, the
 augmentation methods for process data usually add Gaussian
A. Multisource Heterogeneous Data Cleaning and noise to the raw data, which may significantly affect the
Preprocessing data distribution. Thus, data augmentation methods should be
 The process data collected from the real-world heavy-plate appropriately designed for CL (See Section IV-D1).
production environment have the characteristic of MSH. Thus, In the training phase of CL, firstly, a minibatch of N
the data should be cleaned and preprocessed first. data examples is randomly sampled and augmented pair-wise,
LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION 1227

Fig. 4. The structure of the MSH-CL for quality anomaly detection.

 Fig. 6. The schematic diagram of pre-training phase in MSH-CL.

 measure the similarity between each sample by the dot product
 of ℓ2 normalized u and v. The typical contrastive loss function,
 named InfoNCE loss, is defined as follows:
Fig. 5. The examples of MSH data after linear interpolation. The left column
is the original data and the right column is the data after linear interpolation.
 N
 X sim pos
 LInfoNCE = − log
 i=1
 sim pos + sim neg
which results in 2N data examples. The two views xv1 , xv2 of
the same data example are treated as a positive example pair, sim pos = exp(sim(z i , z i+ )/τ )
 X
and the remaining 2(N − 1) samples within the minibatch are sim neg = exp(sim(z i , z j )/τ ) (3)
viewed as negative examples. The negative examples in CL z j ∈z i−
aim at preventing model collapse during the training process.
 Subsequently, the augmented minibatch is coded by the where τ denotes the temperature hyper-parameter. The
feature encoder f θ (·) to produce the latent code h, and then InfoNCE loss can maximize the similarities between each
the nonlinear projector gθ (·) is used to map h to feature z, positive pair and simultaneously minimize that between negwhich can be formalized as follow: ative pairs. The weights θ of each branch are updated by the
 optimizer and backpropagation of the contrastive loss LInfoNCE .
 h = f θ (x) (1) Therefore, the encoder f θ (·) and latent code h can be obtained
 z = gθ (h). (2) by minimizing the loss using unlabeled data.
 2) Fine-Tuning Phase: The trained encoder f θ (·) in the CL
Then, z is used to calculate the contrastive loss. z i and z i+ phase is taken out and follows a fully connected network
are the positive pair of the ith example. The negative
  example as the classifier f c (·) to establish the plate shape anomaly
features within the minibatch are denoted as z i− = z j | j ̸= i . detection model. Subsequently, the model is fine-tuned by the
The cosine similarity sim(u, v) = u ⊤ v/∥u∥∥v∥ is adopted to less labeled data to realize the capacity of quality anomaly
1228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Pt
detection. The cross entropy (CE) loss LCE = − i=1 pi log qi x and improve the quality of latent code h. The CMSH
is used in this training phase, where t denotes the total number consists of two attention modules, i.e., the low dimensional
of classes, pi and qi denote the ture label and predicted information-guided attention (LIGA) module and the high
probability output of i-th class, respectively. dimensional information-guided attention (HIGA) module,
 3) Quality Anomaly Detection Phase: Finally, the trained which are shown in Fig. 7. In these two modules, the underlymodel is deployed to detect the plate shape quality. ing relationship between different data structures is captured
 to enhance the feature representation h 1d and h 2d , respectively.
C. Multisource Heterogeneous Information Feature Encoder In the LIGA, the information of h 1d is utilized to enhance
 the feature representation h 2d . First, for h 1d and h 2d , the
 In this part, the encoder f θ (·) is designed to draw the MSH corresponding query Q 1d , key K 2d and value V2d can be
information, which consists of two parts: the MSH feature generated by
extract network and the MSH feature fusion network.
 1) MSH Feature Extract Network: The MSH data include Q 1d = W Q 1d h 1d , K 2d = W K 2d h 2d , V2d = WV2d h 2d (6)
multiple dimensions. Therefore, the two pathways feature
extract network is proposed, which is formed by a 1D path where W Q 1d , W K 2d and WV2d are matrices with appropriate
and a 2D path to deal with the x 1d and X 2d , respectively. dimensions. Thereafter, Q 1d and K 2d are used to calculate
 The convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are employed the attention map SLIGA of LIGA as
in this part as the feature extract network. The deep residual ⊤
 SLIGA = so f tmax(Q 1d K 2d ). (7)
networks (ResNets) are an advanced CNNs architecture and
have been used as the backbone to extract image features in ′
 Finally, the output V2d of LIGA is the weighted sum with
various computer vision tasks [33]. ResNets contain two kinds the value V2d as
of block, i.e., the residual building block and the bottleneck
building block, and can be extended to different depths. Thus,
 ′
 V2d = SLIGA V2d . (8)
the ResNet is a preferred candidate because of its flexibility
 Contrast to LIGA, h 1d is enhanced by h 2d in the HIGA,
and capability
 of which query Q 2d , key K 1d and value V1d can be formulated
 The 1D convolution is used in the 1D path to acquire the
 as
feature of x 1d . Thus, a 1D vision of ResNet is used as the
encoder f 1d (·). The naive ResNets are directly used as the Q 2d = W Q 2d h 2d , K 1d = W K 1d h 1d , V1d = WV1d h 1d (9)
encoder f 2d (·) in the 2D path to extract the feature of X 2d .
The two pathways of MSH-FEN can formulized as follow: where W(·) denotes the weight matrix of (·) as in (6). Similarly,
 ′
 the attention map SHIGA and the output V1d of HIGA are
 h 1d = f 1d (x 1d ) (4)
 h 2d = f 2d (X 2d ). (5)
 ⊤
 SHIGA = so f tmax(Q 2d K 1d ) (10)
 V1d = SHIGA V1d .
 ′
 (11)
where h 1d and h 2d denote the feature of x 1d and X 2d ,
respectively. Then, h 1d and h 2d are used to obtain the latent Then, in order to better develop the CMSH, three strategies
code of the MSH data. are proposed to integrate the LIGA and HIGA for constructing
 2) MSH Feature Fusion Network: In this part, a fusion the MSH-FFN, namely parallel, first HIGA then LIGA, and
network is designed to combine the two pathways network first LIGA then HIGA. The CMSH is shown in Fig. 8. Different
in the MSH-FEN. strategies can make the CMSH adapt to diversified tasks.
 The common fusion strategies to obtain the latent code h of
an MSH data sample x are to add or concatenate the feature
 D. Implementation Process for Quality Anomaly Detection
of each data structure directly. Such fusion approaches have
often ignored the inner correlation between MSH data and The MSH-CL for quality anomaly detection can be summacannot find out a better feature representation. Thus, the fusion rized in the following four steps:
strategy of MSH data should take advantage of the correlation 1) The collected process data is cleaned and preprocessed.
between h 1d and h 2d . Then, the data is divided into labeled data and unlabeled
 The attention mechanism is an effective method in deep data.
learning and is widely used in various tasks of computer 2) In the training phase of CL, the unlabeled data is used to
vision and natural language processing. It is presented to train the MSHFE f θ (·). First, the unlabeled data is genercapture the most relevant parts of visual or textual inputs ated in different views through data augmentation. Then,
like a human being [34], [35]. The attention mechanism the generated data is input into the Siamese network, and
improves the model performance by focusing on the valuable the InfoNCE loss is selected as the cost function. Finally,
parts. Therefore, inspired by the superiority of the attention f θ (·) is trained by utilizing an optimizer to update the
mechanism, an attention-based feature fusion network is weight θ via backpropagation. The CL phase is shown
proposed to bridge the feature h 1d and h 2d of MSH data. in Algorithm 1.
 Based on the attention mechanism, the cross-MSH (CMSH) 3) In the fine-tuning phase, the trained MSHFE f θ (·) is
data interaction approach is introduced in MSH-FFN to con- taken out and followed by a classifier f c (·), and then
struct a high-level representation of the MSH data sample the model is fine-tuned by the labeled data.
LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION 1229

Fig. 7. The schematic diagram of LIGA and HIGA. (a) LIGA. (b) HIGA.

Fig. 8. The schematic diagram of CMSH fusion strategy. (a) Parallel. (b) First HIGA then LIGA. (c) First LIGA then HIGA.

 Algorithm 1 The Training Procedures of CL Phase
 Input: Unlabeled data set Xu , number of iterations
 epochs.
 Output: The trained MSHFE f θ (·).
 1 Initialize parameters θ of MSHFE f θ (·) and nonlinear
 projector gθ (·);
 2 for e = 1 to epochs do
 3 Obtain mini-batch x by sampling from the
 unlabeled data set Xu ;
 4 Get two views of x by data augmentation method
 Aug(·);
 5 Obtain the latent code h by (1);
 6 Obtain the projected feature z by (2);
 7 Calculate contrastive loss LInfoNCE by (3);
 8 Update model parameters θ by back-propagating
 LInfoNCE ;
 9 end

 presented in detail. All experiments are conducted on a server
Fig. 9. The flow chart of MSH-CL based quality anomaly detection.
 with an NVIDIA Tesla V100 Graphics Card and PyTorch.

 4) When the production of a new heavy-plate is finished, A. Experimental Dataset
 the obtained model is used to detect the shape quality
 of this plate. In this part, the real-world heavy-plate production process
 data set is utilized in the experiments. The data examples are
 The flow chart of MSH-CL-based quality anomaly detection
 collected from a real-world heavy-plate production line located
can be seen in Fig. 9.
 in Eastern China. As shown in Table I, the data set contains
 the normal plate shape and four kinds of anomaly, including
 IV. E XPERIMENTS ON ACTUAL P RODUCTION DATA bend, horizon wave, left wave, and right wave.
 In this section, experiments are carried out to demonstrate As the analysis of heavy-plate production process in
the effectiveness of the proposed MSH-CL. The experimen- Section II-B, the 281 shape quality relevant variables are
tal dataset, evaluation metrics, parameters setting, ablation selected. Then, as mentioned in Section III-A, the collected
experiments, and the comparisons of experimental results are data examples are cleaned and preprocessed first, as shown
1230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE II
 T HE R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH D IFFERENT DATA AUGMENTATION
 M ETHODS

Fig. 10. The schematic diagram of MSH data after cleaning and preprocessing. (a) x 1d ∈ R1×245 . (b) X 2d ∈ R36×36 .
 The 1D version of ResNet-18 and the naive ResNet-18 is
 adopted in MSH-FEN as the two pathways backbone to extract
 TABLE I
 the feature of x 1d and X 2d .
DATA S ET OF H EAVY-P LATE S HAPE C OLLECTED F ROM T HE R EAL -W ORLD
 P RODUCTION P ROCESS
 D. Ablation Experiments
 In this subsection, the effectiveness of the proposed components in MSH-CL is verified and discussed in detail.
 1) Selection of the Data Augmentation Method: The data
 augmentation method is designed to generate two views of
 the same data sample, which should guarantee that it has similar semantic information. Therefore, four data augmentation
 methods are designed, and then explored to determine which
in Fig. 10, a data example is turned into two parts, namely a
 one is appropriate for this task. The four methods are presented
vector x 1d ∈ R1×245 and a matrix X 2d ∈ R36×36 .
 as follows:
 Finally, the collected data is divided into the CL training set,
the fine-tuning set and the testing set according to the ratio of • Method A. Adding a certain proportion α of Gaussian

0.6, 0.2, and 0.2. noise to the preprocessed data.
 • Method B. Performing a certain probability β of dropout
 on the preprocessed data.
B. Evaluation Metric • Method C. Adding a certain proportion of Gaussian noise
 The evaluation metric, i.e., accuracy, is adopted to illustrate processed by a certain probability of dropout to the data.
the performance of the proposed approach. Accuracy is the • Method D. Adding a certain proportion of Gaussian noise
rate of correct classification. The definition of accuracy is to the data and then performing a certain probability
formulated as dropout.
 TP +TN In this ablation investigation, the other components pro-
 Accuracy = , (12)
 T P + FP + T N + FN posed in MSH-CL are set to the same to eliminate the distracwhere TP denotes that both the truth value and predicted value tion of other factors for the experimental result. The CMSH in
are positive, FP denotes that the truth value is negative but MSH-FFN adopts the parallel strategy (See Fig. 8(a)) to fuse
the predicted value is positive, TN denotes that both the truth the h 1d and h 2d to obtain the latent code h. The results of
value and predicted value are negative, FN denotes that the different augmentation methods with different α and β values
truth value is positive but the predicted value is negative. are reported in Table II.
 As shown in Table II, the data augmentation has significantly influenced the anomaly detection accuracy on the
C. Parameter Settings heavy-plate shape. Method C has achieved the best result
 In the training phase of CL, the Adam optimizer is applied with α = 0.01 and β = 0.3. Thus, Method C is adopted
with 50 epochs. The batchsize is set to 512. The learning rate as the augmentation method in the subsequent experiments to
and weight decay are set to 1e − 4 and 1e − 4, respectively. generate different views of the process data.
The temperature hyper-parameter τ is set to 0.5 as mentioned 2) Effects of Proposed CMSH Feature Fusion Approach:
in [28]. In the fine-tune training phase, the SGD optimizer is The ablation experiment of the MSH data information fusion
applied for 50 epochs. The batchsize is set to 128. The learning strategy in MSH-FFN is conducted in this part. As shown in
rate and weight decay are set to 1e−3 and 1e−4, respectively. Section III-C2, the proposed CMSH has three various fusion
LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION 1231

Fig. 11. The results of MSH-CL with different information fusion strategy.

strategies to satisfy the requirement of different application
scenarios. In this part, the experiment is first introduced to
compare the performance of different CMSH strategies in
MSH-FFN. Then, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed fusion approach, it is also compared with the ordinary Fig. 12. The results of MSH-CL with the different scale of fine-tuning data
fusion approach, which concatenates the features of MSH-FEN set.
directly.
 As shown in Table III and Fig. 11, the parallel strategy of
CMSH has achieved outstanding accuracy in the shape quality
anomaly detection task. Meanwhile, the three fusion strategies
of CMSH present better performance than the directly concatenating features method. The results verified that the CMSH
could improve the capability of the model. Thus, the parallel
strategy is adopted in MSH-FFN as the fusion approach for
the quality anomaly detection task.

E. Analysis of Experimental Results
 This subsection first explores the effects of different
fine-tuning set scales on the performance of MSH-CL. Then,
compared with other methods, the superiority and effectiveness
of MSH-CL are verified and discussed in detail. Fig. 13. The accuracy of MSH-CL and other semi- or self-supervised
 1) Effects of Different Fine-Tuning Set Scales: In this part, methods with the different scales of fine-tuning set.
the performance of the proposed MSH-CL with different scale
sets utilized in fine-tuning phase is explored. The number of
labeled data examples used in this phase may significantly Fig. 13. One can see that the proposed MSH-CL can achieve
influence the anomaly detection accuracy for heavy-plate better anomaly detection accuracy than others, and the total
shapes. Therefore, the different proportion data examples of accuracy is improved by 12.60%, 6.16%, 5.05%, 6.93% and
the fine-tuning train data set are used to fine-tune the model 6.05% compared with the co-training AdaBoost, co-training
separately. The results are summarized in Fig. 12. It can be Decision Tree, co-training SVM, Autoencoder, and Denoising
observed that as the number of labeled data examples reduces, Autoencoder, respectively. At the same time, it can be seen
the total anomaly detection accuracy decreases at the same that the detection accuracy of Autoencoder and Denoising
time. Also, when the proportion dropped from 10% to 5%, the autoencoder for abnormal quality classes with a small number
accuracy decreased sharply because the minority class samples of samples is insufficient. In particular, it is unable to detect the
in the fine-tuning phase were rare. However, the MSH-CL right wave of heavy-plate shape, which is with few samples.
can still maintain a higher anomaly detection accuracy with For further comparison, the model performance on fine-tuning
extremely few labeled data for the heavy-plate shape. set with different scales of 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% are also
 2) Comparisons Between MSH-CL and Other Semi- or Self- reported in Table IV. It can be seen that the MSH-CL also
Supervised Methods: In this part, the proposed approach is achieved better results on the labeled data sets with different
compared with other semi- or self-supervised methods that scales than other methods. In particular, while the proportion
are commonly used to solve the less labeled data issue. of labeled samples reduces, the detection accuracy of the
As mentioned in [16], the co-training strategy with multiple right wave and horizon wave of co-training AdaBoost, comachine learning methods is selected as the baseline models, training SVM, Autoencoder and Denoising autoencoder also
such as Adaboost, Decision Tree, and support vector machine decreases.
(SVM). Meanwhile, the Autoencoder and Denoising Autoen- 3) Comparisons Between MSH-CL and Other Supervised
coder, which are the typical self-supervised learning methods, Methods: In this part, the experiment is conducted where
will also be included. The preprocessed data is flattened as the quality anomaly detection model is trained using the
one-dimensional because these methods cannot directly deal labeled data examples, which demonstrates the merit of CL
with the MSH data. The results are given in Table IV and pre-training with the massive unlabeled data. Thus, the pro-
1232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE III
 T HE R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH D IFFERENT F USION S TRATEGY

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH OTHER S EMI - OR S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING M ETHODS BASED ON
 H EAVY-P LATE P RODUCTION DATA S ET

 TABLE V
 T HE R ESULTS OF S UPERVISED L EARNING M ETHODS BASED ON H EAVY-P LATE P RODUCTION DATA S ET

posed MSH-CL is compared with a number of supervised
algorithms, such as AdaBoost, Decision Tree and SVM.
The high-dimensional data also need to be expanded into
one-dimensional since these algorithms cannot directly handle
the MSH data. The train set of these algorithms is identical
to the fine-tuning set used in the second phase of MSH-CL.
In this part, the MSH-CL is also compared with its supervised
 Fig. 14. The accuracy of MSH-CL counterpart and other supervised methods.
counterpart, which trains the MSHFE in a supervised learning
manner. The parameters of the supervised learning counterpart
are set the same as in the second phase of MSH-CL. As shown
in Table IV, Table V and Fig. 14, the results of MSH-CL are V. C ONCLUSION
better than its supervised learning counterpart with the same In this paper, the MSH-CL is proposed for quality anomaly
number of the labeled data. Meanwhile, compared with other detection of the heavy-plate shape, and the CL framework
supervised algorithms, the MSH-CL can also achieve better is developed to solve the problem of less labeled data in
performance. real-world manufacturing process. Meanwhile, to deal with the
LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION 1233

MSH data, a two pathways network to extract data features [15] J. Lu and J. Ding, “A novel stochastic configuration network with
is designed, and an attention-based feature fusion approach iterative learning using privileged information and its application,” Inf.
 Sci., vol. 613, pp. 953–965, Oct. 2022.
named CMSH is proposed to take advantage of the inner [16] B. Liang, X. Yuan, and Z. Ge, “Co-training partial least squares model
correlation of MSH data. On the one hand, the CL phase for semi-supervised soft sensor development,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab.
can utilize the massive unlabeled data to pretrain the MSHFE Syst., vol. 147, pp. 75–85, Oct. 2015.
 [17] X. Yuan, C. Ou, Y. Wang, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “A novel semito get a feature encoder. On the other hand, the CMSH supervised pre-training strategy for deep networks and its application
in MSH-FFN can improve the feature fusion performance for quality variable prediction in industrial processes,” Chem. Eng. Sci.,
by utilizing the inner correlation. The ablation experiments vol. 217, May 2020, Art. no. 115509.
and comparative experiments are conducted on the dataset [18] Z. Ge, “Semi-supervised data modeling and analytics in the process
 industry: Current research status and challenges,” IFAC J. Syst. Control,
which collected from the real-world heavy-plate production vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1933–1951, Jun. 2021.
process. The experimental results indicate that the MSH-CL [19] J. Yuan et al., “Sustainable development evaluation on wind
can improve the performance of plate shape anomaly detection power compressed air energy storage projects based on multisource heterogeneous data,” Renew. Energy, vol. 169, pp. 1175–1189,
with the less labeled and MSH data. May 2021.
 In future works, the proposed approach will be extended [20] J. Yuan, X. Luo, Y. Li, X. Hu, W. Chen, and Y. Zhang,
to other quality-relevant detection problems present in the “Multi criteria decision-making for distributed energy system based
 on multi-source heterogeneous data,” Energy, vol. 239, Jan. 2022,
heavy-plate production process. Meanwhile, more practi- Art. no. 122250.
cal factors, such as different kinds of steel slabs, and [21] Y. Pan and L. Zhang, “Data-driven estimation of building energy consome limitations of the proposed approach will also be sumption with multi-source heterogeneous data,” Appl. Energy, vol. 268,
 Jun. 2020, Art. no. 114965.
considered. [22] Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Li, and Q. Chen, “An online detection method for
 capacitor voltage transformer with excessive measurement error based
 R EFERENCES on multi-source heterogeneous data fusion,” Measurement, vol. 187,
 Jan. 2022, Art. no. 110262.
 [1] F. Schausberger, A. Steinboeck, and A. Kugi, “Feedback control of the [23] P. Zhang et al., “Multi-source information fusion based on
 contour shape in heavy-plate hot rolling,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. rough set theory: A review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 68, pp. 85–117,
 Technol., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 842–856, May 2018. Apr. 2021.
 [2] L. Chen, X. Wang, and L. Tang, “Operation optimization in hot- [24] Q. Xiao, M. Shan, X. Xiao, and C. Rao, “Evaluation model of
 rolling production process,” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., vol. 53, no. 28, industrial operation quality under multi-source heterogeneous data
 pp. 11393–11410, Jun. 2014. information,” Int. J. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 522–547,
 [3] Q. Chen, Q. Pan, B. Zhang, J. Ding, and J. Li, “Effective hot Jan. 2020.
 rolling batch scheduling algorithms in compact strip production,” [25] K. Bu, Y. Liu, and F. Wang, “Operating performance assessment
 IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1933–1951, based on multi-source heterogeneous information with deep learning
 Oct. 2019. for smelting process of electro-fused magnesium furnace,” ISA Trans.,
 [4] L. Tang and X. Wang, “A two-phase heuristic for the production vol. 128, pp. 357–371, Sep. 2022.
 scheduling of heavy plates in steel industry,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. [26] P. Zhou, B. Gao, S. Wang, and T. Chai, “Identification of abnormal
 Technol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2010. conditions for fused magnesium melting process based on deep learning
 [5] Z. Ge, “Review on data-driven modeling and monitoring for plant- and multisource information fusion,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69,
 wide industrial processes,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst., vol. 171, no. 3, pp. 3017–3026, Mar. 2022.
 pp. 16–25, Dec. 2017. [27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum
 [6] M. Zhao, S. Zhong, X. Fu, B. Tang, and M. Pecht, “Deep residual contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc.
 shrinkage networks for fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
 vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4681–4690, Jul. 2020. pp. 9729–9738.
 [7] W. Yu and C. Zhao, “Broad convolutional neural network based [28] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple
 industrial process fault diagnosis with incremental learning capa- framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,”
 bility,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 5081–5091, in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2020,
 Jun. 2020. pp. 1597–1607.
 [8] Q. Jiang and X. Yan, “Learning deep correlated representations for [29] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Z. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon,
 nonlinear process monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, “A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” 2020,
 no. 12, pp. 6200–6209, Dec. 2019. arXiv:2011.00362.
 [9] Q. Q. Sun and Z. Q. Ge, “A survey on deep learning for data-driven [30] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
 soft sensors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 5853–5866, in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Sep. 2021. Jun. 2021, pp. 1597–1607.
[10] L. Feng, C. Zhao, and Y. Sun, “Dual attention-based encoder–decoder: [31] S. Chang, C. Zhao, and K. Li, “Consistent-contrastive net-
 A customized sequence-to-sequence learning for soft sensor devel- work with temporality-awareness for robust-to-anomaly industrial
 opment,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 8, soft sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12,
 pp. 3306–3317, Aug. 2021. 2022.
[11] L. Ren, Z. Meng, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and L. T. Yang, “A data- [32] M. Laugwitz, M. Jochum, T. Scheffer, and J. Lohmar, “Towards
 driven approach of product quality prediction for complex production hot levelling strategies for steel heavy plates: Analysis of
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6457–6465, flatness evolution in accelerated cooling, hot levelling, and
 Sep. 2021. final air cooling via thermo-mechanical FE modelling,” Int.
[12] W. Yu and C. Zhao, “Concurrent analytics of temporal infor- J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 120, nos. 3–4, pp. 2469–2488,
 mation and local correlation for meticulous quality prediction of Feb. 2022.
 industrial processes,” J. Process Control, vol. 107, pp. 47–57, [33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 Nov. 2021. image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[13] Y. Bai, J. Xie, D. Wang, W. Zhang, and C. Li, “A manufacturing quality (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 prediction model based on AdaBoost-LSTM with rough knowledge,” [34] A. Vaswani et al., “Attenion is all you need,” in Proc. 31st
 Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 155, May 2021, Art. no. 107227. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Dec. 2017,
[14] C. Zhao, “A quality-relevant sequential phase partition approach for pp. 6000–6010.
 regression modeling and quality prediction analysis in manufacturing [35] X. Wang, R. B. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local neural
 processes,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 983–991, networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Oct. 2014. Jun. 2018, pp. 7794–7803.
1234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Datong Li received the M.S. degree from the Anhui Tongkang Zhang received the B.S. degree in
 University of Science and Technology, Huainan, automation and the M.S. degree in control theory
 China, in 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. and control engineering from Northeastern Univerdegree with the State Key Laboratory of Syntheti- sity, Shenyang, China, in 2015 and 2017, respeccal Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern tively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 University, Shenyang, China. degree in control theory and control engineer-
 His research interests include data analytics, deep ing with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical
 learning, anomaly detection, and their applications Automation for Process Industries.
 in complex industrial processes. His research interests include data visualization,
 visual analytics, process monitoring, fault diagnosis, and their applications in complex industrial
 processes.

 Jinliang Ding (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China,
 in 2012.
 He is currently a Professor with the State Key
 Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process
 Industry, Northeastern University. He has authored
 or coauthored more than 100 refereed journal articles
 and refereed papers at international conferences.
 He is also the inventor or co-inventor of over
 20 patents. His current research interests include
 Jun Lu received the B.S. degree from the Shenyang modeling, plant-wide control and optimization for the complex industrial
 University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2012, systems, machine learning, industrial artificial intelligence, and computational
 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in control theory and Intelligence and application.
 control engineering from Northeastern University, Dr. Ding was a recipient of the Young Scholars Science and Technology
 Shenyang, in 2014 and 2021, respectively. Award of China in 2016, the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young
 He is currently a Lecturer with the State Key Labo- Scholars in 2015, the National Technological Invention Award in 2013, and
 ratory of Synthetical Automation for Process Indus- the three First-Prize of Science and Technology Award of the Ministry of
 tries, Northeastern University. His current research Education in 2006, 2012, and 2018, respectively. One of his paper published
 interests include neural networks, robust modeling on Control Engineering Practice was selected for the Best Paper Award
 techniques, Bayesian learning, ensemble learning, from 2011 to 2013. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 and applications in complex industrial processes. ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS —II: E XPRESS B RIEFS.