IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024 6775

 Self-Supervised Learning for Time Series Analysis:
 Taxonomy, Progress, and Prospects
 Kexin Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qingsong Wen , Senior Member, IEEE, Chaoli Zhang ,
 Rongyao Cai , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ming Jin , Yong Liu , Member, IEEE, James Y. Zhang ,
 Yuxuan Liang , Member, IEEE, Guansong Pang , Member, IEEE, Dongjin Song , Member, IEEE,
 and Shirui Pan , Senior Member, IEEE

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Self-supervised learning (SSL) has recently achieved subcategories with detailed reviews and discussions about their
impressive performance on various time series tasks. The most key intuitions, main frameworks, advantages and disadvantages.
prominent advantage of SSL is that it reduces the dependence on To facilitate the experiments and validation of time series SSL
labeled data. Based on the pre-training and fine-tuning strategy, methods, we also summarize datasets commonly used in time series
even a small amount of labeled data can achieve high performance. forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and clustering tasks.
Compared with many published self-supervised surveys on com- Finally, we present the future directions of SSL for time series
puter vision and natural language processing, a comprehensive analysis.
survey for time series SSL is still missing. To fill this gap, we
review current state-of-the-art SSL methods for time series data Index Terms—Deep learning, representation learning, selfin this article. To this end, we first comprehensively review existing supervised learning, time series analysis.
surveys related to SSL and time series, and then provide a new
taxonomy of existing time series SSL methods by summarizing
them from three perspectives: generative-based, contrastive-based, I. INTRODUCTION
and adversarial-based. These methods are further divided into ten IME series data abound in many real-world scenarios [1],

 Manuscript received 17 July 2023; revised 23 January 2024; accepted 6
 T [2], including human activity recognition [3], industrial
 fault diagnosis [4], smart building management [5], and health-
April 2024. Date of publication 10 April 2024; date of current version 5 care [6]. The key to most tasks based on time series analysis
September 2024. This work was supported in part by the Key R&D Project
of Zhejiang Province under Grant 2024C01172 and in part by the National is to extract useful and informative features. In recent years,
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2021YFB2012300. Recommended Deep Learning (DL) has shown impressive performance in
for acceptance by M. Cho. (Corresponding authors: Qingsong Wen; Yong Liu.) extracting hidden patterns and features of the data. Generally,
 Kexin Zhang is with the Huzhou Institute of Zhejiang University,
Huzhou 313000, China, and also with the College of Control Science the availability of sufficiently large labeled data is one of the
and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: critical factors for a reliable DL-based feature extraction model,
zhangkexin@zju.edu.cn). usually referred to as supervised learning. Unfortunately, this
 Qingsong Wen was with Alibaba Group. He is now with Squirrel AI, Bellevue,
WA 98004 USA (e-mail: qingsongedu@gmail.com). requirement is difficult to meet in some practical scenarios,
 Chaoli Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technol- particularly for time series data, where obtaining labeled data
ogy, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321017, China (e-mail: is a time-consuming process. As an alternative, Self-Supervised
chaolizcl@zjnu.edu.cn).
 Rongyao Cai and Yong Liu are with the College of Control Science Learning (SSL) has garnered increasing attention for its labeland Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: efficiency and generalization ability, and consequently, many
rycai@zju.edu.cn; yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn). latest time series modeling methods have been following this
 Ming Jin is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University,
Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail: ming.jin@monash.edu). learning paradigm.
 James Y. Zhang is with Ant Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China SSL is a subset of unsupervised learning that utilizes pretext
(e-mail: james.z@antgroup.com). tasks to derive supervision signals from unlabeled data. These
 Yuxuan Liang is with the INTR & DSA Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong (e-mail: pretext tasks are self-generated challenges that the model solves
yuxliang@outlook.com). to learn from the data, thereby creating valuable representations
 Guansong Pang is with the School of Computing and Information for downstream tasks. SSL does not require additional manually
Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 (e-mail:
gspang@smu.edu.sg). labeled data because the supervisory signal is derived from the
 Dongjin Song is with the School of Computing, University of Connecticut, data itself. With the help of well-designed pretext tasks, SSL
Storrs, CT 06269 USA (e-mail: dongjin.song@uconn.edu). has recently achieved great success in the domains of Computer
 Shirui Pan is with the School of Information and Communication
Technology, Griffith University, Southport, Qld 4222, Australia (e-mail: Vision (CV) [7], [8], [9], [10] and Natural Language Processing
s.pan@griffith.edu.au). (NLP) [11], [12].
 https://github.com/qingsongedu/Awesome-SSL4TS. With the great success of SSL in CV and NLP, it is appealing
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3387317, provided by the authors. to extend SSL to time series data. However, transferring the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3387317 pretext tasks designed for CV/NLP directly to time series data
 0162-8828 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 1. Proposed taxonomy of SSL for time series data.

is non-trivial, and often fails to work in many scenarios. Here generation. For contrastive-based methods, we divide the exwe highlight some typical challenges that arise when applying isting work into five categories based on how positive and
SSL to time series data. First, time series data exhibit unique negative samples are generated, including sampling contrast,
properties such as seasonality, trend, and frequency domain in- prediction contrast, augmentation contrast, prototype contrast,
formation [13], [14], [15]. Since most pretext tasks designed for and expert knowledge contrast. Then we sort out and summaimage or language data do not consider these semantics related rize the adversarial-based methods based on two target tasks:
to time series data, they cannot be directly adopted. Second, time series generation/imputation and auxiliary representation
some techniques commonly used in SSL, such as data augmen- enhancement. The proposed taxonomy is shown in Fig. 1. We
tation, need to be specially designed for time series data. For conclude this work by discussing possible future directions
example, rotation and crop are the commonly used augmentation for time series SSL, including selection and combination of
techniques for image data [16]. However, these two techniques data augmentation, selection of positive and negative samples
may break the temporal dependency of the series data. Third, in SSCL, the inductive bias for time series SSL, theoretical
most time series data contain multiple dimensions, i.e., multi- analysis of SSCL, adversarial attacks and robust analysis on
variate time series. However, useful information usually only time series, time series domain adaption, pretraining and large
exists in a few dimensions, making it difficult to extract useful models for time series, time series SSL in collaborative systems,
information in time series using SSL methods from other data and benchmark evaluation for time series SSL.
types. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
 To the best of our knowledge, there has yet to be a comprehen- r New taxonomy and comprehensive review: We provide a
sive and systematic review of SSL for time series data, in contrast new taxonomy and a detailed and up-to-date review of time
to the extensive literature on SSL for CV or NLP [17], [18]. The series SSL. We divide existing methods into ten categories,
surveys proposed by Eldele et al. [19] and Deldari et al. [20] and for each category, we describe the basic frameworks,
are partly similar to our work. However, these two reviews mathematical expression, fine-grained classification, deonly discuss a small part of self-supervised contrastive learning tailed comparison, advantages and disadvantages. To the
(SSCL), which requires a more comprehensive literature review. best of our knowledge, this is the first work to compre-
Furthermore, a summary of benchmark time series datasets hensively and systematically review the existing studies of
needs to be included, and the potential research directions for SSL for time series data.
time series SSL are also scarce. r Collection of applications and datasets: We collect re-
 This article provides a review of current state-of-the-art SSL sources on time series SSL, including applications and
methods for time series data. We begin by summarizing re- datasets, and investigate related data sources, charactercent reviews on SSL and time series data and then propose istics, and corresponding works.
a new taxonomy from three perspectives: generative-based, r Abundant future directions: We point out key problems
contrastive-based, and adversarial-based. The taxonomy is sim- in this field from both applicative and methodology perilar to the one proposed by Liu et al. [21] but specifically spectives, analyze their causes and possible solutions, and
concentrated on time series data. For generative-based meth- discuss future research directions for time series SSL. We
ods, we describe three frameworks: autoregressive-based fore- strongly believe that our efforts will ignite further research
casting, auto-encoder-based reconstruction, and diffusion-based interests in time series SSL.
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6777

 The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II TABLE I
 OVERVIEW OF RECENT SSL SURVEYS ON DIFFERENT MODALITIES
provides some review literature on SSL and time series data.
Sections III to V describe the generation-based, contrastivebased, and adversarial-based methods, respectively. Section VI
lists some commonly used time series data sets from the application perspective. The quantitative performance comparisons and
discussions are also provided. Section VII discusses promising
directions of time series SSL, and Section VIII concludes the
article.

 II. RELATED SURVEYS
 In this section, the definition of time series data is first introduced, and then several recent reviews on SSL and time series
analysis are scrutinized.

A. Definition of Time Series Data
 1) Univariate Time Series: A univariate time series refers
to an ordered sequence of observations or measurements of
the same variable indexed by time. It can be defined as X =
(x0 , x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ), where xi is the point at timestamp i. Most
often, the measurements are made at regular time intervals.
 2) Multivariate Time Series: A multivariate time series consists of two or more interrelated variables (or dimensions) that
depend on time. It is a combination of multiple univariate time
series and can be defined as X = [X0 , X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp ], where
p is the number of variables.
 3) Multiple Multivariate Time Series: Considering the scenario where distinct sets of multivariate time series are concurrently examined. Analyzing such datasets involves studying
each set independently and exploring the relationships between
different sets. For instance, if we study meteorological data from
different cities, each city’s data forms a multivariate time series,
collectively resulting in multiple multivariate time series. This
can be articulated as X = {X0 , X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn }, where n is
the number of multivariate time series.

 learning-paradigm-based criterion, the pretext-task-based cri-
B. Surveys on SSL terion is also related to data modality. For example, Ericsson
 The surveys on SSL can be categorized by different criteria. et al. [28] provides a very comprehensive review of pretext
In this paper, we outline three widely used criteria: learning tasks for multiple modalities, including image, video, text, audio,
paradigms, pretext tasks and components/modules. time series, and graph. The various self-supervised pretexts
 1) Learning Paradigms: This category focuses on model are divided into five broad families: transformation prediction,
architectures and training objectives. The SSL methods can be masked prediction, instance discrimination, clustering, and conroughly divided into the following categories: generative-based, trastive instance discrimination. Jing and Tian [18] summarize
contrastive-based, and adversarial-based methods. The charac- the self-supervised feature learning methods on image and
teristics and descriptions of the above methods can be found in video data, and four categories are discussed: generation-based,
Appendix A, available online. Using the learning paradigm as context-based, free semantic label-based, and cross modala taxonomy is arguably the most popular among the existing based, where cross-modal-based methods construct learning
SSL surveys, including [20], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. task using RGB frame sequence an optical flow sequence, which
However, not all surveys cover the above three categories. The are unique features in the video. Gui et al. [30] explore four
readers are referred to these surveys for more details. In Table I, kinds of pretext tasks in computer vision and natural language
we also provide the data modalities involved in each survey, processing, including context-based methods, contrastive learnwhich can help readers quickly find the research work closely ing methods, generative algorithms, and contrastive generative
related to them. methods. Essentially, the core of the pretext tasks is how to con-
 2) Pretext Tasks: The pretext task serves as a means to learn struct pseudo-supervision signals. Generally speaking, ignoring
informative representations for downstream tasks. Unlike the the differences in data modalities, existing pretext tasks can be
6778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

roughly summarized into three categories: context prediction, methods, pattern mixing, generative models, and decomposition
instance discrimination, and instance generation. The main dif- methods. Moreover, both [45] and [46] empirically compare differences and examples are summarized in Table III. It should be ferent data augmentation methods for time series classification
noted that here we only list some commonly used pretexts tasks, tasks. [48] systematically reviews transformer schemes for time
and some special pretext tasks are not the focus of this article. series modeling from two perspectives: network structure and
The details can be found in Appendix B.2, available online. applications. Liu et al. [33] provide a comprehensive summary
 3) Components and Modules: The literature categorizing of the various augmentations applied to medical time series
SSCL methods according to their modules and components data, the architectures of pre-training encoders, the types of
throughout the pipeline is also an important direction. Jaiswal fine-tuning classifiers and clusters, and the popular contrastive
et al. [17], Le-Khac et al. [29] and Liu et al. [33] sort out the loss functions. The taxonomies proposed by Eldele et al. [19],
modules and components required in SSL from different per- Deldari et al. [20] and Liu et al. [33] are somewhat similar
spectives. Specifically, Liu et al. [33] summarizes the research to our proposed taxonomy, i.e., three taxonomies involve time
progress of self-supervised contrastive learning on medical time series self-supervised contrastive learning methods. However,
series data. In summary, the pipeline can be divided into four our taxonomy provides more detailed categories and more litercomponents: positive and negative samples, pretext task, model ature in the contrastive-based approach. Although the taxonomy
architecture, and training loss. proposed by Liu et al. [33] also focuses on time series data.
 The basic intuition behind SSCL is to pull positive samples They emphasize discussion of medical time series data, while
closer and push negative samples away. Therefore, the first com- we focus more on general time series SSL. More importantly, in
ponent is to construct positive and negative samples. According addition to contrastive-based approaches, we also thoroughly
to the suggestions of Le-Khac et al. [29], the main methods can review a large set of literature for the generative-based and
be divided into the following categories: multisensory signals, adversarial-based approaches.
data augmentation, local-global consistency, and temporal consistency. Additional descriptions regarding the characteristics of III. GENERATIVE-BASED METHODS
these categories can be found in Appendix B.1, available online.
 In this category, the pretext task is to generate the expected
 The second component is pretext tasks, which is a selfdata based on a given view of the data. In the context of time
supervised task that acts as an important strategy to learn data
 series modeling, the commonly used pretext tasks include using
representations using pseudo-labels [17]. Pretext tasks have
 the past series to forecast the future windows or specific time
been summarized and categorized in the previous subsection,
 stamps, using the encoder and decoder to reconstruct the input,
so repeated content will not be introduced again. The details can
 and forecasting the unseen part of the masked time series.
be found in Section II-B2 and Appendix B.2, available online.
 This section sorts out the existing self-supervised representation
 The third component is model architecture, which deterlearning methods in time series modeling from the perspectives
mines how positive and negative samples are encoded during
 of autoregressive-based forecasting, autoencoder-based recontraining. The major categories include end-to-end [16], memstruction, and diffusion-based generation. It should be noted that
ory bank [34], momentum encoder [35], and clustering [36].
 the autoencoder-based reconstruction task is also viewed as an
More details of these four architectures are summarized in
 unsupervised framework. In the context of SSL, we mainly use
Appendix B.3, available online.
 the reconstruction task as a pretext task, and the final goal is
 The fourth component is training loss. As summarized in [29],
 to obtain the representations through autoencoder models. The
commonly used contrastive loss functions generally include
 illustration of the generative-based SSL for time series is shown
scoring functions (cosine similarity), energy-based margin funcin Fig. 2. In Appendix C.1–C.3, available online, the main advantions (pair loss and triplet loss), probabilistic NCE-based functages and disadvantages of three generative-based submethods
tions, and mutual information based functions. More details of
 are summarized. Furthermore, the direct comparison of the three
these loss functions are summarized in Appendix B.4, available
 methods is shown in Appendix C.4, available online.
online.
 A. Autoregressive-Based Forecasting
C. Surveys on Time Series Data Given the current time step t, the goal of an autoregressive-
 The surveys on time series data can be roughly divided into based forecasting (ARF) task is to forecast K future horizons
two categories. The first category focuses on different tasks, such based on t historical time steps, which can be expressed as:
as classification [37], [38], forecasting [39], [40], [41], [42], and  
 x̂[t+1:t+K] = f x[1:t] , (1)
anomaly detection [43], [44]. These surveys comprehensively
sort out the existing methods for each task. The second category where x̂[t+1:t+K] represents the target window, and K represents
focuses on the key components of time series modeling based the length of the target window. When K = 1, (1) is a single-step
on deep neural networks, such as data augmentation [33], [45], forecasting model, and it is a multi-step forecasting model when
[46], [47], model structure [33], [48], [49]. [45] proposed a K > 1. x[1:t] represents the input series before time t (including
new taxonomy that divides the existing data augmentation tech- t), which is usually used as the input of the model. f (·) represents
niques into basic and advanced approaches. [46] also provides the forecasting model. The learning objective is to minimize the
a taxonomy and outlines four families: transformation-based distance between the predicted target window and the ground
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6779

 normalizing flow (GANF) is another graph-based approach that
 can model the conditional dependencies among constituent time
 series [57]. In order to choose a more appropriate model in
 building time series SSL task, we further give the advantages and
 disadvantages of these three commonly used models. The details
 can be found in Appendix D, available online. Unlike the above
 methods, SSTSC [58] proposes a temporal relation learning
 prediction task based on the “Past-Anchor-Future” strategy as
 a self-supervised pretext task. Instead of directly forecasting
 the values of the future time windows, SSTSC predicts the
 relationships of the time windows, which can fully mine the
 temporal relationship in the data.

 B. Autoencoder-Based Reconstruction
 The autoencoder is an unsupervised artificial neural network
 composed of an encoder and a decoder [59]. The encoder maps
 the input x to the representation z, and then the decoder remaps the representation z back to the input. The output of the
 decoder is defined as the reconstructed input x̃. The process can
 be expressed as:
Fig. 2. Three categories of generative-based SSL for time series data.
 z = E(x), x̃ = D(z), (4)
 where E(·) and D(·) represent the encoder and decoder, retruth, thus the loss function can be defined as: spectively. The difference between the original input x and the
   reconstructed input x̃ is called the reconstruction error, and
 L = D x̂[t+1:t+K] , x[t+1:t+K] , (2)
 the goal of the self-supervised pretext task using autoencoder
where D(·) represents the distance between the predicted fu- structure is to minimize the error between x and x̃, i.e.,
ture window x̂[t+1:t+K] and the ground-truth future window
x[t+1:t+K] , usually measured by the mean square error (MSE), L = x − x̃2 . (5)
i.e.,
 The model structure of (4) is defined as the basic autoencoder
 1  2
 K (BAE). Most BAE-based methods jointly train the encoder E(·)
 L= x̂[t+k] − x[t+k] . (3) and the decoder D(·). Then removing the decoder D(·) and
 K
 k=1 leaving only the encoder E(·) that is used as a feature extractor,
 In the time series modeling with autoregressive-based fore- and the representation z is used for downstream tasks [60], [61],
casting task as a pretext task, Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [62], [63]. For example, TimeNet [61], PT-LSTM-SAE [62],
are widely used thanks to their strong capability in spatiotem- and Autowarp [60] all use RNN to build a sequence autoencoder
poral dynamic behavior modeling or sequence prediction [41], model including encoder and decoder, which tries to reconstruct
[42], [50], [51]. Therefore, it is also naturally applied in the the input series. Once the model is learned, the encoder is used
pretext task based on autoregressive forecasting. THOC [52] as a feature extractor to obtain an embedded representation of
constructs a self-supervised pretext task for multi-resolution time series samples, which can help downstream tasks, such
single-step forecasting called Temporal Self-Supervision (TSS). as classification and forecasting, achieve better performance.
TSS takes the L-layer dilated RNN with skip-connection struc- Zhang et al. [64] build a CNN-based autoencoder model and
ture as the model. By setting skip length, it can ensure that the keep the encoder as a feature extractor after minimizing (5). The
forecasting tasks can be performed with different resolutions experimental results show that using the encoded representation
at the same time. In addition to RNNs, the forecasting models is better than directly using the original time series data in
based on Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) also have been industrial fault detection tasks.
developed [53]. Moreover, STraTS [54] first encodes the time However, the representations obtained by (5) are sometimes
series data into triple representations to avoid the limitations of task-agnostic. Therefore, it is feasible to introduce additional
using basic RNN and CNN in modeling irregular and sparse time training constraints based on (5). Abdulaal et al. [63] focus
series data and then builds the transformer-based forecasting on the complex asynchronous multivariate time series data and
model for modeling multivariate medical clinical time series. introduce the spectral analysis in the autoencoder model. The
Graph-based time series forecasting methods can also be used synchronous representation of the time series is extracted by
as a self-supervised pretext task. Compared with RNNs and learning the phase information in the data, which is eventually
CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) can better capture the used for the anomaly detection task. DTCR [65] is a tempocorrelation among variables and constituent in multivariate time ral clustering-friendly representation learning model. It introseries data, such as GDN [55] and GTS [56]. Graph-augmented duces K-means constraints in the reconstruction task, making
6780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

the learned representation more friendly to clustering tasks. the time series samples used for training and inference have
USAD [66] uses an encoder and two decoders to build an autoen- different dimensions or variables, which may be caused by the
coder model and introduces adversarial training based on (5) to absence of some sensor data. This new forecasting task brings
enhance the representation ability of the model. FuSAGNet [67] the feasibility of self-supervised learning based on variable-wise
introduces graph learning on the sparse autoencoder to model masking. Unlike random masking, TARNet [77] considers the
relationships in multivariate time series explicitly. pre-trained model based on the masking strategy irrelevant to the
 Denoising autoencoder (DAE) is another widely used ap- downstream task, which leads to sub-optimal representations.
proach, which is based on the addition of noise to the input TARNet uses self-attention score distribution from downstream
series to corrupt the data, and then followed by the reconstruction task training to determine the time steps that require masking.
task [68]. DAE can be formulated as: Variational autoencoder (VAE) is a model based on variational
 inference [78], [79]. The encoder encodes the input x to the probxn = T (x), Z = E(xn ), x̃ = D(z), (6) ability distribution P (z|x) instead of the explicit representation
where T indicates the operation that adds noise. The learning z. When the decoder is used to reconstruct the input, a vector
objective of a DAE is the same as that of a BAE, which is generated by sampling from the distribution P (z|x) will be used
to minimize the difference between x and x̃. In time series as input to the decoder. The process can be expressed as:
modeling, more than one method can add noise to the input, P (z|x) = E(x), z = S(P (z|x)), x̃ = D(z), (9)
such as adding Gaussian noise [69], [70] and randomly setting
some time steps to zero [71], [72]. where S(·) represents the sampling operation. Unlike (5), the
 Mask autoencoder (MAE) is a structure widely used in lan- loss function of a VAE includes two terms: the reconstruction
guage models and vision models in recent years [11], [73]. The item and the regularization item, i.e.,
core idea behind MAE is that in the pre-training phase, the model
first masks part of the input and then tries to predict the masked L = x − x̃2 + KL(N (μ, δ), N (0, I)), (10)
part through the unmasked part. Unlike BAE and DAE, the loss where KL(·) represents the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The
of MAE is only computed on the masked part. MAE can be role of the regularization term is to ensure that the learned
formulated as: distribution P (z|x) is close to the standard normal distribution,
 xm = M(x), z = E(xm ), x̃ = D(z), (7) thereby regulating the representation of the latent space. The
 representation learning method based on VAE can model the
 L = M(x − x̃2 ), (8) distribution of each time step to better capture the complex
 spatiotemporal dependencies and provide better interpretability
where M(·) represents the mask operation, and Xm represents
 in time series modeling tasks. For example, InterFusion [80]
the masked input. In language models, since the input is usually
 is a hierarchical VAE that models inter-variable and temporal
a sentence, the mask operation masks some words in a sentence
 dependencies in time series data. OmniAnomaly [81] combines
or replaces them with other words. In vision models, the mask
 VAE and Planar Normalizing Flow to propose an interpretable
operation will mask the pixels or patches in an image. For time
 time series anomaly detection algorithm. In order to better capseries data, a feasible operation is to mask part of the time steps
 ture the dependencies between different variables in multivariate
and then use the unmasked part to predict the masked time steps.
 time series, GRELEN [82] and VGCRN [83] introduce the graph
Existing masking methods for time series data can be divided
 structure and in VAE. In addition to modeling on regular time
into three categories: time-step-wise masking, segment-wise
 series, the methods based on VAE have made progress in sparse
masking, and variable-wise masking.
 and irregular time series data representation learning, such as
 The time-step-wise masking randomly selects a certain promTANs [84], P-VAE [85] and HetVAE [86]. The latest work
portion of time-steps in the series to mask, so the fine-grained inattempts to extract seasonal and trend representations in time
formation is easier to capture, but it is difficult to learn contextual
 series data based on VAE. LaST [87] is a disentangled variational
semantic information in time series. The segment-wise masking
 inference framework with mutual information constraints. It
randomly selects segments to mask, which allows the model to
 separates seasonal and trend representations in the latent space
pay more attention to slow features in the time series, such as
 to achieve accurate time series forecasting.
trends or high-level semantic information. STEP [74] divided the
series into multiple non-overlapping segments of equal length
and then randomly selected a certain proportion of the segments C. Diffusion-Based Generation
for masking. Moreover, STEP pointed out two advantages of As a new kind of deep generative model, diffusion models
using segment-wise masking: the ability to capture semantic have achieved great success recently in many fields, including
information and reduce the input length to the encoder. Different image synthesis, video generation, speech generation, bioinforfrom STEP, Zerveas et al. [75] performed a more complex mask- matics, and natural language processing due to their powerful
ing operation on the time series, i.e., the multivariate time series generating ability [88], [89], [90], [91], [92]. The key design of
was randomly divided into multiple non-overlapping segments the diffusion model contains two inverse processes: the forward
of unequal length on each variable. Variable-wise masking was process of injecting random noise to destruct data and the
introduced by Chauhan et al. [76], who defined a new time series reverse process of sample generation from noise distribution
forecasting task called variable subset forecast (VSF). In VSF, (usually normal distribution). The intuition is that if the forward
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6781

process is done step-by-step with a transition kernel between converge correctly. Thus, the key approach (NCSN, a noiseany two adjacent states, then the reverse process can follow a conditional score network), perturbing data with a noise sereverse state transition operation to generate samples from noise quence and jointly estimating the score function for all the
(the final state of the forward process). However, it is usually noisy data with a deep neural network conditioned on noise
not easy to formulate the reverse transition kernel, and thus levels, is proposed [94]. Training and sampling are decoupled in
diffusion models learn to approximate the kernel by deep neural score-based generative models, which inspires different choices
networks. Nowadays, there are mainly three basic formulations in such two processes [95].
of diffusion models: denoising diffusion probabilistic models For score SDEs, the diffusion operation is processed accord-
(DDPMs) [88], [93], score matching diffusion models [94], [95], ing to the stochastic differential equation (SDE) [97]:
and score SDEs [96], [97].
 dx = f (x, t)dt + g(t)dw, (16)
 For DDPMs, the forward and reverse processes are two
Markov chains: a forward chain that adds random noise to where f (x, t) and g(t) are diffusion function and drift function
data and a reverse chain that transforms noise back into data. of the SDE, respectively, and w is a standard Wiener process.
Formally, denote the data distribution as x0 ∼ q(x0 ), the for- Different from DDPMs and SGMs, Score SDEs generalize the
ward Markov process gradually adds Gaussian noise to the diffusion process to the case of infinite time steps. Fortunately,
data according to transition kernel q(xt |xt−1 ). It generates a DDPMs and SGMs also can be formulated with corresponding
sequence of random variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xT . Thus the joint SDEs. For DDPMs, the SDE is
distribution of x1 , x2 , . . . , xT conditioned on x0 is 1 
 dx = − β(t)xdt + β(t)dw, (17)
 
 T 2
 q(x1 , x2 , . . . , xT |x0 ) = q(xt |xt−1 ). (11) where β( Tt ) = T βt when T goes to infinity; for SGMs, the SDE
 t=1
 is
For simplicity of calculation, the transition kernel is usually set
 d[δ(t)2 ]
as dx = dw, (18)
    dt
 q(xt |xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I , (12)
 where δ( Tt ) = δt as T goes to infinity. With any diffusion process
where β1 , β2 , . . . , βT is a variance schedule of the forward in the form of (16), the reverse process can be gained by solving
process (usually chosen βt ∈ (0, 1) ahead of model training) the following SDE:
and p(xT ) = N (xT ; 0, I). Similarly, the joint distribution of dx = [f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log qt (x)]dt + g(t)dw, (19)
the reverse process is
 where w is a standard Wiener process when time flows reversely
 
 T
 and dt is an infinitesimal time step. Besides that, the existence
 pθ (x0 , x1 , . . . , xT ) = p(xT ) pθ (xt−1 |xt ), (13) of an ordinary differential equation, which is also called the
 t=1
 probability flow ODE, is defined as follows.
where θ is the model parameters and pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = 1
N (xt−1 ; μθ (xt , t), θ (xt , t)). The key to achieving the suc- dx = [f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log qt (x)]dt. (20)
 2
cess of sample generating is training the parameters θ to match
the actual reverse process, that is, minimizing the Kullback- The trajectories of the probability flow ODE have the same
Leibler divergence between the two joint distributions. Thus, marginals as the reverse-time SDE. Once the score function at
according to Jensen’s inequality, the training loss is each time step is known, the reverse SDE can be solved with
 various numerical techniques. Similar objective is designed with
 KL(q(x1 , x2 , . . . , xT )||pθ (x0 , x1 , . . . , xT )) SGMs.
 ≥ E[− log pθ (x0 )] + const. (14) Diffusion models have also been applied in time series analysis recently. We briefly summarize them based on the designed
 For score-based diffusion models, the key idea is to perturb architectures and the main diffusion techniques used. Condidata with a sequence of Gaussian noise and then jointly estimate tional score-based diffusion models for imputation (CSDI) [98]
the score functions for all noisy data distributions by training a were proposed for time series imputation task. CSDI utilizes
deep neural network conditioned on noise levels. The motivation score-based diffusion models conditioned on observed data. In
of the idea is that, in many situations, it is easier to model and time series forecasting tasks, TimeGrad [99] takes an RNN
estimate the score function than the original probability density conditioned diffusion probabilistic model at some time step
function. Langevin dynamics is one of the proper techniques. to depict the fixed forward process and the learned reverse
With a step size α > 0, the number of iterations T , and an initial process. D3 VAE [100] is a bidirectional variational auto-encoder
sample x0 , Langevin dynamics iteratively does the following (BVAE) equipped with diffusion, denoise, and disentanglement.
estimation to gain a close approximation of p(x) In D3 VAE, the coupled diffusion process augments the input
 √ time series and output time series simultaneously. ImDiffuxt ← xt−1 + α∇x log p(xt−1 ) + 2αz t , 1 ≤ t ≤ T, (15)
 sion [101] combines imputation and diffusion models for time
where z t ∼ N (0, I). However, the score function is inaccurate series anomaly detection. SSSD [102] combines diffusion modwithout the training data, and Langevin dynamics may not els and structured state space models for time series imputation
6782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 3. Five categories of contrastive-based SSL for time series data.

and forecasting tasks. DiffLoad [103] proposes a diffusion-based As mentioned in [105], suppose one anchor xref , one posistructure for electrical load probabilistic forecasting by consid- tive sample xpos , and K negative samples xneg
 k , k∈1,2,...,K are
ering both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties. DiffSTG [104] chosen, we expect to assimilate xref and xpos and to distinguish
presents the first shot to predict the evolution of spatio-temporal between xref and xnegk , i.e.,
graphs using DDPMs.
 
 K
 IV. CONTRASTIVE-BASED METHODS L = − log(S(xref , xpos )) − log(−S(xref , xneg
 k )), (21)
 Contrastive learning is a widely used self-supervised learning k=1
strategy, showing a strong learning ability in computer vision
and natural language processing. Unlike discriminative models where S(·) denotes the similarity of the two representations.
that learn a mapping rule to true labels and generative models However, due to the non-stationary characteristics of most time
that try to reconstruct inputs, contrastive-based methods aim to series data, it is still a challenge to choose the correct positive
learn data representations by contrasting between positive and and negative samples based on contextual information in time
negative samples. Specifically, positive samples should have series data. Temporal neighborhood coding (TNC) was recently
similar representations, while negative samples have different proposed to deal with this problem [106]. TNC uses augmented
representations. Therefore, the selection of positive samples Dickey-Fuller (ADF) statistical test to determine the stationary
and negative samples is very important to contrastive-based region and introduces positive-unlabeled (PU) learning to handle
methods. This section sorts out and summarizes the existing the problem of sampling bias by treating negative samples as
contrastive-based methods in time series modeling according to unknown samples and then assigning weights to these samples.
the selection of positive and negative samples. The illustration The learning objective is extended to
of the contrastive-based SSL for time series is shown in Fig. 3.
In Appendix E.1–E.5, available online, the main advantages L = − Expos [∈N log S(xref , xpos )]
and disadvantages of five contrastive-based submethods are
summarized. − Exneg ∈Ñ [(1 − w) × log −S(xref , xneg )
 + w × log S(xref , xneg )], (22)
A. Sampling Contrast
 Sampling contrast follows a widely used assumption in time where w is the probability of sampling false negative samseries analysis that two neighboring time windows or time ples, N denotes the neighboring area, and Ñ denotes the nonstamps have a high degree of similarity, so positive and negative neighboring area. Supervised contrastive learning (SCL) [107]
samples are directly sampled from the raw time series, as shown effectively addresses sampling bias, so introducing the superin Fig. 3(a). Specifically, given a time window (or a timestamp) vised signal to identify positive and negative samples is a feasible
as an anchor, its nearby window (or the time stamp) is more solution. Neighborhood contrastive learning (NCL) is a recent
likely to be similar (small distance), and the distant window (or time series modeling method that combines context sampling
the time stamp) should be less similar (large distance). The term and the supervised signal to generate positive and negative
“similar” indicates that two windows (or two-time stamps) have samples [108]. NCL assumes that if two samples share some
more common patterns, such as the same amplitude, the same predefined attributes, then they are considered to share the same
periodicity, and the same trend. neighboring area.
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6783

B. Prediction Contrast been used in many subsequent methods. The objective function
 based on this framework is:
 In this category, prediction tasks that use the context (present)
to predict the target (future information) are considered self- exp (sim (z 1 , z 2 ) /τ )
 L = − log 2 N , (25)
 k=1 [k=1] exp (sim (z 1 , z k ) /τ )
supervised pretext tasks, and the goal is to maximally preserve
the mutual information of the context and the target. Contrastive predictive coding (CPC) proposed by [109] provides where τ is temperature parameter, sim(·) represents the sima contrastive learning framework to perform the prediction task ilarity between two representation vectors, and zk represents
using InfoNCE loss. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the context ct and the training samples in a batch. It can be considered that in
the sample from p(xt+k |ct ) constructs positive pairs, and the the feature learning framework based on multi-view invariance,
samples from the ‘proposal’ distribution p(xt+k ) are negative the core is to obtain different views of the input samples.
samples. The learning objective is as follows: When handling images in computer vision, commonly used
 data augmentation methods include cropping, scaling, adding
 fk (xt+k , ct ) noise, rotation, and resizing [16]. However, compared with
 L = −E log , (23) augmentation methods for images, the augmentation methods
 X xj ∈X fk (xj , ct )
 for time series needs to consider both temporal and variable
where fk (·) is the density ratio that preserves the mutual infor- dependencies.
mation of ct and xt+k [109], and it can be estimated by a simple Since time series data can be converted to frequency domain
log-bilinear model: representations through Fourier transform, the augmentation
 method can be developed from the time and frequency domains.
 fk (xt+k , ct ) = exp(zt+k
 T
 Wk ct ). (24) In the time domain, TS-TCC [116] and its extended version
 CA-TCC [117] designed two time series data augmentation tech-
 It can be seen that CPC does not directly predict future
 niques, one is strong augmentation (permutation-and-jitter), and
observations xt+k . Instead, it tries to preserve the mutual inthe other is weak augmentation (jitter-and-scale). TS2Vec [118]
formation of ct and xt+k . This allows the model to capture
 generates different views through masking operations that ranthe “slow features” that span multiple time steps. Following the
 domly mask out some time steps. Generally speaking, there is
architecture of CPC, LNT [110], TRL-CPC [111], TS-CP2 [112],
 no one-size-fits-all answer to the choice of data augmentation
and Skip-Step CPC [113] were proposed. LNT and TRL-CPC
 methods. Therefore, some works comprehensively compare and
use the same structure as the original CPC [109] to build a
 study the augmentation methods and further evaluate the perrepresentation learning model, and the purpose is to capture the
 formance on different tasks [45], [119], [120], [121]. All the
local semantics across the time to detect the anomaly points.
 above methods only need a single time series sample in the
TS-CP2 and Skip-Step CPC replace the autoregressive model
 augmentation operation, while Mixing-up [122] fuses two time
in the original CPC structure with TCN [114], which improves
 series samples to generate a newly augmented view, while the
feature learning ability and computational efficiency. Moreover,
 pretext task is to correctly predict the proportion of two original
Skip-Step CPC points out that adjusting the distance between
 time series samples in augmented view.
context representation ct and xt+k can construct different posi-
 Data augmentation in the frequency domain is also feasible
tive pairs, which leads to different results in time series anomaly
 for time series data. CoST [123] is a disentangled seasonal-trend
detection.
 representation learning method, which uses fast Fourier trans-
 In addition to the basic contextual prediction tasks mentioned
 form to convert different augmented views into amplitude and
before, some more complex prediction tasks were constructed
 phase representations, and then uses (25) to train the model.
and proved useful. CMLF [115] transforms time series into
 BTSF [124] is a contrastive-based method based on a timecoarse-grained and fine-grained representations and proposes
 frequency fusion strategy, which first generates an augmented
a multi-granularity prediction task. This allows the model to
 view in the time domain through the dropout operation and
represent the time series at different scales. TS-TCC [116] and
 then generates another augmented view in the frequency doits extended version CA-TCC [117] designed a cross prediction
 main through Fourier transform. Finally, the bilinear temporaltask, which uses the context of xT 1 to predict the target in xT 2 ,
 spectral fusion mechanism is used to achieve the fusion of
and vice versa uses the context of xT 2 to predict the target
 time-frequency information. However, CoST and BTSF do not
in xT 1 .
 modify the frequency representation, while TF-C [125] directly
 augments the time series data through frequency perturbations,
C. Augmentation Contrast
 which has achieved better performance than TS2Vec [118] and
 Augmentation contrast is one of the most widely used con- TS-TCC [116]. Specifically, TF-C implements three augmentrastive frameworks, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Most methods utilize tation strategies: low- versus high-band perturbations, singledata augmentation techniques to generate different views of versus multi-component perturbations, and random versus disan input sample and then learn representations by maximizing tributional perturbations.
the similarity of the views that come from the same sample In addition to the above methods, many view generation methand minimizing the similarity of the views that come from the ods are closely related to downstream tasks. Recently, DCdetecdifferent samples. SimCLR [16] is a very typical multi-view tor [126] proposes a dual attention contrastive representation
invariance-based representation learning framework, which has framework for time series anomaly detection. The in-patch and
6784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

patch-wise representations are designed to gain two views of the upward mask strategy, MHCCL believes that outliers greatly
the input samples, as normal samples behave differently from impact prototypes, so these outliers should be removed when
abnormal ones in such two views. TimeCLR [127] proposed updating prototypes. The downward masking strategy, in turn,
DTW augmentation, which can not only simulate phase shifts uses the clustering results to select positive and negative samples,
and amplitude changes but also retain the structure and charac- i.e., samples belonging to the same prototype are regarded as true
teristics of the time series. CLOCS [128] is a self-supervised pre- positive samples, and samples belonging to different prototypes
training method for medical and physiological signals, which are regarded as true negative samples.
uses multi-view invariance contrast in the three perspectives
of time, space, and patient to promote higher similarity of E. Expert Knowledge Contrast
representations from the same source. CLUDA [129] introduces
 Expert knowledge contrast is a relatively new representation
multi-view invariance contrast in the time series domain adaplearning framework. Generally speaking, this modeling frametation problem, which captures the contextual representation of
 work incorporates expert prior knowledge or information into
time series data through intra-domain and inter-domain contrast.
 deep neural networks to guide model training [140], [141]. In the
MTFCC [130] is another view generation method based on
 contrastive learning framework, prior knowledge can help the
multi-scale characteristics, which samples time series samples
 model choose the correct positive and negative samples during
at multiple scales and considers that the views from the same
 training. An example of expert knowledge contrast is shown in
sample have similar representations, even if their scales are
 Fig. 3(e).
different. Methods for constructing multiple contrastive views
 Here we sort out three typical works of expert knowledge
based on multi-granularity or multi-scale augmentations also
 contrast for time series data. Shi et al. [142] used the DTW
include MRLF [131], CMLF [115], and SSLAPP [132].
 distance of time series samples as prior information and believed
 that two samples with a small DTW distance have a higher
D. Prototype Contrast similarity. Specifically, given the anchor xref and the other two
 samples xi and xj , the DTW distance between xref and the
 The contrastive learning framework based on (23) and (25)
 other two samples is calculated first, then the sample with a
is essentially an instance discrimination task, which encoursmall distance from xref is considered as the positive sample of
ages samples to form a uniform distribution in the feature
 xref . This selection process is defined as
space [133]. However, the real data distribution should satisfy
    
that the samples of the same class are more concentrated in 1, DTW xref , xi ≥ DTW xref , xj
 label = . (26)
a cluster, while the distance between different clusters should 0, otherwise
be farther. SCL [107] is an ideal solution when real labels are
available, but this is difficult to implement in practice, especially Based on pair-loss, ExpCLR [143] introduces expert features
for time series data. Therefore, introducing clustering constraints of time series data to obtain more informative representations.
into existing contrastive learning frameworks is an alternative, Given two input samples xi and xj and corresponding represuch as CC [134], PCL [135], and SwAV [36]. PCL and SwAV sentations fi and fj , ExpCLR defines the normalized distance
contrast the samples with the constructed prototypes, i.e., the between two samples:
cluster centers, which reduces the computation and encourages fi − fj 2
the samples to present a cluster-friendly distribution in the sij = 1 − , (27)
 max fk − fl  2
feature space. An illustration of prototype contrast is shown in
Fig. 3(d). where fk and fl are the two representation vectors with the
 In time series modeling based on prototypes contrast, largest distance among all samples. Compared with the original
ShapeNet [136] takes shapelets as input and constructs a cluster- pair-loss, the distance between samples xi and xj is changed
level triplet loss, which considers the distance between the from a discrete value (0 and 1) to a continuous value sij ,
anchor and multiple positive (negative) samples as well as which enables the model to learn more accurately about the
the distance between positive (negative) samples. ShapeNet is relationship between samples, thus thereby enhancing the reprean implicit prototype contrast because it does not introduce sentation ability of the model. In addition to the above two works,
explicit prototypes (cluster centers) during the training phase. SleepPriorCL [144] was proposed to alleviate the sampling
TapNet [137] and DVSL [138] are explicit prototypes con- bias problem faced by (25). Like ExpCLR, SleepPriorCL also
trast because explicit prototypes are introduced. TapNet in- introduces prior features to ensure the model can identify correct
troduces a learnable prototype for each predefined class and positive and negative samples.
classifies the input time series sample according to the dis- Actually, introducing more prior knowledge in contrastivetance between the sample and each class prototype. DVSL based SSL can help the model extract better representations.
defines virtual sequences, which have the same function as The trend of this family of methods can be summarized from
prototypes, i.e., minimize the distance between samples and two perspectives: (i) Addressing sampling bias. Sampling bias
virtual sequences, but maximize the distance between virtual is caused by inappropriate selection of positive and negative
sequences. MHCCL [139] proposes a hierarchical clustering samples, so introducing prior knowledge useful for selecting
based on the upward masking strategy and a contrastive pairs positive and negative samples can deal with this problem, such
selection strategy based on the downward masking strategy. In as a clustering-based negative sample detection algorithm [145]
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6785

 the main advantages and disadvantages of two adversarial-based
 submethods are summarized. Furthermore, the main differences
 in characteristics and limitations between the adversarial-based
 methods and the previous two methods (generative-based and
 contrastive-based) are shown in Appendix G, available online.

 A. Time Series Generation and Imputation
 The generator in the GAN can generate synthetic data close
 to the real data, so adversarial representation learning has a
 wide range of applications in the data generation field [149],
 especially in image generation [150], [151], [152], [153]. In
 recent years, many scholars have also explored the potential
 of generative representation learning in time series generation
 and imputation, such as C-RNN-GAN [154], TimeGAN [155],
 TTS-GAN [156], and E 2 GAN [157]. It should be emphasized
 that although Brophy et al. [49] have reviewed the GAN-based
 time series generation methods in the latest survey, it differs
 from the proposed taxonomy. We sort out the two aspects of
 complete time series generation and missing value imputation,
 while Brophy et al. sorted out from the perspective of discrete
 and continuous time series modeling.
 Complete time series generation refers to generating a new
 time series that does not exist in the existing data set. The new
 sample can be a univariate or multivariate time series. C-RNN-
Fig. 4. Three categories of adversarial-based SSL for time series data. GAN [154] is an early method of generating time series samples
 using GAN. The generator is an RNN, and the discriminator
 is a bidirectional RNN. RNN-based structures can capture the
and sample identification strategy based on real labels [107], dynamic dependencies in multiple time steps but ignore the
[108]. (ii) Addressing representation bias. Representation bias static features of the data. TimeGAN [155] is an improved time
means that the extracted representations cannot be guaranteed to series generation framework that combines the basic GAN with
be strongly related to the downstream task. The essential reason the autoregressive model, allowing the preservation of temporal
is that there may be a big difference between the goals of the dynamic characteristics of the series. TimeGAN also emphasizes
pretext task and the downstream task. An interesting trend is that static features and temporal characteristics are crucial to the
to fuse semi-supervised learning and contrastive-based SSL to generation task.
guide the training of the encoder through a small amount of Some recently proposed methods consider more complex time
labeled data [146], [147]. series generative tasks [156], [158], [159], [160]. For example,
 COSCI-GAN [158] is a time series generation framework that
 V. ADVERSARIAL-BASED METHODS considers the correlation between each dimension of the multivariate time series. It includes Channel GANs and Central Dis-
 Adversarial-based self-supervised representation learning
 criminator. Channel GANs are responsible for generating data
methods utilize generative adversarial networks (GANs) to
 in each dimension independently, while Central Discriminator
construct pretext tasks. GAN contains a generator G and a
 is responsible for determining whether the correlation between
discriminator D. The generator G is responsible for generating
 different dimensions of the generated series is the same as the
synthetic data similar to real data, while the discriminator D is
 raw series. PSA-GAN [159] is a framework for long-time series
responsible for determining whether the generated data is real
 generation and introduces a self-attention mechanism. It further
data or synthetic data. Therefore, the goal of the generator is
 presents Context-FID, a new metric for evaluating the quality
to maximize the decision failure rate of the discriminator, and
 of generated series. Li et al. [156] explored the generation of
the goal of the discriminator is to minimize its failure rate [49],
 time series data with irregular spatiotemporal relationships and
[148]. The generator G and the discriminator D are a mutual
 proposed TTS-GAN, which uses a Transformer instead of an
game relationship, so the learning objective is:
 RNN to build the discriminator and the generator and treats the
 L = Ex∼Pdata (x) [log D(x)] + Ez∼Pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z)))]. time series data as image data of height one.
 (28) Different from generating a new time series, the task of time
 According to the final task, the existing adversarial-based rep- series imputation refers to that given a non-complete time series
resentation learning methods can be divided into time series gen- sample (for example, the data of some time steps is missing),
eration and imputation, and auxiliary representation enhance- and the missing values need to be filled based on the contextual
ment. The illustration of the adversarial-based SSL for time information. Luo et al. [161] treat the problem of missing value
series is shown in Fig. 4. In Appendix F.1–F.2, available online, imputation as a data generation task and then use GAN to learn
6786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

the distribution of the training data set. In order to better capture TABLE II
 SUMMARY OF TIME SERIES APPLICATIONS AND WIDELY USED DATASETS
the dynamic characteristics of the series, the GRUI module was
proposed. The GRUI uses the time-lag matrix to record the timelag information between effective values of incomplete time
series data, which follow the unknown non-uniform distribution
and are very helpful for analyzing the dynamic characteristics
of the series. The GRUI module was also further used in E
2
 GAN [157]. SSGAN [162] is a semi-supervised framework
for time series data imputation, which includes a generative
network, a discriminative network, and a classification network.
Unlike previous frameworks, SSGAN’s classification network
makes full use of label information, which helps the model
achieve more accurate imputations.

B. Auxiliary Representation Enhancement
 In addition to generation and interpolation tasks, an
adversarial-based representation learning strategy can be added
to existing learning frameworks as additional auxiliary learning
modules, which we call adversarial-based auxiliary representation enhancement. The auxiliary representation enhancement
aims to promote the model to learn more informative representations for downstream tasks by adding adversarial-based learning
strategies. It can be defined as:
 L = Lbase + Ladv , (29)
 The adversarial-based strategy is also effective in other time
where Lbase is the basic learning objective and Ladv is the series modeling tasks. For example, introducing adversarial
additional adversarial-based learning objective. It should be training in time series forecasting can improve the accuracy
noted that when Ladv is not available, the model can still extract and capture long-term repeated patterns, such as AST [166] and
representations from the data, so Ladv is regarded as an auxiliary ACT [167]. BeatGAN [168] introduces adversarial representalearning objective. tion learning in the abnormal beat detection task of ECG data
 USAD [66] is a time series anomaly detection framework and provides an interpretable detection framework. In modeling
that includes two BAE models, and two BAE are defined as behavior data, Activity2vec [169] uses adversarial-based train-
AE1 and AE2 , respectively. The core idea behind USAD is to ing to model target invariance and enhance the representation
amplify the reconstruction error by adversarial training between ability of the model in different behavior stages.
two BAEs. In USAD, AE1 is regarded as the generator, and
AE2 is regarded as the discriminator. The auxiliary goal is to
 VI. APPLICATIONS AND DATASETS
use AE2 to distinguish real data from reconstructed data from
AE1 , and train AE1 to deceive AE2 , the whole process can be SSL has many applications across different time series tasks.
expressed as: This section summarizes the most widely used datasets and
 representative references according to the application area, in-
 Ladv = min max W − AE2 (AE1 (W ))2 , (30) cluding anomaly detection, forecasting, classification, and clus-
 AE1 AE2
 tering. As shown in Table II, we provide useful information,
where W is the real input series. Similar to USAD, Anomaincluding dataset name, dimension, size, source, and useful
lyTrans [163] also uses an adversarial strategy to amplify the
 comments. For each task, we summarize from the following
anomaly score of anomalies. But unlike (30), which uses reaspects: task description, related methods, evaluation metrics,
construction error, AnomalyTrans defines prior-association and
 examples, and task flow. Due to space limitations, relevant
series-association and then uses the Kulback-Leibler divergence
 descriptions of evaluation metrics, examples, and task flow
to measure the error of the two associations.
 can be found in Appendix H, available online. In addition, we
 DUBCNs [164] and CRLI [165] are used for series retrieval
 provide performance comparison results of different methods on
and clustering tasks, respectively. Both methods adopt RNNthe same dataset and further summarize the correlation between
based BAE as the model, and the clustering-based loss and
 methods and tasks, the details can also be found in Appendix I,
adversarial-based loss are added to the basic reconstruction loss,
 available online.
i.e.,
 L = Lmse + λ1 Lcluster + λ2 Ladv . (31) A. Anomaly Detection
where λ1 and λ2 are the weight coefficients of the auxiliary r Task description: The anomaly detection problem for time
objective. series is usually formulated as identifying outlier time
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6787

 points or unexpected time sequences relative to some norm VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
 or usual signal.
 r Related methods: Most time series anomaly detection In this section, we point out some critical problems in current
 studies and outline several research directions worthy of further
 methods are constructed under an unsupervised learninvestigation.
 ing framework because obtaining labels for anomalous
 data is challenging. Autoregressive-based forecasting and
 A. Selection and Combination of Data Augmentation
 autoencoder-based reconstruction are the most commonly
 used modeling strategies. To be concrete, THOC [52] Data augmentation is one of the effective methods to genand GDN [55] employ autoregressive-based forecasting erate augmented views in SSCL [47], [193]. The widely used
 SSL framework, which assumes that anomalous sequences methods for time series data include jitter, scaling, rotation,
 or time points are not predictable. RANSynCoders [63], permutation, and warping [45], [119], [120], [121], [194]. In
 USAD [66], AnomalyTrans [163], and DAEMON [184] SimCLR [16], nine different augmentation methods for image
 employ autoencoder-based reconstruction SSL framework. data were discussed. The experiments show that “no single
 Furthermore, VGCRN [83] and FuSAGNet [67] combine transformation suffices to learn good representations” and “the
 two frameworks to achieve more robust and accurate re- composition of random cropping and random color distortion is
 sults. It is beneficial to introduce an adversarial-based the most effective augmentation method”. This naturally raises
 SSL, which can further amplify the difference between the question of which one or composition of data augmentation
 normal and anomalous data, such as USAD [66] and DAE- methods is optimal for time series. Recently, Um et al. [195]
 MON [184]. show that the combination of three basic augmentation methods
 (permutation, rotation, and time warping) is better than that of a
B. Forecasting
 single method and achieves the best performance in time series
 r Task description: Time series forecasting is the process of classification task. Iwana et al. [121] evaluate twelve time series
 analyzing time series data using statistics and modeling to data augmentation methods on 128 time series classification
 make predictions of future windows or time points. datasets with six different types of neural networks. Different
 r Related methods: The pretext task based on autoregressive- evaluation frameworks give different recommendations and rebased forecasting is essentially a time series forecast- sults. Therefore, an interesting direction is to construct a reaing task. Therefore, various models based on forecasting sonable evaluation framework for time series data augmentation
 tasks are proposed, such as Pyraformer [185], FilM [15], methods, then further select the optimal method or combination
 Quatformer [186], Informer [173], Triformer [187], Scale- strategy.
 former [188], Crossformer [189], and Timesnet [190].
 Moreover, we found that decomposing the series (sea- B. Inductive Bias for Time Series SSL
 sonality and trend) and then learning and forecasting on
 Existing SSL methods often pursue an entirely data-driven
 the decomposed components will help improve the final
 modeling approach. However, introducing reasonable inductive
 forecasting accuracy, such as MICN [191] and CoST [123].
 bias or prior is helpful for many deep neural networks-based
 Besides, introducing an adversarial SSL is viable when
 modeling tasks [140], [196], [197]. On the one hand, although a
 missing values are in the series. For example, LGnet [192]
 purely data-driven model can be easily extended to various tasks,
 introduces adversarial training to enhance the modeling of
 it requires much data to train it. On the other hand, time series
 global temporal distribution, which mitigates the impact of
 data usually has some available characteristics, such as seasonal,
 missing values on forecasting accuracy.
 periodic, trend, and frequency domain biases [198], [199], [200].
C. Classification and Clustering Thus one future direction is to consider more effective ways
 r Task description: The goal of classification and clustering to induce inductive biases into time series SSL based on the
 tasks is similar, i.e., to identify the real category to which understanding of time series data and characteristics of specific
 a certain time series sample belongs. tasks.
 r Related methods: Contrastive-based SSL methods are the
 most suitable choice for these two tasks since the core C. SSL for Irregular and Sparse Time Series
 of contrastive learning is identifying positive and negative Irregular and sparse time series also widely exist in various
 samples. Specifically, TS-TCC [116] introduces temporal scenarios. This data is measured at irregular time intervals, and
 contrast and contextual contrast in order to obtain more not all the variables are available for each sample [201]. The
 robust representations. TS2Vec [118] and MHCCL [139] straightforward approach to deal with irregular and sparse time
 perform a hierarchical contrastive learning strategy over series data is to use interpolation algorithms to estimate missaugmented views, which enables robust representations. ing values [161], [162], [202]. However, interpolation-based
 Similar to anomaly detection and prediction tasks, an models add undesirable noise and extra overhead to the model
 adversarial-based SSL strategy can also be introduced into which usually worsens as the time series become increasingly
 classification and clustering tasks. DTCR [65] propose a sparse [54]. Moreover, irregular and sparse time series data is
 fake-sample generation strategy to assist the encoder in often expensive to obtain sufficient labeled data, which motivates
 obtaining more expressive representations. us to build time series analysis models based on SSL in various
6788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

tasks. Therefore, building SSL models directly on irregular also widely distributed in various places in the system, and
and sparse time series data without interpolation is a valuable obtaining sufficient labeled data is also difficult, so time series
direction. SSL has great deployment potential [216], [217]. In recent
 years, federated learning has been the most popular collaborative
D. Pretraining and Large Models for Time Series learning framework and has been used successfully in various
 applications. Combining time series self-supervised learning
 Nowadays, many large language models have shown their
 and federated learning is a valuable research direction that
powerful perception and learning capability for many different
 can provide additional modeling tools for modern distributed
tasks. A similar phenomenon also appears in computational
 systems.
vision [203]. It is naturally an interesting question, how about
the time series analysis field? As far as we know, there is limited
work on pretraining models in large-scale time series. Exploring VIII. CONCLUSION
the potentiality of pretraining and large time series models is a This article concentrates on time series SSL methods
promising direction. and provides a new taxonomy. We categorize the existing methods into three broad categories according to their
E. Adversarial Attacks and Robust Analysis on Time Series learning paradigms: generative-based, contrastive-based, and
 With the widespread use of deep neural networks in time adversarial-based. Moreover, we sort out all methods into
series forecasting, classification, and anomaly detection, the ten detailed subcategories: autoregressive-based forecasting,
vulnerability and robustness of deep models under adversarial autoencoder-based reconstruction, diffusion-based generation,
have become a significant concern [204], [205], [206], [207]. In sampling contrast, prediction contrast, augmentation contrast,
the field of time series forecasting, Liu et al. [205] study the indi- prototypes contrast, expert knowledge contrast, generation and
rect and sparse adversarial attacks on multivariate probabilistic imputation, and auxiliary representation enhancement. We also
forecasting models for time series forecasting and propose two provide useful information about applications and widely used
defense mechanisms: randomized smoothing and mini-max de- time series datasets. Finally, multiple future directions are sumfense. Wu et al. [206] propose an attack strategy for generating marized. We believe this review fills the gap in time series SSL
an adversarial time series by adding malicious perturbations to and ignites further research interests in SSL for time series data.
the original time series to deteriorate the performance of time
series prediction models. Zhuo et al. [208] summarize and com- REFERENCES
pare various recent and typical adversarial attack and defense
 [1] Q. Wen, L. Yang, T. Zhou, and L. Sun, “Robust time series analysis and
methods for fault classifiers in data-driven fault detection and applications: An industrial perspective,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
classification systems, including white-box attack (FGSM [209], Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 4836–4837.
IGSM [210], C & W attack [211], DeepFool [212]) and gray-box [2] P. Esling and C. Agon, “Time-series data mining,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2012.
and black-box attack (UAP [213], SPSA [214], Random noise). [3] J. B. Yang, M. N. Nguyen, P. P. San, X. L. Li, and S. Krishnaswamy,
The research on adversarial attacks and defenses against time “Deep convolutional neural networks on multichannel time series for
series data is a worthwhile direction, but there is much less human activity recognition,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015,
 pp. 3995–4001.
literature on this topic. Existing studies mainly involve forecast- [4] K. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Gu, X. Ruan, and J. Wang, “Multiple-timescale
ing and classification tasks. However, the impact of adversarial feature learning strategy for valve stiction detection based on convoluexamples on time series self-supervised pre-training tasks is still tional neural network,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 27, no. 3,
 pp. 1478–1488, Jun. 2022.
unknown. [5] S. Li, D. Hong, and H. Wang, “Relation inference among sensor time
 series in smart buildings with metric learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
F. Benchmark Evaluation for Time Series SSL Intell., 2020, pp. 4683–4690.
 [6] Y. Xu, S. Biswal, S. R. Deshpande, K. O. Maher, and J. Sun, “RAIM:
 SSL has many applications in time series classification, fore- Recurrent attentive and intensive model of multimodal patient monitoring
 data,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
casting, clustering, and anomaly detection. However, most cur- Mining, 2018, pp. 2565–2573.
rent research seeks to achieve the best performance on specific [7] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation
tasks and needs more discussion and evaluation of the self- learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018, pp. 1–16.
supervised technique. One interesting direction is to pay more [8] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Split-brain autoencoders: Unsuperattention to SSL, analyze its properties in time series modeling vised learning by cross-channel prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
tasks, and give reliable benchmark evaluation. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 645–654.
 [9] A. Dosovitskiy, J. T. Springenberg, M. Riedmiller, and T. Brox,
 “Discriminative unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neu-
G. Time Series SSL in Collaborative Systems ral networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014,
 pp. 766–774.
 Distributed systems have been widely deployed in many [10] Y. Tian, D. Krishnan, and P. Isola, “Contrastive multiview coding,” in
scenarios, including intelligent control systems, wireless sen- Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Cham, 2020, pp. 776–794.
 [11] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
sor networks, network file systems, etc. On the one hand, an of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
appropriate collaborative learning strategy is fundamental in Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Hum. Lang.
these systems, as users can train their own local models without Technol., Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
 [12] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning
sharing their private local data and circumventing the relevant of sentence embeddings,” in Proc. Empirical Methods Natural Lang.
privacy policy [215]. On the other hand, time series data is Process., 2021, pp. 6894–6910.
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6789

 [13] R. B. Cleveland, W. S. Cleveland, J. E. McRae, and I. Terpenning, [39] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning: A
 “STL: A seasonal-trend decomposition,” J. Official Stat., vol. 6, no. 1, survey,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A: Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 379,
 pp. 3–73, 1990. no. 2194, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 20200209.
 [14] Q. Wen, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Sun, “Fast RobustSTL: Efficient [40] O. B. Sezer, M. U. Gudelek, and A. M. Ozbayoglu, “Financial time
 and robust seasonal-trend decomposition for time series with complex series forecasting with deep learning : A systematic literature review:
 patterns,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data 2005–2019,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 90, 2020, Art. no. 106181.
 Mining, 2020, pp. 2203–2213. [41] Z. Liu, Z. Zhu, J. Gao, and C. Xu, “Forecast methods for time series data:
 [15] T. Zhou et al., “Film: Frequency improved legendre memory model for A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 91896–91912, 2021.
 long-term time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. [42] K. Benidis et al., “Deep learning for time series forecasting: Tutorial and
 Syst., pp. 12677–12690, 2022. literature survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1–36, Dec.
 [16] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework 2022.
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. [43] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 [17] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Z. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021.
 “A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9, [44] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT timeno. 1, pp. 1–22, 2021. series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–
 [18] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep 6494, Jul. 2020.
 neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., [45] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A
 vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 4037–4058, Nov. 2021. survey,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4653–4660.
 [19] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li, [46] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of
 “Label-efficient time series representation learning: A review,” 2023, data augmentation for time series classification with
 arXiv:2302.06433. neural networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 16, no. 7, 2021,
 [20] S. Deldari, H. Xue, A. Saeed, J. He, D. V. Smith, and F. D. Salim, Art. no. e0254841.
 “Beyond just vision: A review on self-supervised representation learning [47] G. Iglesias, E. Talavera, Á. González-Prieto, A. Mozo, and S. Gómezon multimodal and temporal data,” 2022, arXiv:2206.02353. Canaval, “Data augmentation techniques in time series domain: A
 [21] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE survey and taxonomy,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 35, no. 14,
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023. pp. 10123–10145, 2023.
 [22] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A [48] Q. Wen et al., “Transformers in time series: A survey,” in Proc. Int. Joint
 review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 6778–6786.
 vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013. [49] E. Brophy, Z. Wang, Q. She, and T. Ward, “Generative adversarial
 [23] S. Liu et al., “Audio self-supervised learning: A survey,” Patterns, vol. 3, networks in time series: A systematic literature review,” ACM Comput.
 no. 12, 2022, Art. no. 100616. Surv., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 1–31, Feb. 2023.
 [24] A. Mohamed et al., “Self-supervised speech representation learning: A [50] M. Schirmer, M. Eltayeb, S. Lessmann, and M. Rudolph, “Modeling
 review,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1179– irregular time series with continuous recurrent units,” in Proc. 39th Int.
 1210, Oct. 2022. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 162, pp. 19388–19405, 2022.
 [25] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. [51] Q. Tan et al., “DATA-GRU: Dual-attention time-aware gated recurrent
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023. unit for irregular multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 [26] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised learning Intell., 2020, pp. 930–937.
 of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. [52] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using tem-
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429, Feb. 2023. poral hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 [27] X. Qiu, T. Sun, Y. Xu, Y. Shao, N. Dai, and X. Huang, “Pre-trained models Syst., 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
 for natural language processing: A survey,” Sci. China Technol. vol. 63, [53] S. Jawed, J. Grabocka, and L. Schmidt-Thieme, “Self-supervised learning
 pp. 1872–1897, 2020. for semi-supervised time series classification,” in Proc. Adv. Knowl.
 [28] L. Ericsson, H. Gouk, C. C. Loy, and T. M. Hospedales, “Self-supervised Discov. Data Mining, Cham, 2020, pp. 499–511.
 representation learning: Introduction, advances, and challenges,” IEEE [54] S. Tipirneni and C. K. Reddy, “Self-supervised transformer for sparse
 Signal Process. Mag., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 42–62, May 2022. and irregularly sampled multivariate clinical time-series,” ACM Trans.
 [29] P. H. Le-Khac, G. Healy, and A. F. Smeaton, “Contrastive repre- Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2022.
 sentation learning: A framework and review,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, [55] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 pp. 193907–193934, 2020. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 [30] J. Gui et al., “A survey on self-supervised learning: Algorithms, applica- pp. 4027–4035.
 tions, and future trends,” 2023, arXiv:2301.05712. [56] C. Shang, J. Chen, and J. Bi, “Discrete graph structure learning for fore-
 [31] S. Latif, R. Rana, S. Khalifa, R. Jurdak, J. Qadir, and B. W. Schuller, casting multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 “Deep representation learning in speech processing: Challenges, recent 2021, pp. 1–14.
 advances, and future trends,” 2020, arXiv: 2001.00378. [57] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 [32] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning on detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representagraphs: Contrastive, generative,or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data tions, 2022, pp. 1–16.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023. [58] L. Xi, Z. Yun, H. Liu, R. Wang, X. Huang, and H. Fan, “Semi-supervised
 [33] Z. Liu, A. Alavi, M. Li, and X. Zhang, “Self-supervised contrastive time series classification model with self-supervised learning,” Eng. Appl.
 learning for medical time series: A systematic review,” Sensors, vol. 23, Artif. Intell., vol. 116, 2022, Art. no. 105331.
 no. 9, 2023, Art. no. 4221. [59] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,”
 [34] I. Misra and L. van der Maaten, “Self-supervised learning of pretext- in Proc. ICML Workshop Unsupervised Transfer Learn., Bellevue,
 invariant representations,” in IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Washington, USA, 2012, pp. 37–49.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 6706–6716. [60] A. Abid and J. Zou, “Autowarp: Learning a warping distance from
 [35] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for unlabeled time series using sequence autoencoders,” in Proc. 32nd
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. pp. 10568–10578.
 [36] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin, [61] P. Malhotra, V. TV, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G. Shroff, “TimeNet:
 “Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assign- Pre-trained deep recurrent neural network for time series classification,”
 ments,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, 2017, arXiv: 1706.08838.
 NY, USA, 2020, pp. 9912–9924. [62] A. Sagheer and M. Kotb, “Unsupervised pre-training of a deep LSTM-
 [37] A. Abanda, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozaono, “A review on distance based stacked autoencoder for multivariate time series forecasting probbased time series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 33, lems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 9, 2019, Art. no. 19038.
 pp. 378–412, 2019. [63] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn-
 [38] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller, chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 “Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New
 Knowl. Discov., vol. 33, pp. 917–963, 2019. York, NY, USA, 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
6790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 [64] K. Zhang and Y. Liu, “Unsupervised feature learning with data augmenta- [87] Z. Wang, X. Xu, G. Trajcevski, W. Zhang, T. Zhong, and F. Zhou, “Learntion for control valve stiction detection,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Data Driven ing latent seasonal-trend representations for time series forecasting,” in
 Control Learn. Syst. Conf., 2021, pp. 1385–1390. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–13.
 [65] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations for [88] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 time series clustering,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019. in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
 [66] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [89] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol, “Diffusion models beat gans on image
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in synthesis,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 8780–8794.
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, [90] L. Yang et al., “Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods
 pp. 3395–3404. and applications,” Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1–39, Nov. 2023.
 [67] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations [91] H. Cao, C. Tan, Z. Gao, G. Chen, P.-A. Heng, and S. Z. Li, “A survey on
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM generative diffusion model,” 2022, arXiv:2209.02646.
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2022, [92] C. Luo, “Understanding diffusion models: A unified perspective,”
 pp. 2977–2986. 2022, arXiv:2208.11970.
 [68] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, “Extract- [93] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep
 ing and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in Proc.
 Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., New York, NY, USA, 2008, Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 2256–2265.
 pp. 1096–1103. [94] Y. Song and S. Ermon, “Generative modeling by estimating gradients
 [69] G. Jiang, P. Xie, H. He, and J. Yan, “Wind turbine fault detection using a of the data distribution,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 denoising autoencoder with temporal information,” IEEE/ASME Trans. pp. 11918–11930.
 Mechatronics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 89–100, Feb. 2018. [95] Y. Song and S. Ermon, “Improved techniques for training score-based
 [70] J. Zhang and P. Yin, “Multivariate time series missing data imputation generative models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
 using recurrent denoising autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Bioinf. pp. 12438–12448.
 Biomed., 2019, pp. 760–764. [96] Y. Song, C. Durkan, I. Murray, and S. Ermon, “Maximum likelihood
 [71] Z. Zheng, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, and X. Luo, “Denoising temporal convo- training of score-based diffusion models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 lutional recurrent autoencoders for time series classification,” Inf. Sci., Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 1415–1428.
 vol. 588, pp. 159–173, 2022. [97] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and
 [72] J. Li, Z. Struzik, L. Zhang, and A. Cichocki, “Feature learning from B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differenincomplete EEG with denoising autoencoder,” Neurocomputing, vol. 165, tial equations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–36.
 pp. 23–31, 2015. [98] Y. Tashiro, J. Song, Y. Song, and S. Ermon, “CSDI: Conditional score-
 [73] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked based diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proc.
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 24804–24816.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 15979–15988. [99] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive de-
 [74] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatial- noising diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series foretemporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasting,” casting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2021, pp. 8857–8868.
 in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New [100] Y. Li, X. Lu, Y. Wang, and D. Dou, “Generative time series forecasting
 York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 1567–1577. with diffusion, denoise, and disentanglement,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 [75] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–14.
 transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation [101] Y. Chen et al., “ImDiffusion: Imputed diffusion models for multivariate
 learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data time series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 17, no. 3,
 Mining, 2021, pp. 2114–2124. pp. 359–372, Nov. 2023.
 [76] J. Chauhan, A. Raghuveer, R. Saket, J. Nandy, and B. Ravindran, “Multi- [102] J. L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff, “Diffusion-based time series imputation
 variate time series forecasting on variable subsets,” in Proc. 28th ACM and forecasting with structured state space models,” Trans. Mach. Learn.
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2022, Res., pp. 1–36, 2022.
 pp. 76–86. [103] Z. Wang, Q. Wen, C. Zhang, L. Sun, and Y. Wang, “Diffload: Un-
 [77] R. R. Chowdhury, X. Zhang, J. Shang, R. K. Gupta, and D. Hong, certainty quantification in load forecasting with diffusion model,”
 “TARNet: Task-aware reconstruction for time-series transformer,” in 2023, arXiv:2306.01001.
 Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, [104] H. Wen et al., “DiffSTG: Probabilistic spatio-temporal graph forecasting
 NY, USA, 2022, pp. 212–220. with denoising diffusion models,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Adv.
 [78] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in Geographic Inf. Syst., pp. 1–12, 2023.
 Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, 2014, [105] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
 pp. 1–14. representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 [79] P. DiederikKingma and M. Welling, “An introduction to variational Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 4650–4661.
 autoencoders,” 2019, arXiv: 1906.02691. [106] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised represen-
 [80] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation tation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–17.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230. [107] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 [81] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 18661–18673.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [108] H. Yèche, G. Dresdner, F. Locatello, M. Hüser, and G. Rätsch, “Neighnetwork,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data borhood contrastive learning applied to online patient monitoring,” in
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 11964–11974.
 [82] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series [109] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397. [110] T. Schneider et al., “Detecting anomalies within time series using local
 [83] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep neural transformations,” 2022, arXiv:2202.03944.
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time [111] T. Pranavan, T. Sim, A. Ambikapathi, and S. Ramasamy, “Contrastive
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, predictive coding for anomaly detection in multi-variate time series data,”
 pp. 3621–3633. 2022, arXiv:2202.03639.
 [84] S. N. Shukla and B. M. Marlin, “Multi-time attention networks for irreg- [112] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
 ularly sampled time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
 2021. Proc. Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
 [85] S. C.-X. Li and B. Marlin, “Learning from irregularly-sampled time [113] K. Zhang, Q. Wen, C. Zhang, L. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Time series anomaly
 series: A missing data perspective,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., detection using skip-step contrastive predictive coding,” in Proc. NeurIPS
 2020, pp. 5937–5946. Workshop: Self-Supervised Learn. - Theory Pract., 2022, pp. 1–9.
 [86] S. N. Shukla and B. M. Marlin, “Heteroscedastic temporal variational [114] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of
 autoencoder for irregularly sampled time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,”
 Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–20. 2018, arXiv: 1803.01271.
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6791

[115] M. Hou et al., “Stock trend prediction with multi-granularity data: A [139] Q. Meng, H. Qian, Y. Liu, L. Cui, Y. Xu, and Z. Shen, “MHCCL:
 contrastive learning approach with adaptive fusion,” in Proc. 30th ACM Masked hierarchical cluster-wise contrastive learning for multivariate
 Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 700–709. time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 9153–9161.
[116] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and [140] X. Wu, L. Xiao, Y. Sun, J. Zhang, T. Ma, and L. He, “A survey of humancontextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, in-the-loop for machine learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 135,
 pp. 2352–2359. pp. 364–381, 2022.
[117] E. Eldele et al., “Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for [141] Y. Chen and D. Zhang, “Integration of knowledge and data in machine
 semi-supervised time-series classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. learning,” 2022, arXiv:2202.10337v2.
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15604–15618, Dec. 2023. [142] P. Shi, W. Ye, and Z. Qin, “Self-supervised pre-training for time series
[118] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” classification,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8980–8987. [143] M. T. Nonnenmacher, L. Oldenburg, I. Steinwart, and D. Reeb, “Utilizing
[119] J. Pöppelbaum, G. S. Chadha, and A. Schwung, “Contrastive learning expert features for contrastive learning of time-series representations,” in
 based self-supervised time-series analysis,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 117, Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 16969–16989.
 2022, Art. no. 108397. [144] H. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Xiao, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “SleepPriorCL: Con-
[120] T. Peng, C. Shen, S. Sun, and D. Wang, “Fault feature extractor based trastive representation learning with prior knowledge-based positive minon bootstrap your own latent and data augmentation algorithm for un- ing and adaptive temperature for sleep staging,” 2021, arXiv:2110.09966.
 labeled vibration signals,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 9, [145] T.-S. Chen, W.-C. Hung, H.-Y. Tseng, S.-Y. Chien, and M.-H. Yang,
 pp. 9547–9555, Sep. 2022. “Incremental false negative detection for contrastive learning,” in Proc.
[121] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data augmentation Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–18.
 for time series classification with neural networks,” PLoS One, vol. 16, [146] K. Zhang, R. Cai, and Y. Liu, “Industrial fault detection using contrastive
 no. 7, Jul. 2021, Art. no. e0254841. representation learning on time-series data,” IFAC-PapersOnLine,
[122] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Øyvind Mikalsen, and R. Jenssen, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 3197–3202, 2023.
 “Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-supervised representation learn- [147] Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Li, R. C. Qiu, H. Xu, and Q. Tian, “Semiing for time series,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 155, pp. 54–61, supervised contrastive learning with similarity co-calibration,” IEEE
 2022. Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1749–1759, 2023.
[123] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “CoST: Con- [148] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 trastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for time Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
 series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, [149] Z. Wang, Q. She, and T. E. Ward, “Generative adversarial networks in
 pp. 1–18. computer vision: A survey and taxonomy,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
[124] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series representation learning no. 2, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 37.
 with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. [150] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation
 Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 25038–25054. with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
[125] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis and, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 5967–5976.
 contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,” [151] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image
 in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 3988–4003. translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE
[126] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 2242–2251.
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly [152] A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan, “Large scale GAN training
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data for high fidelity natural image synthesis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Mining, Long Beach, CA, 2023, pp. 3033–3045. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–35.
[127] X. Yang, Z. Zhang, and R. Cui, ”TimeCLR: A self-supervised contrastive [153] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture
 learning framework for univariate time series representation,” Knowl.- for generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Based Syst., vol. 245, 2022, Art. no. 108606. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 4396–4405.
[128] D. Kiyasseh, T. Zhu, and D. A. Clifton, “CLOCS: Contrastive learning of [154] O. Mogren, “C-RNN-GAN: Continuous recurrent neural networks with
 cardiac signals across space, time, and patients,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. adversarial training,” 2016, arXiv:1611.09904.
 Mach. Learn.2021, pp. 5606–5615. [155] J. Yoon, D. Jarrett, and M. van der Schaar, “Time-Series Generative
[129] Y. Ozyurt, S. Feuerriegel, and C. Zhang, “Contrastive learning for un- Adversarial Networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 supervised domain adaptation of time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019, pp. 5509–5519.
 Representations, 2023, pp. 1–40. [156] X. Li, V. Metsis, H. Wang, and A. H. H. Ngu, “TTS-GAN: A transformer-
[130] K. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Gu, J. Wang, and X. Ruan, “Valve stiction de- based time-series generative adversarial network,” in Proc. Artif. Intell.
 tection using multitimescale feature consistent constraint for time-series Med.: 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Med., Halifax, NS, Canada, Heidelberg,
 data,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1488–1499, 2022, pp. 133–143.
 Jun. 2023. [157] Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, X. Cai, and X. Yuan, “E 2 gan: End-to-end generative
[131] M. Hou et al., “Multi-granularity residual learning with confidence adversarial network for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. 28th
 estimation for time series prediction,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 3094–3100.
 pp. 112–121. [158] A. Seyfi, J.-F. Rajotte, and R. T. Ng, “Generating multivariate time series
[132] H. Lee, E. Seong, and D.-K. Chae, “Self-supervised learning with with Common source coordinated GAN (COSCI-GAN),” in Proc. Adv.
 attention-based latent signal augmentation for sleep staging with lim- Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022.
 ited labeled data,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, [159] P. Jeha et al., “PSA-: Progressive self attention GANs for synthetic time
 pp. 3868–3876. series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–20.
[133] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning [160] J. Jeon, J. Kim, H. Song, S. Cho, and N. Park, “GT-GAN: General purpose
 through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. 37th Int. time series synthesis with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Adv.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9929–9939. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–12.
[134] Y. Li, P. Hu, Z. Liu, D. Peng, J. T. Zhou, and X. Peng, “Contrastive [161] Y. Luo, X. Cai, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, and Y. Xiaojie, “Multivariate time series
 clustering,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8547–8555. imputation with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[135] J. Li, P. Zhou, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “Prototypical contrastive learning of Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 1603–1614.
 unsupervised representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [162] X. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Mao, and J. Yin, “Generative semi-
 2021, pp. 1–16. supervised learning for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc.
[136] G. Li et al., “ShapeNet: A shapelet-neural network approach for multi- AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8983–8991.
 variate time series classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, [163] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 pp. 8375–8383. series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[137] X. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Lin, and C.-T. Lu, “TapNet: Multivariate time series Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–20.
 classification with attentional prototypical network,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [164] D. Zhu et al., “Deep unsupervised binary coding networks for multi-
 Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 6845–6852. variate time series retrieval,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
[138] A. Dorle, F. Li, W. Song, and S. Li, “Learning discriminative vir- pp. 1403–1411.
 tual sequences for time series classification,” in Proc. 29th ACM [165] Q. Ma, C. Chen, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations
 Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York, NY, USA, 2020, for incomplete time series clustering,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 pp. 2001–2004. 2021, pp. 8837–8846.
6792 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

[166] S. Wu, X. Xiao, Q. Ding, P. Zhao, Y. Wei, and J. Huang, “Adver- [190] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timesnet:
 sarial sparse transformer for time series forecasting,” in Proc. 34th Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020, Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–23.
 pp. 17105–17115. [191] H. Wang, J. Peng, F. Huang, J. Wang, J. Chen, and Y. Xiao,
[167] Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Li, C. Liu, and J. Tan, “ACT: Adversarial convolutional “MICN: Multi-scale local and global context modeling for long-term
 transformer for time series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023,
 Netw., 2022, pp. 1–8. pp. 1–22.
[168] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous [192] X. Tang, H. Yao, Y. Sun, C. Aggarwal, P. Mitra, and S. Wang, “Joint
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. 28th modeling of local and global temporal dynamics for multivariate time
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439. series forecasting with missing values,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
[169] K. Aggarwal, S. Joty, L. Fernandez-Luque, and J. Srivastava, “Adversar- 2020, pp. 5956–5963.
 ial unsupervised representation learning for activity time-series,” in Proc. [193] X. Wang, K. Wang, and S. Lian, “A survey on face data augmentation
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 834–841. for the training of deep neural networks,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32,
[170] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- no. 19, pp. 15503–15531, Oct. 2020.
 strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonpara- [194] J. Gao, X. Song, Q. Wen, P. Wang, L. Sun, and H. Xu, “RobustTAD:
 metric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Robust time series anomaly detection via decomposition and convolu-
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2018, tional neural networks,” in Proc. KDD Workshop Mining Learn. Time
 pp. 387–395. Ser., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[171] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support [195] T. T. Um et al., “Data augmentation of wearable sensor data for parkinresearch in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Crit. son’s disease monitoring using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
 Inf. Infrastructures Secur.: 11th Int. Conf., Paris, France, 10–12, 2016, 19th ACM Int. Conf. Multimodal Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2017,
 Springer, 2017, pp. 88–99. pp. 216–220.
[172] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “Wadi: A water distribution [196] C. Deng, X. Ji, C. Rainey, J. Zhang, and W. Lu, “Integrating matestbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in chine learning with human knowledge,” iScience, vol. 23, no. 11, 2020,
 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., New York, Art. no. 101656.
 NY, USA, 2017, pp. 25–28. [197] Y. Chen and D. Zhang, “Integration of knowledge and data in machine
[173] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long se- learning,” 2022, arXiv:2202.10337.
 quence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, [198] Q. Wen, J. Gao, X. Song, L. Sun, H. Xu, and S. Zhu, “RobustSTL: A
 pp. 11106–11115. robust seasonal-trend decomposition algorithm for long time series,” in
[174] European Commission’s STETIS program, “30 years of european Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 5409–5416.
 wind generation,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/ [199] Q. Wen, K. He, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, M. Ke, and H. Xu, “RobustPeriod:
 datasets/sohier/30-years-of-european-wind-generation Robust time-frequency mining for multiple periodicity detection,” in
[175] UCI Machine Learning Repository, “Electricityloaddiagrams20112014 Proc. Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2021, pp. 2328–2337.
 data set,” 2011. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/ [200] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FEDformer:
 datasets/ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series fore-
[176] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. “National, regional, casting,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
 and state level outpatient illness and viral surveillance,” [Online]. Avail- [201] S. N. Shukla and B. M. Marlin, “A survey on principles, models and methable: https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/fluportaldashboard.html ods for learning from irregularly sampled time series: From discretization
[177] Max-Planck-Institut fur Biogeochemie, Jena, “Weather data set,” 2019. to attention and invariance,” 2020, arXiv: 2012.00168.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.bgc-jena.mpg.de/wetter/ [202] Y. Wu et al., “Dynamic gaussian mixture based deep generative model
[178] California Department of Transportation, “Traffic data set,” 2018. [On- for robust forecasting on sparse multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI
 line]. Available: http://pems.dot.ca.gov/ Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 651–659.
[179] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long- and short- [203] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” 2023, arXiv:2304.02643.
 term temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int. [204] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” in Proc. Int.
 ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, New York, NY, USA, Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–10.
 2018, pp. 95–104. [205] L. Liu, Y. Park, T. N. Hoang, H. Hasson, and L. Huan, “Robust multi-
[180] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Solar power data for integra- variate time-series forecasting: Adversarial attacks and defense mechation studies,” [Online]. Available: 2006https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar- nisms,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–18.
 power-data.html [206] T. Wu, X. Wang, S. Qiao, X. Xian, Y. Liu, and L. Zhang, “Small
[181] D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. Parra, and J. L. Reyes-Ortiz, “A public perturbations are enough: Adversarial attacks on time series prediction,”
 domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones,” in Inf. Sci., vol. 587, pp. 794–812, 2022.
 Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 2013, pp. 1–14. [207] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, and H. Darabi, “Adversarial attacks on time
[182] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica series,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 3309–
 Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019. 3320, Oct. 2021.
[183] A. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification archive, [208] Y. Zhuo, Z. Yin, and Z. Ge, “Attack and defense: Adversarial security
 2018,” 2018, arXiv: 1811.00075. of data-driven FDC systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1,
[184] X. Chen, L. Deng, Y. Zhao, and K. Zheng, “Adversarial autoencoder for pp. 5–19, Jan. 2023.
 unsupervised time series anomaly detection and interpretation,” in Proc. [209] J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 16th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015,
 2023, pp. 267–275. pp. 1–11.
[185] S. Liu et al., “Pyraformer: Low-complexity pyramidal attention for long- [210] K. Lee, J. Kim, S. Chong, and J. Shin, “Making stochastic neural networks
 range time series modeling and forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. from deterministic ones,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 Representations, 2022, pp. 1–20. 2017, pp. 1–16.
[186] W. Chen, W. Wang, B. Peng, Q. Wen, T. Zhou, and L. Sun, “Learning [211] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural
 to rotate: Quaternion transformer for complicated periodical time series networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 39–57.
 forecasting,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data [212] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “DeepFool: A simple
 Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 146–156. and accurate method to fool deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
[187] R.-G. Cirstea, C. Guo, B. Yang, T. Kieu, X. Dong, and S. Pan, “Triformer: Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 2574–2582.
 Triangular, variable-specific attentions for long sequence multivariate [213] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, O. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “Universal
 time series forecasting,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, adversarial perturbations,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 pp. 1994–2001. Recognit., 2017, pp. 86–94.
[188] M. A. Shabani, A. H. Abdi, L. Meng, and T. Sylvain, “Scaleformer: [214] J. Uesato, B. O’Donoghue, P. Kohli, and A. van den Oord, “Adversarial
 Iterative multi-scale refining transformers for time series forecasting,” in risk and the dangers of evaluating against weak attacks,” in Proc. 35th
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–23. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 5025–5034.
[189] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “Crossformer: Transformer utilizing cross- [215] J. Li, L. Lyu, D. Iso, C. Chakrabarti, and M. Spranger, “Moco SFL:
 dimension dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. Enabling cross-client collaborative self-supervised learning,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–21. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
ZHANG et al.: SSL FOR TIME SERIES ANALYSIS: TAXONOMY, PROGRESS, AND PROSPECTS 6793

[216] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhao, and Z. Lin, “Unsupervised representation learning Ming Jin received the BEng degree from the Hebei
 from pre-trained diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural University of Technology, Tianjin, China, in 2017,
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–14. and the MInfTech degree from the University of
[217] S. Sørbø and M. Ruocco, “Navigating the metric maze: A taxonomy of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, in 2019. He is
 evaluation metrics for anomaly detection in time series,” Data Mining currently working toward the PhD degree in com-
 Knowl. Discov., vol. 38, pp. 1–42, 2023. puter science with Monash University, Melbourne,
 Australia. His research focuses on graph neural networks (GNNs), time series analysis, data mining, and
 machine learning.
 Kexin Zhang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the BS and the MS degrees in engineering from
 the China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China,
 in 2016 and 2019, respectively, and the PhD degree in
 control engineering and science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2023. His major research
 Yong Liu (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 interests include intelligent time series analysis, deep
 in computer science and engineering and the PhD
 learning, data-driven industrial fault diagnosis, and
 degree in computer science from Zhejiang University,
 artificial intelligence security.
 Hangzhou, China, in 2001 and 2007, respectively. He
 is currently a professor with the Institute of Cyber
 Systems and Control, Department of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University. He has
 authored or co-authored more than 30 research papers
 Qingsong Wen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 in machine learning, computer vision, information
 MS and PhD degrees in electrical and computer enfusion, and robotics. His current research interests ingineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, clude machine learning, robotics vision, information
 Atlanta, USA. He is the head of AI Research &
 processing, and granular computing.
 Chief Scientist, Squirrel Ai Learning. Previously, he
 worked with Alibaba, Qualcomm, and Marvell. He
 has published more than 100 top-ranked AI confer- James Y. Zhang received the bachelor’s and masence and journal papers, had multiple Oral/Spotlight
 ter’s degrees from Zhejiang University, China, in
 Papers at NeurIPS/ICLR, had multiple Most Influen-
 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the PhD degree in
 tial Papers at IJCAI, received multiple IAAI Deployed
 electrical engineering from the University of Ottawa,
 Application Awards at AAAI, and won First Place
 Canada, in 2006. He is the managing director of AI
of SP Grand Challenge at ICASSP. Currently, he serves as Organizer/co-chair
 Forecast and Strategy Platform of Ant Group. Prior
of Workshop on AI for Time Series (AI4TS @ KDD, ICDM, SDM, AAAI,
 to his employment with Ant Group, he worked on
IJCAI) and Workshop on AI for Education (AI4EDU @ KDD, CAI). He also finance-related AI with Bloomberg, spearheaded the
serves as associate editor for Neurocomputing, associate editor for IEEE Signal
 creation of Bloomberg’s GPU computation farm and
Processing Letters, guest editor for Applied Energy, and guest editor for IEEE
 participated in the establishment of the AI branch of
Internet of Things Journal. His research interests include AI for time series, AI
 Bloomberg Labs. His industrial experience of startups
for education, and general machine learning. and larger corporations spans various disciplines, such as image processing,
 natural language processing, time series analysis, high-speed hardware development, optical networks, operations research, biometrics, and financial systems,
 with extensive patents and publications.
 Chaoli Zhang received the BS degree in information
 security from Nankai University, China, in 2015, and
 the PhD degree in computer science and engineering Yuxuan Liang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 2020. degree from the National University of Singapore.
 She is currently a lecturer with the School of Com- He is currently an assistant professor with Intelligent
 puter Science and Technology, Zhejiang Normal Uni- Transportation Thrust, also affiliated with Data Sciversity. She engaged in research at Alibaba DAMO ence and Analytics Thrust, Hong Kong University of
 Academy for nearly three years. Her research interests Science and Technology (Guangzhou). He is workinclude time series analysis, algorithmic game theory ing on the research, development, and innovation of
 and mechanism design, networking. She won the spatio-temporal data mining and AI, with a broad
 gold prize of ICASSP-SPGC root cause analysis for range of applications in smart cities. He published
wireless network fault localization 2022. She was the recipient of Google Anita more than 50 peer-reviewed papers in refereed jour-
Borg Scholarship 2014 and AAAI/IAAI innovative deployed application award nals and conferences, such as IEEE Transactions on
2023. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
 and Data Engineering, AI Journal, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
 KDD, WWW, NeurIPS, and ICLR. Three of them were selected as the most
 influential IJCAI/KDD papers. He received The 23rd China Patent Excellence
 Award, in 2022.

 Guansong Pang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 Rongyao Cai (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re- degree from the University of Technology Sydney,
 ceived the BS degress in chemical engineering from Australia, in 2019. He is a tenure-track assistant prothe Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, fessor of computer science with the School of Com-
 China, in 2022. He is working toward the MS de- puting and Information Systems, Singapore Managegree in control engineering with the College of Con- ment University (SMU), Singapore. Before joining
 trol Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, SMU, he was a research fellow with the Australian
 Hangzhou, China. His major research interests in- Institute for Machine Learning (AIML). His research
 clude data mining, machine learning on industrial interests lie in machine learning techniques and their
 time-series data. applications, with a focus on handling abnormal and
 unknown data.
6794 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Dongjin Song (Member, IEEE) received the PhD Shirui Pan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree from the University of California San Diego degree in computer science from the University of
 (UCSD), in 2016. Currently, he is an assistant pro- Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW, Australia.
 fessor with the School of Computing, University of He is a professor with the School of Information
 Connecticut (UConn). His research interests include and Communication Technology, Griffith University,
 machine learning, deep learning, data mining, and Australia. Prior to this, he was a senior lecturer with
 related applications for time series data and graph rep- the Faculty of IT, Monash University. His research
 resentation learning. Papers describing his research interests include data mining and machine learning.
 have been published at top-tier data science and ar- To date, he has published more than 100 research
 tificial intelligence conferences, such as NeurIPS, papers in top-tier journals and conferences, including
 ICML, ICLR, KDD, ICDM, SDM, AAAI, IJCAI, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
CVPR, ICCV, etc. He has co-organized AI for Time Series (AI4TS) workshop at Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
IJCAI 2022, 2023 and the Mining and Learning from Time Series workshop at Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, ICML, NeurIPS,
KDD 2022, 2023. He has also served as senior PC for AAAI, IJCAI, and CIKM. and KDD. His research has attracted more than 20 000 citations. His research
He won the UConn Research Excellence Research (REP) Award in 2021. His received the 2024 CIS IEEE TNNLS Oustanding Paper Award and the 2020
research has been funded by NSF, USDA, Morgan Stanley, NEC Labs America, IEEE ICDM Best Student Paper Award. He is recognized as one of the AI 2000
Travelers, etc. AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia (2021). He is an ARC Future
 fellow and a fellow of Queensland Academy of Arts and Sciences (FQA).