sensors
Article
Semi-Supervised Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection Based on
Multimodal Traffic Characteristics
Ming Liu , Qichao Yang, Wenqing Wang and Shengli Liu *

 Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China; lm_puree@outlook.com (M.L.);
 yangqichaoo@foxmail.com (Q.Y.); wenqingww@126.com (W.W.)
 * Correspondence: mr_shengliliu@163.com

 Abstract: The exponential growth of encrypted network traffic poses significant challenges for detecting malicious activities online. The scale of emerging malicious traffic is significantly smaller than that
 of normal traffic, and the imbalanced data distribution poses challenges for detection. However, most
 existing methods rely on single-category features for classification, which struggle to detect covert
 malicious traffic behaviors. In this paper, we introduce a novel semi-supervised approach to identify
 malicious traffic by leveraging multimodal traffic characteristics. By integrating the sequence and
 topological information inherent in the traffic, we achieve a multifaceted representation of encrypted
 traffic. We design two independent neural networks to learn the corresponding sequence and topological features from the traffic. This dual-feature extraction enhances the model’s robustness in detecting
 anomalies within encrypted traffic. The model is trained using a joint strategy that minimizes both the
 reconstruction error from the autoencoder and the classification loss, allowing it to effectively utilize
 limited labeled data alongside a large amount of unlabeled data. A confidence-estimation module
 enhances the classifier’s ability to detect unknown attacks. Finally, our method is evaluated on two
 benchmark datasets, UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS2017, under various scenarios, including different
 training set label ratios and the presence of unknown attacks. Our model outperforms other models
 by 3.49% and 5.69% in F1 score at labeling rates of 1% and 0.1%, respectively.

 Keywords: encrypted malicious traffic detection; semi-supervised learning; multimodal features;
 network security

Citation: Liu, M.; Yang, Q.; Wang, W.;
Liu, S. Semi-Supervised Encrypted
Malicious Traffic Detection Based on 1. Introduction
Multimodal Traffic Characteristics.
 Network traffic serves as the medium for the transmission and exchange of information
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507. https://
 online. It contains vast amounts of valuable data. Many malicious actors intercept and alter
doi.org/10.3390/s24206507
 this traffic to achieve illegal objectives. Moreover, they use network traffic to launch attacks,
Academic Editor: Chase Wu which often carry viruses, worms, and Trojans, posing significant risks to network security.
Received: 11 September 2024
 To safeguard privacy and data security, encryption technologies are widely employed in
Revised: 3 October 2024
 network data transmission. The use of traffic-encryption provides a secure data-transfer
Accepted: 9 October 2024 channel for legitimate users, ensuring the safety of data transmission. Nonetheless, while
Published: 10 October 2024 traffic-encryption technologies protect privacy and communication security, they also
 introduce new security risks. Some malicious actors use encrypted channels to transmit
 malicious data, aiming to conceal their malicious intent and evade firewall detection, thus
 creating potential risks to network security.
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors. In the year 2023, according to a report [1] by Sonicwall, there was a substantial surge
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
 in browser-based exploits and adware-infested websites, with increases of 297.1% and
This article is an open access article
 290.5%, respectively. This highlights a worrisome pattern where encrypted pathways
distributed under the terms and
 are being leveraged to target weaknesses in Internet browsers and propagate spyware.
conditions of the Creative Commons
 Additionally, Zscaler’s 2023 report [2] on the state of encrypted attacks indicated that
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
 an alarming 85.9% of all detected threats were transmitted via encrypted channels. This
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
 emphasizes the critical necessity for comprehensive traffic scrutiny to ensure security.
4.0/).

Sensors 2024, 24, 6507. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24206507 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
 Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2

Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 2 of 21
 alarming 85.9% of all detected threats were transmitted via encrypted channels.
 emphasizes the critical necessity for comprehensive traffic scrutiny to ensure secu
 Figure 1 shows the top five most attacked industries and the year-over-year growth
 Figure 1 shows the top five most attacked industries and the year-over-year growth rate
 of attack frequency. Consequently, rapidly and accurately identifying malicious t
 of attack frequency. Consequently, rapidly and accurately identifying malicious traffic
 within SSL/TLS encrypted flows is of paramount importance for ensuring the securi
 within SSL/TLS encrypted flows is of paramount importance for ensuring the security of
 network traffic.
 network traffic.

 2022 year 2023 year 300
 10000
 , increase / decrease %
 9403.7
 250

 8000 7494.6 200
 7323.1
 6956.1
 Hits(million)

 Change %
 150
 6000

 100
 3978.4
 4000
 50
 2359.0 2187.3
 1998.3 1827.7
 2000
 0
 530.9
 0 -50
 Education Healthcare Services Tech & Com Manufacturing

 Figure 1. The top five industries globally affected by encrypted attacks from 2022 to 2023. The
 represents
 horizontal axis Figure fivetop
 1. The distinct
 five industries. The line chart
 industries globally by their
 shows
 affected growth
 encrypted rates. from 2022 to 2023
 attacks
 horizontal axis represents five distinct industries. The line chart shows their growth rates.
 The core difference between identifying encrypted and unencrypted traffic lies in
 the alteration of distinguishing
 The core differencefeatures due to
 between encryption.
 identifying When and
 encrypted the unencrypted
 content of data traffic lies i
 packets is encrypted,
 alteration theoforiginal text is transformed
 distinguishing features due into
 toan unreadableWhen
 encryption. format.
 theAs a result,
 content of data pa
 various statistical characteristics
 is encrypted, at bothtext
 the original packet
 the is and flowinto
 transformed an can
 levels be altered
 unreadable post- As a re
 format.
 encryption. This includes
 various metrics
 statistical like the total at
 characteristics byte count
 both the of a flow,
 packet theflow
 size levels
 and of individual
 can be altered
 packets, and the time gaps between the arrival of successive packets. The
 encryption. This includes metrics like the total byte count of a flow, the size alterations in of indiv
 pose three
 these featurespackets, key challenges to the methods of traffic detection in real-world
 and the time gaps between the arrival of successive packets. The alteratio
 Encrypted
 networks. (1)these traffic-classification
 features models have
 pose three key challenges limited
 to the methodsexpressive
 of trafficpower, and in real-w
 detection
 reliance on a single feature is not suitable for model generalization across multiple
 networks. (1) Encrypted traffic-classification models have limited expressive power scenarios.
 Simple statistical features
 reliance on and TLS characteristics,
 a single feature is notwhich exclude
 suitable for inter-host interaction data,
 model generalization across mu
 are insufficient for abstracting critical patterns of advanced attack
 scenarios. Simple statistical features and TLS characteristics, which behaviors. (2) There is
 exclude inter
 a severe imbalance in the samples. Typically, in training datasets, the number
 interaction data, are insufficient for abstracting critical patterns of advanced a of normal
 traffic instances significantly
 behaviors. is athe
 exceeds
 (2) There number
 severe of attackinsamples,
 imbalance leading
 the samples. to the frequent
 Typically, in training data
 inaccurate detection of minority classes. This extreme class imbalance has always been a
 the number of normal traffic instances significantly exceeds the number of attack sam
 significant challenge for detection problems. (3) There is an inability to detect unknown
 leading to the frequent inaccurate detection of minority classes. This extreme
 attacks. Real-world network environments are often complex and dynamic, with new
 imbalance has always been a significant challenge for detection problems. (3) There
 types of network attacks continuously emerging. Consequently, it is common to encounter
 inability to detect unknown attacks. Real-world network environments are often com
 attack types during testing that were not present in the training data, and classifiers often
 and dynamic, with new types of network attacks continuously emerging. Conseque
 lack the ability to recognize these, resulting in poor detection accuracy. These challenges
 it is common to encounter attack types during testing that were not present in the tra
 render some traditional identification methods difficult or even inapplicable [3]. Effectively
 data, and classifiers often lack the ability to recognize these, resulting in poor dete
 detecting and handling malicious traffic within encrypted flows is a crucial measure for
 accuracy. These challenges render some traditional identification methods difficu
 defending against network attacks and safeguarding network security. Consequently, it
 even inapplicable [3]. Effectively detecting and handling malicious traffic w
 is imperative to seek a new method to differentiate between malicious and normal data
 encrypted flows is a crucial measure for defending against network attacks
 within encrypted traffic in real-world network environments.
 few years, network
 safeguarding
 In the last security.ofConsequently,
 the application deep learningittechnology
 is imperative seek a new metho
 hastoexpanded
 differentiate
 significantly and introduced between malicious and
 new approaches for normal data within
 the identification of encrypted
 encrypted traffic
 traffic.in real-w
 network environments.
 Semi-supervised detection methods, which leverage large amounts of unlabeled data, have
 demonstrated the ability to enhance model accuracy with only a small amount of labeled
 data in fields such as NLP and CV [4,5]. Thus, the objective of this paper is to detect
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 3 of 21

 hidden malicious traffic within encrypted flows, based on features that include network
 packet sequence characteristics and packet interaction graphs, using only a small amount of
 labeled normal and malicious traffic. Our study employs a semi-supervised joint training
 strategy with multimodal fusion decision-making, which exhibits improved detection
 capabilities for both known and unknown attacks.

 Research Contributions
 (1) Extraction of Multimodal Network Traffic Features. Addressing the difficulty in
 mining deep-level encrypted traffic packet features, we propose multimodal features based on sequence characteristics and heterogeneous graph structures from
 the perspectives of encryption-independent and transmission interaction behaviors.
 By analyzing heterogeneous features at different levels, we enhance the model’s
 robustness against encrypted traffic.
 (2) Based on the characteristics of multimodal features, we have designed a unique
 semi-supervised learning model that combines GRU and GCN. By jointly training the
 reconstruction error of the autoencoder and the classification loss of the classifier, we
 aim to improve detection effectiveness. Additionally, we propose an uncertainty estimation of classification results during the training process to better identify unknown
 malicious traffic.
 (3) This paper conducts experimental analysis of our method on two intrusion-detection
 datasets CICIDS2017 and UNSWNB15, examining various aspects such as different
 training set label ratios, the presence of unknown attacks, and ablation studies. The
 results validate the robustness of the proposed model across different scenarios, with
 the integrated model outperforming any single model.
 The second part of the paper investigates the fundamental representations of network
 traffic and summarizes existing network traffic-detection methods. The third part provides
 a detailed introduction to our semi-supervised detection method based on multimodal
 traffic features. The fourth part conducts experiments on two public network-intrusion
 datasets and analyzes the experimental results. The fifth part concludes the paper.

 2. Related Work
 2.1. Extraction of Network Traffic Characteristics
 There are numerous methods for extracting network traffic features, which can be
 categorized into statistical features, payload features, and other features.
 Statistical feature extraction typically involves manually designed features such as the
 number of packets, flow duration, and average packet size. These features are generated
 by aggregating packet information within the same flow. Barradas et al. [6] proposed a
 method based on random forests for detecting malicious covert tunnels in multimedia
 encrypted traffic. This method extracts statistical features based on traffic behavior patterns,
 including the maximum and minimum packet lengths, the duration and number of packets
 at peak times, and the number of bytes sent and received for each connection. The study
 collected normal and malicious multimedia traffic for both QUIC14 and TLS encryption
 protocols and established a binary classification model using random forests, achieving a
 90% detection accuracy for covert tunnels. However, the method has a high false positive
 rate, exceeding 10%. Anderson et al. [7] presented a method for detecting botnet traffic. It
 was the first to propose extracting features from TLS handshake information, including
 low-security cipher suites and self-signed certificates in the certificate content. The method
 tested various classification algorithms, including random forests, logistic regression, and
 MLP, all of which achieved high accuracy. However, the detection accuracy for newly
 discovered malicious traffic was lower than the accuracy achieved in the training set. These
 methods can effectively reduce data dimensionality, making them more suitable for deep
 learning tasks. However, they also lose much useful traffic information, such as packet
 payload and changes in packet behavior over time.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 4 of 21

 Payload-based feature extraction utilizes the original packet payload content, containing richer traffic information. If the payload representation can be effectively learned, it
 can address a wider range of attack types. Lin et al. [8] modeled the temporal relationships
 between bytes and packets in network flows, training a pre-trained model to learn a general
 vector representation of encrypted traffic. For different detection scenarios, the pre-trained
 model can significantly accelerate the training of detection models. Kim et al. [9] employed
 machine learning methods such as K-nearest neighbors and convolutional neural networks
 to evaluate traffic fingerprinting methods based on Markov chains and other methods.
 It concludes that, with an appropriate classifier, the Markov chain-based fingerprinting
 method outperforms other methods in detection effectiveness. Liu et al. [10] introduced a
 method that constructs multilevel attributes for encrypted traffic based on the distribution
 of encryption cipher suites and uses these attributes to extract fingerprint information from
 encrypted traffic.
 Currently, alternative methods are beginning to explore the use of sequence features
 and graph representations based on traffic packets. Typically, only header information is
 used to construct features, which allows the model to avoid interference from encryption
 algorithms. Xie et al. [11] presented the HSTF model, a neural network detection model
 based on spatiotemporal hierarchical features. The model combines CNN and LSTM and
 takes input data that includes raw image data, packet-level features, and flow-level features.
 This enhances the model’s ability to learn autonomously and detect HTTP-based malware,
 achieving an accuracy rate of 99.4%. This method can capture more specific network
 behavior information than statistical features and can handle encrypted traffic, making it an
 effective supplement to methods based on statistical features. Rezaei et al. [12] suggested
 that the order information between adjacent network flows is beneficial for identifying
 homogeneous flows. They employ LSTM networks to uncover the sequential patterns
 between network flows.
 Graph-based representations are particularly adept at maintaining the topological
 integrity of network packets. Shen et al. [13] introduced a novel decentralized application
 fingerprinting method. This method proposes a graph structure named Traffic Interaction
 Graph, which retains rich original flow characteristics. It uses Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
 for vector representation and conducts classification research. However, this method lacks
 the extraction of flow statistical information and external topological structure information. Busch et al. [14] proposed representing the flow between the same endpoints of
 network streams as a simple edge and implementing malware detection through graph
 neural networks.

 2.2. Malicious Traffic Detection
 Based on the types of data covered by the training and test sets, previous detection
 methods can be primarily categorized into three types.
 Supervised detection methods. Experimental results indicate that TLS features, when
 combined with other features, can achieve higher recall rates. et al. Lee [15] proposed
 an intrusion-detection method combining a Transformer encoder and an LSTM network.
 However, supervised detection methods have several limitations. Initially, the prevalence
 of anomalous instances is significantly less than that of typical instances, which results in
 suboptimal classification accuracy for the model. Secondly, obtaining label information
 can be challenging. Thirdly, the model’s generalization cannot be guaranteed to detect
 unknown attacks.
 Unsupervised detection methods. Li et al. [16] presented a method for detecting
 malicious TLS traffic using clustering techniques. The authors assume that normal TLS
 traffic is diverse and cannot be clustered into a single class, therefore, outliers in clustering
 are considered normal flows. On the other hand, traffic originating from the same family
 of malicious software exhibits similar traits, allowing it to be categorized into unified or
 multiple classes. Caville et al. [17] tackled the challenge of acquiring high-fidelity, labeled
 network traffic data in practical settings. They introduced a self-supervised edge embed-
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 5 of 21

 ding technique that combines E-GraphSAGE with advanced graph-based deep learning
 methods, thereby diminishing the need for labeled samples. This approach leverages the
 graph neural network algorithm E-GraphSAGE to extract edge attributes and the graph’s
 topological configuration. Additionally, it implements deep graph mutual information
 maximization strategies for self-supervised learning processes. Min et al. [18] addressed
 the issue of imbalanced data in traffic datasets by proposing a dataset balancing method
 based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The method processes the UGR’16
 dataset to balance the sample distribution, generating attack samples for underrepresented
 categories using GANs and incorporating them into the original dataset. It then uses a
 Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network to experimentally validate the effectiveness
 of the balanced dataset. The experimental findings demonstrated that the MLP model is
 capable of yielding higher precision with the GAN-balanced dataset. However, this method
 has higher requirements for machine performance and presents challenges in processing
 non-numeric features such as IP addresses. Unsupervised methods are widely applied due
 to their ability to adapt well to the variability of network traffic and the absence of manual
 labeling. However, their accuracy is relatively low.
 Semi-supervised detection methods. Semi-supervised methods are less commonly
 used in network traffic anomaly detection. Sun et al. [19] characterized the semi-supervised
 context by having an abundance of normal data devoid of anomalies. Their model assimilates the typical patterns exhibited by normal data and contrasts these with the test samples
 against a normative model to identify potential anomalies. Additionally, Min et al. [20]
 adhered to a general definition, where only a portion of the training data is labeled, and
 unlabeled data is used to assist in the learning of labeled data. Wagh et al. [21] employed a
 self-training method for intrusion-detection tasks. This method labels samples with high
 prediction confidence from unlabeled data, adds them to the training set, and iteratively
 refines the process to enhance the training effect of the classifier.
 However, most of these methods do not consider the highly imbalanced distribution of normal and anomalous traffic in real-world network environments, nor do they
 address the detection of unknown attack categories. Their approach is entirely dependent on the intrinsic generalization abilities of the classification model, which retains
 considerable constraints.

 3. Method
 3.1. Preliminaries
 3.1.1. Problem Statement
 In real-world network environments, it is challenging to collect pure traffic data that is
 free from noise. Training a detection model with only normal or malicious samples limits
 its learning capabilities. Therefore, we hypothesize the research scenario: the training
 dataset comprises a limited set of labeled benign and malicious instances, supplemented
 by an ample quantity of unlabeled normal samples. The labeled malicious samples may
 not encompass all types of malicious traffic, indicating that only a subset of malicious
 categories is known.

 3.1.2. Notations
 Given N data streams, x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , x N ∈ Xtrain , where M samples have label information, M ≪ N. ( x 1 , y1 ) , ( x 2 , y2 ) , ( x 3 , y3 ) , . . . , ( x M , y M ) ∈ Xk × Y, and Xk ⊆ Xtrain ,
 Y = {0, 1}. We assume that when y = 0, the sample belongs to normal traffic, and when
 y = 1, the sample belongs to malicious traffic. We propose a novel traffic-detection method
 ψ based on multimodal traffic features, which include network traffic sequence features Ts
 and graph features Tg . In the test set, we are given T stream data, x̂1 , x̂2 , x̂3 , . . . , x̂ T ∈ Xtest .
 We ultimately aim to use the model ψ to provide an anomaly score x̂i = ψ( x̂i ) for each
 stream to assess its likelihood of being malicious traffic.
 and graph features 𝑇𝑔 . In the test set, we are given T stream data, 𝑥̂1 , 𝑥̂2 , 𝑥̂3 , … , 𝑥̂𝑇 ∈ 𝑋𝑡
 We ultimately aim to use the model 𝜓 to provide an anomaly 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑥̂𝑖 = 𝜓(𝑥̂𝑖 ) for ea
 stream to assess its likelihood of being malicious traffic.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 6 of 21
 3.2. Framework
 Given that statistical features of network traffic can result in significant loss
 3.2. Framework
 informationGiven thatthe
 from original
 statistical data,of
 features propose
 wenetwork can result insemi-supervised
 a multimodal
 traffic monitori
 significant loss of inmodel for detecting encrypted malicious
 formation from the original data, we propose a multimodal semi-supervised monitoring sequen
 traffic. This model is based on traffic
 analysis
 modelandforheterogeneous
 detecting encrypted graph embedding.
 malicious The
 traffic. This framework
 model is based on oftraffic
 the model,
 sequencedetailed
 analysis and heterogeneous graph embedding.
 Figure 2, encompasses several key components: data preprocessing, featureinextracti
 The framework of the model, detailed
 Figure 2, encompasses several key components: data preprocessing, feature extraction,
 semi-supervised learning, and multimodal decision fusion.
 semi-supervised learning, and multimodal decision fusion.

 Figure 2. Our
 Figure 2. Oursemi-supervised approach
 semi-supervised approach for thefor the identification
 identification of encrypted
 of encrypted malicious malicious tra
 traffic utilizing
 utilizing features
 features from multiple
 from multiple modalities.
 modalities.

 3.3. Data Preprocessing
 Preprocessing
 3.3. Data The granularity of network traffic detection addressed in this study is focused on the
 The granularity
 flow level, of network
 which typically traffic
 involves detection
 the collection addressed
 of data in this
 packets that sharestudy is focused
 a common set on
 flow of characteristics,
 level, includinginvolves
 which typically the sourcethe source port, of
 IP, collection destination destination
 IP, andthat
 data packets share aport.
 common
 Since general attacks or abnormal behaviors are often manifested within flows rather than
 of characteristics, including the source IP, source port, destination IP, and destinati
 individual packets, this aggregation approach can significantly reduce resource overhead.
 Since general
 port. Compared abnormal
 attacks orflows,
 to unidirectional from thebehaviors
 perspective areofoften
 traffic manifested within flows rath
 interaction, bidirectional
 individual
 than flows packets,
 with richer thisareaggregation
 information approach
 chosen as the detection can significantly
 granularity. Therefore, wereduce
 catego- resou
 rize the packets in PCAP files into different session flows
 overhead. Compared to unidirectional flows, from the perspective of traffic based on the five-tuple, which interacti
 facilitates subsequent labeling and processing. The segmentation process utilizes the tool
 bidirectional flows with richer information are chosen as the detection granulari
 pkt2flow [22], using source address, destination address, source port, and destination
 port as we
 Therefore, categorize
 classification the packets
 information PCAP
 to splitinthe packets intointo
 files different
 bidirectional session
 session flows
 flows, with based
 the five-tuple, which facilitates subsequent labeling and processing.
 each session flow saved to a separate PCAP file. Subsequently, invalid packets are The segmentati
 reprocess utilizes
 moved, the data
 and dirty pkt2flow
 toolwithin [22], using
 each session source
 flow after address,including
 segmentation, destination address, sou
 ARP packets,
 andpackets,
 port, DNS and retransmission
 destination packets, are cleared
 port as classification to minimizeto
 information their impact
 split theon packets
 the in
 detection results.
 bidirectional session flows, with each session flow saved to a separate PCAP fi
 Subsequently, invalid
 3.4. Multimodal packets
 Feature areand
 Extraction removed,
 Encoding and dirty data within each session flow af
 segmentation, including ARP packets, DNS packets, and retransmission packets,
 3.4.1. Sequence Feature
 cleared toWe minimize
 use only thetheir impact
 header onofthe
 portion eachdetection
 traffic dataresults.
 packet for feature extraction. The
 features extracted for each packet are listed in Table 1. In total, we extract five types of
 packet features, which effectively reflect the unique properties of traffic data packets within
 3.4. Multimodal Feature Extraction and Encoding
 the sequence.
 Among Feature
 3.4.1. Sequence these, the target port number does not inherently possess a measure of magnitude and is not suitable for direct treatment as a continuous feature. Consequently, we
 We use only the header portion of each traffic data packet for feature extraction. T
 consider encoding it as a discrete value. The range of port number features is extensive, pofeatures extracted
 tentially spanningfortheeach packet
 interval are Therefore,
 [0, 65536]. 1. In total,
 TableOne-Hot
 listed in using weisextract
 Encoding five types
 impractical.
 packet
 As a features,
 result, wewhich effectively
 have resorted reflect
 to binary the for
 encoding unique properties
 all features except foroftime
 traffic data pack
 intervals
 and packet payload
 within the sequence. sizes. We also utilize the size of the packet payload and the size of the
 packet header as features. Since the header size can indicate the type of multi-layer protocol
 to some extent, we consider encoding it as a discrete value. The numerical value of the
 payload size is more meaningful, so we directly use numerical encoding for it. Compared to
 traditional statistical features, our method based on packet sequence modeling can capture
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 7 of 21

 more detailed patterns of traffic behavior, effectively leveraging the temporal attributes
 of packets. Additionally, due to the low computational cost of feature extraction, this
 approach offers significant advantages in terms of time efficiency.

 Table 1. Overview of traffic sequence characteristics.

 Feature Coded Format
 Destination Port Binary coding
 Time Interval Numerical coding
 Packet Header Size (Byte) Binary coding
 Packet Payload Size (Byte) Numerical coding
 TCP Window Size Binary coding

 We utilize an autoencoder model based on Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) to extract
 and reconstruct features from unlabeled sequence data. GRUs are effective in encoding
 variable-length input sequences into fixed-length vectors. Let si represent the current input
 sample sequence, si = (e1 , e2 , . . . , en ) and n denote the length of sequence si . Consequently,
 the relationship for the hidden state of the first GRU layer can be expressed as shown in
 Equation (1). (
 (1)
 ht =  0, t = 0 (1)
 (1)
 GRU ht−1 , et , 1 ≤ t ≤ n

 ht−1 represents the hidden state from the previous moment. The GRU () function
 denotes the transition relationship between hidden states at adjacent moments. We employ
 a stacked multi-layer GRU architecture for encoding, with a total of H layers. For layers
 where i > 1, the input to the ith GRU unit is generated by the output of the previous layer
 at the same time step. Since the GRU uses the hidden state G for information transfer
 between adjacent moments and directly for the output of the GRU unit at that moment, the
 relationship for the i-th layer GRU can be expressed as Equation (2).
  
 (i ) (i ) ( i −1)
 ht = GRU ht−1 , ht , 1 ≤ t ≤ n, i > 1 (2)

 Essentially, we utilize the output of the hidden state from the last layer as a fixedlength vector representation z that we obtain from the encoding process, which can be
 (H)
 denoted as z = hn .
 Similarly, the decoder is composed of several layers of GRU units and a dense layer,
 configured to calculate the discrepancy in the reconstruction between the generated sequence and the original input. Within the decoder, the ultimate output z derived from the
 encoder serves as the initial input, as demonstrated in Equation (3).
  
 (i ) (i )
 ĥt = GRU ĥt−1 , z , 1 ≤ t ≤ n (3)

 At the final stage of the decoder, we employ a fully connected layer to generate the
 seq
 reconstructed sequence, which is then employed to calculate the reconstruction loss Lrec , as
 illustrated in Equation (4).  
 N n
 Lrec = ∑i=1 ∑t=i 1 l et′i , eit
 seq
 (4)

 l represents the distance function between vectors, and we use the mean squared error
 for this calculation. Figure 3 depicts the process of extracting traffic sequence features and
 calculating reconstruction loss.
 features and calculating reconstruction loss.
 𝑠𝑒𝑞 𝑛
 𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑐 = ∑𝑁 𝑖 ′𝑖 𝑖
 𝑖=1 ∑𝑡=1 𝑙(𝑒𝑡 , 𝑒𝑡 ) (4)
 𝑙 represents the distance function between vectors, and we use the mean squared
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 error for this calculation. Figure 3 depicts the process of extracting traffic sequence
 8 of 21
 features and calculating reconstruction loss.

 Figure 3. Illustration of traffic sequence feature extraction.

 3.4.2. Graph Feature
 To avoid
 Figure
 Figure 3. Illustration
 3. feature
 Illustration of overlap
 traffic
 of traffic between
 sequence
 sequence feature
 featuretraffic flows of different categories and versions,
 extraction.
 extraction.
 we describe the traffic features from another perspective as a supplement to flow sequence
 3.4.2. Graph Feature
 features. This topological
 3.4.2. Graph Feature feature can capture the connection behaviors between different
 To avoid feature overlap between traffic flows of different categories and versions, we
 host applications.
 To avoid Moreover,
 feature overlap the low-dimensional
 between traffic flows of as feature vectors
 different categories generatedversions,
 and sequence through
 describe the traffic features from another perspective a supplement to flow
 graph
 we embedding
 describe
 features. This
 technology
 thetopological
 traffic features are
 from
 feature
 independent
 can another
 capture
 of the statistical
 perspective
 the connectionas a supplementfeatures to flow
 behaviors between
 of encrypted
 sequence
 different
 flow
 data and
 features. possess
 This a certain
 topological level
 feature of
 can anti-interference
 capture the capability.
 connection
 host applications. Moreover, the low-dimensional feature vectors generated through graph behaviorsBuilding
 between upon the
 different work
 host
 [13], weapplications.
 embedding furthertechnology Moreover,
 optimized the traffic
 the
 are independent low-dimensional
 ofinteraction feature
 the statistical graph vectors
 features generatedflow
 byofembedding
 encrypted through
 packetdata size,
 graph
 direction, embedding
 and possess order, and
 a certaintechnology
 graph-level are packet
 independent
 level of anti-interference of the statistical
 information
 capability. into thefeatures
 Building uponof
 heterogeneous
 theencrypted
 workgraph
 [13],flow
 weneural
 data
 further We
 network. and possess
 definethe
 optimized a certain
 thetraffic
 packet
 level of
 interactionanti-interference
 length as graphthe byvertices capability.
 embedding Building
 graphsize,
 of thepacket upon
 structure the
 direction, andwork arrange
 order,
 [13], we furtherpacket optimized
 andin
 them graph-level
 sequence within the the
 information
 graph.traffic
 intoTotheinteraction
 heterogeneous
 represent graph
 the graph by neural
 directionembedding
 ofnetwork.
 packets packet
 We size,
 indefine
 the graph
 direction,
 the packet order,
 length and
 as graph-level
 the vertices ofpacket
 the information
 graph structure into
 and the heterogeneous
 arrange them in graph neural
 sequence within
 structure, we use positive and negative signs to denote downstream and upstream
 the graph.We
 network. To define
 represent thethepacket length
 direction of as the vertices
 packets of the structure,
 in the graph graph structure
 we use and arrange
 positive and
 packets,
 them
 respectively.
 in sequence
 Subsequently,
 the graph. and
 withindownstream
 the entire
 To represent
 flow is divided
 the direction
 into
 of packets
 multiple burst
 in the graph
 data
 negative signs to denote upstream packets, respectively. Subsequently, the
 packets basedison
 entire flowwe
 structure, use packet-transmission
 thepositive
 divided and negative
 into multiple burst data
 direction.
 signspackets
 First,
 to denote we connect the
 baseddownstream and vertices
 upstream
 on the packet-transmission
 within
 same
 thepackets, group
 direction.respectively.of burst
 First, we connect data packets
 Subsequently,
 the vertices with
 thewithin edges.
 entirethe flow Unlike
 same group ofinto
 is divided [13], we multiple
 burst use a different
 burst data
 data packets withtype of
 edge to connect
 packets
 edges. based [13],
 Unlike different
 on the usegroups
 wepacket-transmission
 a different of type
 burstof data
 edge packets
 direction. First, we
 to connect sequence.
 indifferent theFigure
 connectgroups vertices 4within
 of burst provides
 data a
 detailed
 the sameillustration
 group of of
 burstthe heterogeneous
 data packets with traffic
 edges. burst
 Unlike graph.
 [13],
 packets in sequence. Figure 4 provides a detailed illustration of the heterogeneous traffic Different
 we use a colored
 different lines
 type ofin the
 edge
 burstrepresent
 figure to connect
 graph. different
 two
 Different types groups
 of edges.
 colored linesofinburst data packets
 the figure represent sequence.
 in two types ofFigure
 edges.4 provides a
 detailed illustration of the heterogeneous traffic burst graph. Different colored lines in the
 figure represent two types of edges.

 Figure
 Figure trafficgraph
 4. Illustrationofoftraffic
 4. Illustration feature construction.
 graph feature construction.The
 Thetransfer of packets
 transfer between
 of packets clientclient
 between and and
 Figure
 server 4. transformed
 is Illustration ofinto
 traffic
 a graph feature graph
 heterogeneous construction. The transfer of packets between client and
 representation.
 server is transformed into a heterogeneous graph representation.
 server is transformed into a heterogeneous graph representation.
 We employ a heterogeneous graph encoder that combines different relationships
 within the heterogeneous graph to learn high-quality representations of network traffic. The
 strength of a heterogeneous graph is its capacity to encapsulate diverse types of relationship
 data, effectively converting high-dimensional, sparsely distributed topological graph data
 into concise vector forms. This transformation aims to preserve the structural and semantic
 details of the nodes to the greatest extent possible. As depicted in Figure 5, we deploy a
 GCN to distill the representation for each node within the graph. The convolutional layer
 operation in GCN can be formalized as Equation (5).
 within the heterogeneous graph to learn high-quality representations of network traffic.
 The strength of a heterogeneous graph is its capacity to encapsulate diverse types of
 relationship data, effectively converting high-dimensional, sparsely distributed
 topological graph data into concise vector forms. This transformation aims to preserve the
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 9 of 21
 structural and semantic details of the nodes to the greatest extent possible. As depicted in
 Figure 5, we deploy a GCN to distill the representation for each node within the graph.
 The convolutional layer operation in GCN can be formalized as Equation (5).
 ∼−1 ∼ ∼−1 2 2
 H ( l +1) = σ ( D AD
 1 H1( j) W ( j) ) (5)
 (𝑙+1) − ̃ −2 𝐻(𝑗) 𝑊 (𝑗) )
 ̃ 2 𝐴̃𝐷 (5)
 𝐻 = 𝜎(𝐷
 ∼ ∼
 where, ̃D = D + IN , ̃ A = A + IN , IN represents the identity matrix. D represents the
 where, 𝐷 = 𝐷 + 𝐼𝑁 , 𝐴 = 𝐴 + 𝐼𝑁 , 𝐼𝑁 represents the identity matrix. 𝐷 represents the
 degree matrix of the nodes, which indicates the degree of each node. A represents the
 degree matrix of the (nodes, which indicates the degree of each node. A represents the
 adjacency matrix. H(𝑗)j) represents the feature matrix of the j-th layer. W ( j) represents
 (𝑗)
 the
 adjacency matrix. 𝐻
 learned weights. σ denotes the non-linear activation function. After encoding through the the
 represents the feature matrix of the j-th layer. 𝑊 represents
 learned weights.𝜎
 GCN layer, denotes
 the final embeddedthe non-linear activationisfunction.
 feature representation given by After encoding
 Equation (6). through the
 GCN layer, the final embedded feature representation is given by Equation (6).
 ∼ − 21 ∼ ∼ − 12 ∼ − 21 ∼ ∼ − 12
 1 1 1 1 (0)
 Z = GCN ( GCN ( X, A)) = so f tmax ( D ̃ A−D2 ̃ ̃·−σ2( D ̃A−D 2 ̃̃ 2
 XW
 − W (1) )(1)
 )(0) (6) (6)
 𝑍 = 𝐺𝐶𝑁(𝐺𝐶𝑁(𝑋, 𝐴)) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐷 𝐴𝐷 ⋅ 𝜎(𝐷 𝐴𝐷 𝑋𝑊 )𝑊 )
 Thedecoder
 The decoderpart of the
 part of graphconvolution
 the graph convolution typically computes
 typically the reconstructed
 computes the reconstructed
 adjacency matrix Â
 ̂ through the use of an inner product, as indicated in Equation
 adjacency matrix 𝐴 through the use of an inner product, as indicated in Equation (7). (7).
    
 Â =𝐴̂σ= ZZ T 𝑇
 𝜎(𝑍𝑍 =) sigmoid ZZ T 𝑇 )
 = 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑(𝑍𝑍 (7) (7)

 Throughout
 Throughout thethetraining
 training phase,
 phase, the objective
 the objective of the
 of the decoder reduce theisdiscrepancy
 is todecoder to reduce the
 between thebetween
 discrepancy original the
 graph datasetgraph
 original and thedataset reconstructed
 and theversion,
 reconstructed version,the
 thereby enabling thereby
 enabling robust featureof
 theof acquisition
 acquisition robust feature
 representations. representations.
 Commonly, Commonly,error
 the graph reconstruction the isgraph
 reconstruction error
 quantified using is quantified
 the mean using
 squared error the as
 (MSE) mean squared
 the primary errorfor(MSE)
 metric as the
 the overall primary
 graph
 reconstruction
 metric indicated
 loss, asgraph
 for the overall in Equation (8).
 reconstruction loss, as indicated in Equation (8).
 gra 𝑔𝑟𝑎 =
 A, Â 𝐴̂)
 N 𝑁
 𝑟𝑒𝑐∑i =∑
 Lrec 𝐿= 𝑀𝑆𝐸(𝐴, (8)
 
 MSE
 0 𝑖=0
 (8)

 5. 5.
 Figure
 Figure ofgraph
 Frameworkof
 Framework graph encoder
 encodernetwork.
 network.
 3.5. Semi-Supervised Co-Training
 3.5. Semi-Supervised Co-Training
 Given that the training dataset Xtrain comprises a limited set of labeled instances and
 Given thatamount
 a substantial the training dataset
 of unlabeled 𝑋𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
 ones, comprises
 traditional a limited set
 semi-supervised of labeled instances
 classification methods and
 substantial
 a often unlabeledofdata
 utilize allamount unlabeled traditional
 ones,training
 for pre-training, semi-supervised
 an autoencoder network, and classification
 learning reconstruction error loss to better learn the original features and
 methods often utilize all unlabeled data for pre-training, training an autoencoder reduce dimensionality.
 Subsequently,
 network, one can continue
 and learning to fine-tune
 reconstruction error original
 theloss encoder
 to better using
 learn labeled
 the datafeatures
 original to train and
 the final classifier. However, we found that the method of initializing the
 reduce dimensionality. Subsequently, one can continue to fine-tune the original encoder classifier weights
 through pre-training often encounters performance limitations. Therefore, we design a
 using labeled data to train the final classifier. However, we found that the method of
 joint training approach for the autoencoder and the classifier, simultaneously learning
 initializing the classifier weights through pre-training often encounters performance
 reconstruction error and classification error to update the model weights. In this context,
 limitations. Therefore,
 the autoencoder acts aswe design a joint
 a regularizer, which training approach
 often leads forperformance
 to better the autoencoderthan theand the
 classifier, simultaneously
 general separate model. Thelearning
 specific training phaseerror
 reconstruction processand classification
 is depicted error6. to
 in Figure Theupdate
 model can be divided into the training phase and the detection phase.
 the model weights. In this context, the autoencoder acts as a regularizer, which often leads
 to better performance than the general separate model. The specific training phase process
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 10 detection
 is depicted in Figure 6. The model can be divided into the training phase and the of 21
 phase.

 Figure 6. 6.
 Figure Description ofour
 Descriptionof our semi-supervised co-training
 semi-supervised co-training TheThe
 framework.
 framework. process
 process primarily
 primarily consists
 consists
 of two components:
 of two components:the thetraining andthe
 phaseand
 training phase detection
 thedetection phase.
 phase.

 The classifier module first utilizes the output of the encoder as the supervised learning
 The classifier module∼ first utilizes the output of the encoder as the supervised
 input for labeled data s i , which, after being encoded by the encoding layer, yields a fixedlearning input for
 ∼ labeled data ∼𝑠̃ 𝑖 , which, after being encoded by the encoding layer,
 length vector o i . We input𝑜̃the o i into a fullỹ connected layer and a softmax layer to
 yields a fixed-length vector 𝑖 . We input the 𝑜 𝑖 into a fully connected layer and ∼ a softmax
 train a binary classifier, with the output representing the predicted probability
 layer to train a binary classifier, with the output representing the predicted probability p i of the 𝑝̃𝑖
 classification result.
 of the classification result.
 To counteract the challenge of a significant imbalance between the positive and neg-
 To counteract the challenge of a significant imbalance between the positive and
 ative samples in the training data, we employ the focal loss [23], function in place of the
 negative
 standard samples loss. Thisdata,
 in the training
 cross-entropy we employ
 specialized the focaldiminishes
 loss function function
 loss [23], the impactinofplacea of
 standardofcross-entropy
 themultitude loss. This specialized loss function diminishes
 straightforward negative examples during training, thereby boosting the the impact of a
 multitude of straightforward
 model’s capacity negativesamples.
 to learn from complex examples Theduring training,
 computation thereby
 of this boosting the
 loss is depicted
 model’s capacity
 in Equation (9). to learn fromcomplex samples. The computation of this loss is depicted
 ∼ ∼ γ
    ∼ 
 in Equation (9). FL p i = −α 1 − p i · log p i (9)

 α and γ are weighting factors 𝐹𝐿(𝑝 ̃𝑖 )respectively
 that ̃𝑖 )𝛾 ⋅ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝
 = −𝛼(1 − 𝑝control ̃𝑖 ) of sample imbalance and (9)
 issues
 the difficulty of recognition. We have adopted the value of 2 for γ as recommended in the
 𝛼 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛾 are weighting factors that respectively control issues of sample imbalance
 focal loss [23], and we have used the default value of 1 for α.
 and theFordifficulty of recognition.
 the detection of unknownWe traffic, wethe
 have adopted
 malicious for γ aasconfidencevalue of 2design
 concurrently recommended
 the focal loss
 in estimation [23], and we have used the default value of 1 for α.
 method during the training of the classifier. When faced with unknown samples,
 theFor output of
 the detection
 probability of aunknown malicious
 typical classifier cannot traffic, werepresent
 directly concurrently design
 the model’s a confidenceconfidence
 estimation during
 method result.
 in the classification theif training
 Even a sample does of thenot classifier.
 belong to the Whensame faced withasunknown
 distribution the
 training set of the classifier, the classifier often provides a very high probability
 samples, the probability output of a typical classifier cannot directly represent the model’s output, even
 in theprediction.
 for an incorrect
 confidence Therefore,
 classification result. introduced
 weEven an uncertainty-estimation
 does not belong method
 if a sample to the same
 ∼
 in the classification module to calculate the confidence
 distribution as the training set of the classifier, the classifier c i estimate often provides the
 for samples in test high
 a very
 set. The architecture primarily comprises several dense layers and a sigmoid activation
 probability output, even for an incorrect prediction. Therefore, we introduced an
 function. The confidence score is bounded within the interval [0, 1], where a higher score
 uncertainty-estimation method in the classification module to calculate the confidence 𝑐̃𝑖
 indicates higher certainty. Facing unknown anomalies in the test set often results in lower
 estimate for samples
 confidence, which willin help
 the test set. The
 improve architecture
 the model’s abilityprimarily comprisesanomalies.
 several dense
 to detect unknown
 layers and a sigmoid activation function. The confidence score
 To incorporate confidence into the model training, we adjust the classification predictionis bounded within the
 interval [0, 1], where
 probabilities a higher
 as indicated score indicates
 in Equation (10). higher certainty. Facing unknown anomalies
 in the test set often results in lower  confidence, which will help improve the model’s
 ∼ ∼1 ∼
 ability to detect unknown anomalies. ∼′
 
 i · p y = 0 confidence into the model training,
 Tocincorporate
 p i = ∼ ∼1  i i ∼  ∼ (10)
 we adjust the classification prediction p + 1 − c i yas =
  c i · probabilities indicated
 1 in Equation (10).
 i i
 1
 ∼′
 c̃i ⋅p̃ ỹ i =0
 ’
 { 1 i sample
 p i represents the probability thatp̃ai =predicted is malicious, and similarly, the (10)
 ̃′i ⋅p̃ i +(1-c̃i ) ỹ i =1
 ∼c
 probability that a sample is benign is 1 − p i . Intuitively, when the predicted confidence is
 𝑝̃𝑖′ we
 high, represents the probability
 use the original predictionthat a predicted
 to calculate the loss, whileis
 sample malicious,
 when and similarly,
 is low, the
 the confidence
 the training
 probability provides
 that a hint,
 a sample i.e., we is
 is benign 1 − 𝑝̃𝑖′ .the
 calculate loss using when
 Intuitively, the true label.
 the predicted confidence is
 the training provides a hint, i.e., we calculate the loss using the true label.
 During the training phase, a joint training process is achieved through alternating
 labeled and unlabeled data. The ultimate loss function is a combination of the
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 classification loss and the reconstruction loss, as shown in Equation (11). 11 of 21

 𝐿 = 𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑐 + 𝜇𝐿𝑐𝑙𝑠 (11)
 𝜇 is used
 where During training
 the to phase,
 balance a joint training
 the classification process
 loss is achieved through
 and reconstruction loss. alternating
 labeled and6b
 Figure unlabeled data. the
 represents ultimate loss function stage,
 The anomaly-detection is a combination
 where weof the classification
 combine three loss
 loss and the reconstruction loss, as shown in Equation (11).
 functions that are meaningful for detecting unknown malicious traffic samples to evaluate
 anomalies. For each test sample 𝑥̂𝑖 ,Lwe = Lcalculate its anomaly score 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑥̂𝑖 , as shown in
 rec + µLcls (11)
 Equation (12).
 where µ is used to balance the classification
 𝑖 loss𝑖 and reconstruction
 𝑖 loss. 𝑖
 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ̂
 𝑥 = 𝜆 ⋅ 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑐𝑙𝑠 ⋅ 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 − 𝜃 ⋅ 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒
 Figure 6b represents𝑖 the anomaly-detection stage, where we combine 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 + 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑐 functions (12)
 three loss
 that
 Weareaim to jointlyfordetermine
 meaningful detecting unknown
 the anomaly malicious basedsamples
 scoretraffic to evaluate anomalies.
 on the classification results from
 For each test sample x̂i , we calculate its anomaly score scorex̂i , as shown in Equation (12).
 supervised learning and the reconstruction error from unsupervised learning. We use the
 score x̂i = λ ·of
 product of the probability classifying
 i i a sample i as anomalous i and the (12)model’s
 score cls · scorecon f − θ · scorecon f + scorerec
 confidence as the core influence of the classifier, with 𝜆 being used to adjust the weights.
 We aim we
 Additionally, to jointly determine
 consider the anomaly
 the possibility score based aonsample
 of classifying the classification results from
 as an unknown malicious
 supervised learning and the reconstruction
 type when the confidence is low. Therefore, we also use a penalty term 𝜃 to the
 error from unsupervised learning. We use assign a
 product
 higher estimateof classifying
 of the probability
 anomaly to samples with aslow
 a sample anomalous and theand
 confidence model’s
 sumconfidence
 it with the
 as the core influence of the classifier, with λ being used to adjust the weights. Additionally,
 reconstruction error to obtain the final anomaly score. In summary, for samples with high
 we consider the possibility of classifying a sample as an unknown malicious type when
 confidence in the classification results, the model tends to rely on supervised learning
 the confidence is low. Therefore, we also use a penalty term θ to assign a higher anomaly
 estimate for
 outcomes judgment.
 to samples withConversely,
 low confidence samples
 forand sum it with classificationerror
 lowreconstruction
 with the confidence,
 to obtain there
 a strong
 is the likelihood that they belong to unknown categories, and
 final anomaly score. In summary, for samples with high confidence in the classification we prefer to use
 reconstruction error
 results, the model for determination.
 tends to rely on supervised learning outcomes for judgment. Conversely,
 for samples with low classification confidence, there is a strong likelihood that they belong
 unknown categories,
 3.6.toMultimodal Fusion and we prefer to use reconstruction error for determination.
 this section,
 3.6.InMultimodal we describe the detection framework based on multimodal data. For
 Fusion
 each flow, we can
 In this section, weobtaindescribetwo features:based
 types offramework
 the detection traffic sequence data.
 on multimodal For and
 features
 heterogeneous
 each flow, we can graph embedding
 obtain features:We
 features.
 two types of aim
 traffic to adopt
 sequence an appropriate
 features multimodal
 and heterogeneous
 graph embedding features. We aim to adopt an appropriate multimodal strategy to effectively
 strategy to effectively combine the multimodal features of network traffic. To effectivelythe
 utilize two distinct
 combine feature representations
 the multimodal features of network of sequences and topological
 traffic. To effectively graphs,
 two and
 utilize the
 distinct feature representations of sequences and topological graphs,
 to integrate with the semi-supervised joint training model proposed by us, we will and to integrate with
 the semi-supervised
 construct a multimodal jointdetection
 training model proposed
 framework by us,
 using a we will construct afusion
 multimodal
 post-processing approach,
 detection framework using
 which is also known as decision fusion. a post-processing fusion approach, which is also known as
 decision fusion.
 As shown in Figure 7, we train a semi-supervised model using an unlabeled dataset
 As shown in Figure 7, we train a semi-supervised model using an unlabeled dataset
 and a labeled dataset. The sequence features 𝑠𝑖 and
 and a labeled dataset. The sequence features si and
 the heterogeneous graph features 𝑔𝑖
 the heterogeneous graph features gi are
 used
 areused to train these two models, respectively. For
 to train these two models, respectively. For the test sample, wesample,
 the test combine we combine the
 the scoretotal
 score total output
 output by the
 by the two measuretothe
 twotomodels
 models measure the that
 probability probability
 the samplethat the sample
 belongs belongs to
 to malicious
 malicious
 traffic. Thetraffic.
 parameter τ is used to𝜏adjust
 The parameter is used
 the to adjustofthe
 weights theweights of the two models.
 two models.

 scorescore
 total =
 total = score
 score seq +seq
 ⋅ score
 τ+· τscore graph
 graph (13) (13)

 { , , } =1

 {( , )} =1

 {( , )} =1

 Figure 7. Overall discriminator model based on multimodal data.
Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 21

 Figure 7. Overall discriminator model based on multimodal data.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 12 of 21
 4. Experiment
 4.1. Dataset
 4. Experiment
 To substantiate the robustness of our suggested model in various settings, we
 4.1. Dataset
 performed experiments utilizing two publicly available datasets, namely UNSW-NB15
 andsubstantiate
 [24] To CICIDS2017the robustness of our suggested model in various settings, we per-
 [25].
 formed experiments utilizing
 UNSW-NB15 is a network two publicly
 attack available
 dataset datasets,
 that includes namelynetwork
 genuine UNSW-NB15traffic [24]
 and
 and CICIDS2017 [25].
 composite malicious communication behaviors within a real network environment. The
 UNSW-NB15
 records is a network
 are primarily attack
 categorized intodataset andincludes
 benignthat types,network
 genuine
 malicious with thetraffic and
 malicious
 composite malicious communication behaviors within a real network environment. The
 records further divided into nine categories. The original network data in the dataset was
 records are primarily categorized into benign and malicious types, with the malicious
 created by the Cyber Range Lab, utilizing the IXIA PerfectStorm tool
 records further divided into nine categories. The original network data in the dataset was
 (https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset, accessed on 8 October 2024).
 created by the Cyber Range Lab, utilizing the IXIA PerfectStorm tool (https://research.
 The quantities of each category are listed in Table 2 and Figure 8. In the UNSW-NB15
 unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset, accessed on 8 October 2024). The quantities of
 dataset, the majority of the data is normal traffic, with Generic and Exploits attack types
 each category are listed in Table 2 and Figure 8. In the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the majority
 also accounting for a significant proportion. The execution complexity of various attack
 of the data is normal traffic, with Generic and Exploits attack types also accounting for a
 behaviors, the potential benefits, and their occurrence frequency result in a highly skewed
 significant proportion. The execution complexity of various attack behaviors, the potential
 distribution of attack types within the network traffic data. This imbalance presents a
 benefits, and their occurrence frequency result in a highly skewed distribution of attack
 considerable challenge for the detection of anomalous network traffic patterns.
 types within the network traffic data. This imbalance presents a considerable challenge for
 the detection of anomalous network traffic patterns.
 Table 2. The composition of the UNSW-NB15 dataset.

 Table 2. The composition of the UNSW-NB15 dataset.
 Classes Quantity
 Normal 2,218,761
 Classes Quantity
 Reconnaissance 13,987
 Normal 2,218,761
 Worms 174
 Reconnaissance 13,987
 Dos
 Worms 16,353
 174
 Generic
 Dos 215,481
 16,353
 Generic
 Analysis 215,481
 2677
 Analysis 2677
 Fuzzers 24,246
 Fuzzers 24,246
 Shellcode
 Shellcode 1511
 1511
 Backdoor
 Backdoor 2329
 2329
 Exploits
 Exploits 44,525
 44,525
 Total
 Total 2,540,044
 2,540,044

 0.1%
 0.1%
 0.1%

 87.4% 0.6%
 1%
 1.8%
 0.6%
 8.5%

 Normal Generic Exploits Fuzzers
 Dos Reconnaissance Analysis Backdoor
 Shellcode Worms

 Overall category
 Figure8.8. Overall
 Figure distributionof
 categorydistribution theUNSW-NB15.
 ofthe UNSW-NB15.

 CICIDS2017 collects five days of simulated real-world traffic generated by the B-
 Profile system, encompassing a variety of network services and attack methods, including
 DoS, DDoS, and Port Scanning, among others. Consequently, the dataset contains both
 benign and various malicious traffic, widely used for the classification of encrypted traffic.
 CICIDS2017 collects five days of simulated real-world traffic generated by th
 Profile system, encompassing a variety of network services and attack methods, inclu
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 DoS, DDoS, and Port Scanning, among others. Consequently, the dataset 13 of 21contains
 benign and various malicious traffic, widely used for the classification of encrypted tra
 This paper filters out 10 types of attacks, with the specific categories and their quant
 This paper filterslisted Table of
 in types
 out 10 Figure 9with
 3. attacks, presents a pie chart
 the specific that graphically
 categories depicts the catego
 and their quantities
 listed in Table 3.distribution within thea dataset.
 Figure 9 presents pie chart that graphically depicts the categorical
 distribution within the dataset.
 Table 3. The composition of the CICIDS2017 dataset.
 Table 3. The composition of the CICIDS2017 dataset.
 Classes Quantity
 Classes Normal Quantity 2,271,320
 Normal Dos Hulk 2,271,320 230,124
 Dos Hulk Port Scan 230,124 158,804
 Port Scan DDos 158,804 128,025
 DDos Dos GoldenEye 128,025 10,293
 Dos GoldenEye FTP-Patator 10,293 7935
 FTP-Patator 7935
 SSH-Patator 5897
 SSH-Patator 5897
 Dos slowloris Dos slowloris 5796 5796
 Dos SlowhttptestDos Slowhttptest 5499 5499
 Bot Bot 1956 1956
 Web Attack Web Attack 1507 1507
 Total 2,827,156
 Total 2,827,156

 0.1%
 0.1%

 0.4% 0.2%

 80.3% 1.5%
 0.2%
 4.5%
 0.3%
 0.2%
 5.6%

 8.1% Normal Dos Hulk Port Scan DDos
 Dos GoldenEye FTP-Patator SSH-Patator Dos slowloris
 Dos Slowhttptest Bot Web Attack

 Overall category
 Figure 9. distribution
 Figure 9. Overall category distribution
 of the CICIDS2017.of the CICIDS2017.

 andEnvironment
 4.2. Environment4.2. Parameters Setting
 and Parameters Setting
 The experimentsThe were conductedwere
 experiments Windows 10
 on a conducted onsystem with Python
 a Windows 10 system 3.7 with
 and Py-Python 3.7
 Torch 1.10. During 1.10. Duringstage
 the preprocessing
 PyTorch the of the traffic data,
 preprocessing stagetheofopen-source tool pkt2flow
 the traffic data, the open-source
 is used to convert the original
 pkt2flow is usedPCAP files into
 to convert originalflows.
 thesession PCAPIn theinto
 files stages of model
 session flows.con-
 In the stage
 model the
 struction and training, model was
 construction andbuilt and trained
 training, using
 the model PyTorch,
 was with
 built and optimization
 trained using PyTorch,
 performed on anoptimization
 NVIDIA GeForce performed
 RTX 4080 an acceleration.
 on for NVIDIA GeForce For the RTX 4080 for
 sequential acceleration.
 feature en- For
 sequential
 coder, the GRU model feature
 can easily encoder,
 perform the GRU model
 reconstruction. canwe
 Thus, easily perform
 equate reconstruction. Thus
 the classification
 equate the classification
 loss with the reconstruction loss, settinglossµ towith
 1. Forthe
 the graph featureloss,
 reconstruction settingthe
 encoder, μ RGAT
 to 1. For the g
 feature encoder, the RGAT model experiences a higher
 model experiences a higher reconstruction loss during the initial epochs of iteration. To reconstruction loss during
 initial epochs of iteration. To balance the joint training loss,
 balance the joint training loss, we set µ to 2 for the graph structure branch. To standardize we set μ to 2 for the g
 structure branch. To standardize the units, we manually set
 the units, we manually set λ to 1 and θ to 0.05. Table 4 presents the parameter values for λ to 1 and θ to 0.05. Tab
 presents
 the network structure chosenvalues
 the parameter
 attributes in ourfor the network structure attributes chosen in our mod
 model.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 14 of 21

 Table 4. The main parameters setting.

 Parameters Default Value
 Epoch 200
 Learning rate 0.0005
 Optimizer Adam
 Batch size 64
 Layer of GRU 3
 Layer of GCN 2
 α, γ (1, 2)
 µ 1, 2
 λ, θ (1, 0.05)
 τ 1

 4.3. Evaluation and Validation Metrics
 This section utilizes four key performance indicators for assessment: accuracy, precision, recall, and the F1 score. Accuracy, the most frequently used metric, indicates the
 ratio of correctly identified instances to the total instances. Precision is defined as the ratio
 of true positive instances to the total number of instances labeled as positive. Recall, on
 the other hand, is the ratio of true positive instances to the total actual positive instances.
 The F1 score is a metric that provides a balance between precision and recall. To reduce the
 variability from a single trial, this study conducts the experiment five times, each with a
 random split of the dataset into training and testing subsets. The final experimental result
 is determined by averaging the results from these five iterations.
 We design three sets of experiments to evaluate the performance of various methods:
 (1) Performance of the model under different label ratios.
 During the semi-supervised training phase, different quantities of labeled samples
 were used to train each model to observe the performance under varying degrees of
 labeled samples.
 (2) Performance in detecting unknown malicious traffic.
 For the two datasets, the experimental scenario was uniformly set to 1% label ratio.
 Two types of malicious traffic are selected from each dataset as unknown categories for
 experiments, and corresponding ROC curves were plotted to observe the detection results.
 (3) The role of each component in our model.
 To analyze the actual effects of each component in the model, including confidence
 estimation, reconstruction error, and the effect of multimodal fusion. Experiments were
 conducted under a known label ratio of 1% in the IDS2017 dataset.
 To more thoroughly assess the efficacy of our proposed model, we select various
 baselines for comparison. An introduction to the selected methods is as follows.
 • CNN+LSTM Model [11]: This model combines convolutional neural networks and
 long short-term memory to integrate spatial and temporal features of traffic data.
 • E-GraphSAGE Model [18]: This model is the first to introduce graph neural networks
 into the field of anomaly traffic detection, focusing on the aggregation and update of
 graph information on edge features.
 • E-ResGAT Model [26]: This model replaces the backbone network with Graph Attention Networks on the basis of E-GraphSAGE, introduces attention mechanisms into
 graph neural networks, calculates the mutual importance of each node to its adjacent
 nodes, and participates in the aggregation of information on the graph.
 • BYOL-NIDS Model [27]: This model implements self-supervised learning for anomaly
 traffic-intrusion detection, introduces the BYOL model into the field of anomaly traffic
 detection and specifically performs data augmentation.
 • RUIDS Model [28]: This model implements an anomaly traffic-detection scheme based
 on self-supervised masked time context using the Transform.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 15 of 21

 • VGAE Model [29]: This model uses variational graph auto-encoders to achieve selfsupervised capture and learning of feature representations of traffic graphs for traffic classification.
 • CNN+AE [30]: Composed of a pre-trained CNN model and an autoencoder model for
 classification. The CNN model automatically extracts deep features from the payload
 of network traffic, and the AE model judges normal and malicious traffic through the
 reconstruction error of deep features.

 4.4. Detection Analysis on Known Samples and Varying Label Ratios
 In the experiment with known sample verification, both the training and test data
 consist of the same malicious family. The objective of this experiment is to verify whether
 different detection models can effectively distinguish between malicious and normal traffic.
 Table 5 first presents the detection results of our proposed model and other baseline models
 on the complete labeled training set.
 On the UNSW-NB15 dataset, our model achieves the Acc, Pre, Rec, and F1 rates by
 99.51%, 99.46%, 99.36% and 99.41% respectively. It can be observed that on the IDS2017
 dataset, our model still achieves the best classification performance. All four metrics have
 exceeded 99%. This demonstrates that our model has good generalization capabilities.
 The E-ResGAT model, which employs an attention mechanism to focus on the channel
 dimensions of traffic features, yields good results.

 Table 5. Comparison of detection performance on UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS2017.

 UNSW-NB15 CICIDS2017
 Model
 Acc Pre Rec F1 Acc Pre Rec F1
 1D-CNN 96.61 96.55 96.51 96.53 95.16 91.63 95.39 89.79
 LSTM 95.10 92.94 95.17 91.83 96.78 96.07 96.56 95.83
 CNN+LSTM 97.95 97.03 97.48 96.80 98.02 98.05 98.20 98.25
 E-GraphSAGE 98.93 98.64 98.18 98.41 99.09 99.06 99.29 98.94
 E-ResGAT 99.40 99.50 98.90 99.20 99.84 99.65 99.43 99.76
 BYOL-NIDS 97.05 97.26 98.72 96.54 96.70 95.24 95.74 94.99
 RUIDS 98.91 98.80 98.86 98.77 99.09 99.06 99.69 98.75
 VGAE 98.63 98.80 97.63 99.38 97.20 97.26 97.40 97.19
 CNN+AE 96.96 97.19 97.22 97.17 98.64 98.62 98.59 98.63
 Our 99.51 99.46 99.36 99.41 99.99 99.98 99.98 99.98

 In real network environments, malicious data is far less common than benign data.
 To better reflect this characteristic in dataset validation. We set up training sets with
 different proportions of labeled malicious traffic. For each of the two datasets, we will
 evaluate whether the model can still achieve good performance with a very small amount
 of labeled data. We will conduct experiments with label proportions in the training set
 at 0.5%, 1%, 5%, 10%, and 20%. The F1 score on the CICIDS2017 dataset, as shown in
 Table 6, indicates that the method proposed by us consistently achieves nearly the best
 performance across varying label ratios. When the percentage of labeled training samples
 exceeds 10%, all methods exhibit similar performance to the previous experiment. The
 performance of all other models, except for ours, has significantly decreased to varying
 degrees when the label ratio is low. Specifically, when the labeling rate is reduced to 5%,
 our method outperforms current baseline methods by more than 2.69%. As the labeling
 rate decreases to 1% and 0.5%, supervised learning models [11,18,26] tend to focus more
 on extracting features from normal traffic. The insufficient extraction of malicious traffic
 features often leads to a significant decrease in the F1 score. When compared to selfsupervised learning methods [27–29], our approach demonstrates significant advantages,
 outperforming the best models by 3.49% and 5.69% in F1 score, respectively. We attribute
 this to our joint training method and confidence-estimation design, which more effectively
 utilizes unlabeled data to enhance the model’s robustness.
 supervised learning methods [27–29], our approach demonstrates significant advantages,
 outperforming the best models by 3.49% and 5.69% in F1 score, respectively. We attribute
 this to our joint training method and confidence-estimation design, which more effectively
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 utilizes unlabeled data to enhance the model’s robustness. 16 of 21

 Table 6. Comparative experiment on different label ratios on CICIDS2017.
 Table 6. Comparative experiment on different label ratios on CICIDS2017.
 0.5% 1% 5% 10% 20%
 1D-CNN 67.81
 0.5% 81.09
 1% 88.61
 5% 90.55
 10% 94.36
 20%
 LSTM
 1D-CNN 70.95
 67.81 79.23
 81.09 89.08
 88.61 92.32
 90.55 96.09
 94.36
 CNN+LSTM
 LSTM 78.18
 70.95 82.71
 79.23 90.16
 89.08 92.80
 92.32 97.81
 96.09
 CNN+LSTM
 E-GraphSAGE 78.18
 80.78 82.71
 92.72 90.16
 94.86 92.80
 95.77 97.81
 98.56
 E-GraphSAGE
 E-ResGAT 80.78
 82.02 92.72
 94.10 94.86
 95.74 95.77
 96.79 98.56
 99.13
 E-ResGAT 82.02 94.10 95.74 96.79 99.13
 BYOL-NIDS
 BYOL-NIDS 85.29
 85.29 90.73
 90.73 92.72
 92.72 95.09
 95.09 96.07
 96.07
 RUIDS
 RUIDS 92.33
 92.33 95.16
 95.16 96.71
 96.71 97.68
 97.68 98.84
 98.84
 VGAE
 VGAE 87.05
 87.05 93.72
 93.72 96.44
 96.44 96.81
 96.81 97.15
 97.15
 CNN+AE
 CNN+AE 79.59
 79.59 84.71
 84.71 93.16
 93.16 94.66
 94.66 98.41
 98.41
 Our
 Our 98.02
 98.02 98.65
 98.65 99.40
 99.40 99.40
 99.40 99.73
 99.73

 Figure 10
 Figure illustrates the
 10 illustrates accuracy rates
 the accuracy rates of
 of our
 our model
 model during each epoch
 during each of training
 epoch of training onon
 CICIDS2017, with labeled samples comprising 0.5%, 1%, 5%, and 10% of the dataset. The
 performance of our model is slightly influenced by the number of labeled samples samples in the
 early stages. As the numberofofiterations
 the number iterationsincreases,
 increases,the
 the of of
 accuracy
 accuracy ourour method
 method rapidly
 rapidly imimproves, compensating
 proves, compensating the insufficient
 forinsufficient
 for the numbernumber of training
 of training samples.samples.
 After 150 After 150
 iterations,
 the model the
 iterations, model
 trained trained
 with with 1%
 1% labeled labeledhas
 samples samples
 achievedhasthe
 achieved the same performance
 same performance as the one
 as the one
 trained withtrained 10% labeled
 with samples.
 10% labeled samples.
 However, bothHowever, both
 methods still methods
 exhibit still exhibit
 a performance gapa
 performance
 compared to the compared
 gapmodel to the
 trained model
 with 20% trained
 labeled with 20% labeled samples.
 samples.

 1.00

 0.95

 0.90
 Accuracy

 0.85

 0.80
 20%
 0.75 10%
 5%
 1%
 0.70 0.5%

 0 50 100 150 200
 Epoch

 Figure 10.
 Figure Accuracy curves
 10. Accuracy of our
 curves of our model
 model during
 during training with different
 training with label ratios.
 different label ratios.

 Detection Analysis
 4.5. Detection
 4.5. on Unknown
 Analysis on Attacks
 Unknown Attacks
 this part,
 In this
 In we primarily
 part, we evaluate the
 primarily evaluate the model’s detection effectiveness
 model’s detection for attacks
 effectiveness for of
 attacks of
 unknown categories. In the experimental process, we start with the initial data partition
 unknown categories. In the experimental process, we start with the initial data partition that
 excludes
 that unknown
 excludes attacks.
 unknown We remove
 attacks. all samples
 We remove corresponding
 all samples to the attack
 corresponding categories
 to the attack
 from the labeled training data, while
 categories from the labeled training data, while still retaining these samples indata
 still retaining these samples in the unlabeled the
 and test sets.
 unlabeled Equally,
 data and test have
 wesets. standardized
 Equally, we have thestandardized
 experimentalthesetup to a 1% labeled
 setup data
 experimental to a
 ratio. We conduct a comparative study of our method with four baseline models that
 have shown good performance in known attack detection. Furthermore, to mitigate the
 impact of training instability on the assessment, we performed five repetitions for each
 experimental scenario and calculated the average results.
 In selecting samples from unknown categories, we aim to train the detector using
 common and low-risk attack traffic to identify those categories that are high-risk and
 In selecting
 In selecting samples
 samples from unknown categories,
 from unknown categories, we we aim aim to to train the detector
 train the detector usiusi
 common and
 common and low-risk attack traffic
 low-risk attack traffic to to identify
 identify those those categories
 categories that are high-risk
 that are high-risk aa
 highly stealthy.
 highly stealthy. Consequently,
 Consequently, for the UNSW-NB15
 for the UNSW-NB15 dataset, dataset, we we have selected Backdo
 have selected Backdo
 and Exploits
 and Exploits attack traffic for
 attack traffic the test
 for the set. For
 test set. For the the CICIDS.2017
 CICIDS.2017 dataset, dataset, we have chos
 we have chos
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 17 of 21
 PortScan and
 PortScan and DoS Hulk attack
 DoS Hulk traffic to
 attack traffic to be included in
 be included the test
 in the set.
 test set.
 Figures 11
 Figures 11 and
 and 12 correspond to
 12 correspond the ROC
 to the ROC curves
 curves for for three scenarios in
 three scenarios the UNS
 in the UNS
 NB15 and
 NB15highly CICIDS2017 datasets,
 stealthy. Consequently,
 datasets,for
 and CICIDS2017 respectively.
 the UNSW-NB15
 respectively. It is observable
 It isdataset,
 observable that
 thatselected
 we have the detection
 the detection efficacy
 Backdoorefficacy
 and
 methods Exploits
 relying attack
 on traffic
 classifiersfor the test
 markedly set. For the
 diminishesCICIDS.2017
 methods relying on classifiers markedly diminishes in the presence of unknown in the dataset,
 presence we have
 of chosen attac
 unknown attac
 PortScan
 the exception
 With the and DoS
 exception of Hulk
 of our attack
 method, the
 our method, traffic to be
 the otherincluded
 methods have
 other methods in the test set.
 have weak capabilities in
 weak capabilities identifyi
 in identifyi
 With Figures 11 and 12 correspond to the ROC curves for three scenarios in the UNSWunknown
 unknown
 NB15 and
 attacks.
 attacks. Methods
 Methods
 CICIDS2017
 [18,26]
 [18,26]
 datasets,
 based Iton
 based
 respectively.
 on supervised
 supervised
 is observable
 learning
 that learning
 the detection
 have
 have aa high
 efficacy
 high
 of
 rate
 rate
 misclassification,
 misclassification,
 methods relying confirming
 confirming
 on classifiersthat
 that they are
 they
 markedly are insufficient
 insufficient
 diminishes in the inin characterizing
 characterizing
 presence traffic
 of unknowntraffic
 attacks.interacti
 interacti
 behaviors.
 With the
 behaviors. In contrast,
 Inexception
 contrast, the detection
 our detection
 method, theeffectiveness
 ofthe effectiveness
 other methods of of
 havesemi-supervised
 weak capabilities in
 semi-supervised methods
 identifying
 methods experien
 experien
 unknown
 slight reduction.
 only aa slight attacks. Methods
 reduction. However, [18,26]
 However, our based on
 our method,
 method, which
 supervisedwhich islearning
 is based have
 based on a high rate
 multimodal
 on multimodal of featu
 only featu
 misclassification, confirming that they are insufficient in characterizing traffic interaction
 extraction
 extraction and semi-supervised
 andInsemi-supervised training,
 training, shows
 shows no significant
 no significant change.
 change. The embeddi
 The embeddi
 behaviors. contrast, the detection effectiveness of semi-supervised methods experiences
 features
 only calculated
 features calculated by
 by our
 a slight reduction. our method
 methodourare
 However, are not
 not confined
 method, confined
 which is based to the
 to the characteristics
 characteristics
 on multimodal featureof aa sin
 of sin
 network session,
 extraction
 network session, but rather
 and but rather represent
 semi-supervised represent the
 training,the multidimensional
 shows no significant change.
 multidimensional features of network
 The embedding
 features of network traffitraffi
 features
 which can calculated
 uncover more
 can uncover by our method
 more classification are not confined
 classification features to
 features for the characteristics
 both benign
 for both benign and
 of a single network
 malicious traffi
 and malicious traffi
 which
 session, but rather represent the multidimensional features of network traffic, which can
 Therefore, the
 Therefore, the method introduced in this
 method introduced chapter is better
 this chapter suited to
 better suited unknown atta
 to detect unknown atta
 uncover more classification featuresinfor both benign is and malicious traffic.detect
 Therefore, the
 traffic.
 traffic.
 method introduced in this chapter is better suited to detect unknown attack traffic.

 1.0
 1.0 1.0
 1.0 1.0
 1.0

 0.8
 0.8 0.8
 0.8 0.8
 0.8
 Rate

 Rate

 Rate
 PositiveRate

 PositiveRate

 PositiveRate
 0.6
 0.6 0.6
 0.6 0.6
 0.6
 TruePositive

 TruePositive

 TruePositive
 0.4
 0.4 0.4
 0.4 0.4
 0.4
 True

 True

 True
 Our(AUC=0.9940) Our(AUC=0.9636) Our(AUC=0.9709)
 Our(AUC=0.9940) Our(AUC=0.9636) Our(AUC=0.9709)
 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9922) E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9387) E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9400)
 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9922) 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9387) 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9400)
 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9874) 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9284) 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9367)
 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9874) E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9284) E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9367)
 RUIDS(AUC=0.9813) RUIDS(AUC=0.9461) RUIDS(AUC=0.9480)
 RUIDS(AUC=0.9813) RUIDS(AUC=0.9461) RUIDS(AUC=0.9480)
 VGAE(AUC=0.9900) VGAE(AUC=0.9203) VGAE(AUC=0.9442)
 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9900) 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9203) 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9442)
 0.0 0.0 0.0
 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0
 False Positive
 False Positive Rate
 Rate Positive Rate
 False Positive
 False Rate Positive Rate
 False Positive
 False Rate
 (a)
 (a) (b)
 (b) (c)
 (c)

 Figure
 Figure 11. 11.
 11.
 Figure Evaluation
 Evaluation ofunknown
 of
 Evaluation of unknown
 unknown attack
 attackattack detection
 detection
 detection the UNSW-NB15
 on the
 on
 on the UNSW-NB15 UNSW-NB15 dataset.
 dataset.
 dataset. (a) Without unknown With
 (a) With
 (a)
 unknown
 unknown attacks.
 attacks.
 attacks. (b)
 (b)
 (b) With With
 unknown
 With unknown
 unknown attacks as
 attacks
 attacks as backdoor. as backdoor.
 (c) backdoor. (c) attacks
 (c)
 With unknown With unknown
 With unknown attacks as
 as exploits. attacks exploits.
 as exploits.

 1.0
 1.0 1.0
 1.0 1.0
 1.0

 0.8
 0.8 0.8
 0.8 0.8
 0.8
 Rate

 Rate

 Rate
 PositiveRate

 PositiveRate

 PositiveRate

 0.6
 0.6 0.6
 0.6 0.6
 0.6
 TruePositive

 TruePositive

 TruePositive

 0.4
 0.4 0.4
 0.4 0.4
 0.4
 True

 True

 True

 Our(AUC=0.9898) Our(AUC=0.9758) Our(AUC=0.9645)
 Our(AUC=0.9898) Our(AUC=0.9758) Our(AUC=0.9645)
 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9830) E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9564) E-ResGAT(AUC=0.8637)
 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9830) 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.9564) 0.2 E-ResGAT(AUC=0.8637)
 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9610) 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.8739) 0.2 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.8376)
 E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.9610) E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.8739) E-GraphSAGE(AUC=0.8376)
 RUIDS(AUC=0.9796) RUIDS(AUC=0.9463) RUIDS(AUC=0.9206)
 RUIDS(AUC=0.9796) RUIDS(AUC=0.9463) RUIDS(AUC=0.9206)
 VGAE(AUC=0.9762) VGAE(AUC=0.9450) VGAE(AUC=0.9283)
 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9762) 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9450) 0.0 VGAE(AUC=0.9283)
 0.0 0.0 0.0
 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0 0.0
 0.0 0.2
 0.2 0.4
 0.4 0.6
 0.6 0.8
 0.8 1.0
 1.0
 False Positive
 False Positive Rate
 Rate Positive Rate
 False Positive
 False Rate Positive Rate
 False Positive
 False Rate
 (a)
 (a) (b)
 (b) (c)
 (c)

 Figure
 Figure Evaluation
 12. 12.
 Figure
 12. ofunknown
 Evaluation of
 Evaluation of unknown
 unknown attack detection
 attackattack
 detection on the
 the dataset.
 on the CICIDS2017
 detection on CICIDS2017
 (a) Without
 CICIDS2017 dataset.
 unknown
 dataset. (a) With
 (a) With
 unknown attacks.
 attacks. (b) (b)
 With With
 unknown unknown
 attacks as attacks
 DoS Hulk.as DoS
 (c) WithHulk. (c)
 unknown With
 attacks unknown
 as PortScan.
 unknown attacks. (b) With unknown attacks as DoS Hulk. (c) With unknown attacks as PortScan attacks as PortScan
 4.6. Ablation Experiment
 Ablation
 4.6. Ablation
 4.6. Experiment
 Experiment
 4.6.1. Effect Analysis of Model Components
 Effect
 4.6.1. Effect
 4.6.1. Analysis
 Finally, of Model
 we analyze
 Analysis of Model Components
 the practical effects of each component of our model. This includes
 Components
 an analysis of the effectiveness of confidence estimation, reconstruction error, different
 Finally,
 Finally, weloss
 we
 classification
 analyze
 analyze the
 functions,
 practical
 theandpractical effects
 effects
 single-modal
 of For
 of
 models.
 each
 each component
 thecomponent
 of our
 of our model.
 following experiments,
 model. T
 T
 we
 includes
 includes an
 set the analysis of
 anexperimental
 analysis of the effectiveness
 the
 scenarioeffectiveness of
 to have a label of confidence
 confidence
 ratio of 1%. estimation, reconstruction
 estimation, err
 reconstruction err
 The ablation study results are presented in Table 7. Compared to the original model
 proposed in this paper, the detection performance of all variants, which have had one
 module removed, has decreased to varying degrees. This indicates that each module plays
 a positive role in the detection of anomalous traffic. The removal of the GCN component
 results in a significant decrease in model performance, indicating that graph neural
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507
 networks are more effective at extracting correlations between features, thereby detecting
 18 of 21
 more subtle attacks. It can be observed that the F1 score significantly decreases when the
 focal loss function is substituted by cross entropy loss, indicating that the model may have
 moduleitsremoved,
 reduced detect
 ability tohas classes.
 covertto
 decreased varying degrees. This indicates that each module
 plays a positive role in the detection of anomalous traffic. The removal of the GCN
 Table 7. Ablation
 component study
 results a key
 inof components
 significant on the
 decrease UNSW-NB15
 in model and CICIDS2017
 indicating dataset.
 performance, that graph
 neural networks are more effective at extracting correlations between features, thereby
 detecting more Method
 Dataset subtle attacks. It can be observed that theAccF1 scorePre F1
 Rec decreases
 significantly
 confidence
 w/ofunction
 when the focal loss estimation
 is substituted 95.91
 by cross entropy 95.28
 loss, indicating 95.36
 that 95.32
 the model
 may have reducedw/oits covert classes. 94.84
 ability to detecterror
 reconstruction 93.67 93.22 93.44
 w/o sequence feature 91.29 91.40 90.25 90.82
 UNSW-NB15
 Table 7. Ablation study of key components on the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS2017 dataset.
 w/o graph feature 90.89 90.46 90.99 90.72
 Dataset Method
 w/cross-entropy loss Acc Pre
 94.96 Rec
 94.28 F1
 93.33 93.80
 w/o confidence
 default (all) estimation 95.91 95.28
 97.63 95.36
 98.37 95.32
 94.23 96.26
 w/o reconstruction error 94.84 93.67 93.22 93.44
 w/o confidence estimation
 w/o sequence feature 91.29 97.42
 91.40 97.36
 90.25 96.74
 90.82 97.05
 UNSW-NB15
 graph feature
 w/oreconstruction
 w/o error 90.89 90.46
 96.55 90.99
 95.23 90.72 94.89
 94.55
 w/cross-entropy loss 94.96 94.28 93.33 93.80
 w/o sequence feature 94.63 93.74 96.26 93.65
 93.56
 CICIDS2017 default (all) 97.63 98.37 94.23
 w/ograph
 w/o feature
 confidence estimation 97.42 94.19
 97.36 93.80
 96.74 97.05 93.86
 93.93
 w/o reconstruction
 w/cross-entropy loss error 96.55 95.23
 96.32 94.55
 96.95 94.89
 95.29 96.11
 w/o sequence feature 94.63 93.74 93.56 93.65
 CICIDS2017 default (all) 98.79 98.68 98.63
 w/o graph feature 94.19 93.80 93.93 93.86 98.65
 w/cross-entropy loss 96.32 96.95 95.29 96.11
 default (all) 98.79 98.68 98.63 98.65
 4.6.2. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
 We conducted a parameter comparison between the number of GRU layers and GCN
 4.6.2. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
 layers in semi-supervised learning, examining the impact of varying network layer depths
 We conducted a parameter comparison between the number of GRU layers and
 model
 on GCN accuracy,
 layers as shown in learning,
 in semi-supervised Figure 13. By stacking
 examining layers in
 the impact of the graph
 varying neurallayer
 network network,
 modeloncan
 thedepths capture higher-order neighbor feature information, leading
 model accuracy, as shown in Figure 13. By stacking layers in the graph neural to a more
 precise
 network,representation.
 the model canHowever, an excessive
 capture higher-order number
 neighbor ofinformation,
 feature result to
 layers can leading ina oversmoothing,
 more precisewhere of different
 the featuresHowever,
 representation. nodes become
 an excessive number homogenized, making
 of layers can result it difficult
 in overto smoothing,
 distinguishwhere the features
 between of different
 nodes and nodes become homogenized,
 negatively impacting modelmaking itperformance.
 difficult
 between
 to distinguish the
 Consequently, and negatively
 nodesaccuracy
 model’s impacting
 initially model
 increases performance.
 with Consequently,
 the addition of layers but
 the model’s accuracy initially increases with the addition of layers but eventually
 eventually decreases. According to the experimental data, configuring the model in this decreases.
 According to the experimental data, configuring the model in this study with 3 GRU
 study with 3 GRU layers and 2 GCN layers strikes a balance that efficiently captures the
 layers and 2 GCN layers strikes a balance that efficiently captures the characteristics of
 characteristics
 network flows.
 of network flows.

 95 UNSW-NB15 95 UNSW-NB15
 CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017

 90 90
 F1

 F1

 85 85

 80 80
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 Layer Layer
 (a) (b)
 Figure 13. F1 Scores for models with different layer configurations. (a) GRU layers. (b) GCN layers.

 Additionally, we assess the importance of the branches for the fusion of sequential and
 graph features. We assign three different values to τ to combine them, and the classification
 results are shown in Table 8. The results indicate that different settings yield satisfactory
 outcomes, demonstrating that both sequential features and graph structures are equally
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 19 of 21

 important for the identification of malicious traffic. Therefore, in our experiment, we assign
 equal decision weights to both modalities.

 Table 8. Ablation study of key parameter on the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS2017 dataset.

 τ Acc Pre Rec F1
 0.5 97.67 97.70 94.66 96.16
 UNSW-NB15 1 97.63 98.37 94.23 96.26
 5 97.46 96.84 94.57 95.69
 0.5 98.67 98.85 98.58 98.71
 CICIDS2017 1 98.79 98.68 98.63 98.65
 5 97.84 98.13 98.40 98.26

 5. Conclusions
 To address the challenges in malicious traffic detection, such as the difficulty in labeling samples and capturing attack traffic, as well as the limitations of existing deep
 learning methods in uncovering subtle malicious activities and low detection accuracy,
 this paper introduces a multimodal approach for detecting malicious traffic. We characterize encrypted traffic by leveraging both sequential and graph structural features of the
 traffic flow. Initially, we segment the traffic based on session granularity and then train a
 multimodal deep learning model that integrates these two types of features, providing a
 holistic description of malicious traffic behavior. The co-training of confidence loss and
 classification loss effectively mitigates the issue of insufficient sample information mining
 common in existing semi-supervised training methods, enhancing the robustness of the
 classifier. Experimental results on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
 proposed fusion method for malicious network traffic detection, particularly outperforming benchmark methods in scenarios with scarce labeled samples and the discovery of
 unknown malicious categories.
 To advance the research on encrypted malicious traffic detection, future efforts will
 concentrate on the following areas: (1) Enhancing the scale of samples. It is well recognized
 that the quantity of samples significantly impacts deep learning models; hence, we will
 explore the use of contrastive representation learning ang generative adversarial networks
 to augment the sample size. (2) Improving the interpretability of traffic features. While
 deep learning is powerful in its end-to-end data learning capabilities, its interpretability
 has been a persistent challenge. Poor interpretability can limit the practical application of
 traffic features.

 Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.L.; Methodology, M.L., Q.Y., W.W. and S.L.; Validation,
 M.L.; Formal analysis, M.L., Q.Y. and S.L.; Writing—original draft, M.L.; Writing—review & editing,
 Q.Y. and S.L.; Visualization, W.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
 the manuscript.
 Funding: This research was funded by National Key Research and Development Program of China
 (Grant number: 2019QY1300) and Science & Technology Commission Foundation Strengthening
 Project (Grant number: 2019-JCJQ-ZD113).
 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
 Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
 Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are openly available in [24,25].
 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 20 of 21

References
1. 2023 SonicWall Cyber Threat Report. Available online: https://www.sonicwall.com/resources/white-papers/mid-year-2023
 -sonicwall-cyber-threat-report (accessed on 31 August 2024).
2. Zscaler ThreatLabz 2023 State of Encrypted Attacks Report. Available online: https://www.zscaler.com/resources/2023
 -threatlabz-state-of-encrypted-attacks-report (accessed on 31 August 2024).
3. Ji, I.H.; Lee, J.H.; Kang, M.J.; Park, W.J.; Jeon, S.H.; Seo, J.T. Artificial intelligence-based anomaly detection technology over
 encrypted traffic: A systematic literature review. Sensors 2024, 24, 898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Wu, M. Commonsense knowledge powered heterogeneous graph attention networks for semi-supervised short text classification.
 Expert Syst. Appl. 2023, 232, 120800. [CrossRef]
5. Yang, X.; Song, Z.; King, I.; Xu, Z. A survey on deep semi-supervised learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2022, 35, 8934–8954.
 [CrossRef]
6. Barradas, D.; Santos, N.; Rodrigues, L. Effective detection of multimedia protocol tunneling using machine learning. In
 Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18), Baltimore, MD, USA, 15–17 August 2018; pp. 169–185.
7. Anderson, B.; McGrew, D. Machine learning for encrypted malware traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and
 non-stationarity. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
 Halifax, NS, Canada, 13–17 August 2017; pp. 1723–1732.
8. Lin, X.; Xiong, G.; Gou, G.; Li, Z.; Shi, J.; Yu, J. Et-bert: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 for encrypted traffic classification. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, Lyon, France, 25–29 April 2022; pp. 633–642.
9. Kim, H.; Kim, M.; Ha, J.; Roh, H. Revisiting TLS-encrypted traffic fingerprinting methods for malware family classification. In
 Proceedings of the 2022 13th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC),
 Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, 19–21 October 2022; pp. 1273–1278.
10. Liu, C.; Xiong, G.; Gou, G.; Yiu, S.M.; Li, Z.; Tian, Z. Classifying encrypted traffic using adaptive fingerprints with multi-level
 attributes. World Wide Web 2021, 24, 2071–2097. [CrossRef]
11. Xie, J.; Li, S.; Yun, X.; Zhang, Y.; Chang, P. Hstf-model: An http-based trojan detection model via the hierarchical spatio-temporal
 features of traffics. Comput. Secur. 2020, 96, 101923. [CrossRef]
12. Rezaei, S.; Kroencke, B.; Liu, X. Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning. IEEE Access 2019, 8, 348–362. [CrossRef]
13. Shen, M.; Zhang, J.; Zhu, L.; Xu, K.; Du, X. Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 graph neural networks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2021, 16, 2367–2380. [CrossRef]
14. Busch, J.; Kocheturov, A.; Tresp, V.; Seidl, T. NF-GNN: Network flow graph neural networks for malware detection and
 classification. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management, Tampa, FL,
 USA, 6–7 July 2021; pp. 121–132.
15. Lee, W.; Xi, S. Encrypted malware traffic detection using TLS features and random forest. In Proceedings of the International
 Conference on Computational & Experimental Engineering and Sciences, Phuket, Thailand, 6–10 January; Springer International
 Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 85–100.
16. Li, W.; Zhang, X.Y.; Bao, H.; Shi, H.; Wang, Q. ProGraph: Robust network traffic identification with graph propagation. IEEE/ACM
 Trans. Netw. 2022, 31, 1385–1399. [CrossRef]
17. Caville, E.; Lo, W.W.; Layeghy, S.; Portmann, M. Anomal-E: A self-supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph
 neural networks. Knowl. Based Syst. 2022, 258, 110030. [CrossRef]
18. Min, B.; Yoo, J.; Kim, S.; Shin, D.; Shin, D. Network anomaly detection using memory-augmented deep autoencoder. IEEE Access
 2021, 9, 104695–104706. [CrossRef]
19. Sun, Y.; Guo, L.; Li, Y.; Xu, L.; Wang, Y. Semi-supervised deep learning for network anomaly detection. In Algorithms and
 Architectures for Parallel Processing, Proceedings of the 19th International Conference, ICA3PP 2019, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 9–11
 December 2019; Proceedings, Part II 19; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 383–390.
20. Min, E.; Long, J.; Liu, Q.; Cui, J.; Cai, Z.; Ma, J. Su-ids: A semi-supervised and unsupervised framework for network intrusion
 detection. In Cloud Computing and Security, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference, ICCCS 2018, Haikou, China, 8–10 June 2018;
 Revised Selected Papers, Part III 4; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 322–334.
21. Wagh, S.K.; Kolhe, S.R. Effective intrusion detection system using semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 2014
 International Conference on Data Mining and Intelligent Computing (ICDMIC), Delhi, India, 5–6 September 2014; pp. 1–5.
22. Pkt2flow. Available online: https://github.com/caesar0301/pkt2flow (accessed on 21 February 2024).
23. Lin, T.; Goyal, P.; Girshick, R.; He, K.; Dollár, P. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 2980–2988.
24. Moustafa, N.; Slay, J. UNSW-NB15, a comprehensive data set for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
 set). In Proceedings of the 2015 Military Communications and Information Systems Conference (MilCIS), Canberra, Australia,
 10–12 November 2015; pp. 1–6.
25. Sharafaldin, I.; Lashkari, A.H.; Ghorbani, A.A. Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
 characterization. ICISSp 2018, 1, 108–116.
26. Chang, L.; Branco, P. Graph-based solutions with residuals for intrusion detection: The modified e-graphsage and e-resgat
 algorithms. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2111.13597.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6507 21 of 21

27. Wang, Z.; Li, Z.; Wang, J.; Li, D. Network Intrusion Detection Model Based on Improved BYOL Self-Supervised Learning. Secur.
 Commun. Netw. 2021, 2021, 9486949.
28. Wang, Z.; Li, Z.; Wang, J.; Li, D. Robust unsupervised network intrusion detection with self-supervised masked context
 reconstruction. Comput. Secur. 2023, 128, 103131. [CrossRef]
29. Zakroum, M.; François, J.; Ghogho, M.; Chrisment, I. Self-Supervised Latent Representations of Network Flows and Application
 to Darknet Traffic Classification. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 90749–90765. [CrossRef]
30. He, M.; Wang, X.; Zhou, J.; Xi, Y.; Jin, L.; Wang, X. Deep-Feature-Based Autoencoder Network for Few-Shot Malicious Traffic
 Detection. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021, 2021, 6659022. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.