IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024 5504115

 Sliding Dual-Window-Inspired Reconstruction
 Network for Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
Degang Wang , Lina Zhuang , Member, IEEE, Lianru Gao , Senior Member, IEEE, Xu Sun , Member, IEEE,
 Xiaobin Zhao , and Antonio Plaza , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) aims to I. I NTRODUCTION
identify anomalous objects that deviate from surrounding backgrounds in an unlabeled hyperspectral image (HSI). Most available neural networks that make use of the reconstruction error
to perform HAD tend to fit both backgrounds and anomalies,
 H YPERSPECTRAL images (HSIs) can discriminate the
 fine spectral features of different ground materials [1],
 [2], and this property enables these images to be applied
resulting in small reconstruction errors for both and not being for detecting and locating objects of interest [3], [4]. Among
effective in separating targets from background. To address this many different HSI interpretation tasks, hyperspectral anomaly
issue, we develop Dual-window-inspired reconstruction Network
(DirectNet), a new background reconstruction network for HAD
 detection (HAD) is extensively utilized in both military and
that seamlessly integrates a sliding dual-window model into a civilian applications by virtue of its ability to identify anomablind-block architecture. Concretely, DirectNet establishes an lous targets with no prior information [5], [6]. The anomalies
inner window within the network’s receptive field by erasing the are commonly defined as objects that occupy an extremely
center block information so that the content of the inner window small area and deviate from the overall pattern of their
remains invisible during the reconstruction of the central pixel.
In addition, the depth of our reconstruction network is adaptive surrounding background as well [7], [8]. The absence of
to the size of the input image patch, ensuring that the network’s prior knowledge about targets and background in the HAD
receptive field aligns with the dimensions of the input patch. The task poses a critical challenge to separate anomalies from
receptive field outside the inner window is considered an outer background and numerous detectors model such background
window. This weakens the impact of anomalies on the recon- through diverse approaches, where those samples not construction process, causing the reconstructed pixels to converge
toward the background distribution in the outer window region. forming to the background pattern are defined as anomalies.
Consequently, the reconstructed HSI can be regarded as a pure The mainstream existing methods are classified into three
background HSI, leading to further amplification of reconstruc- categories: statistical modeling-based, representation learningtion errors for anomalous targets. This enhancement improves the based, and deep learning (DL)-based approaches.
discriminatory ability of DirectNet. Specifically, DirectNet solely
utilizes the outer window information to predict/reconstruct the
central pixel. As a result, when reconstructing pixels inside A. Statistical Modeling-Based Methods
anomalous targets of different sizes, the targets primarily fall
 As the baseline of the statistical-based methods, the
within the inner window. Comprehensive experiments (conducted
on four datasets) demonstrate that DirectNet achieves competitive Reed–Xiaoli (RX) detector assumes that the background of an
performance compared to other state-of-the-art detectors. HSI obeys a multivariate Gaussian distribution and typically
 Index Terms— Blind-spot network, convolutional neural netestimates the background using the global information of the
works (CNNs), deep learning (DL), hyperspectral images (HSIs), image [9]. Those pixels with a large Mahalanobis distance
image reconstruction, self-supervised learning. from the estimated background have more potential to be
 considered as anomalies in a way that can be viewed as a
 Manuscript received 23 August 2023; revised 2 November 2023;
accepted 20 November 2023. Date of publication 15 January 2024; date of
 global RX (GRX) detector. In order to alleviate the anomalous
current version 19 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the contamination during the process of background modeling, the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 42325104 and local RX (LRX) [10] uses a sliding dual-window strategy.
Grant 62161160336, and in part by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e
Innovación under Project PID2019-110315RB-I00 (APRISA). (Corresponding Here, the outer window pixels are analyzed to estimate the
author: Lina Zhuang.) background, while the inner window avoids the leakage of
 Degang Wang is with the Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging target information. The weighted RX [11] method boosts the
Technology, Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100094, China, and also with the College of Resources and detection performance of the model by endowing the potential
Environment, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, background with a high weight. To enhance the separability
China (e-mail: wangdegang20@mails.ucas.ac.cn). of anomalies from backgrounds, Kwon and Nasrabadi [12]
 Lina Zhuang, Lianru Gao, and Xu Sun are with the Key Laboratory of
Computational Optical Imaging Technology, Aerospace Information Research adopted a kernel trick into the RX detector, and Tao et al. [13]
Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100094, China (e-mail: introduced the fractional Fourier transform [14] into the HAD
zhuangln@aircas.ac.cn; gaolr@aircas.ac.cn; sunxu@aircas.ac.cn). task. Subsequently, Li et al. [15] proposed the sliding dual-
 Xiaobin Zhao is with the Beijing Key Laboratory of Fractional Signals
and Systems, School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of window-based 2S-GLRT method to locate multipixel anoma-
Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: xiaobinzhao@bit.edu.cn). lous targets of the HSI. Vincent et al. [16] modified the RX
 Antonio Plaza is with the Hyperspectral Computing Laboratory, Department scheme by adopting the replacement model as a more realistic
of Technology of Computers and Communications, Escuela Politécnica,
University of Extremadura, 10003 Cáceres, Spain (e-mail: aplaza@unex.es). anomaly detection framework. Yang et al. [17] combined the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3351179 detection results of different features on a random RX detector
 1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

with the aid of ensemble learning to leverage the multiple paired pixels, which is then transferred into the HAD task
characteristics in HSI. for identifying those anomalous pixels that are significantly
 different from their surroundings. Li et al. [45] considered
B. Representation Learning-Based Methods the difference between the pixel pairs as the input, causing
 the constructed single-stream CNN to directly output the
 Since then, representation learning (encompassing sparse
 difference scores between the tested pixel and outer window
representation (SR) [18], [19], [20], [21], collaborative reprepixels. Unlike this, Rao et al. [46] devised a Siamese network
sentation (CR) [22], and low-rank representation (LRR) [23],
 with feature extraction and similarity measurement abilities
[24], [25]) has attracted extensive attention [26], [27],
 and took the original pixel pairs as the input to explore the
[28]. Among them, SR-based studies emphasize that norsimilarity between each pixel and the surrounding ground
mal/background samples can be represented by only a few
 objects at the latent layer. However, the detection efficiency
atoms in an overcomplete dictionary, while anomalous ones
 of this family of methods is reliant on the quantity of paired
cannot [29]. CR-based detectors [30], in contrast, focus on
 data and the quality of labels, and transferability cannot be
the collaborative relationships among all dictionary atoms
 fundamentally guaranteed.
and thus analyze whether each sample can be linearly rep-
 Conversely, reconstruction model-based methods have
resented by its surrounding neighbors. Both of them take
 demonstrated their effectiveness and adaptability in the unsureconstruction residuals to indicate the degree of anomaly
 pervised HAD task, due to the fact that they directly apply
of the testing pixels. To acquire more accurate detection
 unlabeled HSIs to be detected as training data and mine the
results, many variants of CRD have been presented [22], [31].
 intrinsic abstract features in unsupervised learning fashion.
Examining the global structural information of HSIs from
 This category of methods primarily applies autoencoders [AEs
the perspective of LRR, an HSI can be decomposed into
 or generative adversarial networks (GANs)] to reconstruct
background (with low-rank properties) and anomalies (with
 the raw data and employs the reconstruction error to obtain
sparse properties) [32], [33]. Zhang et al. [34] employed the
 the final anomaly detection result. Since background pixels
Mahalanobis distance between the pixels to be measured and
 occupy the overwhelming majority of the HSI, the model
the low-rank matrix to detect anomalies in the HSI, while
 could fully learn the background characteristics and emerge
Li et al. [35] introduced the Manhattan distance to recognize
 as a well-behaved background reconstructor. The proportion
anomalies and represented the sparse matrix by utilizing a
 of anomalies is quite low, rendering the model to generate
mixture of Gaussian noise models. In addition, LRR-based
 large reconstruction errors for them. Bati et al. [47] introduced
methods have emerged with diverse background dictionary
 AEs to the HAD task with a first attempt to reconstruct all
constructions for better representation of HSIs, such as the
 samples in the detected image. To exploit the spatial features
works by Xu et al. [36] and Fu et al. [37], who obtained
 of HSIs in a reasonable way, Xiang et al. [48] introduced a
the background dictionary by leveraging K -means clusterguided model in the hidden layer of the AE to strengthen
ing, while Qu et al. [38] performed mean-shift clustering in
 the network’s power to represent the background, while
the abundance matrix and separated anomalous pixels from
 Fan et al. [49] imposed a graph regularization constraint on
the constructed dictionary. Given the spatial correlation of
 the hidden features of the AE to enhance the robustness of the
neighboring pixels, the total variation technique (which allows
 model in reconstructing background samples. Wang et al. [50]
dictionary atoms to represent the background more efficiently)
 implemented an automatic end-to-end HAD, with the aid of a
was introduced into LRR-based approaches [39]. Besides, HSI
 fully convolutional AE. Furthermore, unlike the traditional AE,
can be directly treated as a third-order tensor, and taking into
 the memory AE (with an external memory module recording
account the use of both spatial and spectral information of
 latent representations of background samples) was introduced
HSI, He et al. [40] recently proposed a novel tensor low-rank
 into HAD in [51], [52]. In order to inspire AEs to represent
approximation method for performing HAD.
 the background more prominently, several efforts have been
 dedicated to embedding discriminators into AEs (forming
C. DL-Based Methods GANs) by also imposing Gaussian constraints on them [53] or
 In recent years, DL has emerged as a successful approach performing background screening on the training samples in
in HSI processing, including the HAD task, by virtue of its advance [54], [55]. All these strategies can further increase the
powerful capabilities for mining deep characteristics [41], [42], reconstruction error for anomalies. Very recently, Li et al. [56]
[43]. The prevailing DL-based HAD methods can be cate- integrated spatial and spectral characteristics via a two-stream
gorized as similarity measurement models and reconstruction convolutional AE architecture, with a parameter-free clustering
models. approach chosen to select background samples.
 Similarity measurement models commonly incorporate a
convolutional neural network (CNN) [44] as the backbone,
and a vast number of training pixel pairs are selected in D. Motivation and Contributions
advance from the labeled HSIs. The paired pixels from the Among the DL-based HAD methods described above, simsame category are labeled as 0, while the pixels paired from ilarity measurement models tend to involve a complicated
different categories are labeled as 1. This value means the training sample generation process, and the model’s generaldissimilarity between the two. This property empowers the izability is relatively limited. Meanwhile, most reconstruction
backbone network to measure the similarity of the input models take the input HSI as the learned target, which is prone
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

 pixels), the blind-spot network will not predict/reconstruct the
 central one adequately, leading to an increased reconstruction
 error and a high anomaly score. Accordingly, the architecture
 of blind-spot networks is well-suited to perform the HAD
 task. Nevertheless, as it can be seen in Fig. 1(a), the original
 blind-spot network does not succeed in recognizing large-sized
 anomaly targets. This is because the network is influenced by
 the neighboring pixels containing the target’s spectral information when predicting the central anomalous pixel, which causes
 large-sized anomalies to exhibit low reconstruction errors and
 low anomaly scores.
 To tackle this challenge, we conceive a sliding dualwindow-inspired reconstruction network for HAD in a selfsupervised manner. As shown in Fig. 1(b), our network divides
Fig. 1. Blind-spot reconstruction network has a blind area in the receptive
field corresponding to a single central pixel (i.e., the white area invisible the original receptive field into a dual window, where only the
to the network/eye). Therefore, the network has to predict/reconstruct the outer window pixels are exploited to predict the central pixel,
central pixel (represented by a red rectangle) using only the surrounding pixels while the inner window works as a guard window against
(the blue area seen by the eye). (a) Original blind-spot network contains
a blind spot in the center of the receptive field. Here, the reconstruction potential contaminating effects coming from anomalous pixof anomalous pixels is interfered with by neighboring pixels that are also els. When the central anomalous sample is reconstructed,
anomalous, ultimately leading to undesirable results in relatively large-sized sparsely distributed and small-occupancy targets with a certain
targets. (b) Our proposed DirectNet improves the original blind-spot network
by conceiving a dual-window blind-block reconstruction model. Specifically, spatial size tend to lie in the inner window, whereas the
the original receptive field of DirectNet is divided into a dual window, where network will be unable to see the inner window informathe blind-block area is considered the inner window (represented by a green tion, so that no anomalous properties are learned. Those
dashed rectangle) and the receptive field outside the inner window (represented
by a magenta dashed rectangle) is regarded as the outer window. Fortunately, backgrounds with large scales and homogeneous properties
DirectNet possesses promising detection performance for both large- and always remain located in the outer window, which impels
small-sized targets, thus extending the application range of blind-spot models. the samples predicted by the network to converge to the
 surrounding background distribution, resulting in an increase
 in the reconstruction error of anomalies. Specifically, first,
to lead to the identity mapping being learned [57], [58], i.e., training patch pairs are constructed from the unlabeled part
parts of the anomalies will inevitably appear in the recon- of the observed HSI. Then, the designed background reconstructed HSI, although it is expected that the model serves struction model cannot see the center block of the receptive
as a pure background reconstructor. Therefore, the obtained field (inner window) and has to predict/reconstruct the central
results manifested by the reconstruction errors make it difficult pixel using only the receptive field area outside the center
to separate anomalies from the background, resulting in a block (outer window), which is in accordance with the idea of
degradation of the model performance. the dual-window model, weakening the ability to fit anoma-
 To address the aforementioned issues, we opted to per- lous features. Finally, the trained network turns out to be a
form HAD using a self-supervised learning technique. Self- superb background reconstructor, and the reconstruction error
supervised learning is similar to unsupervised learning in that is employed to reflect the degree of anomaly of each pixel.
only unlabeled HSIs are required, yet it generates supervi- Compared with existing HAD methods, the core contributions
sion signals from the raw data for network training [59], of our proposed sliding Dual-window-inspired reconstruction
[60]. Nowadays, self-supervised learning has proven to be Network (DirectNet) are summarized as threefold.
effective in diverse topics related to HSI processing, such 1) We propose a novel blind-block architecture-based
as denoising [61], fusion [62], [63], spectral unmixing [64], network for HAD purposes, which operates in a
and classification [65]. More recently, the blind-spot net- fully self-supervised learning manner, i.e., generatwork [66] (as a representative of self-supervised learning) ing training pairs from an unlabeled observed HSI,
has been introduced to HAD for accurately identifying small- leading to impressive detection performance (sursized subpixel anomalous targets in HSIs [67]. However, this passing that achieved by unsupervised reconstruction
technique is unable to detect large-sized targets effectively in models).
a direct way. To explain the challenge of detecting large-sized 2) To fully leverage the spatial–spectral features of an HSI,
targets using the original blind-spot network, a toy example we propose an adaptive depth reconstruction network.
is given in Fig. 1. We emphasize that the original blind- This network adjusts its depth according to the size
spot network possesses a special receptive field centered on a of the input image patch, ensuring that the network’s
blind spot, implying that the network fails to see the spectral receptive field aligns with the dimensions of the input
information of the receptive field’s central pixel. Hence, the patch.
network’s prediction value for the blind spot depends only 3) To address the limitations of blind-spot networks in
on its neighboring pixels, excluding its own information and handling large-size targets, we propose a novel dualavoiding identity mapping [68]. When the central pixel is window-inspired blind-block network. Unlike traditional
an anomaly (i.e., significantly different from its surrounding blind-spot networks that focus on one-pixel blind spots,
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the proposed DirectNet.

 our approach considers a large-size block as the blind reconstruction network. Finally, a masking scheme is
 area of the receptive field. We erase the center block devised to modify the self-supervised objective funcinformation of the image patch, meaning that the net- tion. (The mask here is different from the mainstream
 work is unable to see this information when reconstruct- definition, as described in [69]. Instead of representing
 ing the central pixel. The blind center block serves as the occluded regions during training, it refers to the
 an inner window, which prevents large-sized anomalies portions that are not utilized in the calculation of the
 located in the inner window from influencing the recon- loss function.) The above process forces the network
 struction of the central pixel. Simultaneously, the regions not to see the information of the center block of the
 of the receptive field outside the center block are con- receptive field (inner window), but instead to reconstruct
 sidered the outer window. By leveraging the surrounding the central pixel using the remaining receptive field
 outer window pixels, our network predicts/reconstructs (outer window).
 the central pixel. This design forces the network to rely 2) Detection Phase: The whole observed HSI is fed into
 on the outer window information, leading to signifi- the well-trained DirectNet to estimate the expected pure
 cant reconstruction errors for anomalous targets. Con- background HSI, and the reconstruction error is treated
 sequently, our DirectNet shows promising potential in as the final detection result. Next, we fully detail each
 recognizing both large- and small-sized targets, thus part of DirectNet.
 expanding the application scope of original blind-spot
 networks. A. Problem Formulation
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. We give the R×C
details of the proposed DirectNet in Section II. In Section III, Let us consider an HSI as X = {xi ∈ R L×1 }i=1 , where
comprehensive experimental results between DirectNet and R, C, and L, respectively, represent the row number, column
state-of-the-art detectors are discussed. Finally, the conclusion number, and band/channel number of X, and xi denotes the
is summarized in Section V. ith spectral vector pixel of size L. The proposed DirectNet
 is expected to be a superior background reconstructor using
 a self-supervised strategy, i.e., only using the observed HSI
 II. P ROPOSED A NOMALY D ETECTOR : DirectNet X without any labeled background and anomaly information,
 We designed a background reconstruction network inspired to well-identify the anomalous targets. Furthermore, DirectNet
by a sliding dual-window model, called DirectNet, whose divides its own receptive field into a dual window, which is
overall flowchart is shown in Fig. 2. More specifically, Direct- illustrated in Fig. 3. The pixel information lying in the inner
Net can be divided into two stages. window is invisible to the network when reconstructing the
 1) Training Phase: First, pairs of input and pseudo-labeled central pixel. Our DirectNet empowers the feature expression
 data (in the form of patches) are obtained from the of the background, generating a small reconstruction error for
 observed HSI, and then, they are fed into the background backgrounds and a large reconstruction error for anomalies.
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

 only the contents of the patch lying outside the inner window.
 Clearly, the receptive field of the network for reconstructing
 the central pixel is partitioned into a dual window, where the
 inner window is of size Win × Win and the outer window is
 of size Wout × Wout (with the same spatial size as the training
 patch), and when the network reconstructs the central pixel,
 it only utilizes the surrounding pixels in the outer window.
 Concretely, the detailed network structure is presented in
 Fig. 4, where the convolution kernel size of all convolution
 layers is 3 × 3. The first convolution layer is followed by the
 Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) function, and the penultimate
Fig. 3. Illustration of the dual window provided by our DirectNet. Note that
only the outer window pixels are employed to predict the central pixel. convolution layer is followed by a batch normalization layer.
 We applied Nr ResNet blocks, where Nr = (Wout −7)/4 that is
 derived from the network’s receptive field. For example, when
Therefore, the reconstruction error showcases the degree of the outer window size is 15×15 (i.e., Wout is 15), our DirectNet
anomaly for each pixel naturally, facilitating the recognition contains two ResNet blocks. In the ResNet block, there are two
of anomalous targets in HSIs. convolution layers both followed by the batch normalization
 layer, and the first layer also takes the ReLU function. The
 pixel-level summation (the same as given next) is performed
B. Training Phase on the output and input feature maps to realize skip connec-
 Here, we introduce the training phase of DirectNet, i.e., tions. Meanwhile, to fuse the beginning low-level visual with
the generation of training patch pairs as well as the specific high-level semantic features, the feature maps obtained from
structure. the first and penultimate convolution layers are summed and
 Let poi ∈ RWout ×Wout ×L denote a patch centered at pixel xi , fed into the last convolution layer. We denote the proposed
where Wout is the width of the patch (usually an odd number). background reconstruction model as Fr , parameterized by θ.
Symbol Po = {poi }i=1 R×C
 denotes the patches extracted from Then, Pr is input into Fr to get the output, i.e.,
the HSI. In order to keep the network from seeing the pixels Pb = Fr (Pr ; θ ) (1)
in the center block (denoted as pci ∈ RWin ×Win ×L ) of poi , R×C Wout ×Wout ×L
we erase the spectral information covering the corresponding where Pb = {pbi }i=1 and pbi ∈ R indicates the
center block. It is implemented by randomly picking Win ×Win patch corresponding to pri , in which L is the number of
pixels from the region excluding pci to replace all pixels convolution channels in the last layer, which is equal to the
of pci , with the purpose of forming Pr = {pri }i=1 R×C
 , where number of bands of X.
pri ∈ R Wout ×Wout ×L
 is the ith patch that removes the information Given that Po is the supervision information for Pr , the
of pci . Indeed, Pr and Po are considered as the input data and optimization goal of the proposed DirectNet is to make Pb
learned target of DirectNet. A tailored masking strategy will (excluding the center block information) converge to Po .
be subsequently devised to allow the network to concentrate In particular, DirectNet only exploits the contents within the
its efforts on reconstructing the central pixel of each patch. outer window of Po to reconstruct the corresponding central
The above procedure creates an inner window (guard window) pixel, which inspires us to impose a mask-learning scheme to
of size Win × Win for the corresponding receptive field of the enable Fr to specialize in reconstructing/predicting the central
network during the prediction of the central pixel, enabling the pixel of the patch, serving the dual-window model construcneed to avoid the pixels located in the inner window whenever tion. More specifically, we additionally applied a binary mask
the central pixel is reconstructed. In the case of reconstructing to Pb and Po to obtain Pbm and Pom (see Fig. 2), aiming
anomalous pixels, targets of a certain spatial size normally to only calculate the loss at the central pixel position during
fall in the inner window, which lessens the contribution of backpropagation. By now, only the outer window pixels of the
anomalous information. This is unlike the original blind-spot receptive field are available for DirectNet to reconstruct the
network, as the setting of the inner window endows our central pixel, in which the homogeneous background would
DirectNet with the ability to detect targets of different sizes. commonly be located inside the outer window, impelling the
 Next, a ResNet block-based background reconstruction net- background samples to be reconstructed successfully. Meanwork (whose receptive field is adaptively matched to the while, it induces that each pixel reconstructed by DirectNet
training patch size) is designed. The number of network layers, will satisfy the background distribution of the outer window,
i.e., the number of adopted ResNet blocks, is automatically weakening the model’s power to fit anomalous targets, and
derived from the patch size, avoiding manually configured motivating its promise to be a well-performing background
parameters. Since the size of the network’s receptive field and reconstructor.
patch aligned well, this ensures that the reconstruction of the Our DirectNet Fr (·; θ ) is trained using an ℓ1 loss-based
central pixel will exploit all the spatial–spectral information objective function as follows:
of the patch. Nevertheless, owing to the setting of the inner θ̂ = arg min Lsel f
 θ
window (meaning that the network is unable to see this area),
the pixels actually devoted to the reconstruction come from = arg min∥Fr (Pr ; θ) ⊙ M − Po ⊙ M∥1
 θ
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 4. Details of the proposed overall network structure (the numbers above Conv, such as 64, represent the number of output channels).

 = arg min∥Pb ⊙ M − Po ⊙ M∥1 Algorithm 1 DirectNet
 θ
 R×C
 = arg min∥Pbm − Pom ∥1 (2) Input: Observed HSI X = {xi ∈ R L×1 }i=1 ;
 θ Parameters: 1) width of inner window Win , 2)
where M = {mi }i=1 R×C
 represents the patches of binary mask, width of outer window Wout .
 R×C
mi ∈ {0, 1} Wout ×Wout ×L
 is the mask corresponding to pbi and Output: Final detection result D = {Di }i=1 .
poi (see Fig. 2), the position of the one in mi denotes the 1 Stage 1: Training Phase;

position of the central pixel, and the rest of the elements 2 for i = 1 : N (N = R × C) do

are all zeros. Symbol ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication. 3 Construct patch poi ∈ RWout ×Wout ×L centered at pixel
Here, for better generalization, we adopt the ℓ1 loss instead xi ;
of the typical ℓ2 loss that is more attentive to larger errors 4 Replace all pixels in the center block
but less sensitive to smaller ones [70]. This ℓ1 norm loss pci ∈ RWin ×Win ×L of poi with Win × Win pixels
function is based on the mean absolute error, which requires randomly selected from the region outside of pci ;
calculating the absolute value of the difference between the 5 Get the patch pri ∈ RWout ×Wout ×L that removes the
output predicted data and the supervision information, and information of pci ;
its gradient descent process is based on the adaptive moment 6 end
 R×C R×C
estimation (Adam) stochastic optimization algorithm [71] that 7 Obtain pairs of Pr = {pri }i=1 and Po = {poi }i=1 as

comes with the PyTorch framework. input data and learned target for network training,
 respectively;
 8 for i = 1 : N do
C. Detection Phase 9 Train a reconstruction network Fr with
 In the detection phase, the observed HSI X is fed into the Nr = (Wout − 7)/4 ResNet blocks by minimizing
well-trained DirectNet, parameterized by θ̂, to acquire the final loss function Eq. (2);
reconstructed image (denoted as X b = {x̂i ∈ R L×1 } R×C ), i.e., 10 end
 i=1
 11 Obtain a well-trained network Fr , parameterized by θ̂;
 b = Fr (X; θ̂).
 X (3) 12 Stage 2: Detection phase;
 13 Acquire a reconstructed HSI by feeding X into the
 After the aforementioned self-supervised training procedure,
 b = Fr (X; θ̂ );
 well-trained DirectNet, i.e., X
the proposed DirectNet behaves as an efficient background
 14 Calculate the degree of anomaly Di of each pixel in X
reconstruction model; thus, the output X b becomes a pure
background image, and naturally, anomalies have larger recon- by Eq. (4);
struction errors compared to backgrounds. Finally, the reconstruction error is recognized as a detection result as follows:

 Di = xi − x̂i 2 (4) A. Datasets

where xi and x̂i denote the ith pixels of X and X,
 b respectively, 1) Salinas Dataset: This is a synthetic image collected by
and Di stands for the abnormal response value of the ith the Airborne Visible Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
pixel and constitutes the final HAD map D = {Di }i=1 R×C
 . covering the Salinas valley [72], and we adopted the anomaly
This ℓ2 norm reconstruction error is based on the mean target implantation approach of [73], which follows a linear
square error, which requires calculating the square value of the mixing model [74], [75], [76], i.e., n = f a a + (1 − f a )b,
difference between the output predicted data and the original where a, b, n ∈ R L×1 are spectral vectors of the anomaly,
one. The key steps of the proposed DirectNet are summarized background, and final mixture of the two, respectively, and
in Algorithm 1. f a denotes the nonnegative abundance fraction of a. The
 16 anomalous objects (buildings) with a spatial size of 3 × 3
 were randomly embedded into this sub-HSI, and the abun-
 III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS dance fraction of a for these targets begins at 0.05 and
 In this section, the superior performance of the proposed increases by 0.04 in turn.
DirectNet is validated qualitatively and quantitatively through 2) Pavia Dataset: It was captured by the Reflective Optics
extensive experiments. System Spectrographic Imaging System (ROSIS-03) sensor
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

 models to reconstruct backgrounds, and all adopt the residual
 spectral error between the original and reconstructed HSIs to
 measure the degree of anomaly of each pixel. This remains
 in line with the motivation of our proposed DirectNet. Meanwhile, the blind-spot network architecture endows BS3 LNet
 with the power to detect subpixel small-sized anomalies in
 the HSI. Hence, the differences between the detection effect
 of these five methods require to be involved in emphasizing the
 effectiveness of coupled dual window with deep reconstruction
 networks. For the proposed DirectNet, it is implemented
 by PyTorch on a GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU with 11-GB
Fig. 5. Pseudocolor images and ground truth maps of the four considered memory. The batch size and the learning rate were set to
HSI datasets. (a) Salinas. (b) Pavia. (c) El Segundo. (d) Indiana. 100 and 1e−4 , respectively, for all datasets. The spatial sizes of
 the input patches for the four datasets (namely, Salinas, Pavia,
 TABLE I El Segundo, and Indiana) were set to 15×15, 19×19, 19×19,
 D ETAILS OF THE E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS and 23 × 23, with the number of training epochs for the four
 datasets set to 700, 1000, 700, and 950, respectively.
 2) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
 different popular compared detectors, some well-known criteria are adopted, i.e., receiver operating characteristic (ROC),
 the area under the ROC curve (AUC) [80], and the statistical
 separability map. Among them, the ROC curve reveals the
 relationship between the probability of detection and the false
 alarm rate (FAR), revealing the detection accuracy of the
over the city of Pavia [77]. There are several vehicles embedmodel in a holistic manner. The corresponding AUC value
ded in the bridge as anomalous targets.
 can assess the detection accuracy quantitatively. An excellent
 3) El Segundo Dataset: It was collected by AVIRIS and
 detector would carry an ROC curve in near proximity to the
covered an urban scene in El Segundo city [78], in which the
 upper left corner, with an AUC value near 1. Moreover, the
anomalies mainly consist of storage tanks on the oil refinery.
 separability map provides the statistical range of the abnormal
 4) Indiana Dataset: It was acquired from the Earth Observresponse values at the pixel location of the background and
ing One (EO-1) Hyperion sensor over the Indiana area [79],
 anomalous classes, and these values are distributed in two
and some storage bins and roofs of small size are considered
 separated boxes (blue for the background and red for the
to be anomalies in this image.
 anomaly), each with a statistical interval from 10% to 90%.
 Notably, the above four images contain both small- and
 Clearly, if the detector demonstrates a predominant ability to
large-sized anomalous targets, and more detailed features of
 extrude anomalies and suppress backgrounds, the blue box will
these images are shown in Table I. In addition, the pseudobe at the exact bottom and narrow width, with a big interval
color images and ground truth maps of targets are shown in
 from the red box.
Fig. 5.
 C. Detection Performance for Different Methods
B. Comparison Algorithms and Evaluation Metrics Figs. 6–9 visualize the HAD colored results obtained by the
 1) Comparison Algorithms: To assess the efficacy of the 11 considered methods on the four considered datasets, where
proposed DirectNet, some well-established competitive meth- the first one in each figure is the ground truth of detected
ods selected for comparison embrace four statistical modeling- anomalous targets, and the rest are the resulting maps for
based methods (i.e., GRX [9], FrFE [13],1 LRX [10], and different detectors. Also, Figs. 10 and 11 show the ROC curves
2S-GLRT [15]2 ), two representation learning-based methods and separability boxplots of these 11 methods, whose AUC
(i.e., CRD [30] and LSDM-MoG [35]3 ), and four DL-based scores are listed in Table II. Note that the best results are
methods (i.e., GAED [48],4 RGAE [49],5 Auto-AD [50],6 marked in boldface (the same as given next).
and BS3 LNet [67]). Among the above detectors, all based on Across the board, Figs. 6–9 show that the proposed Directcutting-edge DL technology, GAED, RGAE, Auto-AD, and Net attains an acceptable tradeoff in anomaly detectability
BS3 LNet methods are designed to enhance the capacity of and background suppressibility, and its corresponding detec-
 1 https://github.com/xudongzhao461/Hyperspectral-Anomaly-Detection-bytion maps are closest to the ground truth. Considering the
Fractional-Fourier-Entropy
 Salinas dataset as an example, GRX and FrFE do not work
 2 https://github.com/zephyrhours/Hyperspectral-Anomaly-Detection-2S- satisfactorily because the shapes of 16 targets are barely
GLRT visible in the result maps. Although LSDM-MoG, GAED,
 3 https://github.com/l7170/LSDM-MoG
 4 https://github.com/pei-xiang/GAED
 and RGAE perform relatively well in highlighting anomalies,
 5 https://github.com/FGH00292/Hyperspectral-anomaly-detection-with- they maintain some background structural information and so
RGAE suffer from varying degrees of false alarms. LRX, 2S-GLRT,
 6 https://github.com/RSIDEA-WHU2020/Auto-AD CRD, Auto-AD, and BS3 LNet can restrain the background to
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 6. HAD colored maps obtained by different algorithms for the Salinas dataset. (a) Ground truth. (b) GRX. (c) FrFE. (d) LRX. (e) 2S-GLRT. (f) CRD.
(g) LSDM-MoG. (h) GAED. (i) RGAE. (j) Auto-AD. (k) BS3 LNet. (l) DirectNet.

Fig. 7. HAD colored maps obtained by different algorithms for the Pavia dataset. (a) Ground truth. (b) GRX. (c) FrFE. (d) LRX. (e) 2S-GLRT. (f) CRD.
(g) LSDM-MoG. (h) GAED. (i) RGAE. (j) Auto-AD. (k) BS3 LNet. (l) DirectNet.

Fig. 8. HAD colored maps obtained by different algorithms for the El Segundo dataset. (a) Ground truth. (b) GRX. (c) FrFE. (d) LRX. (e) 2S-GLRT.
(f) CRD. (g) LSDM-MoG. (h) GAED. (i) RGAE. (j) Auto-AD. (k) BS3 LNet. (l) DirectNet.

a certain extent but cannot effectively highlight the anomalous outline the boundaries of backgrounds, making the distinction
targets. Conversely, our DirectNet avoids the aforementioned between backgrounds and anomalies not clear. Although GRX,
issues and can accurately identify the embedded pixels with FrFE, LRX, 2S-GLRT, GAED, and BS3 LNet can locate most
high abnormal response values and low false alarms. of the vehicles, they risk misjudging the background. Auto-
 Another example is the Pavia dataset. CRD, LSDM-MoG, AD and DirectNet can suppress background interference to a
and RGAE can highlight these anomalous targets, yet they large degree, yet our DirectNet is more capable of enhancing
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

Fig. 9. HAD colored maps obtained by different algorithms for the Indiana dataset. (a) Ground truth. (b) GRX. (c) FrFE. (d) LRX. (e) 2S-GLRT. (f) CRD.
(g) LSDM-MoG. (h) GAED. (i) RGAE. (j) Auto-AD. (k) BS3 LNet. (l) DirectNet.

Fig. 10. ROC curves obtained by different detectors for the four considered datasets. (a) Salinas. (b) Pavia. (c) El Segundo. (d) Indiana.

Fig. 11. Separability maps obtained by different detectors on the four considered datasets. (a) Salinas. (b) Pavia. (c) El Segundo. (d) Indiana.

anomalous characteristics compared to Auto-AD while yield- and second place on the Indiana dataset. BS3 LNet, known for
ing a lower FAR. Analogous results are displayed on the its effectiveness in detecting small-sized subpixel anomalous
other two datasets, and the above visualizations show that targets while excelling on the Indiana dataset, performs poorly
DirectNet holds a better capacity for separating targets from on the other three datasets with large-sized targets. To further
backgrounds. The main reason lies in the fact that the proposed verify the strong background suppressibility and anomalous
DirectNet couples the sliding dual-window model in a self- target separability of DirectNet, Fig. 11 draws separability
supervised way, indicating promising performance in strength- boxplots of all detectors regarding backgrounds and anomalies.
ening anomalous characteristics and restraining background On these four datasets, the red anomaly boxes of DirectNet
interference. are normally not located at the highest place, but its blue back-
 In addition, other metrics were operated to evaluate the ground boxes are at a rock-bottom level and narrow enough,
detection performance of different algorithms from qualitative implying that DirectNet is well qualified for restraining the
and quantitative views. In Fig. 10, overall, the red curve background. At the same time, on the Salinas and Indiana
of DirectNet lies mostly above the other colored curves datasets, DirectNet can ensure a larger gap between the two
and generally exceeds the other detectors. Unsurprisingly, boxes and swimmingly extract anomalies from the suppressed
compared with the other ten competing methods, DirectNet backgrounds. Apparently, this accords with the visual analysis
achieves the highest AUC values on the first three datasets effects described earlier.
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE II
 AUC VALUES OF THE 11 C ONSIDERED D ETECTORS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

Fig. 12. AUC values of the proposed DirectNet with inner windows of different widths (Win ) and ResNet blocks of different numbers (Nr ) on the four
considered datasets. (a) Salinas. (b) Pavia. (c) El Segundo. (d) Indiana.

 All told that, from the findings by visual inspection, sizes. For the four datasets containing targets of different
the proposed DirectNet presents remarkable visual results. spatial sizes, the parameter Win is fixed to 5, 3, 9, and 3 as
Besides, the comparison and analysis of the ROC curves, AUC the optimal setting.
scores, and separability boxplots for different methods reveal
that DirectNet achieves the highest average AUC of 0.9927, E. Ablation Study
which is 0.0099 larger than that of the second-best Auto-AD,
 This section evaluates the contribution of each component
as reported in Table II. In addition, the FAR of DirectNet
 to the proposed DirectNet on all datasets. As a baseline,
remains generally at a low value, further achieving a satisfacwe employ a traditional unsupervised learning-based recontory balance between anomaly detectability and background
 struction model (denoted as USLNet), which uses the same
suppressibility, thus affirming the efficacy of DirectNet.
 framework as DirectNet, except for the fact that it trains the
 background reconstruction network directly with the original
D. Parameter Analysis patches, without removing any information. By placing the
 The proposed DirectNet involves two parameters: the width inner window in the center of the receptive field (meaning that
of the inner window Win and the number of ResNet blocks Nr this information is not visible to the network) and the outer
(whose setting is adaptive to the width of the outer window, window (corresponding to the receptive field area) outside
i.e., Wout = 4 × Nr + 7). It is noteworthy that the feasible of the center block, our DirectNet couples a dual-window
value of Win needs to be an odd number greater than 1. If Win model, which is well-suited for detecting anomalous targets
is equal to 1, then DirectNet degenerates into a blind-spot of different sizes. When there is no inner window (i.e., the
network with a coupled single-window model. Among them, width of the inner window is 1), DirectNet degenerates into
the values of Win and Nr for all the datasets are set to {3, 5, a blind-spot network with a single-window model (denoted
7, 9} and {2, 3, 4, 5} (i.e., Wout is set to {15, 19, 23, 27}), as BaseNet). Meanwhile, we also compared the effect of
respectively. Then, the AUC scores under different parameter different types (i.e., ℓ1 and ℓ2 ) of reconstruction errors on
settings are summarized in Fig. 12. the detection performance. The details of AUC comparisons
 It can be found from Fig. 12 that the detection accuracy on these datasets are shown in Table III.
of DirectNet (coupled with dual-window of different sizes) As seen from Table III, BaseNet has some advantages over
does not exhibit significant fluctuations on the Salinas dataset. the unsupervised learning-based method on most datasets,
For the El Segundo dataset (with large-sized targets), Win especially for the Indiana dataset containing slightly smallshould be chosen as a larger value, and for datasets with sized targets, where BaseNet achieves an overwhelming
small-sized targets (such as Pavia and Indiana), the smaller superiority by virtue of its blind-spot network architecvalue should be selected for Win to further promote the ture. However, when reconstructing the pixels within largeperformance of DirectNet. As long as the inner window size sized anomalous targets, both the unsupervised learning-based
is selected appropriately, the outer window size (number of USLNet and the self-supervised learning-based BaseNet (joint
ResNet blocks) brings little impact, manifesting the stability of spatial–spectral learning-based models) are prone to inter-
DirectNet in the task of detecting anomalous targets of diverse ference from neighboring anomalous pixels, which causes
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

 TABLE III reliably leverage the self-supervised learning-based blind-spot
AUC VALUES A FTER THE A BLATION S TUDY FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS framework for HAD purposes, thus extending its applications.

 G. Comparison of Inference Times
 The inference times of different methods on all datasets
 are recorded in Table V to assess the models’ computational
 burden. Other than Auto-AD, BS3 LNet, and DirectNet, which
 were implemented based on the PyTorch 1.12.1 framework,
 the remaining methods were implemented with MATLAB
 2019b. Compared to the traditional model-based detectors
 using several tricks (e.g., fractional Fourier transform, sliding
the models to overfit anomalies and limits the detection
 dual window, and representation learning), GRX acquires the
performance. In contrast, DirectNet (coupled with a sliding
 fastest computation time due to its clean design principle, but
dual-window model) avoids the abovementioned problems,
 its detection effect is deemed relatively ineffective. Furtherwhere the inner window prevents potential contamination of
 more, because the five DL-based methods employ analogous
anomalies to reconstruct HSIs with pure backgrounds. As a
 procedures for HAD (these networks promise to be excellent
result, the capability of DirectNet in recognizing anomalies
 background reconstruction models, and most of them adopt
from HSIs is significantly enhanced, yielding higher AUC
 mean square error-based reconstruction errors as the final
values. In addition, the reconstruction errors as the degree of
 anomaly scores), they achieve comparable inference times on
anomaly of each pixel based on ℓ1 and ℓ2 have comparable
 different datasets. Although the inference time of the proposed
effects in separating anomalous targets from the original HSI
 DirectNet is nonoptimal, DirectNet obtains promising results
by the model, which reflects the robustness of DirectNet in
 and its competitiveness is outstanding.
the task of detecting anomalies.

 IV. D ISCUSSION
F. Performance Analysis Between Target Size and Inner At present, mainstream DL-based HAD methods, such as
Window Size GAED, RGAE, and Auto-AD, commonly adopt AE as the
 To investigate the relationship between the inner window background reconstruction models and train the networks in
size and the target size, we regularly embed 2 × 2 anomalous an unsupervised learning manner, with the reconstruction error
targets on a background subimage, and their spatial sizes are as the final detection result. However, the above methods may
set between 1 × 1 and 9 × 9. Among them, a background fit anomalous targets to varying degrees and yield unsatisimage and anomaly spectrum (building) were chosen from the factory effects. In this article, we incorporate a blind-spot
Salinas dataset. Meanwhile, the abundance of all targets and network based on self-supervised learning as the backbone
the inner window size Win × Win were set to 0.3 and {1 × 1, and seamlessly embed a sliding dual-window model into
3 × 3, 5 × 5, 7 × 7, 9 × 9}, respectively. Then, the AUC this. Unlike BS3 LNet that concerns one-pixel blind spots, our
values attained by the proposed DirectNet on the nine synthetic DirectNet places the center block of the receptive field as a
datasets (using different inner window sizes) are reported in blind area (inner window), preventing potential contamination
Table IV. We reiterate that, when Win is set to 1, DirectNet from anomalous pixels. Therefore, DirectNet is considered
degenerates into a blind-spot network with a single-window as a superior background reconstructor to enhance the backmodel (same as BaseNet in Section III-E). ground reconstruction and restrain the anomaly reconstruction.
 We observed that BaseNet behaved with varying degrees of BS3 LNet is only applicable to recognize anomalous targets for
performance degradation on HSIs with target sizes larger than small-sized subpixels, while DirectNet is flexible in detecting
4×4, and the larger the target sizes, the lower the correspond- both large- and small-sized targets, expanding the application
ing AUC scores. Moreover, when Win is small (e.g., 3 and 5), range of blind spot networks.
DirectNet appears to manifest a similar behavior on HSIs with From a practical application perspective, our DirectNet is
relatively larger target sizes. However, as Win increases, the similar to the traditional unsupervised reconstruction model,
applicability of DirectNet becomes broader, particularly when only requiring unlabeled observed HSI to identify anomalous
the inner window size is 9 × 9, DirectNet always performs targets by using the reconstruction error. Yet, DirectNet can
optimally on HSIs containing synthetic targets of different further weaken the fitting ability for anomalies, favorably
sizes. This is a result of DirectNet coupling a sliding dual- separating anomalies from HSI and apparently performing
window reconstruction model, where the inner window (which better. Therefore, DirectNet will probably showcase more
is not available for reconstructing the central pixel) mitigates potential and advantages in practical applications. However,
the interference of anomalies with the outer window (the limited by the initial design concept, the insufficient genreceptive field outside of the inner window) pixels, enforcing eralization performance remains an existing issue for most
the model’s ability to reconstruct the background samples models in the hyperspectral remote sensing field, including our
on the one hand, and weakening its representation ability DirectNet. In the HAD task, several researchers have made
for anomalous samples on the other, thus achieving a purer some efforts to achieve generalizability for models, such as
background. Especially for large-sized targets, DirectNet can WeaklyAD [81], AUD-Net [82], and AETNet [83]. Among
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE IV
 AUC VALUES OF THE P ROPOSED D IRECT N ET W ITH D IFFERENT PARAMETERS ON THE S YNTHETIC DATASET

 TABLE V
 RUNNING T IMES ( IN S ECONDS ) OF THE 11 C ONSIDERED D ETECTORS

them, WeaklyAD and AETNet are devoted to enhancing the is reduced, rendering the proposed DirectNet as a promising
discrimination between the background and anomaly of the model for background reconstruction. Extensive experiments
reconstructed image and employ GRX or other detectors have proven the superior and comprehensive performance of
directly on the reconstructed image to identify anomalous our DirectNet on HSIs with anomalous targets of various sizes.
targets efficiently. AUD-Net, on the other hand, aims at
estimating the central pixel by the contextual information and R EFERENCES
exploits the relation embedding difference between each pixel
and the surrounding pixels as the anomaly scores. Meanwhile, [1] B. Zhang et al., “Progress and challenges in intelligent remote sensing
 satellite systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
AUD-Net and AETNet use a huge number of training samples vol. 15, pp. 1814–1822, 2022.
from multiple HSIs to improve the generalization capability of [2] J. Li et al., “Deep learning in multimodal remote sensing data fusion:
models, benefiting from the rich information provided. Unlike A comprehensive review,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 112,
 Aug. 2022, Art. no. 102926.
the aforementioned methods, our DirectNet is trained on a [3] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
single HSI in a fully self-supervised manner, so as to obtain A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
a model that can adequately reconstruct the background of Mar. 2022.
 [4] Z. Zhang, D. Wang, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, R. Liu, and L. Ni, “Spatial
this HSI, and it employs the reconstruction error to detect sampling and grouping information entropy strategy based on kernel
anomalies. The generalization performance of DirectNet is fuzzy C-means clustering method for hyperspectral band selection,”
relatively limited; therefore, in future work, we will focus on Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 19, p. 5058, Oct. 2022.
designing frameworks with strong generalization capability for [5] W. Rao, L. Gao, Y. Qu, X. Sun, B. Zhang, and J. Chanussot, “Siamese
 transformer network for hyperspectral image target detection,” IEEE
HAD for practical engineering applications. Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5526419.
 [6] X. Sun et al., “Ensemble-based information retrieval with mass estimation for hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 V. C ONCLUSION Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5508123.
 [7] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang, “Hyperspectral
 In this article, the sliding dual-window model is creatively anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
coupled with a deep reconstruction network for HAD pur- Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016.
 [8] X. Zhao, K. Liu, K. Gao, and W. Li, “Hyperspectral time-series target
poses. To be specific, we built a background reconstruction detection based on spectral perception and spatial–temporal tensor
network whose receptive field is adaptively matched to the decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
training patch size so that the spatial–spectral features of the Art. no. 5520812.
 [9] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
HSIs come into full play. Besides, the center block information optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
of the receptive field is erased so that it is not seen by the Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, 1990.
network at all, and it is regarded as an inner window. An elab- [10] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
orate mask-learning strategy allows the network to concentrate optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
 anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
on the reconstruction of the central pixel. Ultimately, our Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
DirectNet divides its receptive field into a dual window and [11] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Weightedonly uses outer window (the receptive field outside the inner RXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics
 estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel.
window) pixels to reconstruct each pixel. As a result, the Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366,
interference of anomalous samples on the reconstructed HSI Jun. 2014.
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

[12] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear [34] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
 anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral
 Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005. anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
[13] R. Tao, X. Zhao, W. Li, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016.
 detection by fractional Fourier entropy,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth [35] L. Li, W. Li, Q. Du, and R. Tao, “Low-rank and sparse decomposition
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 4920–4929, Dec. 2019. with mixture of Gaussian for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
[14] X. Zhao, Z. Hou, X. Wu, W. Li, P. Ma, and R. Tao, “Hyperspectral Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4363–4372, Sep. 2021.
 target detection based on transform domain adaptive constrained energy [36] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
 minimization,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 103, Dec. 2021, hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
 Art. no. 102461. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
[15] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel Apr. 2016.
 anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,” [37] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Hyperspectral
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567, anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising CNN regulariza-
 Oct. 2022. tion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9553–9568,
[16] F. Vincent, O. Besson, and S. Matteoli, “Anomaly detection for replace- Nov. 2021.
 ment model in hyperspectral imaging,” Signal Process., vol. 185, [38] Y. Qu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection through spectral unmix-
 Aug. 2021, Art. no. 108079. ing and dictionary-based low-rank decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
[17] X. Yang, X. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Xu, and Y. Liu, “Ensemble and random Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4391–4405, Aug. 2018.
 RX with multiple features anomaly detector for hyperspectral image,” [39] C. Zhao, C. Li, S. Feng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced total variation regular-
 IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 6009505. ized representation model with endmember background dictionary for
[18] L. Zhuang and M. K. Ng, “FastHyMix: Fast and parameter-free hyper- hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 spectral image mixed noise removal,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5518312.
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 4702–4716, Aug. 2023. [40] X. He, J. Wu, Q. Ling, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly
[19] L. Zhuang, M. K. Ng, X. Fu, and J. M. Bioucas-Dias, “Hy-demosaicing: detection for hyperspectral imagery via tensor low-rank approximation
 Hyperspectral blind reconstruction from spectral subsampling,” IEEE with multiple subspace learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5515815. vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5509917.
[20] L. Zhuang, M. K. Ng, and Y. Liu, “Cross-track illumination correction [41] J. Li, K. Zheng, Z. Li, L. Gao, and X. Jia, “X-shaped interactive
 for hyperspectral pushbroom sensor images using low-rank and sparse autoencoders with cross-modality mutual learning for unsupervised
 representations,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 Art. no. 5502117. Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5518317.
[21] L. Ren, Z. Ma, and F. Bovolo, “A novel dual-alternating direction method [42] Z. Wang, M. K. Ng, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Nonlocal
 of multipliers for spectral unmixing,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., self-similarity-based hyperspectral remote sensing image denoising with
 vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 528–532, Mar. 2021. 3-D convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[22] X. Zhao, W. Li, C. Zhao, and R. Tao, “Hyperspectral target detection vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5531617.
 based on weighted Cauchy distance graph and local adaptive collabora- [43] L. Gao, J. Li, K. Zheng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced autoencoders
 tive representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, with attention-embedded degradation learning for unsupervised hyper-
 Art. no. 5527313. spectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[23] L. Gao, Z. Wang, L. Zhuang, H. Yu, B. Zhang, and J. Chanussot, vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5509417.
 “Using low-rank representation of abundance maps and nonnegative [44] S. Mei, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Accelerating
 tensor factorization for hyperspectral nonlinear unmixing,” IEEE Trans. convolutional neural network-based hyperspectral image classification
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5504017. by step activation quantization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[24] L. Zhuang, X. Fu, M. K. Ng, and J. M. Bioucas-Dias, “Hyperspectral vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5502012.
 image denoising based on global and nonlocal low-rank factorizations,” [45] W. Li, G. Wu, and Q. Du, “Transferred deep learning for anomaly
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 10438–10454, detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
 Dec. 2021. vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 597–601, May 2017.
[25] L. Zhuang and M. K. Ng, “Hyperspectral mixed noise removal by ℓ1 - [46] W. Rao, Y. Qu, L. Gao, X. Sun, Y. Wu, and B. Zhang, “Transferable
 norm-based subspace representation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth network with Siamese architecture for anomaly detection in hyperspec-
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 13, pp. 1143–1157, 2020. tral images,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 106, Feb. 2022,
[26] T.-X. Jiang, L. Zhuang, T.-Z. Huang, X.-L. Zhao, and J. M. Bioucas- Art. no. 102669.
 Dias, “Adaptive hyperspectral mixed noise removal,” IEEE Trans. [47] E. Bati, A. Caliskan, A. Koz, and A. A. Alatan, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511413. detection method based on auto-encoder,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9643,
[27] L. Ren, Z. Ma, F. Bovolo, and L. Bruzzone, “A nonconvex frame- Oct. 2015, Art. no. 96430N.
 work for sparse unmixing incorporating the group structure of the [48] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 spectral library,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 Art. no. 5506719. vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.
[28] T.-X. Jiang, M. K. Ng, J. Pan, and G.-J. Song, “Nonnegative low [49] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
 rank tensor approximations with multidimensional image applications,” anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Numerische Math., vol. 153, no. 1, pp. 141–170, Jan. 2023. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
[29] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection [50] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
 by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel. hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolu-
 Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533, tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 Jun. 2015. Art. no. 5503314.
[30] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral [51] Z. Zhao and B. Sun, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via memoryanomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3, augmented autoencoders,” CAAI Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 8, no. 4,
 pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015. pp. 1274–1287, Dec. 2023.
[31] M. Vafadar and H. Ghassemian, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral [52] Y. Lian, Y. Zhang, X. Feng, X. Jiang, and Z. Cai, “Low-rank constrained
 imagery using modified collaborative representation,” IEEE Geosci. memory autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–581, Apr. 2018. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023,
[32] L. Zhuang, L. Gao, B. Zhang, X. Fu, and J. M. Bioucas-Dias, pp. 1–5.
 “Hyperspectral image denoising and anomaly detection based on low- [53] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN
 rank and sparse representations,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., for hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,”
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5500117. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811.
[33] L. Zhang, L. Song, B. Du, and Y. Zhang, “Nonlocal low-rank tensor [54] W. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lei, J. Li, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
 completion for visual data,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 2, low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
 pp. 673–685, Feb. 2021. Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 3889–3900, Aug. 2021.
5504115 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

[55] D. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Qu, X. Sun, and W. Liao, “Frequency-to-spectrum [78] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 mapping GAN for semisupervised hyperspectral anomaly detection,” detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 CAAI Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1258–1273, Dec. 2023. Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020.
[56] K. Li et al., “Spectral–spatial deep support vector data description for [79] Z. Wu, W. Zhu, J. Chanussot, Y. Xu, and S. Osher, “Hyperspectral
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., anomaly detection via global and local joint modeling of background,”
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522316. IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 14, pp. 3858–3869, Jul. 2019.
[57] F. Ye, C. Huang, J. Cao, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Attribute [80] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target
 restoration framework for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE
 vol. 24, pp. 116–127, 2022. Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2021.
[58] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for [81] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
 unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
 no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022. network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
[59] L. Ericsson, H. Gouk, C. C. Loy, and T. M. Hospedales, “Self-supervised Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
 representation learning: Introduction, advances, and challenges,” IEEE [82] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, D. Quan, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, “AUD-
 Signal Process. Mag., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 42–62, May 2022. Net: A unified deep detector for multiple hyperspectral image anomaly
[60] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, detection via relation and few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 “BockNet: Blind-block reconstruction network with a guard window for Learn. Syst., early access, Oct. 27, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9931456, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531916. 2022.3213023.
[61] L. Zhuang, M. K. Ng, L. Gao, J. Michalski, and Z. Wang, “Eigen- [83] Z. Li, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, Q. Ling, Z. Lin, and W. An, “You only
 image2Eigenimage (E2E): A self-supervised deep learning network for train once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with ranhyperspectral image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., dom masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 early access, Jul. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718.
 org/abstract/document/10187207, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3293328.
[62] Z. Wang, M. K. Ng, J. Michalski, and L. Zhuang, “A self-supervised
 deep denoiser for hyperspectral and multispectral image fusion,” IEEE
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5520414. Degang Wang received the B.S. degree in com-
[63] H. Gao, S. Li, and R. Dian, “Hyperspectral and multispectral image munication engineering from the Hebei University
 fusion via self-supervised loss and separable loss,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. of Technology, Tianjin, China, in 2020. He is cur-
 Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5520917. rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cartography and
[64] Z. Han, D. Hong, L. Gao, J. Yao, B. Zhang, and J. Chanussot, geography information system with the Key Labora-
 “Multimodal hyperspectral unmixing: Insights from attention networks,” tory of Computational Optical Imaging Technology,
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5524913. Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese
[65] J. Yue, L. Fang, H. Rahmani, and P. Ghamisi, “Self-supervised learning Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
 with adaptive distillation for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE His research interests include hyperspectral image
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5501813. processing, deep learning, and target detection.
[66] A. Krull, T.-O. Buchholz, and F. Jug, “Noise2Void—Learning denoising
 from single noisy images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2124–2132.
[67] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
 “BS3 LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for hyper- Lina Zhuang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 spectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, degree in electrical and computer engineering from
 2023, Art. no. 5504218. the Instituto Superior Tecnico, Universidade de Lis-
[68] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza, “PDB- boa, Lisbon, Portugal, in 2018.
 SNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for From 2015 to 2018, she was a Marie Curie Early
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., Stage Researcher of Sparse Representations and
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914. Compressed Sensing Training Network (SpaRTaN
[69] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked number 607290) with the Instituto de Telecomuniautoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. cações, Lisbon. SpaRTaN Initial Training Networks
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988. (ITN) is funded under the European Union’s Sev-
[70] G. Scarpa, S. Vitale, and D. Cozzolino, “Target-adaptive CNN-based enth Framework Programme (FP7-PEOPLE-2013-
 pansharpening,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 9, ITN) call and is part of the Marie Curie Actions-ITN funding scheme.
 pp. 5443–5457, Sep. 2018. From 2019 to 2021, she was a Research Assistant Professor with the Math
[71] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” Department, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong. From 2021 to 2022,
 in Proc. ICLR, 2015, pp. 1–15. She was a Research Assistant Professor with the Math Department, The
[72] K. Tan, Z. Hou, D. Ma, Y. Chen, and Q. Du, “Anomaly detection in University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. She is currently a Professor with
 hyperspectral imagery based on low-rank representation incorporating a the Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 spatial constraint,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 13, p. 1578, Jul. 2019. Beijing, China. Her research interests include hyperspectral image restoration,
[73] M. S. Stefanou and J. P. Kerekes, “A method for assessing spectral superresolution, and compressive sensing.
 image utility,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 47, no. 6,
 pp. 1698–1706, Jun. 2009.
[74] L. Ren, D. Hong, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and J. Chanussot,
 “Hyperspectral sparse unmixing via nonconvex shrinkage penalties,” Lianru Gao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5500415. B.S. degree in civil engineering from Tsinghua Uni-
[75] B. Zhang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, W. Luo, Q. Ran, and Q. Du, “PSO- versity, Beijing, China, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree
 EM: A hyperspectral unmixing algorithm based on normal compo- in cartography and geographic information system
 sitional model,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 52, no. 12, from the Institute of Remote Sensing Applicapp. 7782–7792, Dec. 2014. tions, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing,
[76] L. Ren, D. Hong, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and J. Chanussot, in 2007.
 “Orthogonal subspace unmixing to address spectral variability for hyper- He has been a Visiting Scholar at the University
 spectral image,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, of Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain, in 2014, and the
 Art. no. 5501713. Mississippi State University (MSU), Starkville, MS,
[77] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyper- USA, in 2016. He is currently a Professor with the
 spectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,” Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging Technology, Aerospace
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611, Information Research Institute, CAS. In the last ten years, he was the Principal
 Oct. 2017. Investigator of ten scientific research projects at national and ministerial levels,
WANG et al.: SLIDING DUAL-WINDOW-INSPIRED RECONSTRUCTION NETWORK FOR HAD 5504115

including projects by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Xiaobin Zhao received the B.S. degree in elec-
(2018–2020, 2022–2025, and 2024–2028) and the National Key Research tronic information science and technology from the
and Development Program of China (2021–2025). He was supported by the Guangxi University of Science and Technology,
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2023. Liuzhou, Guangxi, China, in 2014, the M.S. degree
He has published more than 240 peer-reviewed articles, and there are more in electronics and communications engineering from
than 150 journal articles included by the Science Citation Index (SCI). He was Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia,
coauthor of three academic books, including Hyperspectral Image Information China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree in information
Extraction. He obtained 30 national invention patents in China. His research and communications engineering from the Beijing
focuses on hyperspectral image processing and information extraction. Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2022.
 Dr. Gao is a fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with
He was awarded the Outstanding Science and Technology Achievement Prize the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing
of CAS in 2016. He won the Second Prize of the State Scientific and Institute of Technology. His research interests include remote image
Technological Progress Award in 2018. He received the 2021 Outstanding processing and hyperspectral target detection.
Paper Award at the IEEE Workshop on Hyperspectral Image Processing:
Evolution in Remote Sensing (WHISPERS). He is an Associate Editor of Antonio Plaza (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
IEEE IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING and and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from the
IET Image Processing. Department of Technology of Computers and Communications, University of Extremadura, Cáceres,
 Spain, in 1999 and 2002, respectively.
 He is currently a Full Professor and the Head of
 the Hyperspectral Computing Laboratory, Department of Technology of Computers and Communications, University of Extremadura. He has authored
 more than 700 publications and guest edited ten
 journal special issues. He has reviewed more than
 500 manuscripts for over 50 different journals.
 Dr. Plaza was elected in 2020 as a member of Academia Europaea—
 The Academy of Europe. He received the 2021 Outstanding Paper Award
 at the IEEE Workshop: Hyperspectral Sensing meets Machine Learning and
 Pattern Analysis (HyperMLPA), the 2019 Outstanding Paper Award at the
 IEEE Workshop on Hyperspectral Image Processing: Evolution in Remote
 Sensing (WHISPERS), and the Top Cited Article Award of Elsevier’s Journal
 of Parallel and Distributed Computing from 2005 to 2010 for the contribution
 entitled “Commodity Cluster-Based Parallel Processing of Hyperspectral
 Imagery.” He was a recipient of the 2015 IEEE Signal Processing Magazine
 Xu Sun (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree Best Column Paper Award for the contribution entitled “Parallel Hyperspectral
 in mathematics and application mathematics from Image and Signal Processing” published in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine
 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2006, and in April 2011, the 2014 Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society Prize Paper
 the Ph.D. degree in cartography and geographical Award of the IEEE J OURNAL OF S ELECTED T OPICS IN A PPLIED E ARTH
 information system from the Graduate University of O BSERVATIONS AND R EMOTE S ENSING (JSTARS) for the contribution
 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 2011. entitled “A Web-Based System for Classification of Remote Sensing Data”
 He is currently an Associate Researcher with published in IEEE JSTARS in August 2013, the recognition of Best Reviewers
 the Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chi- of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING (TGRS)
 nese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research in 2010, and the recognition of Best Reviewers of the IEEE G EOSCIENCE
 interests include hyperspectral image processing, AND R EMOTE S ENSING L ETTERS journal in 2009. He was the Editor-in-Chief
 artificial intelligence algorithm, and high-resolution of IEEE TGRS from 2013 to 2017. From 2018 to 2021, he was included in
 remote sensing image information mining. the Highly Cited Researchers List (Clarivate Analytics).