IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024 5535317

 SMCNet: Sparse-Inspired Masked Convolutional
 Network for Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
 Zhaoyue Wu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Mercedes E. Paoletti , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Hongjun Su , Senior Member, IEEE, Pan Zheng , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zhong Zhang,
 Juan M. Haut , Senior Member, IEEE, and Antonio Plaza , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection, which aims to Index Terms— Deep learning, hybrid attention mechanism,
search and localize potential targets, is a research area with exten- hyperspectral anomaly detection, masked convolutional network,
sive application prospects and profound implications. In recent sparse representation.
years, the emergence of unsupervised and self-supervised deep
learning for image reconstruction has provided inspiring solutions for hyperspectral anomaly detection. However, due to I. I NTRODUCTION
sensor-induced and environmental effects, the full-image detection networks inevitably reconstruct anomalies along with the
background. Existing detectors indirectly mitigate anomaly
reconstruction by imposing constraints on hidden features or
 H YPERSPECTRAL imaging, as a technology capable of
 providing continuous spectral and fine-grained spatial
 information about ground objects, has become one of the
loss functions, but they provide unsatisfactory performance in most significant data sources for contemporary Earth obserlarge target detection scenarios. This work straightforwardly vation [1], [2], [3]. Hyperspectral anomaly detection, which
addresses this issue from the input source, i.e., introducing focuses on identifying regions within an image that exhibit
the concept of masked autoencoders (MAEs) into fully convolutional networks and further developing a sparse-inspired different physical and chemical properties compared to the
masked convolutional network (SMCNet) consisting of three dominant features, is a fundamental and promising research
mutually supportive components: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2) topic [4], [5]. With the absence of prior knowledge, the
a sparse projection layer; and 3) a hierarchical decoder. The main goal of hyperspectral anomaly detection is to explore
encoder employs an adaptive potential anomaly masking strategy, and pinpoint potential targets while removing other extraleveraging sparse convolution for extracting multidimensional
features of the remaining background. Meanwhile, a sparse- neous backgrounds [6], [7]. This technique plays a crucial
guided projection layer is created by discarding the positional role in border security, resource surveying, precision agriembedding technique to populate the uncoded region and guide culture, disaster relief, environmental surveillance, and other
the background recovery without introducing anomalies. Finally, applications [8].
the decoder couples the hierarchical structure and a hybrid In this context, hyperspectral anomaly detection is basically
attention mechanism (local–middle–global and spatial–spectral)
to refine the background during image recovery, whereas anoma- a form of “no reference detection,” confronting various challies in the residual map are highlighted. Extensive experiments lenges and complexities [9], [10]. Primarily, the processing
using ten typical competitors on six different types of datasets and analysis of high-dimensional data require powerful comvalidate the effectiveness and generalization ability of the newly putational capabilities [11]. Moreover, spectral mixing, noise,
proposed SMCNet method.
 and changes in environmental conditions increase the diffi-
 Received 4 June 2024; revised 7 August 2024 and 17 September 2024; culty of identifying anomalous pixels. Therefore, designing
accepted 7 October 2024. Date of publication 9 October 2024; date of efficient approaches for addressing these problems has become
current version 21 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 42122008 and
 a challenge [12], [13]. Briefly, hyperspectral anomaly detection
Grant 42371327; in part by the Consejería de Economía, Ciencia y Agenda methods can be categorized into traditional and deep learning
Digital of the Junta de Extremadura and the European Regional Development methods. Further, from the perspective of problem-solving
Fund (ERDF) of the European Union, under Grant GR21040; in part by the
ERDF of the European Union Interreg V-A Espana-Portugal (POCTEP)
 ideas, they can be subdivided into three categories: statistics-
2021–2027 Program under Grant 0206_RAT_EOS_PC_6_E; and in part based, feature mining-based, and image reconstruction-based.
by China Scholarship Council under Grant 202106710022. (Corresponding
author: Hongjun Su.)
 Zhaoyue Wu, Mercedes E. Paoletti, Juan M. Haut, and Antonio Plaza A. Insight Into Traditional Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
are with the Hyperspectral Computing Laboratory, Department of Technology of Computers and Communications, University of Extremadura, Traditional methods for hyperspectral anomaly detection
10003 Caceres, Spain (e-mail: zhaoyue_wu@163.com; mpaoletti@unex.es; were dominant until 2018, giving rise to a plethora of algojuanmariohaut@unex.es; aplaza@unex.es). rithms based on statistical theory, sparse representation, and
 Hongjun Su is with the College of Geography and Remote Sensing, Hohai
University, Nanjing 211100, China (e-mail: hjsu@hhu.edu.cn). tensor decomposition. The Reed–Xiaoli (RX) algorithm is a
 Pan Zheng is with the School of Earth Sciences and Engineering, Hohai milestone work that benefited from statistical theory, assuming
University, Nanjing 211100, China (e-mail: zhengpan1013@163.com). that background pixels follow a simple multivariate Gaussian
 Zhong Zhang is with the School of Public Administration, China University
of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zhangzhong@cug.edu.cn). distribution while anomalous pixels deviate from it [14].
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3477256 Several examples have demonstrated that RX can achieve
 1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

desirable results with simple backgrounds rather than with B. Deep Learning and Hyperspectral Processing: Exploring
complex ones [5], [24]. In general, RX performs unsatisfacto- New Horizons in Anomaly Detection
rily for anomaly detection in complex urban areas and better Since the breakthrough achievement of AlexNet in 2012,
in natural scenes. Subsequently, corresponding improvements a deep convolutional neural network (CNN), the research
have been developed, such as localized RX (LRX) [15], fervor surrounding deep learning has extended to a variety
Gaussian mixture modeling [16], and nonlinear mapping [17], of applications. Initial CNN-based anomaly detection methods
[18]. With the development of compressive sensing theories, were implemented by transfer learning due to the lack of
the collaborative representation derived from sparse represen- training samples [35], which severely limited the scalability
tation theory was applied to hyperspectral anomaly detection, of existing methods. Until recent years, deep learning methods
opening up a new research avenue and attracting consid- have been widely applied to hyperspectral anomaly detection
erable attention. In the collaborative representation detector tasks due to the progressive development of unsupervised and
(CRD), each pixel under test (PUT) is linearly reconstructed self-supervised deep learning techniques, including autoen-
(approximately) from the surrounding background pixels, and coders (AEs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs).
the reconstruction residual is the anomaly degree of the Regarding the former, AE-based hyperspectral anomaly detec-
PUT [19]. In this case, the surrounding background pixels tion approaches endeavor to compress the input image into
are sampled by a dual window. Under ideal conditions, where a low-dimensional latent space through an encoder and then
all samples belong to the background, anomalous targets reconstruct the background from the latent space using a
can be easily detected. However, in practical applications, decoder [8]. Ideally, the latent space is formed by backanomalous targets are complex and diverse, making it difficult ground vectors, in which case the decoder reconstructs the
to obtain pure background samples through a simple dual- background satisfactorily and the reconstructed residuals are
window strategy. Hence, statistical distributions [20], principal used to determine anomalies. To this end, several strategies
components analysis (PCA) [21], and density clustering are have been explored. For instance, an adaptive-weight loss
combined with the dual window [22] to mitigate anoma- function has been designed to weaken the reconstruction of
lous contamination. Moreover, a recent work comprehensively anomalies in an autonomous hyperspectral anomaly detection
improved the CRD by adopting a relaxed implementation (Auto-AD) network based on fully convolutional AEs [36].
from both model optimization and dictionary construc- Graph regularization has also been imposed on the latent
tion perspectives, significantly enhancing anomaly detection space to mitigate anomalous contamination [37]. No referenceperformance [23]. spot and no reference-block sampling strategies have been
 Unlike the aforementioned methods, anomaly detectors devised to build pure background samples [38], [39], [40].
based on tensor decomposition split the original image into A background-guided pattern has also been developed to
a low-rank background tensor and a sparse anomaly tensor, facilitate background reconstruction [41]. Two decoders have
taking into account the inherent spatial and spectral structures been adopted to separate low-rank background and sparse
of hyperspectral images. Depending on the formation mode anomalies [42].
of the background tensor or the anomaly tensor, two methods On the other hand, GAN-based hyperspectral anomaly
can be applied, i.e., direct and indirect decomposition. Direct detection methods train the generator to produce fake samples
decomposition imposes regularization constraints directly on that adhere to the background distribution and gradually comthe background and anomaly tensor. Examples include the plete the image reconstruction process until the discriminator
robust PCA (RPCA), tensor RPCA [24], and prior-based cannot distinguish between fake-synthetic and true samples.
tensor approximation (PTA) [25], [26], [27], [28]. In con- How to motivate the generator to produce background and
trast, indirect decomposition performs image reconstruction ignore anomalies is critical to the success of such meththrough a background or anomaly dictionary and imposes ods. Until now, background distribution assumptions [43],
regularization constraints on the corresponding representation background sample searching [44], [45], the initial sepacoefficient tensor. Examples include the low-rank and sparse ration between background and anomalies [46], [47], and
representation [29], graph and total variation regularized low- regularization constraints [48] have been extensively studrank representation [30], generalized shrinkage mappings for ied to minimize anomaly reconstruction to some extent.
hyperspectral anomaly detection [31], and tensor low-rank and Moreover, the Transformer has been introduced into hypersparse representation [32]. Besides, leveraging the powerful spectral anomaly detection to benefit from the success of
learning capacity of deep learning to boost the solution pro- the attention mechanism, which mines both local and global
vided by the alternating direction method of multipliers has features for hyperspectral anomaly detection tasks [49], [50],
emerged as a new trend [33], [34]. Conclusively, most of [51]. Numerous studies have indicated that these methods
the traditional hyperspectral anomaly detection methods are perform excellently for pixel-level anomaly detection, relybased on statistics and image reconstruction strategies, where ing on the powerful computational and feature extraction
the breakthrough difficulty lies in how to design a reasonable capabilities of deep learning [52], [53], [54]. However, the
mathematical model as well as to construct a suitable dic- overfitting problem inevitably arises when detecting large
tionary. Further, these methods only utilize shallow features anomalies. The underlying reasons are mainly two: on the
to perform downstream tasks and have not yet explored deep one hand, anomaly detection is an unsupervised task, and
features, which are crucial for anomaly detection in complex large-target detection scenes lead to the fact that the netscenes. work training focuses on image reconstruction rather than on
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

anomaly detection. On the other hand, the network design recovery. In the decoder, a hybrid attention mechanism (local–
lacks physical significance and reliability, blending informa- middle–global and spatial–spectral) is designed to refine the
tion about different anomalies during the image reconstruction background during image recovery. Different from other fully
process. convolutional network-based hyperspectral anomaly detection
 methods, the design of the proposed SMCNet removes the
 negative impact of potential anomalies on the background
C. Current Challenges and Weaknesses
 reconstruction from the root, providing a simpler and more
 Currently, in addition to classical statistical methods, most effective solution.
of the mainstream anomaly detection methods are carried out The main innovative contributions of this work can be
using the idea of image reconstruction. In this context, how to summarized as follows.
successfully detect anomalies while completely reconstructing 1) Inspired by MAE, a new SMCNet is designed for
the background is a challenging objective. Existing hyperspec- hyperspectral anomaly detection, dedicated to learning
tral anomaly detection networks generally employ background an efficient representation of the complete background
guidance [41], [44], regularization constraints [37], [48], and reconstruction from a small amount of background samstatistical distribution assumptions [43] to suppress the recon- ples, which not only achieves an accurate reconstruction
struction of anomalies. However, in real-world applications, of the background but also highlights the salience of the
due to the limitations of sensor devices and the effects anomalies.
of varying illumination, complex and diverse backgrounds 2) To support the proposed framework, a potential anomaly
and anomalies do not exhibit highly distinctive spectral and masking strategy based on adaptive segmentation is
spatial differences. Specifically, sensor resolution makes the designed. Meanwhile, a matching sparse convolution is
edges of anomalies and backgrounds unclear, while changes employed in the encoder to guarantee accurate extraction
in illumination conditions cause spectral variability. In turn, of background features while reducing computational
sparse backgrounds behave consistently with anomalies in complexity.
a spatial sense. At this point, anomaly detection becomes 3) To boost background reconstruction, a sparse-inspired
extremely difficult when feeding the hyperspectral anomaly projection layer and a hybrid attention mechanism are
detection network with the entire image and thus eliminating developed. The former delicately exploits background
the negative impact of potential anomaly contamination on features to fill holes in the encoded map, while the latter
background reconstruction is essential. refines the background through multiscale (local–middle–
 Recently, the masked autoencoder (MAE) has demonstrated global) and multidimensional (spatial–spectral) feature
its ability to reconstruct complete images using a high pro- mining.
portion of missing data [55], providing a new avenue for
 The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
hyperspectral anomaly detection network design schemes. The
 Section II describes some related work. Section III proquestion is whether a small amount of background is indeed
 vides a detailed introduction of the newly proposed SMCNet.
sufficient to learn an effective representation of the complete
 Section IV introduces the experimental setup and gives an
image, thus eliminating anomalies while reconstructing the
 in-depth analysis of the obtained anomaly detection results.
background. In this respect, two fundamental issues naturally
 Section V concludes this article with some remarks.
arise.
 1) Since anomalous targets come in different shapes, sizes,
 and distributions, how to construct a valid mask to cover II. R ELATED W ORK
 potential anomalies? The proposed SMCNet method involves the principal con-
 2) Although the covering probability of the random mask cepts of two techniques, i.e., fully convolutional anomaly
 in MAE is extremely high (around 75%), the model sees detection and MAE.
 almost the entire image over multiple training sessions.
 However, the masks of potential anomalies are fixed. How A. Fully Convolutional Anomaly Detection
 to ensure a high-quality reconstruction of the background
 in this case? The fully convolutional anomaly detection method is an AEbased method, which is mainly classified into two categories
 With these two concerns in mind, in this work, the core according to the specific implementation process. The former
idea of MAE is introduced into fully convolutional networks, is the noise-to-image reconstruction process [36], i.e., the input
developing a new sparse-inspired masked convolutional net- is uniform noise N with the same size as the image Y, and
work (SMCNet) for hyperspectral anomaly detection. The the noise map is gradually approximated to the original map
novel SMCNet primarily consists of three intersupporting by encoder and decoder operations, i.e.,
components: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2) a sparse projection (
layer; and 3) a hierarchical decoder. With an adaptive potential Z = fen (N; W, b)
anomaly masking strategy, the encoder extracts multidimen-  (1)
 Ŷ = fde Z; Ŵ, b̂
sional features of the remaining background with the help of
sparse convolution. Rather than the commonly used positional where Z and Ŷ are the latent space feature and the reconembedding strategy, a novel sparse-inspired projection layer structed image, respectively. W and b are the hyperparameters
is built to populate the unencoded regions for complete image of the encoder fen , and Ŵ and b̂ are the hyperparameters of
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 Considering the particularities of hyperspectral anomaly
 detection, a new SMCNet is developed to efficiently reconstruct the background and detect anomalies. This section
 provides further details on the problem statement, network
 deployment, and loss function.

 A. Problem Statement
 The goal of fully convolutional-based hyperspectral
Fig. 1. Graphical illustration of the MAE. The gray patches of the input anomaly detection is to reconstruct the background and detect
are the masked regions, which retain the position information. The encoder anomalies by residuals. Inspired by MAE, our goal is to
operates on the visible patches to obtain hidden features, i.e., green patches.
Then, the hidden features and the mask tokens (gray patches) are fed into the
 mask out potential anomalies and rely on a small amount
decoder to reconstruct the image (blue patches). of background samples to reconstruct the image. Let Y ∈
 R H ×W ×B be the hyperspectral image, where H, W, and B
 are the height, width, and the number of bands, respectively.
the decoder fde . The reconstruction residual map between Y The above idea, then, can be concretely translated into the
and Ŷ is obtained to determine anomalies by the l2 -norm or following four formulas:
the Mahalanobis distance.  ∗
 The latter is the image-to-image reconstruction process, 
  Y = Mask(Y)
which differs from the first one because the encoder input  Z∗ = f (Y∗
 
 en unmasked ; W, b)
is the original image, as shown in the following equation. (3)
 
  Z = Z ∗
 + f (Y ∗
 masked )
The reconstruction is accomplished by feature squeezing and 
 Ŷ = f de (Z; Ŵb̂)
 
expansion operations, i.e.,
 Z = fen (Y; W, b). (2) corresponding to the four operations of masking, encoding,
 embedding, and decoding, respectively. Here, masked Y is
Nevertheless, the crucial problem to be solved is the same Y∗ , composed by Y∗unmasked and Y∗masked , which corresponds
for both parts, i.e., how to avoid anomaly reconstruction. to the green and gray areas in Fig. 1. Accordingly, Z∗ is
Low-rank embedding [56], no reference sampling [57], loss the hidden space feature of Y∗unmasked . Before decoding, the
guidance [58], and positive sample generation [59] provide function f embeds the masked region (combined with Z∗ )
limited mitigation of anomaly reconstruction, requiring the into Z. Although this implementation has been formulated and
exploration of more immediate and productive methods to specified, the following issues need to be considered at each
remove such anomalous contamination. stage for hyperspectral anomaly detection purposes.
 1) Masking: In the proposed method, anomalies in the
B. Masked Autoencoder hyperspectral image are expected to be covered, and thus,
 MAE is a scalable learning framework in computer vision the traditional random masking strategy is not applicable.
with excellent performance in self-supervised and unsuper- Besides, the shape, size, and distribution of the anomalous
vised tasks [55]. The basic idea is that images contain a targets are diverse and unknown. Therefore, a question
massive amount of redundant information and the original arises: how to mask the anomalies accurately?
image can be reconstructed based on small portions of the 2) Encoding: After masking the hyperspectral image, the
image. As illustrated in Fig. 1, MAE has two main designs, encoder is desired to operate on unmasked regions for
i.e., an asymmetric coding structure (based on the transformer background feature extraction. However, the input to the
framework) and a high percentage of mask rate. Specifically, fully CNN is a regular image, which will inevitably waste
a high percentage of masking operations are executed on the computation and affect accuracy if the mask portion is
image (e.g., 75%), and the encoder operates only on a subset filled with zeros and regular convolution is performed.
of the visible patches. Meanwhile, a lightweight decoder is Therefore, a question arises: how to extract background
deployed to reconstruct the original image from the latent features efficiently?
representations and mask tokens. 3) Embedding: To avoid introducing anomalous information
 Typically, after the MAE training is accomplished, the in the encoder, the masking strategy occludes part of
decoder is simply replaced to migrate to various down- the background. If conventional positional embedding is
stream tasks, such as classification, target detection, and video used to populate the mask region for the decoder, the
tracking. Given the success of MAE, its combination with background false alarm in the mask region will most
CNNs has recently been investigated, giving rise to network probably be caused. Hence, it is necessary to contemplate
architectures such as CovMAE [60], ConvNeXt V2 [61], embedding methods favoring background recovery.
and Spark [62], which provide strategies for self-supervised 4) Decoding: In any framework associated with MAE,
learning with CNNs. To the best of authors’ knowledge, despite the high percentage of masking strategies
there are no network architectures using MAEs for anomaly employed, the network tends to sense the full image
detection purposes. information as the number of training sessions increases.
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

Fig. 2. Architecture of the newly proposed SMCNet, which works to reconstruct the background of the image so that anomalies can be detected by the
residual map. First, the input image Y is gathered sparsely using superpixel segmentation and (4)–(6) to retain reliable background information. Then, the
masked image Y∗ is fed into a Unet framework, as shown in Fig. 4, in which the encoding stage is implemented by employing sparse convolution of the
ME library to extract hierarchical features of backgrounds E1 , E2 , E3 , and E4 . Before decoding, a projection strategy is devised to complement the masked
region of the hidden feature map E4 to generate D4 . During the decoding stage, D4 , regular 2-D CNN, and skip connections are used to obtain the decoding
feature maps D1 , D2 , and D3 , in which D1 is the preliminary background reconstruction map with low feature dimensions. After that, a background refinement
module composed of two feature extraction layers and a hybrid attention mechanism is deployed, as shown in Fig. 5, to recover the background Ŷ completely.

 However, the masking strategy is static in the proposed
 approach, which undoubtedly poses a challenge to the
 global background reconstruction. As a result, it is vital
 to ascertain how to refine the background at the decoding
 stage.

B. Network Deployment
 With the above considerations in mind, the proposed
SMCNet is deployed using the following parts: 1) adaptive
segmentation-based masking; 2) hierarchical sparse convolu- Fig. 3. (a) Regular CNN and (b) sparse CNN for a “holey hyperspectral
 image” with “empty parts.” The mask regions of the sparse CNN are filled
tional AE; 3) sparse-inspired projection layer; and 4) hybrid as blank areas, while the mask regions in the regular CNN are filled as
attention mechanism for background refinement. The overall gray areas to indicate the zero padding. The regular CNN will change the
network architecture is shown in Fig. 2. feature distribution, i.e., the black dashed regions in (a), with the increasing
 of convolutional layers, while the sparse CNN will keep the original feature
 1) Adaptive Segmentation-Based Masking: The masking distribution.
strategy intended for the hyperspectral anomaly detection task
consists of two stages: 1) to adaptively segment the image
into compact regions with similar features and 2) to identify
potential anomalous regions and mask them out. Among lies are considered: (case 1) the size of the anomaly is far
the adaptive segmentation algorithms, superpixel segmentation smaller than the superpixel and occupies a small portion of
exhibits superior flexibility and applicability in image process- it and (case 2) the size of the anomaly is greater than or
ing as a preprocessing procedure. Therefore, in this section, equal to the superpixel, occupying the entire superpixel or even
a superpixel segmentation method (simple linear iterative contaminating neighboring superpixels. Regarding the former
clustering) is employed to segment the hyperspectral image case, since the spectral distribution of the anomaly is signif-
Y into s1 , s2 , . . . , sn compact regions, where n is the number icantly different from that of the surrounding backgrounds,
of superpixels. the spectral standard deviation of all pixels of a superpixel
 For hyperspectral images containing anomalies, after seg- in case 1 is intuitively larger than that of the background
mentation, the number of background superpixels is dominant superpixel, while the spectral mean within the superpixel in
and highly correlated. Furthermore, the number of superpixels case 2 is intuitively far from that of the background superpixel.
containing anomalies is small and sparsely-distributed. Before Depending on this, an anomalous superpixel can be masked
masking, the following two cases regarding the size of anoma- out as follows:
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 4. Structure of the Unet framework by using sparse and regular convolution.

 regular CNN is the “holey hyperspectral image” with zero
 ( padding to keep the regular input in size. The input of the
 M(where(si )) = 1, case 1 or case 2
 (4) sparse CNN is only the unmasked regions of the “holey
 M(where(si )) = 0, otherwise hyperspectral image,” which is irregular in size. In this case,
where the regular CNN with zero padding not only interferes with the
 distribution of feature values but also extracts all the features
 case 1, std(si ) ∈ top n2 sortdescend (std(s j ) j=1 )
 n
 
 covered by the convolution kernel, resulting in an inflated
 n
 1X feature map. Sparse convolution, on the other hand, skips the
 ) mean(s j ) ≥ std mean(s j )nj=1
 
 case 2, mean(s i −
 masked regions in the hole feature map and focuses on the

 n j=1
 unmasked regions, thus preserving the background distribution
 (5) and ratio in the input image with an efficient computation. The
and M is the mask tensor with the same size as Y. Here, the entire sparse MAE is structured using a hierarchical layout,
locations in M equal to 1 denote the masked region, and the as shown in Fig. 4, where the encoder is implemented using
masked image Y∗ can be obtained as follows: the sparse convolution of the ME library, and the decoder
 is implemented using regular convolution. Specifically, the
 Y∗ = Y ◦ (1 − M) (6) encoder consists of a shallow feature extraction layer E1 and
 three downsampling feature extraction layers Ei , i ∈ {2, 3, 4}
where ◦ is the Hadamard product, and 1 is the tensor where (
all elements are 1 with the same size to M. In this case, the E1 = E1 (Y∗ ), if i = 1
pixels with zeros of Y∗ are the masked regions and others are (7)
 Ei = Ei (Ei−1 ), if i ∈ {2, 3, 4}.
the unmasked regions. Fig. 2 depicts the specific operation of
masking, where the blank parts are the obscured areas. After (7), the spatial resolutions of the encoded features E1 ,
 2) Hierarchical Sparse Convolutional AE: Notwithstanding E2 , E3 , and E4 are H × W, (H/2) × (W/2), (H/4) × (W/4),
its ability to handle irregular inputs (with variable lengths), the and (H/8) × (W/8), and the corresponding feature dimensions
original MAE is not suitable for irregularly shaped superpixels, are 8, 16, 32, and 64, respectively.
leaving the fully convolutional structure as a natural alterna- In the decoder, except for the upsampling hierarchy (symtive. In addition, hierarchical structures have been recognized metric to the encoder), like the Unet [64], skip connections
as fundamental and necessary in computer vision tasks, allow- are inserted between the encoder and the decoder, transmitting
ing the network to handle objects with different sizes by the background feature information extracted by the encoder
extracting scale-invariant features, especially for target detec- directly to the decoder
tion purposes. Exploiting this idea, a hierarchical structure is
 (
 Di = P(Ei ), if i = 4
introduced into the fully convolutional encoder and decoder to (8)
 Di = Di+1 (Di+1 + Ei+1 ), if i ∈ {3, 2, 1}
extract multiscale background features.
 Nevertheless, as discussed in Section III-A, popular convo- where P is a projection layer for filling in holes in sparse
lution methods such as regular convolution, dilated convolu- features as specified in Section III-B3 and Di is the decoder
tion, and deformable convolution do not adapt to a “holey layer with regular convolution for handling dense feature
image” structure. Fortunately, a 3-D “holey hyperspectral maps. Similar to the encoder, the spatial resolutions of the
image” is extremely similar to a sparse point cloud in 3-D decoded features D4 , D3 , D2 , and D1 are (H/8) × (W/8),
tasks, where well-established sparse convolutions such as the (H/4) × (W/4), (H/2) × (W/2), and H × W, respectively.
Minkowski engine (ME) framework [63] have been developed It is noteworthy that the final output of the decoder is D1 ,
for mining features of visible data. Inspired by this, the with a spatial size of H × W and a feature dimension of
standard convolution in the encoder is replaced by a sparse 8. The background refinement module in Section III-B4 will
convolution in ME as well as the corresponding normalization further restore D1 to the size of the input image to complete
and activation layers. As shown in Fig. 3, the input of the the reconstruction, i.e., Ŷ.
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

Fig. 5. Background refinement framework with local–middle–global hybrid attention. (a) and (b) Simple examples of generating patches for middle and
global attentions, respectively.

 3) Sparse-Inspired Projection Layer: Between the encoder a linear layer is adopted to finish the projection of E4 to
of sparse convolution and the decoder of dense convolution, D4 . Let E′4 be the 2-D unfolding of E4 with the size of
the projection layer is set up to tackle the mask region to 64 × n m and D′4 is the 2-D unfolding of D4 with the size
generate dense features. In previous MAE-inspired networks, of 64 × ((H/8) × (W/8)), where n m is the number of feature
positional embedding is conventionally used to fill in the vectors after masking, that is,
holes in the sparse feature maps as a straightforward and
 D′4 = linear E′4 ; Wp
 
 (9)
convenient method. Moreover, most of these networks are
solely trained by the random masking strategy to extract where Wp is the projection matrix with the size of n m ×
desirable features for various downstream tasks, but not to ((H/8) × (W/8)). Through (9), the masked region will be
reconstruct the image. In contrast, the proposed SMCNet: embedded with background information, which encourages
1) dedicates itself to image reconstruction and focuses on the recovery of the background as well as the identification
the background rather than anomalies; 2) designs a masking of anomalies, which is optimally applicable to hyperspectral
strategy for the hyperspectral anomaly detection task, i.e., anomaly detection tasks.
covering potential anomalies as much as possible; and 3) However, despite the fact that the downsampling and maskemploys a static masking strategy rather than a dynamic one, ing strategies filter out effective background features, this
resulting in invariable input features. This implies that the magnitude is still sizable and completely outperforms the
projection layer and the decoder are crucial for the anomaly overcomplete dictionary. According to the golden cornerstone
detection performance, supporting both the downstream and in sparse representation, a small number of bases can achieve
the reconstruction tasks. a compact and efficient representation of the data and promote
 Given the complexity of the application scenario, the model robustness. Besides, research has shown that complex
masked regions inevitably cover up some background pixels neural network structures not only bring in numerous paramwhile obscuring potential anomalies. Therefore, at the pro- eters to optimize but are also prone to over-fitting, whereas
jection layer, a differential approach to the background and model pruning can effectively improve the inference speed
anomalies of the masked region is necessary instead of using and the generalization ability of the model. Therefore, in the
positional embedding, which is prone to cause false alarms. projection layer, we adopt a sparse-inspired regularization to
Because the similarity between natural objects is higher than constrain the projection matrix as follows:
that between natural and artificial objects, a sparse-inspired
 D′4 = linear E′4 ; Wp s.t min Wp l
 
 (10)
projection layer is designed motivated by the traditional
representation learning-based hyperspectral anomaly detection where l can be the Frobenius norm or the l1 -norm of a matrix.
method. Hence, the effective representation of the background During the code implementation, the fully connected layer
extracted by the encoder can be considered as a dictionary, is employed to complete the projection from E′4 to D′4 , and
while the background of the masked region can be approxi- Wp is the corresponding weight matrix. Subtly, the projection
mated by this dictionary. At the same time, the background layer can be understood as a representation process in a
underlying the anomalous location is approximated without sparse representation model, where E′4 can be considered as a
introducing anomalous information. In our implementation, dictionary extracted from the background and D′4 is a linear
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

combination of the features in E′4 with the corresponding transformer computation, i.e., leading to two scales of attention
representation coefficient Wp . To this end, the regularization modules.
constraint to Wp will make the representation stable and Meanwhile, to enhance channel and spatial interactions and
reliable, and D′4 only contains the background information. transmit spatial and channel information in a tight mode,
 4) Hybrid Attention Mechanism for Background Refine- a spatial-channel attention module is constructed for middle
ment: With respect to the popular transformer mechanism, attention and global attention, simultaneously, thus mining
fully convolutional networks ignore spatial and channel the comprehensive spatial and channel information. As shown
interactions, which are valuable for further background recon- in Fig. 6, on the spatial interaction, the input feature Fin ∈
struction in hyperspectral anomaly detection. An interesting R H W ×C is first linearly projected three times to obtain the
improvement is a hybrid design using a transformer and query, key, and value metrics Qs ∈ R H W ×C , Ks ∈ R H W ×C , and
convolutional layers, either explicitly or implicitly [65], [66]. Vs ∈ R H W ×C , respectively. Then, the dot product of Qs and
To this end, we combine convolutional layers and hybrid Ks is computed and normalized to obtain a spatial attention
attention mechanisms in the decoding phase to refine the map of size H W × H W . Finally, the spatial interaction results
background features to generate Ŷ from D1 are obtained by weighted summation of the spatial attention
 map and Vs as follows:
 Ŷ = BR(D1 ) (11) (
 Qs = Lq (Fin ), Ks = Lk (Fin ), Vs = Lv (Fin )
 (12)
where BR is the background refinement module. As shown in Ys = As (Qs , Ks , Vs ) = SoftMax(Qs KTs ) · Vs
Fig. 5, the designed background refinement module includes where Lq , Lk , and Lv are the linear projection operations, As
two feature extractors, a local convolution block, a middle is the spatial attention operation, and Ys is the corresponding
attention block, and a global attention block, which endows output. On the channel interaction, Qc ∈ RC×H W , Kc ∈
the network with full-scale (local/middle/global scale) feature RC×H W , and Vc ∈ RC×H W can be derived from two alternative
extraction capability to mine richer information for back- means for subsequent channel attention computation, one is a
ground refinement with higher information entropy. Among a linear projection onto FFN(Ys ) and the other is a direct
them, the feature extraction layer is composed of a 3 × 3 con- rotation of Qs , Ks , and Vs to obtain the transpositions. Here,
volution kernel and an enhanced channel attention module. the first strategy is adopted. As shown in Fig. 6, the size of
Local convolution is implemented by the lightweight MBConv the channel attention map is C × C and the size of Yc is
module [67], while middle attention and global attention are C × H W . The spatial-channel interaction Ysc can be obtained
implemented in a subtle way. by counter-rotating Yc and adding it to the spatial interaction
 As shown in Fig. 5, middle attention works to compute result as follows:
attention scores between pixels within a patch, while global
 Ŷs = FFN(Ys )
 
attention works to compute attention scores between pixels 
 
 Qc = Lq (Ŷs ), Kc = Lk (Ŷs ), Vc = Lv (Ŷs )
 
 
located at the same position within all patches. Although (13)
 c = Ac (Qc , Kc , Vc ) = SoftMax(Qc Kc ) · Vc
 T
the attention domains of middle and global attentions are 
  Y
 
completely different, they are realized under the same window 
 Ysc = R−1 (Yc ) + Ŷs
size. Specifically, for H × W feature maps with the window
size of P × P, middle attention divides the image into where R−1 is the inverse rotation, Ac is the spectral attention
(H/P) × (W/P) nonoverlapping patches with a spatial size operation, and FFN is a feed-forward network, as shown in
of P × P. In the global attention module (without any extra Fig. 5. Briefly, we compute the attention maps corresponding
parameters), the image is divided into P × P nonoverlapping to the spatial and channel orientations through sequential
patches with a spatial size of (H/P)×(W/P). In other words, matrix operations and rotation matrix operations, in which
the window size in middle attention is the spatial size of spectral–spatial information integration is elegantly achieved.
the patch to be divided, while the window size in global
attention is the number of patches to be divided in the row C. Loss Function
and column. Even though the sizes of their input features are In existing methods, the mean square error or the l1 -norm
scaled to C × ((H/P) × (W/P)) × (P × P) in the attention between Y and Ŷ is commonly taken as a loss function to
map computation, the implied meanings are quite different, guide the network training. From a physical meaning perspecleading to different levels of attention. Take the image with tive, anomalies are sparse and noise is uniformly distributed in
a size of 8 × 8 and a window size of 4 × 4 as an example, images, so the l1 -norm is more suitable for anomaly detection
as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). In the middle attention module, tasks
the image is divided into four patches with a spatial size
of 4 × 4, and the attention maps between pixels in a patch L = Y − Ŷ 1 . (14)
are computed. In the global attention module, the image is
 Moreover, inspired by the idea of sparsity, in the projection
divided into 16 patches with a spatial size of 2 × 2, and thus,
 layer, we impose sparse constraints on the weight parameters
the attention maps between pixels at the same position in all
 of the projection layer; thus, the loss function can be finally
the patches are computed. In brief, both can be realized by
 expressed as
splitting the input features into nonoverlapping patches under
the same parameters, which are only arranged differently in the L = Y − Ŷ 1 + λ W p F (15)
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

Fig. 6. Graphical illustration of spatial-channel attention.

where λ is a tradeoff parameter. After the training of the A. Datasets
network, the anomaly map can be computed as follows:
 Hyperspectral anomaly detection performance is closely
 rX
 2 linked to the characterization of the dataset. For this reason,
 Y − Ŷ j,i .
 
 E = Y − Ŷ :,i = (16) six different types of data are selected in this study, including
 2 j
 subpixel anomalies, small anomalies, and planar anomalies.
The detailed pseudo-code of SMCNet is summarized in Furthermore, these datasets involve both small and large
Algorithm 1. scenes. A brief summary of the selected datasets is shown
 in Table I, and the details are given as follows.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code of SMCNet
 1) HYDICE Urban: The first selected dataset was taken by
Input: the Hyperspectral Digital Imagery Collection Experiment
 Hyperspectral dataset: Y (HYDICE) sensor over an urban area in August 1995, and
 Parameters: λ it contains a total of 80 × 100 pixels with 175 effective
 Initialization: lr = 1e − 2, wd = 1e − 6 spectral bands. The spatial resolution is 1.56 m and the
 1: Sparse gathering by superpixel segmentation and Eqs. (4-
 spectral resolution is 10 nm, where the anomalous target
 6) to obtain Y∗ roofs and automobiles are presented at the subpixel and
 2: for each epoch do
 pixel level.
 3: Extract encoded hierarchical feature maps E1 , E2 , E3 , 2) ABU-B4: The second selected dataset was taken by
 and E4 by Eq. (7) the Reflective Optics Spectrographic Imaging System
 4: Complement the masked region of E4 to generate D4 (ROSIS) sensor with a spatial resolution of 1.3 m over the
 by Eq. (10) city center of Pavia, comprising a total of 150×150 pixels
 5: Recover hierarchical feature maps D3 , D2 , and D1 by and 102 effective spectral bands. As shown in the figure
 Eq. (8) of Table I, the selected subimage is from the ABU dataset
 6: Refine background by Eq. (11) in [68], in which the background mainly consists of a
 7: Train the network by minimizing Eq. (15) river, a bridge, vegetation, and bare ground, where the
 8: end for
 vehicles on the bridges are regarded as small anomalous
 9: Save the SMCNet model with the optimal parameters
 targets.
10: Run 3-6 with the above optimal parameters to obtain Ŷ
 3) San Diego I and II: The third and fourth selected
11: Compute the anomaly map E by Eq. (16)
 datasets come from two different subimages of the same
Output: hyperspectral image. They were collected by the Air-
 Anomaly map matrix: E borne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
 sensor with a spatial resolution of 3.5 m over the San
 Diego airport in CA, USA, and both images consist of
 100 × 100 pixels with 186 effective spectral bands. The
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
 anomalous targets in both images are three airplanes, but
 In this section, comprehensive experiments are conducted the difference is that the airplanes in San Diego I are
on six hyperspectral anomaly detection datasets using ten smaller than those in San Diego II.
comparison methods to evaluate the performance of the pro- 4) Gulfport: The fifth selected dataset was taken by the
posed SMCNet. The details of the datasets, evaluation criteria, AVIRIS sensor on July 7, 2010, over the airport in
comparison methods and parameter setting, ablation study, and Gulfport, MS, USA. It contains 100 × 100 pixels and
anomaly detection performances are as follows. 191 effective spectral bands, and has a spatial resolution
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE I
B RIEF S UMMARY OF THE S ELECTED DATASETS . H ERE , “ SPA” R EFERS TO THE S PATIAL R ESOLUTION AND “ SPE ” R EFERS TO THE S PECTRAL R ESOLUTION

 of 3.4 m. The anomalous targets are similar to those in the detector’s performance is superior to that of a random
 the San Diego scenes, with three airplanes, one large and guess, and the closer the AUC is to 1, the better the detector’s
 two small airplanes [68]. performance.
 5) CRi: The sixth selected dataset was taken by the Nuance The box plot is a visualization tool for showing the data
 Cri sensor, with a spectral resolution of 10 nm and distribution. In anomaly detection, the background and anoma-
 46 effective spectral bands. Unlike the first five datasets, lies in the anomaly map are usually plotted as two boxes
 this image is larger and contains 400 × 400 image pixels. to observe their distributions; the larger the interval between
 Relatively speaking, this image has a simple ground the background box and the anomaly box, the higher the
 object composition with only grass and ten anomalous separation between the anomalies and the background, and the
 target rocks. shorter the background box indicates a better reconstruction of
 the background.
B. Evaluation Criteria
 Besides the anomaly detection maps, we employed the C. Comparison Methods and Parameter Setting
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the area under Ten competitors, including deep and nondeep methods,
the curve (AUC), and the box plot to assess the anomaly are considered to validate the effectiveness of the proposed
detection performance of all the considered methods. network. The details are as follows.
 The ROC curve is a common tool for evaluating the perfor- 1) Nondeep Competitors: RX [14] is the most fundamenmance of a target detection model, which draws the detector’s tal and representative benchmark algorithm for hyperspectral
performance at different thresholds with the true positive rate anomaly detection (without any parameters). Kernel isolated
(TPR) as the vertical coordinate and the false positive rate forest detector (KIFD) [69], which performs anomaly detection
(FPR) as the horizontal coordinate. In other words, the TPR by constructing isolated forests, is an emerging statistic-based
represents the proportion of correctly detected anomalies to hyperspectral anomaly detection method, and its experimental
all anomalous samples, while the FPR denotes the ratio of parameters are set as indicated by the authors. CRD [19] is
the number of background samples incorrectly detected as a classical hyperspectral anomaly detection method based on
anomalies to the number of all background samples, computed representation learning. In the experiments, the dual window
as follows: size for CRD ranges from {(15, 13), (15, 11), (15, 9), (15,
 TP FP 7), (15, 5), (15, 3)} and λ is fixed to 1e-6. PTA [25] is
 TPR = , FPR = (17)
 TN FN a hyperspectral anomaly detection method based on tensor
where TP denotes the number of detected anomalous sam- decomposition; the parameters µ, α, β, and τ are set in the
ples, TN denotes the total number of anomalous samples, range of {1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1, 1e0, 1e1, 1e2, 1e3, 1e4} and
FP denotes the number of background samples detected as the rank is set below 20.
anomalies, and FN denotes the total number of background 2) Deep Competitors: Robust graph AE detector (RGAE)
samples. [37] and guided AE detector (GAED) [70] are AE-based deep
 The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, which is used learning methods, where the former uses graph regularization
to quantitatively evaluate the performance of the detector. The to constrain hidden features to weaken the representation of
value of AUC ranges from 0 to 1, where 0.5 means a random anomalies, and the latter uses spectral similarity constraints to
detector, i.e., the performance of the model is comparable to guide the generation of hidden features. In the experiments,
that of a random guess. An AUC greater than 0.5 means that the regularization tradeoff parameter of RGAE is set in the
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

 TABLE II
 O PTIMAL PARAMETERS S ETTING OF THE C ONSIDERED M ETHODS FOR S IX DATASETS

 TABLE III
 A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE R EGULARIZATION T ERM FOR THE S IX
 C ONSIDERED DATASETS . I–VI A RE HYDICE U RBAN , ABU-B4, S AN
 D IEGO I, S AN D IEGO II, G ULFPORT, AND CR I , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE M ASKING
 S TRATEGY FOR THE S IX C ONSIDERED DATASETS

Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis of SMCNet to parameter λ.

range of {1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1}. Auto-AD [36] is the most
representative fully convolutional anomaly detection network,
which achieves anomaly detection by recovering the hyper- 1e1, 1e0, 1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5, 1e-6, 0}. Parametric
spectral image from the random noise map. PDBSNet [40] and analysis experiments are performed on all datasets using
BockNet [39] are two excellent works based on no reference- SMCNet, as shown in Fig. 7. It can be observed that, for
spot net, dedicated to suppressing anomalous recovery through the CRi data, the accuracy of SMCNet shows an increasing
local masking strategies. In the experiments, the factor-train and then decreasing trend with the decrease of λ, reaching its
and factor-test of PDBSNet are set in the range of {1, 2, 3, 4, maximum value at λ = 1e − 4.
5, 6}, the window size of BockNet is set in the range of {1, 3, For the San Diego I data, the accuracy of SMCNet showed
5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, and the learning rate (lr) for both PDBSNet a slow decreasing trend with the decrease of λ and then
and BockNet is set in {1e-6, 1e-5, 1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1}. The remained stable. For the other datasets, the accuracy of
gated transformer for hyperspectral anomaly detection (GT- SMCNet exhibits small fluctuations with the decrease of λ.
HAD) [49] is the latest work that introduces the transformer In the experimental results presented in this article, λ is set
into anomaly detection, enabling differential reconstruction to 1 for San Diego I and II and Gulfport data, and λ is set to
of backgrounds and anomalies through a gating device. The 1e − 4 for HYDICE Urban, ABU-B4, and CRi data.
parameters of GAED, Auto-AD, and GT-HAD are set to the In further analysis, the setting of λ may be related to
values recommended by the authors. The optimal parameters the background’s complexity and the background’s similarity
for the considered methods are listed in Table II, except for to the anomaly in the image. The CRi data, despite the
RX, Auto-AD, and GT-HAD without tuning parameters. simplicity of the background, have a high similarity between
 3) Proposed SMCNet: In the proposed SMCNet, the trade- the background and the target, resulting in a SMCNet perforoff parameter λ of sparse-inspired term is set in the range {1e2, mance that is sensitive to λ. In practical applications, λ can
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

take the empirical value of 1 for the scenes with complex while a random masking strategy can weaken the possibility of
background and 1e − 4 for the scenes with simple background anomaly contamination (adaptive masking can fundamentally
or high similarity between the background and anomaly. Note address the problem). However, for HYDICE Urban, ABUthat the case λ = 0 is also considered and the AUCs of B4, and CRi data, the random masking strategy is detrimental.
SMCNet with/without the regularization constraint are listed in There are two main reasons. One is that, in the HYDICE Urban
Table III, which indicates the effectiveness of regularization. and ABU-B4 datasets, the interference of pixel-level anomalies
In addition, during the optimization, the Adam optimizer is on the background reconstruction is tiny, and random masking
adopted, with a learning rate of 1e-2 and a weight decay of will lose more valuable background information. The other is
1e-6. The number of training epochs is up to 500 (dataset VI) that, in the CRi dataset, due to the high similarity between
or 1000 (others). the background and anomalies, random masking weakens both
 Regarding the hardware and software environment, for anomalies and the background simultaneously. In comparfairness, all nondeep learning methods are implemented in the ison, the adaptive masking strategy can implement masks
MATLAB 2016b platform on a laptop equipped with Intel according to different anomaly detection scenarios, which has
Core i7 CPU and 8-GB RAM, and deep learning methods are better generalization ability and competitiveness. Moreover,
implemented in the PyTorch framework on a laptop equipped the comparison results between SMCNet without projection
with Intel Core i7 CPU, 32-GB RAM, and NVIDIA GeForce and SMCNet dramatically demonstrate the importance of the
RTX 3070 GPUs. sparse-inspired projection layer for SMCNet, especially for
 large-target anomaly detection scenarios.
 2) Hybrid Attention for Background Refinement: Our
D. Ablation Experiment
 SMCNet is designed with hybrid attention in the decoder,
 Three indispensable components determine the experimental refining the background reconstruction by extracting the delperformance of our newly designed SMCNet: 1) the adaptive icate spatial and spectral features of the hyperspectral image.
masking strategy; 2) the sparse-inspired projection layer; and To validate the effectiveness of this module, we designed four
3) the hybrid attention for the background refinement module. groups of comparative experiments using SMCNet for the con-
This section will discuss the performance and impact of these sidered datasets as follows and calculated the corresponding
three components in detail via ablation experiments. AUCs (see Fig. 8).
 1) Adaptive Masking Strategy and Sparse-Inspired Projec- 1) Spectral (spe) and Spatial (spa) Attention: The former
tion Layer: Inspired by MAE in self-supervised deep learning, retains spectral attention both in the middle and global
we consider adopting a masking strategy to cover potential attention modules, while the latter retains spatial attention
anomalies, eliminating the possibility of anomaly contami- both in the middle and global attention modules, and the
nation from the source. However, the generalized random local attention module remains the same.
masking strategy neglects the specificity of anomaly detection 2) Local, Middle, and Global: Only one scale of attenapplications. Thus, we further design an adaptive masking tion module is employed in SMCNet, i.e., local attention
strategy as well as a matching sparse-inspired projection module, middle attention module, or global attention
layer. To verify its effectiveness, we devise four experimental module.
schemes for all datasets using SMCNet as follows and com- 3) Mix 1, Mix 2, and Mix 3: Hybrid attention with two
pute the corresponding AUCs as shown in Table IV. scales, where mix 1 is the combination of the local and
 1) Without Mask: The input is the original hyperspectral the middle attention, mix 2 is the combination of local
 image Y. Accordingly, the hierarchical coding phase uses and global attention, and mix 3 is the combination of the
 regular 2-D convolution instead of sparse convolution, middle and the global attention.
 and the projection layer is removed. The remaining 4) All: The full SMCNet.
 network architecture is the same as that of SMCNet. As shown in Fig. 8, in the first group of comparison
 2) Random Mask: The original hyperspectral image is parti- experiments, it can be observed that spatial attention is more
 tioned into nonoverlapping 5×5 patches. Then, following important than spectral attention for the HYDICE Urban,
 MAE’s behavior, these patches are randomly masked in Gulfport, and CRi datasets, while spectral attention is slightly
 each epoch using a 75% masking rate. In addition, the more important than spatial attention for the San Diego I
 projection layer is modified to positional embedding, and and II and ABU-B4 datasets. In the second and third groups
 the remaining network architecture is the same as that of of comparison experiments, it can be observed that, for difthe proposed SMCNet. ferent anomaly detection scenarios, different scaled attention
 3) Without proj: The sparse-inspired projection layer in modules contribute to background reconstruction in differ-
 SMCNet is replaced with positional embedding. ent degrees. Relatively speaking, for datasets with complex
 By comparing SMCNet without mask, SMCNet with ran- backgrounds (HYDICE Urban, ABU-B4, San Diego I and II,
dom mask, and SMCNet in Table IV, it can be observed that and CRi), the spatial and spectral features extracted by the
the masking strategy is significantly effective for large-target middle and global attention modules are more conducive to
detection scenarios (San Diego I, San Diego II, and Gulfport), background reconstruction. Therefore, in practical unknown
where the adaptive mask outperforms the random mask. This and complex application scenarios, the multiscale spatial and
is consistent with our intuitive reasoning that large targets are spectral features not only improve the anomaly detection
more likely to negatively affect background reconstruction, accuracy but also enhance the generalization ability.
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

Fig. 8. Comparative results of ablation experiments on hybrid attention for the six considered datasets. (a) HYDICE Urban. (b) ABU-B4. (c) San Diego I.
(d) San Diego II. (e) Gulfport. (f) CRi.

Fig. 9. Anomaly maps produced by the considered detectors on six datasets. From top to bottom: (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San
Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and (f) CRi.

E. Anomaly Detection Results where the best and second best values are highlighted in
 In Sections IV-E1–IV-E4, the anomaly detection results bold and underlined formats, respectively. Along with this,
obtained by the ten aforementioned detectors on the six a comprehensive analysis was carried out according to the
considered datasets are discussed. First, the anomaly detection results of each evaluation indicator.
results of each detector are displayed in Fig. 9, and the box 1) Anomaly Maps: From a visual perspective, classical
plots are shown in Fig. 10 for qualitative analysis. Then, the methods such as RX and CRD largely fail to highlight
ROC curves are plotted in Fig. 11, and the corresponding AUC the accurate location of large anomalies, as shown in
values are tabulated in Table V for quantitative evaluation, Fig. 9(c)–(f). This is particularly noticeable in the San Diego I
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 10. Box plots of the considered detectors on six datasets: (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and (f) CRi.

 TABLE V
 AUC AND P ROCESSING T IME ( S ) OF THE C ONSIDERED M ETHODS W HEN P ROCESSING THE S IX C ONSIDERED DATASETS

and CRi datasets. In contrast, the detection of small anomalies in capturing anomalies in small-target anomaly detection sce-
(HYDICE Urban and ABU-B4) all proceed normally, albeit narios (HYDICE Urban and ABU-B4); thus, it is unable to
with varying degrees of background interference. As advanced perform properly in large-target anomaly detection scenarios,
versions, the latest representatives of traditional methods as shown in Fig. 9(c)–(f), in which anomaly detection maps
(KIFD and PTA) provide superior detection of anomalies, are full of noise. The anomaly maps of GT-HAD (motivated by
both for large and small targets, but with slightly infe- the transformer) are severely patchy, which mainly arises from
rior background suppression (with KIFD exhibiting lower the fact that the method operates on nonoverlapping patches
antinoise performance). The primary reason is that both meth- without edge processing. AE-driven RGAE and GAED work
ods implement anomaly detection with decomposition-based properly for most of the datasets, but the limited spatial
ideas, focusing on the prominence of anomalies and ignoring information restricts the performance of these methods with
background suppression. In comparison, deep learning-driven large targets and complex scenes, which is especially obvious
anomaly detection methods (RGAE, GAED, PDBSNet, Bock- in HYDICE Urban, San Diego I, and Gulfport scenes. It is
Net, GT-HAD, and SMCNet) not only emphasize the exact noteworthy to highlight that the anomaly maps of PDBSNet,
locations of anomalies but also suppress the background BockNet, and SMCNet are similar, especially in HYDICE
better, except for the Auto-AD. In this regard, Auto-AD is Urban, ABU-B4, and San Diego II datasets. This is mainly
equipped with a fully convolutional structure and specializes because they both use a masking strategy to suppress anomaly
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

Fig. 11. ROC curves for the considered detectors on six datasets. (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and
(f) CRi.

recovery, the only difference is that the PDBSNet and BockNet and CRi data, all of the competitors are not able to distinguish
use a local masking strategy, while the proposed SMCNet the anomalies from the background accurately due to the high
uses a global masking strategy. And the effect of the two similarity between the background and the anomalies. In conshielding strategies is significantly different for the scenarios trast, all the competitors work normally in the HYDICE Urban,
containing small backgrounds, as shown in Fig. 9(c), (e), ABU-B4, San Diego, and Gulfport datasets. In particular, for
and (f). PDBSNet and BockNet with local masking strategy all considered datasets, KIFD and PTA invariably highlight
can suppress background better, but at the same time weaken anomalies and separate out the background despite their weak
the anomalies. While SMCNet with global masking strategy background suppression performance, which is compatible
can highlight the anomalies better, but is accompanied by with the visualization of anomaly maps. Moreover, as shown
a certain degree of false alarms. This is because the global in Fig. 10(b), (d), and (e), deep learning methods (RGAE,
masking strategy can easily mask small backgrounds although GAED, PDBSNet, BockNet, GT-HAD, and SMCNet) tend to
the background refinement module can alleviate this problem, accurately separate the anomalies from the background and
whereas the local masking strategy has difficulty in suppress- suppress the background more effectively when compared to
ing backgrounds and highlighting anomalies at the same time traditional methods. It is remarkable that these two aspects
due to the fixed-size parameters. In contrast, it can be seen that of the novel SMCNet method’s performance are impressive
the proposed SMCNet is capable of accurately highlighting among all competitors.
the locations of anomalies under the constraints of sparse 3) Anomaly Detection Accuracy: To emphasize the differconvolution and sparse mapping. ences in the quantitative performance of each competitor, the
 2) Separation of Background and Anomalies: In the box ROC curves for each dataset appropriately scaled are provided
plot, we focus on the degree of separation between back- in Fig. 11. As it can be seen, the proposed SMCNet is
ground and anomalies and on the suppression degree of the remarkably competitive in Gulfport and CRi datasets, conbackground, where a method achieving both properties is sistently leading the other contenders in detection rate as the
considered to be optimal. From a holistic perspective, the false alarm rate grows. For the other datasets, the SMCNet
performance of each competitor in different datasets varies method performs similarly to several excellent competitors, but
significantly, which is mostly attributed to the fact that the still outperforms them by a narrow margin, as seen from the
degree of background suppression is closely related to the AUCs listed in Table V. Moreover, it can be observed that the
complexity of the background, while the separation degree of traditional method CRD, as well as the deep learning methods
the background and the anomalies is linked to their similarity. PDBSNet and BockNet, is more competitive than the other
As shown in Fig. 10, for the ABU-B4 and CRi data, most methods although the novel SMCNet method is still better.
of the competitors can suppress the background satisfactorily In terms of generalization performance over the considered
due to the simplicity of the background. For the San Diego I datasets, the performance ranking of each competitor can be
5535317 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

established as SMCNet > PDBSNet > BockNet > CRD [4] S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A tutorial overview of anomaly
> GAED > GT-HAD > KIFD > PTA > RGAE > RX detection in hyperspectral images,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag.,
 vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 5–28, Jul. 2010.
> Auto-AD, where the proposed SMCNet is significantly [5] B. Du, R. Zhao, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A spectral–spatial based local
outperforming the other competitors. summation anomaly detection method for hyperspectral images,” Signal
 4) Summary: From our qualitative and quantitative analy- Process., vol. 124, pp. 115–131, Jul. 2016.
 [6] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
ses, it can be concluded that CRD exhibits better anomaly anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
detection capacity than other traditional methods. In contrast, Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
the deep learning-driven methods achieve a superior back- [7] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Beyond background feature
ground suppression effect, which cannot be separated from the extraction: An anomaly detection algorithm inspired by slowly varying
 signal analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
support of their feature mining ability and powerful learning pp. 1757–1774, Mar. 2016.
capability. Remarkably, the performance of fully convolu- [8] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
tional Auto-AD varies significantly for small- and large-target A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
 Mar. 2022.
anomaly detection scenarios, mainly because the anomalous [9] Y. Xu, L. Zhang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
features are not eliminated in the background reconstruction based on machine learning: An overview,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
process, which is critical for large-target detection purposes. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 3351–3364, 2022.
 [10] C.-I. Chang and S.-S. Chiang, “Anomaly detection and classification
To solve this shortcoming, the designed SMCNet employs an for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 40,
adaptive masking strategy and a matched sparse fully convo- no. 6, pp. 1314–1325, Jun. 2002.
lutional network to mine the background features, and then [11] X. Tao, M. E. Paoletti, Z. Wu, J. M. Haut, P. Ren, and A. Plaza,
 “An abundance-guided attention network for hyperspectral unmixing,”
reconstructs the image for superior anomaly identification; IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5505414.
meanwhile, the background refinement module enhances the [12] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A robust background
effective representation of the background, thus suppressing it regression based score estimation algorithm for hyperspectral anomaly
 detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 122, pp. 126–144,
and making the proposed SMCNet method very competitive Dec. 2016.
among fully convolutional anomaly detection networks. [13] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
 a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 V. C ONCLUSION Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
 In this article, a new SMCNet is developed for hyperspectral [14] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
 optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
anomaly detection. It consists of three mutually supportive Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
parts: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2) a sparse projection layer; [15] H. Kwon, S. Z. Der, and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Adaptive anomaly detection
and 3) a hierarchical decoder. Among them, the encoder using subspace separation for hyperspectral imagery,” Opt. Eng., vol. 42,
 no. 11, pp. 3342–3351, 2003.
extracts pure and effective background features by an adaptive [16] D. W. J. Stein, S. G. Beaven, L. E. Hoff, E. M. Winter, A. P. Schaum,
anomaly masking strategy and sparse convolution. The and A. D. Stocker, “Anomaly detection from hyperspectral imagery,”
sparse-inspired projection layer suppresses anomalies while IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 58–69, Jan. 2002.
 [17] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
promoting background representation by utilizing background anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
features to fill the uncoded region. In the decoder, the designed Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
hybrid attention mechanisms (local–middle–global and [18] A. Banerjee, P. Burlina, and C. Diehl, “A support vector method
spatial–spectral) extract multiscale and multidimensional fea- for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 2282–2291, Aug. 2006.
tures to further refine the background. The design of SMCNet [19] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
radically eliminates the negative impact of potential anomalies anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
on the background reconstruction. Extensive experiments on pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
 [20] M. Vafadar and H. Ghassemian, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral
six datasets show that SMCNet outperforms other state-of-the- imagery using modified collaborative representation,” IEEE Geosci.
art methods. Nonetheless, SMCNet still has an unsolved prob- Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–581, Apr. 2018.
lem that the number of parameters in the projection layer com- [21] H. Su, Z. Wu, Q. Du, and P. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using
 collaborative representation with outlier removal,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
puted by linear rises sharply with the increase of data scale, Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 5029–5038,
which is a potential issue for future large-scale applications. Dec. 2018.
Although sparse excitation can alleviate this problem to some [22] S. Feng, S. Tang, C. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “A hyperspectral anomaly
 detection method based on low-rank and sparse decomposition with
extent, it is not the most immediate and optimal solution. In the density peak guided collaborative representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
future, this concern will be addressed by improving the pro- Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2021.
jection layer computation using dynamic weight deactivation. [23] Z. Wu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with relaxed collaborative representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 Art. no. 5533417.
 R EFERENCES [24] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Chanussot, and Z. Wei, “Joint reconstruction and
 [1] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y. Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson, anomaly detection from compressive hyperspectral images using Maha-
 “Deep learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,” lanobis distance-regularized tensor RPCA,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709, Sens., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2919–2930, May 2018.
 Sep. 2019. [25] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
 [2] J. M. Bioucas-Dias, A. Plaza, G. Camps-Valls, P. Scheunders, tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
 N. Nasrabadi, and J. Chanussot, “Hyperspectral remote sensing data IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
 analysis and future challenges,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 1, Mar. 2022.
 no. 2, pp. 6–36, Jun. 2013. [26] S. Sun, J. Liu, X. Chen, W. Li, and H. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 [3] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation detection with tensor average rank and piecewise smoothness conmodel,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, straints,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11,
 pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024. pp. 8679–8692, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152252.
WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5535317

[27] S. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, and W. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detec- [48] W. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lei, J. Li, and Q. Du, “Weakly
 tion based on adaptive low-rank transformed tensor,” IEEE Trans. supervised low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detec-
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 9787–9799, 2024, doi: tion,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 3889–3900,
 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3236641. Aug. 2021.
[28] W. Shang et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via sparsity of core [49] J. Lian, L. Wang, H. Sun, and H. Huang, “GT-HAD: Gated transformer
 tensor under gradient domain,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5517816. Syst., early access, Feb. 12, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3355166.
[29] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in [50] Z. Wu and B. Wang, “Transformer-based autoencoder framework for
 hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,” nonlinear hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000, Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5508015.
 Apr. 2016. [51] Z. Wang, D. Ma, G. Yue, B. Li, R. Cong, and Z. Wu, “Self-supervised
[30] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized low- hyperspectral anomaly detection based on finite spatialwise attention,”
 rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502918.
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, Jan. 2020. [52] D. Ma, M. Chen, Y. Yang, B. Li, M. Li, and Y. Gao,
[31] L. Ren, L. Gao, M. Wang, X. Sun, and J. Chanussot, “HADGSM: “Coarse-to-fine multiview anomaly coupling network for hyperspec-
 A unified nonconvex framework for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” tral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5503415. 2024, Art. no. 5507715.
[32] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning [53] M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-Álvarez, Y. Xue, J. M. Haut, and A. Plaza,
 tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” “AAtt-CNN: Automatic attention-based convolutional neural networks
 IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023. for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
[33] Y. Li, K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, X. Zhang, and Q. Du, “A model-driven Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511118.
 deep mixture network for robust hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE [54] M. E. Paoletti, J. M. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522916. classifiers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
[34] C. Li, B. Zhang, D. Hong, J. Yao, and J. Chanussot, “LRR-Net: An inter- Remote Sens., vol. 158, pp. 279–317, Dec. 2019.
 pretable deep unfolding network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” [55] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5513412. autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[35] W. Li, G. Wu, and Q. Du, “Transferred deep learning for anomaly Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
 detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., [56] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Deep low-rank prior for
 vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 597–601, May 2017. hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[36] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5527017.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolu- [57] L. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wu, M. Xu, and M. Shao, “Eliminating
 tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, spatial correlations of anomaly: Corner-visible network for unsupervised
 Art. no. 5503314. hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[37] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5529114.
 anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. [58] W. Liu et al., “UADNet: A joint unmixing and anomaly detection
 Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314. network based on deep clustering for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans.
[38] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5511419.
 “BS3LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for [59] J. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Dynamic negative sampling
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218. Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 9829–9841, 2022.
[39] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
 [60] P. Gao, T. Ma, H. Li, Z. Lin, J. Dai, and Y. Qiao, “ConvMAE: Masked
 “BockNet: Blind-block reconstruction network with a guard window for
 convolution meets masked autoencoders,” 2022, arXiv:2205.03892.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 [61] S. Woo et al., “ConvNeXt v2: Co-designing and scaling ConvNets with
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531916.
 masked autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[40] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza,
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 16133–16142.
 “PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote [62] K. Tian, Y. Jiang, Q. Diao, C. Lin, L. Wang, and Z. Yuan, “Designing
 Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914. BERT for convolutional networks: Sparse and hierarchical masked
[41] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder modeling,” 2023, arXiv:2301.03580.
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [63] C. Choy, J. Gwak, and S. Savarese, “4D spatio-temporal ConvNets:
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816. Minkowski convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[42] S. Lin, M. Zhang, X. Cheng, L. Shi, P. Gamba, and H. Wang, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 3075–3084.
 “Dynamic low-rank and sparse priors constrained deep autoencoders for [64] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional nethyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
 pp. 1–18, 2024. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
[43] T. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Xie, and Q. Du, “Discriminative reconstruction Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
 constrained generative adversarial network for hyperspectral anomaly [65] Z. Tu et al., “MaxViT: Multi-axis vision transformer,” in Proc. 17th Eur.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7, Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 459–479.
 pp. 4666–4679, Jul. 2020. [66] H. Wang, X. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Liu, and J. Liu, “Omni aggregation net-
[44] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Autoencoder and adversarial- works for lightweight image super-resolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 learning-based semisupervised background estimation for hyperspectral Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22378–22387.
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8, [67] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
 pp. 5416–5427, Aug. 2020. “MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc.
[45] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
 spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral pp. 4510–4520.
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7, [68] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperpp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020. spectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,”
[46] J. Zhong, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Characterization of IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611,
 background-anomaly separability with generative adversarial network Oct. 2017.
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [69] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 6017–6028, Jul. 2021. detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
[47] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020.
 discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial [70] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022. vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.