12350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Space Decoupled Prototype Learning for
 Few-Shot Attack Detection in
 Cyber–Physical Systems
 Haili Sun , Yan Huang , Member, IEEE, Chunjie Zhou , Lansheng Han , Hongle Liu, Juan Chen ,
 and Xin Li

 Abstract—Due to the lack of effective attack detection space. The experimental results on three public cyberattack
measures, cyberattacks may cause strong damage to in- datasets show that, compared with the suboptimal model a
dustrial cyber–physical systems (CPSs). The embedding few-shot learning model with Siamese convolutional neural
of attack categories learned by the existing attack detec- network (FSL-SCNN), the proposed DPL-FSAD can improve
tion methods is highly coupled to each other with fuzzy the precision by 5.53%, F1-score by 3.3%, and reduce the
boundaries and overlapped neighborhood, leading to weak false positive rate by 2.37% in average, which proves that
robustness and high false positive rates. To address these the space decoupled prototype learning is effective for imissues, in this article, we propose a few-shot attack de- proving the generalization and robustness of industrial CPS
tection method based on decoupled prototype learning attack detection in few-shot scenario.
(DPL-FSAD), aiming to enhance the detection accuracy and
generalization capabilities for malicious attacks in CPS. Index Terms—Few-shot learning (FSL), industrial cyber–
Specifically, we first introduce feature contrastive learning physical system (CPS), network attack detection, prototype
to extract differentiated features from highly similar sam- contrastive learning (PCL), space decoupling.
ples, achieving compact intraclass and sparse interclass
feature embedding space. To solve the problem of fuzzy I. INTRODUCTION
boundaries of different attack categories, prototype con-
 HE rapid development of Industry 4.0 has promoted the
trastive learning is then employed to reduce the coupling
degree among prototypes and enhance their discriminability. A regularization term is exploited to mitigate the over-
 T integration of cyber network and physical systems, giving
 rise to a new paradigm: Cyber–physical systems (CPSs). CPSs
fitting problem by reducing the gap between the feature are large, distributed, heterogeneous, and multidimensional inembedding and prototypes. Furthermore, an orthogonal telligent systems, integrating communication, computation, and
constraint is employed to separate prototypes of different
attack types, generating a decoupled prototype embedding control to realize close combination and coordination of physical and software resources [1]. These systems provide a wide
 range of functionalities, including intelligent production and
 Manuscript received 22 January 2024; revised 2 May 2024; accepted collaborative control, which play significant roles in advancing
18 June 2024. Date of publication 16 July 2024; date of current version industrial intelligence. However, they are vulnerable to cyber–
7 October 2024. The work of Lansheng Han was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under physical attacks due to the lack of effective network security
Grant 2022YFB3103402 and in part by the National Natural Science defense measures [2]. Attackers may invade controllers of CPS
Foundation of China under Grant 62072200, Grant 62172176, and Grant by launching malicious code injection attacks to disrupt the
62127808. The work of Chunjie Zhou was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61873103, Grant normal operation of equipment and the production order of an
62127808, and Grant 61433006. Paper no. TII-24-0342. (Haili Sun and enterprise, which may cause catastrophic consequences on the
Yan Huang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: economy, environment, and life security [3], [4]. Therefore, the
Lansheng Han.)
 Haili Sun, Lansheng Han, Hongle Liu, Juan Chen, and Xin Li are detection of cyberattacks against CPS is of paramount imporwith the Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei tance for timely warning, ensuring enterprise production safety,
Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Sci- and reducing economic loss.
ence and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: hailisun@hust.edu.cn; hanlansheng@ Attack detection aims to distinguish attack behaviors from
hust.edu.cn; hongleliu@hust.edu.cn; juanchen1737@hust.edu.cn; zs- normal system states within multivariate time series (MTS), such
gkljhy@126.com). as network traffic, sensor signals, and system logs generated by
 Yan Huang is with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School of Artificial Intel- CPS. However, due to the complexity of network attacks and
ligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technol- the variety of network functionalities, detection technologies
ogy, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: platanus@hust.edu.cn). based on mathematical statistics, state estimation, and traditional
 Chunjie Zhou is with the Key Laboratory of Image Processing and
Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelli- machine learning encounter issues, such as high false alarm rate
gence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technol- (FAR), poor adaptability, and low detection accuracy. Recently,
ogy, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: cjiezhou@hust.edu.cn). attack detection algorithms based on deep learning have been
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3423327. widely explored [3], [5]. These attacks are usually sparse or even
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3423327 unseen in real-world scenarios, leading to insufficient labeled
 1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12351

 distinctive features and enhance the discriminability, we first design a feature contrastive learning (FCL) [see Fig. 1(c)] module
 via maximizing mutual information to obtain a compact intraclass and sparse interclass feature embedding space. Second, to
 alleviate the problem of sample sparsity and fuzzy boundaries
 of different attack categories, we propose prototype contrastive
 learning (PCL) [see Fig. 1(d)] to reduce the coupling degree
 between different prototypes. In addition, the FCL and PCL
 may overfit in few-shot cases; thus, a robust regularization term
 is exploited based on the mutual information from features to
 prototypes. Finally, the orthogonal constraints between prototypes [see Fig. 1(e)] are introduced to make the prototype spaces
 of different attack categories orthogonal to each other so as to
 realize prototype decoupling in the latent embedding space. This
 not only improves the robustness of model classification but also
Fig. 1. Illustration of the problems and motivations. (a) Highly cor- reduces the FAR.
related features with large coupling degrees (e.g., c>0.2) and fuzzy The main contributions of this article are as follows.
boundaries. (b) Overlapped prototype neighborhood. (c) Feature space
decoupling based on FCL. (d) Prototype space decoupling based on
 1) A two-stage few-shot attack detection model DPL-FSAD
PCL and regularization. (e) Decoupling via prototype orthogonal con- based on FCL and PCL is proposed to tackle the problem
straint. of high coupling degree and fuzzy boundaries between
 different attack types. Different attacks are spatially decoupled from the feature level and prototype level, respecsamples for model training and problems, such as overfitting tively, which improves the discriminability of complex
and weak generalization ability. This poses great challenges CPS attacks.
for existing attack detection methods that rely heavily on rich 2) To learn more differentiated features from few labeled
labeled data. samples, a lightweight FCL module is designed to gener-
 To this end, some researchers have attempted to introduce the ate a compact intraclass and sparse interclass embedding
few-shot learning (FSL) method to overcome the challenge of space.
insufficient labeled samples. FSL enables models to effectively 3) To reduce the coupling degree between different protodistinguish novel categories with few labeled samples. In recent types, PCL and orthogonal constraints are exploited for
years, several works based on FSL have been proposed for attack generating highly decoupled embedding space.
detection in industrial CPS. Zhou et al. [6] created a Siamese 4) An efficient attack detection algorithm is developed based
neural network for detecting industrial attacks to solve the on the decoupled feature and prototype embedding space,
overfitting issue. Huang et al. [7] proposed a gated network that which identifies CPS attacks with few labeled samples
detects different attacks by aggregating both seen and unseen through the nearest neighbor in the prototype embedding
types within few-shot settings. space.
 However, due to the inherent high correlation and coupling
degree of sample features between attack categories, as shown
in the upper layer of Fig. 1, methods based on feature learning, II. RELATED WORK
such as convolutional neural networks [see Fig. 1(a)], and met- In recent years, attack detection algorithms [10], [12] have
alearning methods based on prototypical networks (PNs) [see been extensively analyzed and studied for the security and reli-
Fig. 1(b)] face the problems of fuzzy boundaries and overlapped ability of industrial CPS. It is crucial to develop appropriate deprototype neighborhood, leading to poor robustness and high tection architectures to identify attacks on these systems. Several
FAR in the scenario of sample sparsity and few-shot cases. methods based on deep learning have been designed to protect
 Furthermore, Tian et al. [8] have demonstrated that a well- CPS against cyber–physical attacks [11], such as error diagnosis
designed feature extractor is more effective than models relying [13], attack detection, and fault-tolerant control [14]. Pearce
solely on complex metalearning algorithm for few-shot classifi- et al. [15] proposed a bidirectional runtime enforcement to
cation tasks, as they are hard to extract more discriminative and mitigate the damages posed by compromised controllers in CPS.
differentiated features from industrial CPS data. To overcome To alleviate misclassification errors, Khan et al. [27] designed a
the above challenges, our intuitive idea is to achieve feature statistical feature extraction algorithm and developed an intruspace decoupling by extracting differentiated sample features sion detection system based on long-short term memory network
and prototype space decoupling by prototypical intraclass ag- (LSTM) autoencoder to distinguish malicious actions from ingregation and interclass separation so as to reduce the feature dustrial control systems. Zhou et al. [3] proposed a variational
correlation and coupling degree between different attack cate- long short-term memory model (VLSTM) for guaranteeing ingories, as shown in the lower layer of Fig. 1. dustry security. They designed a variational reparameterization
 Therefore, this article proposes a few-shot attack detection scheme to capture the low-dimensional feature embeddings and
method based on space decoupled prototype learning, called identified anomalies by an estimation network. Wu and Guo [28]
DPL-FSAD, for industrial CPS security. Specifically, to extract detect attacks by designing a hierarchical convolution neural
12352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

network and recurrent neural network (CNN+RNN) architec- ization, and orthogonal constraint, to achieve a high intraclass
ture named LuNet with a gradually increasing granularity to variance and low interclass coupling degree. To facilitate comextract both spatial and temporal features of the data. Obviously, parison, we also analyzed the strengths and weaknesses of the
the aforementioned approaches show that deep-learning-based above models, as shown in Table I.
methods are promising to identify cyber–physical attacks in
industrial CPS. However, as traditional supervised learning III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
methods typically rely on rich labeled data and prior knowledge,
they are difficult to detect novel attacks from few labeled samples In this article, the attack detection of industrial CPS is defined
effectively in the smart industrial environment. as an FSL task. Given a dataset D containing two general
 Semisupervised anomaly detection: To alleviate the above subsets Dnor and Datt indicating normal and attack samples,
problem, several researchers have developed semisupervised respectively, Dnor = {(xnori , ynori )|i = 1, 2, . . . , Nnor } contains
learning anomaly detection techniques. Huang et al. [16] devel- Nnor labeled normal samples in which xnori is the ith normal
oped a semisupervised learning-based framework named a semi- sample and ynori is the corresponding class label. Likewise,
supervised learning based active anomaly detection framework Datt = {(xatti , yatti )|i = 1, 2, . . . , Natt } contains Natt labeled atusing variational auto-encoder (SLA-VAE) to detect anomalies tack samples in which xatti is the attack sample and yatti is the
in an industrial environment using a variational autoencoder. To corresponding class label. To describe the few-shot scenario, we
detect anomaly patterns in MTS, Zheng et al. [17] integrated assume that the scale of attack samples is far less than normal
reconstruction model, prediction model, and auxiliary discrim- samples, i.e., Nnor  Natt . Thus, a set of samples from Datt is
inator and proposed an end-to-end semisupervised anomaly de- selected to form the support set TrS in each training episode, and
tection model to make reasonable use of the limited labeled data. the corresponding query set TrQ , which is used to indicate the
 Contrastive learning for attack detection: Contrast learning unobserved samples of novel classes between different episodes,
is widely used in computer vision [18], [19]. Due to its can be described as TrQ = {(xattj , yattj )|j = 1, 2, . . . , Nq }.
powerful representation learning ability, many researchers Specifically, to form the N -way k-shot learning task, we ranhave introduced it to attack detection field [20], [21]. Kopuklu domly select N malicious attack categories from Datt , each
et al. [20] adopt supervised contrastive learning for detecting category contains k samples to form the support set TrS and
anomalous driving behavior. For the out-of-class detection the corresponding unseen query set TrQ , which indicates other
task, Shenkar and Wolf [21] proposed to maximize the samples of the same categories in each training episode. The
mapping relationship of mutual information between samples few-shot attack detection task based on prototype learning aims
and their shielded part through contrastive loss. However, to learn the prototypes for each of the N attack categories
these methods do not incorporate the label information for using the corresponding k samples, then classify unseen samples
temperature coefficient adjustment, which may lose some according to the distance to the N different prototypes.
class-level features. In addition, the correlation between
different categories has not been well measured. IV. METHODOLOGY
 FSL for attack detection: Few-shot learning (FSL) is a new
type of transfer learning technique [22]. By reusing the trans- A. Framework Overview
ferable knowledge of existing classes, it can identify novel The left part of Fig. 2 illustrates a typical architecture for
categories with limited supervisory information [6], [23]. Zhou attack detection in artificial intelligence (AI)-enhanced induset al. [6] develop an anomaly detection model named a few- trial CPS in which attackers may send the malicious code to
shot learning model with Siamese convolutional neural network compromise the CPS systems through hacking into the CANbus
(FSL-SCNN) based on Siamese convolutional neural network network or programmable logic controller (PLC) controllers.
to detect the anomalies in industrial CPS. Kale and Thing The supervisory control and data acquisition system is involved
[24] propose an enhanced anomaly detection network based on to monitor and collect sensor signals (e.g., pressure and temper-
FSL to identify anomalies using few seen class anomalies and ature) and network flows (e.g., TX&RX packet data) generated
evaluated the network on three public datasets. To optimize the across the cyber network, in which the AI-based attack detection
resource consumption in systems, Puzanov et al. [25] propose module is deployed to identify malicious attacks.
a deep reinforcement one-shot learning framework and train a Unlike the traditional classification models in industry, we
deep-Q network to obtain a policy for identifying unseen classes formulate the detection of malicious attacks with few labeled
in testing data. To overcome the class imbalance problem, abnormal samples in CPS as a few-shot classification task and
Bedi et al. [26] design a new type of intrusion system named proposed a novel and efficient attack detection architecture based
Siam-intrusion detection systems (IDS) based on a Siamese on prototype learning to ensure its security and safety (upper
neural network to detect attacks without using oversampling right of Fig. 2).
and random undersampling. However, these methods neglect Fig. 3 illustrates the architecture of the proposed DPL-FSAD,
the possible coupling between different classes in the learned which consists of three modules, i.e., feature extractor, FCL, and
feature space, which may lead to high false positive rates. decoupled prototype generation (PCL). The feature extractor
 Different from the existing approaches, we solve the problems is composed of two residual blocks and each block contains
of fuzzy boundaries and neighborhood overlapping of different two convolution layers. One of the main components of the
attack categories via space decoupling techniques, i.e., feature FCL module is a contrastive head with a multilayer perceptron
decoupling via FCL and prototype decoupling via PCL, regular- (MLP) that maps feature into a hypersphere. In addition, the PCL
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12353

 TABLE I
 STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE METHODS (UL DENOTES UNSUPERVISED LEARNING, SSL DENOTES SEMISUPERVISED LEARNING, SL DENOTES
 SUPERVISED LEARNING, CL DENOTES CONTRASTIVE LEARNING, AND FSL DENOTES FEW-SHOT LEARNING)

Fig. 2. Overview of a typical hierarchical layered architecture of security protection for industrial CPS.

module consists of three convolution layers with regularization this problem, we propose decoupled PCL to make prototypes
constraint and orthogonal constraint to generate prototype em- closer to the real class center and design orthogonal constraints
bedding space, in which the query sample can be classified via on prototypes to separate the different prototype spaces of the
searching for the nearest prototype. attack classes, thereby reducing the coupling degree of each
 On the one hand, the quality of features captured from input prototype space.
data determines the upper bound of the model. A well-designed Furthermore, as industrial processes are sensitive to the false
encoder is of more significance than a complex metalearning positive rate, even a minute of downtime may cause serious loss
framework in FSL [8]. Therefore, we design the specific FCL [2]. To this end, a robust regularization term is also designed
module for industrial CPS attack samples to extract differen- based on the distance between samples and the corresponding
tiated high-level features (see Section IV-B for details). On prototypes so that similar samples will distribute closer in the
the other hand, to identify unseen attacks, we formulate the feature space to generate more distinctive prototypes, which can
attack detection process as a classification task based on class benefit from improving the generalization ability of the model
prototypes. Intuitively, the more accurate the class prototype is, (see Section IV-C for details).
the better performance the detection achieves. However, in the Overall, the proposed attack detection algorithm consists of
FSL scenario, the learned prototypes usually deviate from the two stages: the FCL stage and the PCL stage. FCL is the premise
true center of the class due to few labeled samples [9]. To solve of PCL, providing it with decoupled feature representation. The
12354 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 3. Architecture of the proposed DPL-FSAD. Inputs xs and xq denote the samples of the support set and the query set, respectively. The
input is first passed through the feature extractor to obtain the features zs and zq , which are then fed into the FCL and PCL modules for FCL and
prototype generation tasks, respectively. In addition, in the FCL module, the contrastive head is an MLP, which encodes the features zs and zq
into a 1 × 128-dimensional vector; in the PCL module, Ω(·) denotes the prototype generation function, and C1 , C2 , and C3 denote the generated
prototypes.

purpose of FCL is to generate a distinctive high-level feature During the FCL process, specifically, for a minibatch of K
embedding space that is compact within classes and sparse features {ri , yi }N
 i=1 , they are mapped into a hypersphere denoted
between classes. Based on the feature embedding space, the as {zi , yi }N
 i=1 by the contrastive head, where zi = MLP(ri ) ∈
PCL aims to learn a high-quality prototype space in which R1×128 and yi ∈ R1×128 is the label of the ground truth, MLP
prototypes are located close to the real class centers. Meanwhile, denotes the multilayer perceptron, then the FCL loss LFCL can
orthogonal constraints and regularization terms are designed to be defined as follows:
reduce the coupling degree of the prototype space and improve N
the generalization ability of the model. 1 
 LFCL = Lz (2)
 N i=1 i
B. Stage 1: FCL 
 −1 exp (d (zi , zk ) /τ )
 Aiming at the problem that most existing attack detection Lz i = log N . (3)
 |Nyi | − 1 q=1 exp (d (zi , zq ) /τ )
 k∈Nyi
methods may fail to extract the differentiated features of CPS
network attacks and fuzzy boundaries, we propose the following Here, we denote samples with the same labels as positive
hypothesis. samples, and samples with different labels as negative samples.
 Hypothesis 1. FCL can capture common features of positive Nyi is the set of indices of positive samples with the same label
samples and differentiated features of negative samples, thus as yi in an episode, |Nyi | is its cardinality, and τ is a scalar
improving the significance level of key features. temperature coefficient.
 According to Hypothesis 1, we first design a specific feature As in (3), d(zi , zk ) denotes the similarity between the ith
extractor f for CPS attacks to encode samples into an embedding and kth samples in the feature embedding space, zk (k ∈ Nyi )
space. Then, to improve the quality of the embedding space, we denotes the samples from the same cluster as zi . The objective of
conduct the FCL as a supervised instance-level classification LFCL and Lzi is to narrow the instance-level distance between
task, which is designed to recognize latent fine-grained structure samples with the same label, i.e., d(zi , zk ), and enlarge those
in the low-dimensional feature space by separating the represen- with different labels, i.e., d(zi , zq ), q ∈
 / Nyi . Consequently, the
tations of different latent classes and aggregating those of the samples of each category will form a compact cluster Ci with
same latent classes simultaneously. Meanwhile, we develop a lower variance, and the boundaries between different clusters
class-information injection (CII) technique for the FCL to obtain will be enlarged with a higher coupling degree. This will capture
a compact intraclass and sparse interclass embedding space. The differentiated features and facilitate the following classification
FCL process is shown in the upper right of Fig. 3. task to obtain more accurate class prototypes, which are evalu-
 Given input data xi , the feature extractor f encodes it as a ated in Section V-E.
feature embedding ri that can be represented as follows: Control of temperature coefficient: The temperature coeffiri = f (xi , θ) (1) cient is used to adjust the degree of attention paid to hard samples
 in contrastive loss (3). The lower the temperature coefficient
where θ denotes the parameters of f and ri denotes the encoded is, the more attention will be paid to similar samples. But
feature embedding. After that, ri is passed to a contrastive head for supervised contrastive learning, the category information is
to conduct the following FCL process. known. To learn the embedding space with clearer boundaries,
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12355

we design a CII technique to inject label-specific features into prototype vector
the FCL module so that the model will pay more attention to
the category-related common features instead of the distinction I (Ci , TrQ ) ≥ E [log (d (Ci , xin ))] + E [log (1 − d (Ci , xnot ))]
between similar samples. The CII can be defined as follows: (6)
  where E denotes the expectation, and xin and xnot denote the
 1/β yi = yk samples in the query set TrQ that in Ci or not in Ci . d(Ci , x)
 CII (i, k) = (4)
 1/τ, yi = yk denotes the similarity between Ci and x; here, we choose the dot
 product as the metric, i.e., d(Ci , x) = Ci · x. Then, the InfoMax
where 0 < τ < β. CII assigns a lower temperature coefficient β loss for prototype Ci can be defined as follows:
to positive samples’ pairs, resulting in the repulsion strength of
the anchor toward positive samples being lower compared with −1 
 L (Ci ) = log (d (Ci , xin ))
negative samples. Then, the CII is multiplied by the similarity |Qin |
 xin ∈Qin
score between sample pair, so Lzi in (3) can be converted to 
 1
 −1  exp (d (zi , zk ) /τ ) − log (1 − d (Ci , xnot )) (7)
 Lz i = log N . |Qnot |
 xnot ∈Qnot
 |Nyi | − 1 q=1 exp (d (zi , zq ) ∗CII (i, q))
 k∈Nyi
 where {Qin , Qnot } ⊂ TrQ denotes the samples that belong to Ci
 (5)
 and the samples that not belong to Ci , respectively. Thus, for N -
 By setting a small penalty rate of 1/β for the positive sample
pair, the unique representations of different samples can be way k-shot attack detection task, the final prototype contrastive
 loss can be defined as the sum of the InfoMax losses of the N
learned and can avoid the characteristics of positive samples
from being too similar. prototypes
 1 
 LPCL = L (Ci ) . (8)
C. Stage 2: Decoupled Prototype Generation N
 Considering the prevalent issues of prototype-based FSL, in Intuitively, minimizing the InfoMax loss (mutual informawhich prototypes tend to overlap and exhibit a high degree of tion) is equivalent to narrowing the distance between the sample
coupling, we posit the following hypothesis. and its prototype and enlarging the distance between the sample
 Hypothesis 2. PCL can improve the degree of intraclass and other prototypes, resulting in a more compact prototype
aggregation and reduce the coupling degree between prototypes. embedding space with a larger margin between classes. Thus,
 Based on Hypothesis 2, we design a mutual information the deviation of the prototype from the true center of the samples
maximization (InfoMax) training objective to treat normal and is reduced, refer to Section V-E for more detail.
attack samples as contrastive views to alleviate that problem. Distance-based regularization term: Since industry (such as
During the training stage, we maximize the mutual information smart manufacturing plants) is sensitive to FAR, overfitting is
between the same samples in query set and the corresponding usually an issue to consider in a few-shot scenario. To overcome
prototype, which is generated based on the samples in support this issue, we design a regularization term based on the distance
set, while penalizing other samples that do not belong to the pro- between the sample feature embedding r and the corresponding
totype. In this way, samples from the query set also participate prototype C to improve the generalization ability of the model.
in generating prototypes. Theoretically, incorporating both the This distance-based regularization term is defined as follows:
query set and the support set into the fine-tuning prototype is Lregu = D (r, C) . (9)
beneficial to obtain more accurate prototypes because the more
samples involved in the prototype generation, the more accurate Lregu can further improve the performance of the classifier
the prototype will be [9]. due to the following reasons.
 Therefore, we formalize the PCL as an InfoMax and 1) It enables the sample features of the same class distribute
prototype-based classification task. The proposed DPL-FSAD more compactly, which can implicitly enlarge the margin
is forced to learn a multivariate classified F partitioning the em- between different classes and, therefore, boosting the
bedding space according to the classes. For the few-shot attack classification.
detection task, introducing the multivariate classified function 2) LPCL emphasizes the separation of prototypes, thus by
F cannot only alleviate the problem of inaccurate mean-based combining LPCL and Lregu together, we can learn intraprototype computation but also simplify the whole training class compact and interclass distinctive feature embedmechanism. That is, F can be approximated as a simple cross- dings.
entropy implementation of the InfoMax objective. Additionally, Orthogonal constraint: As shown in Fig. 1(b), the neighborto improve the generalization ability and avoid overfitting, a hoods of prototypes learned may overlap with each other, which
regularization term and orthogonal constraints are designed to make it difficult to learn classification boundaries with high disenhance the internal compactness of prototypes and reduce the criminative power. To solve this issue, we propose Hypothesis 3
coupling degree between prototypes. as follows.
 Given the prototype of class i, i.e., Ci , the prototype con- Hypothesis 3. The prototype orthogonal constraint can imtrastive loss can be formalized as the approximate mutual infor- prove the interclass sparsity of the classifier’s spatial distribumation I(Ci , TrQ ) between all the samples in query set and the tion and reduce the degree of overlapping.
12356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 where M is a matrix to map each sample from feature embedding
 Algorithm 1: Training process of the proposed model DPLspace to prototype embedding space and trained according to the
 FSAD
 Input: A set of normal signal samples prototype orthogonal constraint.
 Dnor = {(xnori , ynori )|i = 1, 2, . . . , Nnor }. Prototype generation: For the proposed model, we generate
 A set of attack samples prototypes based on feature mapping and average operations.
 Datt = {(xatti , yatti )|i = 1, 2, . . . , Natt } Given a minibatch of k features {ri , i ∈ [1, k]}, the support set
 Output: A trained attack detection model DPL-FSAD TrS , the feature extractor first embeds all samples into the latent
 1: Initialize hyperparameter epoch E, batch size B, loss feature space. Then, feature embedding of the same class is
 threshold ε, hyperparameter τ , β, λ1 , λ2 mapped by a matrix M and aggregated into a prototype C in
 2: for epoch =1 to E do the prototype embedding space. Typically, it is calculated as an
 3: for each episode do average of those embedding
 k
 4: Choose N classes with K samples from Dnor and 1
 Datt to build support set TrS C = Ω (·) = M ∗ ri (11)
 k i=1
 5: Choose N classes with K samples from Datt to build
 query set TrQ where k denotes the number of samples per class in TrS and ri
 6: for xq in TrQ do is the feature embedding of the ith sample.
 7: Transform xq into feature embedding rq by (1)
 8: for xs in TrS do D. Learning Strategy
 9: Transform xs into feature embedding rs by (1)
 10: Calculate the feature contrastive loss LFCL by (2) To achieve efficient training performance, the overall loss of
 and (5) the proposed DPL-FSAD model is a combination of the four
 11: for k=1 to N do losses introduced above, which can be formulated as follows:
 12: Calculate the prototype Ck of class k using rs by LDPL−FSAD = LFCL + LPCL + λ1 Lregu + λ2 Lorth (12)
 (11)
 13: Calculate the prototype contrastive loss LPCL where λ1 and λ2 are the coefficients to balance the loss of regularbased on rq and Ck by (8) ization and orthogonal terms, respectively. The training process
 14: for rj in rq do of the proposed model DPL-FSAD is shown in Algorithm 1, and
 15: Calculate the regularization term Lregu using (9) the parameters are learned via minimizing LDPL−FSAD .
 16: for k =1 to N − 1 do
 17: Calculate the orthogonal loss Lorth between Ck E. Attack Detection With DPL-FSAD
 and Ck+1 by (10) During the test stage, given the learned prototype embedding,
 18: Update DPL-FSAD to minimize LDPL−FSAD by (12) the model first extracts the feature of the test samples and then
 19: if LDPL−FSAD < ε then predicts the category of the sample based on the similarity
 20: break between the feature embedding and each prototype.
 21: return DPL-FSAD In detail, we measure the similarity of samples and prototypes
 by the distance between them. Thus, the probability p(x ∈ yi |x)
 that x belongs to the prototype Ci should be proportional to the
 The orthogonal constraint enforces the prototype embedding negative of the distance between them. To satisfy the property
to be orthogonal to each other, that is, their inner product is that probability must be normalized and nonnegative, we define
approaching 0. This increases the interclass sparsity because if p(x ∈ yi |x) as follows:
two prototypes are orthogonal, their projections on a dimension
will not overlap. Furthermore, under orthogonal constraints, to exp (−D (f (x) , Ci ))
 p (x ∈ yi |x) =  (13)
maximize the interclass distance, the optimization algorithm j exp (−D (f (x) , Cj ))
will automatically adjust the prototype embedding to separate
them as much as possible, thereby reducing the overlap between where D (f (x), Ci ) = f (x) − Ci 22 represents the Euclidean
different categories. distance between sample x and class yi . Based on this probabil-
 According to Hypothesis 3, the correlation of different cat- ity, the overall prediction error can be measured via the negative
egories can be reduced by prototype space decoupling via the log probability
orthogonal constraint. To impose the orthogonal constraint, we Lpred = − log p (x ∈ yi |x) . (14)
first map the sample features to the prototype space by matrix
mapping, calculate the mean of the feature maps to obtain the The attack type of the input sample x can be identified via the
prototype embedding C, and then calculate the dot product closest prototype with the highest probability p(xࢠyi |x).
between the prototypes and make it approximate to zero so that
the prototype spaces are orthogonal to each other. The prototype V. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
orthogonal loss function is defined as follows: A. Experimental Settings
 
 Lorth (M ) = Ci · Cj (10) Datasets: To verify the effectiveness of our proposed model
 i,j∈[1,N ],i=j on attack detection, we conducted a plenty of experiments on
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12357

 TABLE II compromise the IEC-61850 communication protocols and cause
 STATICS OF THE THREE PUBLIC DATASETS
 improper functioning of the power system. It was collected by
 Quincozes et al. [32] via simulating an electric grid substation
 network traffic to produce representative features using an extensible tool ERENO.
 Comparative models: To validate the advancement of DPL-
 FSAD, four FSL methods (i.e., FSL-SCNN [6], AnoS_Net [24],
 DeROL[25], and Siam_IDS [26]), three deep-learning-based
 methods (i.e., VLSTM [3], AE_LSTM [27], and LuNet [32]),
 and two semisupervised learning methods (i.e., SLA-VAE [16]
 and MDAE-DT [17]) were selected for comparison.
 Implementation details: The classifier of the model is implemented based on the PN. For the N -way k-shot attack detection
 task, we set k= {1, 5, 10} in all experiments and select the best
 results. The ratio of samples in support set TrS and query set
 TrQ is set to 1:1. We set the initial learning rate to 0.001, choose
 stochastic gradient descent as the optimizer, and iterate for 1000
 epochs to train the model. Empirically, we choose λ1 and λ2
four public datasets, i.e., UNSW-NB15 [29], a network security from {0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001} and set λ1 = 0.001 and
detection dataset upgraded from the KDD CUP99 dataset (NSL- λ2 = 0.005 for the best performance.
KDD) [30], TON_IoT [31], and ERENO IEC-61850 [32]. The Evaluation metrics: We apply and calculate four widely used
details of the four datasets are shown in Table II, which were metrics, precision, recall, F1, and FAR depending on whether
preprocessed accordingly for few-shot settings. normal and abnormal samples have been recognized correctly or
 UNSW-NB15 was created by the Intelligent Security Group not, to prove the detection performances of the above methods.
of Australia and widely used to develop approaches in different Besides, we introduce the following two metrics, i.e., variance
systems, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), SCADA, and σ and coupling degree c to measure the degree of intraclass
Industrial IoT. The IXIA PerfectStorm tool is utilized as an aggregation and coupling degree between different categories,
attack traffic generator along with normal traffic, and the attack respectively, in the embedding space
behavior is nourished from the CVE site for the purpose of a
real representation of a modern threat environment. These attack σi = var (Ci ) (15)
behaviors contain nine types of network attacks that may result |cov (Ci , Cj )|
in data leakage, tampering, illegal control, or service interruption c= √ √ (16)
 σi × σj
of CPS systems.
 NSL-KDD is an upgraded version of the KDD CUP99 [30] where var(Ci ) denotes the variance of the class i, and
dataset, addressing the inherent issues by incorporating data cov(Ci , Cj ) denotes the covariance of the classes i and j. The
from the DARPA ’98 IDS Evaluation Program. It utilizes the range of c is [0, 1], namely, the larger the value of c, the higher
same environment (U.S. Air Force LAN), and the simulation the coupling degree between two classes.
ended with 41 features for each connection along with the Feature selection: To avoid overfitting and curse of dimenclass label using the Bro-IDS tool. NSL-KDD offers a compre- sionality, we performed feature selection before training by
hensive benchmark for intrusion detection research. Notably, using the SelectFromModel interface of sklearn, which selects
both training and testing sets contain four simulated attacks, features by assessing their importance to the model performance.
including denial of service (Dos), probe, remote-to-local (R2L), Since this article focuses on the classification task, we used
and user-to-root (U2R). SVM.LinearSVC as the sparse estimator and L1 norm as the
 TON_IoT is a new generation Industry 4.0 and Industrial IoT penalty term for feature selection. With this setting, the results
dataset collected from a realistic and large-scale network de- after feature selection for these four datasets were UNSW-NB15
signed at the Cyber Range and IoT Labs, UNSW Canberra @ the with 31 features, NSL-KDD with 26 features, TON_IoT with 25
Australian Defence Force Academy. The whole dataset covers features, and ERENO IEC-61850 with 32 features.
nine attack families, including heterogeneous data sources collected from telemetry datasets of IoT and IIoT sensors, operating
 B. Attack Detection Evaluation
systems datasets of Windows 7 and 10, as well as Ubuntu 14 and
18 TLS and network traffic datasets. The datasets were gathered Robustness evaluation: To evaluate the robustness of our
in parallel processing to collect several normal and cyberattack proposed DPL-FSAD method on detecting cyberattacks, we
events from network traffic, Windows audit traces, Linux audit conduct comparative experiments with nine models on UNSWtraces, and telemetry data of IoT services. NB15, NSL-KDD, TON_IoT, and ERENO IEC-61850 datasets.
 ERENO IEC-61850 is a simulation of an existing Brazilian Table III illustrates the remarkable detection capabilities of
transmission line and generated more than 4.4 GB of data con- DPL-FSAD on the four datasets, surpassing previously setaining seven attack types that target the electric grid substations lected benchmark models. Impressively, DPL-FSAD achieves
networks based on the IEC-61850 standards. These attacks may the highest precision, recall, F1-score, and FAR on all four
12358 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 TABLE III
 STATICS OF THE FOUR PUBLIC DATASETS

datasets. On UNSW-NB15 dataset, although achieving compa- necessity and effectiveness of each module of the proposed
rable performance in the recall metric with VLSTM, DPL-FSAD model in identifying attacks. We compare five variants of the
outperforms the suboptimal model SLA-VAE by a significant proposed model:
margin, marking an absolute improvement of 4.3% in precision, 1) DPL-FSAD (ours);
2.3% in F1-score, and a reduction of 2.0% in FAR. On NSL-KDD 2) w./o FCL: without feature contrastive learning;
dataset, DPL-FSAD is significantly better than other compari- 3) w./o PCL: without prototype contrastive learning;
son models. Compared with the suboptimal model SLA-VAE, 4) w./o Regu: without regularization constraint;
DPL-FSAD showcases an absolute improvement of 4.4% in pre- 5) w./o Ortho: without orthogonal constraint.
cision and 2.9% in the F1-score. Moreover, our model exhibits Table IV presents the results of ablation experiments. As can
a notable reduction of 1.2% in FAR. On TON_IoT and ERENO be seen from the table, each of our variants can effectively help
IEC-61850 datasets, compared with the suboptimal model, our the model to obtain better performance. Compared with the
DPL-FSAD achieves an average improvement of 3.75% in FSL-SCNN model from Table III, we see that all variants of
precision, 2.7% in recall, 3.2% in F1-score, and a reduction DPL-FSAD can outperform FSL-SCNN except for w./o Regu,
of 4.9% in FAR, implying the effectiveness of the DPL-FSAD which indicate that the regularization term is essential for high
in industrial CPS traffic attack detection. Overall, DPL-FSAD performance. From the metrics of variance σ and coupling
outperforms the competing methods across all evaluated metrics, degree c, we can find that the absence of the regularization term
demonstrating its superior robustness in detecting seen attacks. leads to an increase in the variance and coupling degree; this
 Generalization evaluation: To verify the generalization abil- exactly explains the decrease in attack detection performance.
ity of DPL-FSAD for detecting unseen attacks, taking the In addition, all these variants without FCL, PCL, and orthog-
UNSW-NB15 dataset as an example, we randomly excluded onal constraint show a decrease in F1 and an increase in FAR,
two attacks (i.e., Analysis and Worms) from the training set as well as an increase in σ and c. It proves that these modules
and retained both attacks in the testing set. Then, the two sets are necessary and can promote the performance of the model.
were used to train and test the model, respectively. As a result, In these three variants, the absence of PCL module poses the
an F1-score of 94.5% was obtained on detecting these two biggest impact on model performance, and the increase of σ and
types of attacks, which demonstrates the generalization ability c demonstrates that the reason for the performance degradation
of DPL-FSAD. may be that the intraclass dispersion and interclass coupling
 become stronger.
C. Impact of Regularization Factor
 In summary, the ablation results confirm the remarkable
 As the proposed regularization term enhances the cohesion capabilities of our proposed DPL-FSAD model. It excels in
of the prototypes, a higher level of cohesion leads to im- accurately learning distinctive features, reducing the coupling
proved model performance. Hence, we conducted additional degree of prototypes, and delivers impressive performance enexperiments to examine the impact of the regularization factor hancements, particularly in scenarios with few labeled samples.
on model performance, as presented in Table III. The results These findings underscore the effectiveness and potential of our
demonstrate that the model’s performance consistently improves model in the field of attack detection in industrial CPS.
with decreasing values of the regularization factor. It reaches its
optimal point at 0.001 and, subsequently, declines as the regular-
 E. Hypothesis Evaluation
ization factor decreases further. This observation suggests that
there exists a nonlinear relationship between prototype cohesion To demonstrate the validity of the three hypotheses, as proand the regularization term, which warrants future investigation. posed in Section IV, we measured the degree of intraclass
 aggregation and the degree of interclass dispersion by the vari-
D. Ablation Study
 ance metric σ and the coupling degree c in Table III.
 Ablation experiments are carried out on UNSW-NB15, NSL- As shown, without the FCL module, the variance σ and the
KDD, TON_IoT, and ERENO IEC-61850 datasets to verify the coupling degree c increased by 15.5% and 100.5% on average,
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12359

 TABLE IV
 RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDY (F1 AND FAR ARE MEASURED IN PERCENTAGES)

Fig. 4. Feature embedding visualization based on PCA. (a) AnoS_Net. (b) DeROL. (c) Siam_IDS. (d) FSL-SCNN. (e) DPL-FSAD.

which proves that FCL is helpful to reduce the coupling degree TABLE V
 INFERENCE TIME (S) OF THE FOUR FSL ATTACK DETECTION METHODS ON
and variance. The lower variance indicates that the extracted UNSW-NB15 DATASET
features are more significant, and the lower coupling degree
indicates that the features are more distinctive, these confirm
the feasibility of Hypothesis 1.
 Second, when without the PCL module, the variance σ and
coupling degree c increased by 30.1% and 110.9% on average,
which proves that PCL can significantly reduce the degree of
intraclass aggregation and the interclass coupling degree (Hypothesis 2), and the effect is more significant than that of FCL distributed, this is beneficial to distinguish between different
module. attack types.
 Finally, compared with the variant without Ortho, the variance
σ and coupling degree c of the proposed model reduced by 21.4%
and 23.8% on average, which indicates that the orthogonal G. Complexity Analysis
constraint on the prototypes can improve the sparsity of the As most terminal devices in CPS are resource constrained,
spatial distribution; it can also promote the degree of intraclass high performance and low overhead are usually priorities; comaggregation; the lower variance and coupling degree are helpful putational complexity is an important indicator to measure
to mitigate the overlapping of neighborhoods (Hypothesis 3). whether a detection model is practical for integration into realtime IDS systems. To evaluate the computational complexity of
 the model, we calculated the inference time (taking the average
F. Feature Visualization of 100 experiments) of the proposed model and four few-shot
 detection models on the UNSW-NB15 and NSL-KDD datasets,
 To further verify the decoupling effect of the proposed model, as shown in Table V. It can be seen that the proposed model can
the feature representations of the compared FSL methods are quickly complete the detection task, and the inference time on
visualized by performing dimensionality reduction via PCA both datasets is better than the other four methods. This observaon the NSL-KDD dataset, as shown in Fig. 4. The average tion indicates that our method is more suitable for deployment
intraclass variance and interclass coupling of the four models in resource-constrained CPS devices.
are as follows: AnoS-Net (σ= 0.45 and c= 0.332), DeROL
(σ= 0.44 and c= 0.325), Siam_IDS (σ= 0.43 and c= 0.319),
FSL-SCNN (σ= 0.38 and c=0.207), and DPL-PSAD (σ= VI. CONCLUSION
0.34 and c= 0.127). It demonstrates that the proposed model To ensure the network security of industrial CPSs, this article
DPL-FSAD can effectively reduce the variance of the intraclass proposed a new model DPL-FSAD to address the problems of
distribution (by 10.5% compared with FSL-SCNN). In addition, existing attack detection methods with high coupling degrees
it reduces the coupling degree between prototypes (38.6% lower and fuzzy boundaries between attack categories. Comparative
than FSL-SCNN), thereby making different categories sparsely experiments as well as ablation studies were conducted with
12360 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

existing advanced attack detection algorithms and several tradi- Therefore, through FCL, the significance level of the key
tional machine learning methods on TON_IoT, UNSW-NB15, features can be improved by maximizing the eigenvalues of
and NSL-KDD in few-shot settings. The experimental results positive samples and negative samples.
showed that our proposed method outperforms the existing Proof of Hypothesis 2.
models in terms of precision, recall, F1-score, and FAR met- 1) Intraclass aggregation can be measured by the average
rics. It validated the effectiveness of the three hypotheses and expectation of the similarity between intraclass samples
demonstrated the ability of DPL-FSAD for extracting distinctive and different class prototypes. Based on the prototype
attack features, space decoupling of different prototypes, and contrastive loss defined in formula (7), since both the left
mitigating the fuzzy boundaries, which contribute to the robust and right terms of the loss are positive, to minimize L(Ci ),
detection of attack signals in industrial CPS environment in the left and right terms need to be minimized separately
few-shot cases.
 ⎧ ⎫
 ⎨ −1  ⎬
 APPENDIX min log (d (Ci , xin ))
 ⎩ |Qin | ⎭
 xin ∈Qin
 Proof of Hypothesis 1.
 ⎧ ⎫
 1) Since log is an increasing function, to minimize Lzi in for- ⎨  ⎬
 i ,zk )/τ )
 mula (3), we need to maximize log Nexp(D(z , ⇒ max log (d (Ci , xin ))
 exp(D(z ,z )/τ )
 q=1 i q ⎩ ⎭
 xin ∈Qin
 i.e., maximize the numerator term exp(D(zi , zk )/τ ) and
  ⎧ ⎫
 minimize the denominator term N q=1 exp(D(zi , zq )/τ ) ⎨  ⎬
 ⇒ max d (Ci , xin )
 max {exp (D (zi , zk ) /τ )} ⇒ max {D (zi , zk )} ⎩ ⎭
 xin ∈Qin
 ⎧ ⎫
 = max {zi · zk } = max {|zi | |zk | cos zi , zk } ⎨  ⎬
 ⎧ ⎫ ⇒ max Ci · xin
 ⎨N ⎬ ⎩ ⎭
 xin ∈Qin
 min exp (D (zi , zq ) /τ ) ⇒ min {D (zi , zq )}
 ⎩ ⎭ ⎧ ⎫
 q=1 ⎨  ⎬
 = min {zi · zq } = min {|zi | |zq | cos zi , zq } . ⇒ max Ci · xin ⇒ max {Ci · E (xin )} .
 ⎩ ⎭
 xin ∈Qin

 Under normalization condition, |zi | = |zk | = |zq | = 1, max
{|zi ||zk | cos zi , zk } = max{cos zi , zk }, i.e., to maximize Therefore, for the cluster of prototype Ci , we only need to
the similarity between the features of in-class samples maximize the similarity between the sample expectation E(xin )
and capture the common features; min{|zi ||zq | cos zi , zq } = and the prototype Ci , i.e., to maximize the degree of intraclass
min{cos zi , zq } = max{1 − cos zi , zq }, i.e., to minimize the aggregation.
similarity and maximize the distance between the features of 2) Prototype coupling degree can be measured by formula
different classes of samples. Therefore, for negative samples, (16), where Ci and Cj denote the prototypes of different
the model is more inclined to capture differentiated features that categories, respectively, c denotes the coupling degree of
are distinguishable from positive samples. prototypes, c ∈ [0, 1], c = 1 exist only if i = j.
 2) The significance level of a feature can be represented by If i = j, to minimize the right term of formula (7)
 the eigenvalue λ corresponding to the feature vector.
 z ·z T +z ·z T ⎧ ⎫
 As zi · zk ≤ i i 2 k k , max{zi · zk } ⇒ max ⎨  ⎬
{sup(zi · ziT + zk · zkT )} ⇒ max{zi · ziT } and max{zk · zkT }, 1
 min L (Ci ) ⇒ min − log (1 − d (Ci , xnot ))
zi and zk belong to the same category. ⎩ |Qnot | ⎭
 xnot ∈Qnot
 As zi · ziT is a square matrix, max{zi · ziT } ⇒ max ⎧ ⎫
{det(zi · ziT )} ⇒ max{ nj=1 λi i }. 1 ⎨  ⎬
 Similarly, max{zk · zkT } ⇒ max{ nj=1 λk }, i.e., the positive ⇒ max log (1 − d (Ci , xnot ))
 ⎩ |Qnot | ⎭
 xnot ∈Qnot
sample eigenvalues can be maximized via orthogonal con-
 ⎧ ⎫
straints. ⎨  ⎬
 z ·z T +z ·z T 1
 In addition, as zi · zq ≥ − i i 2 q q , zi and zq belong to ⇒ max (1 − d (Ci , xnot ))
different categories ⎩ |Qnot | ⎭
 xnot ∈Qnot
  ⎧ ⎫
 min {zi · zq } ⇒ max inf zi · ziT + zq · zqT ⎨ 1  ⎬
   ⇒ min d (Ci , xnot )
 ⇒ max zi · ziT and max zq · zqT . ⎩ |Qnot | ⎭
 xnot ∈Qnot
 ⎧ ⎫
 As zq · zqT is a square matrix, max{zq · zqT } ⇒ ⎨ 1  ⎬
max{det(zq · zqT )} ⇒ max{ nj=1 λq }, i.e., to maximize ⇒ min Ci · xnot .
 ⎩ |Qnot | ⎭
 xnot ∈Qnot
the eigenvalues of negative samples feature vectors.
SUN et al.: SPACE DECOUPLED PROTOTYPE LEARNING FOR FEW-SHOT ATTACK DETECTION IN CYBER–PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 12361

 Ci 
 For any Cj = |Q j| xj ∈Qj xj ∈ Qnot , where i = j, [8] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, D. Krishnan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and P. Isola, “Rethinking
 few-shot image classification: A good embedding is all you need?,” in
min L(Ci ) ⇒ min{Ci · Cj } ⇒ min{c}, i.e., to reduce the Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 266–282.
coupling degree between prototypes. [9] J. Liu, L. Song, and Y. Qin, “Prototype rectification for few-shot learning,”
 Proof of Hypothesis 3. in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 741–756.
 [10] O. A. Beg, T. T. Johnson, and A. Davoudi, “Detection of false-data
 1) To minimize Lorth (M ) in formula (10), we have injection attacks in cyber-physical DC microgrids,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 ⎧ ⎫ Inform., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 2693–2703, Oct. 2017.
 ⎨  ⎬ [11] Q. Sun, K. Zhang, and Y. Shi, “Resilient model predictive control of cyber–
 min{Lorth (M )} ⇒ min Ci · Cj physical systems under DoS attacks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 16,
 ⎩ ⎭ no. 7, pp. 4920–4927, Jul. 2020.
 i,j∈[1,N ],i=j [12] F. Li, Y. Shi, A. Shinde, J. Ye, and W. Song, “Enhanced cyber-physical
 ⎧ ⎫ security in Internet of things through energy auditing,” IEEE Internet
 ⎨  ⎬ Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5224–5231, Jun. 2019.
 ⇒ max (1 − Ci · Cj ) [13] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Detecting cyber attacks in industrial control
 ⎩ ⎭ systems using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Workshop Cyberi,j∈[1,N ],i=j
 Physical Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 72–83.
 [14] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
 i.e., the similarity of different types of prototypes is mini- systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the comparmized. ison with the KDD99 data set,” Inf. Secur. J., Glob. Perspective, vol. 25,
 As the intraclass samples are aggregated near the prototypes, no. 1/3, pp. 18–31, 2016.
 [15] H. Pearce, S. Pinisetty, P. S. Roop, M. M. Y. Kuo, and A. Ukil, “Smart
i.e., d(Ci , xin ) → 0; therefore, the sparsity between different I/O modules for mitigating cyber-physical attacks on industrial conclasses increases. trol systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4659–4669,
 2) Interclass overlapping can be measured by the distance Jul. 2020.
 [16] T. Huang, P. Chen, and R. Li, “A semi-supervised VAE based acbetween samples of different classes tive anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series for
 ⎧ ⎫ online systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1797–1806,
 ⎨  ⎬ doi: 10.1145/3485447.3511984.
 min{Lorth (M )} ⇒ min Ci · Cj [17] M. Zheng, J. Man, D. Wang, Y. Chen, Q. Li, and Y. Liu, “Semi-
 ⎩ ⎭ supervised multivariate time series anomaly detection for wind turbines
 i,j∈[1,N ],i=j
 ⎧  ⎛ ⎞⎫ using generator SCADA data,” Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 235, Jul. 2023,
 ⎨ 1  ki
 1 kj ⎬ Art. no. 109235, doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2023.109235.
 ⇒ min M ∗ ri · ⎝ M ∗ rj ⎠ [18] H. Cho, J. Seol, and S.-G. Lee, “Masked contrastive learning for anomaly
 ⎩ ki kj j=1 ⎭ detection,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1434–1441.
 i=1
 ⎧  ⎛ ⎞⎫ [19] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information
 ⎨  ki kj ⎬ estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 ⇒ min ri · ⎝ rj ⎠ 2019, pp. 1–24.
 ⎩ ⎭ [20] O. Kopuklu, J. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Rigoll, “Driver anomaly detection:
 i=1 j=1
 ⎧⎛ ⎞⎫ A dataset and contrastive learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf.
 ⎨  ki  kj ⎬ Appl. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 91–100.
 [21] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with internal
 ⇒ min ⎝ ri · rj ⎠
 ⎩ ⎭ contrastive learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 i=1 j=1 2022, pp. 1–26.
 ⎧ ⎫ [22] Y. Wang, Q. Yao, J. T. Kwok, and L. M. Ni, “Generalizing from a few
 ⎨ ki  kj ⎬ examples: A survey on few-shot learning,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53,
 ⇒ max (1 − ri · rj ) . no. 3, 2020, Art. no. 63.
 ⎩ ⎭ [23] M. Uchida, “Human error tolerant anomaly detection based on timei=1 j=1
 periodic packet sampling,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 106, pp. 242–250,
 The similarity between different types of samples is mini- 2016.
 [24] R. Kale and L. L. V. Thing, “Few-shot weakly supervised cybersecurity
mized, i.e., the distance between different types of samples is anomaly detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 130, 2023, Art. no. 103194.
maximized; thus, the degree of overlapping between different [25] A. Puzanov, S. Zhang, and K. Cohen, “Deep reinforcement one-shot
classes is reduced. learning for artificially intelligent classification in expert aided systems,”
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 91, 2020, Art. no. 103589.
 [26] P. Bedi, N. Gupta, and V. Jindal, “Siam-IDS: Handling class imbalance
 REFERENCES problem in intrusion detection systems using Siamese neural network,”
 Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 171, pp. 780–789, 2020.
 [1] L. Hou, Y. Li, W. Luo, and H. Sun, “Adaptive tracking control of switched [27] I. A. Khan, M. Keshk, D. Pi, N. Khan, Y. Hussain, and H. Soliman,
 cyber-physical systems with cyberattacks,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 415, “Enhancing IIoT networks protection: A robust security model for attack
 2022, Art. no. 126721. detection in Internet industrial control systems,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 134,
 [2] A. Humayed, J. Lin, F. Li, and B. Luo, “Cyber-physical systems security— 2022, Art. no. 102930.
 A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1802–1831, Dec. 2017. [28] P. Wu and H. Guo, “LuNET: A deep neural network for network intrusion
 [3] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell., 2019, pp. 617–624.
 anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., [29] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021. network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 [4] J. Slay and M. Miller, “Lessons learned from the Maroochy water breach,” Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Crit. Infrastruct. Protection, 2007, pp. 73–82. [30] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis
 [5] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep long short-term memory based of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur.
 classifier for wireless intrusion detection system,” ICT Exp., vol. 6, no. 2, Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
 pp. 98–103, 2020. [31] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “TON_IoT
 [6] X. Zhou, W. Liang, S. Shimizu, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Siamese neural telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and IIoT for data-driven
 network based few-shot learning for anomaly detection in industrial cyber- intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165130–165150,
 physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5790–5798, 2020.
 Aug. 2021. [32] S. E. Quincozes, C. Albuquerque, D. G. Passos, and D. Mossé, “ERENO: A
 [7] S. Huang et al., “A gated few-shot learning model for anomaly detection,” framework for generating realistic IEC–61850 intrusion detection datasets
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2020, pp. 505–509. for smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., pp. 1–15, 2023.
12362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Haili Sun received the B.S. degree in informa- Hongle Liu received the B.S. degree in automation and computer science from Hainan Uni- tion in 2022 from the Huazhong University of
 versity, Haikou, China, in 2013, and the M.S. Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, where
 degree in computer technology in 2015 from she is currently working toward the M.S. dethe School of Computer Science and Engineer- gree in cyber science and engineering with the
 ing, Huazhong University of Science and Tech- School of Cyber Security and Engineering.
 nology, Wuhan, China, where she is currently Her current research focuses on software
 working toward the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace security.
 security with the School of Cyber Security and
 Engineering.
 Her research interests include anomaly detection and security control of industrial IoT systems, and theory and
application of cyber-physical systems.

 Juan Chen received the B.S. degree in information and computational science from Northeast-
 Yan Huang (Member, IEEE) received the M.S. ern University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2021. She
 and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and is currently working toward the M.S. degree in
 technology from the Huazhong University of Sci- cyberspace security with the School of Cyber
 ence and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2016 Security and Engineering, Huazhong University
 and 2022, respectively. of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
 Since 2022, he has been a Postdoctor with Her current research focuses on malicious
 the School of Artificial Intelligence and Automa- behavior detection.
 tion, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research interests include knowledge graph embedding, knowledge inference,
 and their application in object detection, cyber
security, and natural language processing.

 Xin Li received the B.S. degree in cyber science
 Chunjie Zhou received the M.S. and Ph.D. de- and engineering in 2023 from the Huazhong
 grees in control theory and control engineering University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
 from the Huazhong University of Science and China, where he is currently working toward the
 Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1991 and 2001, M.S. degree in cyber science and engineering
 respectively. with the School of Cyber Science and Engineer-
 He is currently a Professor with the School of ing.
 Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong His current research focuses on binary
 University of Science and Technology. His re- vulnerability inversion and Java application
 search interests include safety and security con- security.
 trol of industrial control systems, theory and
 application of networked control systems, and
artificial intelligence.

 Lansheng Han received the B.S. degree from
 Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China, in 1995,
 and the Ph.D. degree from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
 China, in 2006, both in information security.
 He is currently a Professor with the School
 of Cyber Security and Engineering, Huazhong
 University of Science and Technology, and the
 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His
 research interests include computer virus, IoT
 security, malicious code detection, and mobile
intelligent terminal security.