IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024 683

 Tensor Recurrent Neural Network
 With Differential Privacy
 Jun Feng , Member, IEEE, Laurence T. Yang , Fellow, IEEE, Bocheng Ren, Deqing Zou , Mianxiong Dong ,
 and Shunli Zhang

 Abstract—Recurrent neural network (RNN), a branch of deep Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, deep learning, differential
learning, is a powerful model for sequential data that has out- privacy, Internet-of-Things, privacy protection, recurrent neural
standing performance on a wide range of important Internet of networks, tensor model.
Things (IoT) tasks. This unprecedented growth of RNN model has
however encountered both heterogeneous IoT data and privacy
issues. Existing RNN model can not deal with heterogeneous se- I. INTRODUCTION
quential data; often the larger datasets used in training of RNN HE Internet of Things (IoT) integrates many things with
model contain sensitive information. To tackle these challenges
and for the first time, this research proposes a novel differentially private tensor-based RNN (DPTRNN) that can be applied
 T computations and communications that can be powered
 by artificial neural network (ANN) [1]. ANN has gained much
in many challenging deep learning sequence tasks for IoT systems. attention in both industry and academia and has witnessed a flux
Specifically, to process heterogeneous sequential data, we propose in its usage in different IoT application domains [2]. Recurrent
a tensor-based RNN model. To guarantee privacy, we develop a neural networks (RNN) are ANN with recurrent connections
tensor-based back-propagation through time algorithm with perturbation to avoid exposing the sensitive information for training
 (feedback loops) [3]. Currently, machine learning schemes based
the tensor-based RNN model within the framework of differential on RNN are showing remarkable results in many challenging
privacy. Thorough security analysis shows that the differential sequence modeling tasks in IoT systems [4], [5]. RNN model is
private tensor-based RNN efficiently protects the confidentiality increasingly gaining popularity as a result of the improved perof sensitive user information for IoT. Our results from extensive formance in results obtained in different challenging sequence
experiments on two challenging large video datasets suggest that
our proposed scheme is practical with guarantee of data privacy
 problems. RNN is undoubtedly the tool of choice that has been
preservation and acceptable accuracy loss. used in a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) applications, e.g., language translation, speech recognition, input
 decoding etc. Although RNN was initially designed for usage
 Manuscript received 15 November 2020; revised 27 April 2021; accepted in speech recognition [6], [7], it is increasingly being applied to
1 May 2021. Date of publication 27 March 2023; date of current version 12 other application domains like social media, text summarization
February 2024. The work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62002128 and 61932010, in part by the etc. Specific use cases where RNN has been successful include
National Key Research & Development (R&D) Plan of China under Grant language translation where the input of the RNN is the source
2019YFB1705903, in part by the China Postdoctoral International Exchange language (e.g. Chinese) and the output is the target language
Fellowship Program under Grant 2020068, in part by the Science and Technology Project of Guizhou Province under Grant [2019]Y239, and in part by the (e.g. English), text summarization where given a very large text
Science and Technology Research Project of Education Department of Jiangxi as input, the RNN gives as output a condensed summary of the
Province under Grant GJJ2201914. Recommended for acceptance by S. Guest whole text that explains the whole original text [8].
Editors. (Corresponding author: Shunli Zhang.)
 Jun Feng and Deqing Zou are with the Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed It is very meaningful and challenging to process high-order
System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, Big Data in IoT systems. The existing RNN models are hard to
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and process high-order Big Data [9]. Tensor is a promising represen-
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China (e-mail: junfeng989@gmail.com;
deqingzou@hust.edu.cn). tation model for high-order data processing [10], [11]. Tensor
 Laurence T. Yang is with the Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System relations occur naturally in our everyday life due to the complex
Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of nature of data. These relations takes different forms depending
Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China, and also with the Department of Computer on the number of entities involved. Relations can be modeled
Science, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada as one-way tensors (vectors), two-way tensors (two-dimensional
(e-mail: ltyang@ieee.org). array or matrix), and three or more way tensors generally referred
 Bocheng Ren is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China to as high order tensors (for example, network intrusion data with
(e-mail: bc_revincent@hust.edu.cn). source-ip, target-ip, port-number, and timestamp). The tensor-
 Mianxiong Dong is with the Department of Information and Electronic En- based schemes have shown significant effectiveness in many
gineering, Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran 050-0071, Japan (e-mail:
mxdong@mmm.muroran-it.ac.jp). artificial intelligence applications, such as deep computation
 Shunli Zhang is with the School of Computer and Big Data Science, Jiu- model, deep convolutional computation model [12]. Therefore,
jiang University, Jiujiang, Jiangxii 332005, China, and also with the School of it is possible to propose a tensor-based RNN (TRNN) model
Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University, Haikou 430074, China
(e-mail: shunlizh@jju.edu.cn). for processing high-order sequential Big Data in IoT systems.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TC.2023.3236868 However, neural network for high-order data is a challenging
 0018-9340 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

task and the limited number of researches in this area is an TABLE 1
 TABLE OF SYMBOLS
attestation of this fact.
 This increased usage of RNN in different application domains
has however encountered obvious trust issues, the topnotch
concerns in IoT systems [13], [14]. Trust-oriented IoT systems
should involve ingredients contributing to data privacy protection. Only a few scientific researches on how to protect the
privacy of data on RNN however exist. Data privacy issues are
the biggest hurdle parts of IoT systems, and have prevented the
RNN-based applications in many IoT tasks that involve personal
or sensitive information such as photo, shopping history, private
financial data, and clinical records of COVID-19 patients [15].
 In the last few decades, we have witnessed a growing concern on how best to release sensitive information from statistical analysis, data mining, and artificial intelligence while
still protecting its privacy in IoT systems. One state-of-the-art
mechanism that has been deployed widely in IoT systems is processing and privacy protection in IoT systems. To the best of
differential privacy [16]. This mechanism guarantees stronger our knowledge, this is the first work to combine RNN, tensor
privacy protection of a specific record such that an adversary and differential privacy. The main contributions of this article
having all the other records in the dataset except the record include the following three aspects from the neural network and
under consideration can not be able to infer any information the differential privacy perspectives.
 r A tensor-based RNN model is innovatively designed to deal
about this record. The privacy guarantee is controlled by a
privacy budget, a measure that controls the amount by which with high order data by extending RNN model to tensor
distributions of output induced by two adjacent datasets differs. space. The tensor-based RNN model includes input tensor
Privacy budget is inversely proportional to the privacy guarantee layer, hidden tensor layer and output tensor layer.
 r A new tensor-based back-propagation through time
i.e. a smaller privacy budget gives stronger privacy guarantees.
A lot of studies have been done in privacy preservation using (TBPTT) algorithm with perturbation is proposed to
differential privacy both in theory and practice [17]. There are achieve privacy protection for tensor-based RNN. The main
some main ways of achieving differential privacy: Injecting idea of the proposed scheme is that we use functional
Laplace noise [16], Gaussian noise mechanism, exponential mechanism to enforce -differential privacy by perturbing
mechanism [18] and functional perturbation mechanism [19]. the loss function of the tensor-based RNN model rather
Neural network models can memorize sensitive, or private data than its results. People can make use of the proposal to
records used in their training. By using membership inference build intelligent video surveillance systems in a privacyattacks and model inversion attacks, adversaries can infer the preserving way. As far as we know, this is the first attempt
training data. The publishing of trained recurrent neural network to apply differential privacy to the task of tensor-based deep
models may disclose the training data in practice. Therefore, it computation. The proposed scheme can prevent adveris of great importance to propose differentially-private recurrent saries who have strong background knowledge to achieve
neural network schemes to protect sensitive, or private training privacy protection for tensor RNN model.
 r Extensive empirical evaluations were performed on two
data against the adversaries who have full information of neural
network model parameters. challenging well-known datasets: The KTH dataset and the
 Considering the strengths of RNN, tensor model and dif- UCF50 dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our
ferential privacy, combining the technologies is expected to scheme is competitive even with a non-privacy-enforcing
yield better results both in performance and privacy protection. tensor-based RNN model and introduces acceptable side
It is therefore deemed paramount to develop a data privacy effects on the precision.
preservation and heterogeneous RNN scheme that satisfies two The reminder of the paper is organized as follows: We discuss
goals. First of all, it should be able to be applied across a the preliminaries in Section II, followed by detailed discussion of
number of heterogeneous recurrent neural network application the construction of DPTRNN scheme in Section III. Section IV
domains. Secondly, it should not reveal private information in describes the experiments conducted including performance
the datasets used during the training of heterogeneous RNN evaluations. Section V presents related works and finally we
models. A scheme that satisfies these two conditions definitely have conclusion and future work in Section VI.
can dramatically enhance the usage of RNN while still ensuring
data privacy protection.
 To achieve the above goals, we proposed a novel differ- II. PRELIMINARIES
entially private tensor-based recurrent neural network (DP- In this section, we describe various important technologies
TRNN) scheme, which combines the current most advanced used in our work, e.g, RNN, differential privacy, and Laplace
artificial intelligent algorithm with the current most advanced mechanism. Some key notations used in this article are introprivacy protection techniques, for heterogeneous sequential data duced in Table 1.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
FENG et al.: TENSOR RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY 685

A. Recurrent Neural Network and D1 , D2 ∈ Dn be two neighbouring databases that differ with
 only one record (row).
 A recurrent neural network (RNN) is a deep learning model
that has achieved far greater success in modeling time se- Definition 1. Let  > 0. X is -differentially private if for all
 neighbouring databases and for all subsets of Y ∈ Y, we have
ries [20]. The input layer can take T inputs in form of a
variable-length vector sequences through time [21]. Suppose Pr [(D1 ) ∈ Y]
 ≤ exp(), (5)
x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xT ) is an input vector, the RNN updates its Pr [(D2 ) ∈ Y]
hidden state ht by
 where the probability space is over the coin flips of the mecha-
 
 0, t=0 nism φ.
 ht = , (1) Numeric queries and functions of the form f : D → Rk by
 (ht−1 , xt ), otherwise
 far represents the most common queries in a majority of the
where φ is a non-linear activation function (which can be as databases. The function f maps databases to k real numbers.
simple as an element-wise sigmoid function or as complex as The l1 -sensivity of these queries is a very important parameter
an LSTM) and ht is an element in the hidden vector sequence as it determines how accurately we can answer these queries.
h = (h1 , h2 , . . . , hT ). The RNN can optionally have an output Definition 2. (l1 -sensivity). The l1 -sensitivity of a function
vector sequence y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yT ) of variable length. The f : D → Rk is:
RNN updates both its hidden and output layers by using equations 2 and 3 below in each iteration stating from t = 1 to T , Δf = max f (x) − f (y)1 . (6)
 x, y ∈ D
 x − y1 = 1
 ht = (Wxh xt + Whh ht−1 + bh ), (2) This l1 -sensivity of any given function f acquires the magyt = Why ht + by . (3) nitude by which one individual data could vary f in the worst
 case.
 A RNN can be linear network or non-linear network. Non- The Laplace distribution (centered at 0) with scale b is the
linear networks are very powerful compared to their linear distribution with the following probability density function:
counterparts. However, due to the non-linearity, it is difficult  
 1 |x|
to determine the output given an input. This is one of the major Lap(x|b) = exp − . (7)
reason why we must learn the correlations between a given input 2b b
and output. There are a number of activation functions used in The Laplace distribution has a variance of σ 2 = 2b2 . We of-
RNN, the three major ones being sigmoid, tanh and ReLU. Loss ten denote this distribution by Lap(b) where b is a scale of
function is a function that assesses the performance of a model the Laplace distribution. This denotation basically represents
by comparing the output of the model yt to a corresponding a random variable (i.e. X ∼ Lap(b)). This distribution is just
target zt . The loss function is thus defined as like the exponential distribution except for the fact that it is
 T symmetrical.
 
 L(y, z) = Lt (yt , zt ), (4) The Laplace mechanism, as its name suggest, simply comt=1 putes f , and perturbs every coordinate with Laplace distribution
 noise. The scale of the noise will be calibrated to the sensitivity
which indicates summation of all the losses in every timestep. of f (divided by ).
The choice of the loss function depends on the issue to be solved. Definition 3. (The Laplace Method). Given any function f :
Popular loss functions used include the Euclidean distance for D → Rk , the Laplace method is defined as:
real-values forecasting and cross-entropy for classification problems over probability distributions of outputs. L (x, f (·), ) = f (x) + (Y1 , . . . , Yk ) , (8)
 where Yi ∼ Lap(∇f /) iid (random variables taken from the
B. Differential Privacy distribution Lap(∇f /)). The Laplace mechanism preserves -
 In this subsection, we introduce the concept of differential differential privacy.
privacy, functional mechanism and finally take a deep look at Differential privacy exhibits a contrasting behaviour between
how to achieve the functional mechanism [22], [23]. the minimization of privacy loss and maximization of utility.
 Supposing D is a database that contains m records Privacy loss is measured by parameter  (the privacy budget)
r1 , r2 , . . . , rm and p + 1 attributes R1 , R2 , . . . , Rp , Y then each while utility can be measured by either L1 or L2 losses among
record ri can be expressed as ri = ri1 , r i2 , . . . , rip , ry . Without
 other mechanisms [22]. The selection of parameter  depends on
 p 2
 several factors including how differentially private algorithms
loss of generality, we also assume that j=1 rij ≤ 1 where behave under compositions and the way the privacy loss accurij ≥ 0. We can enforce this this assumption by changing each mulates over time during multiple analyses.
 rij −αj
rij by (βj −α √ where βj and αj are the maximum and
 j ). p
 Functional mechanism is a general framework used in some
minimum values of the domain Rj . machine learning tasks that preserves -differential privacy. By
 For purposes of formulating a formal definition of - using this framework, perturbation (adding noise) is done on the
differential privacy, we let : Dn → Y be a randomized algorithm objective function (optimization goal) of the machine learning

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

Fig. 1. Overview for differentially private tensor RNN.

task rather than the outputs. The exact noise you use can come Fig. 2. Structure of one tensor RNN model.
from a number of distributions including Laplace distribution,
Gaussian distribution etc. In our case, we make use of Laplace
distribution for perturbing our objective function.

 III. THE CONSTRUCTION OF TENSOR-BASED RECURRENT
 NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY
 This section details the main components of the proposed
scheme toward differentially private training of tensor-based
recurrent neural network: Tensor-based RNN, and tensor-based
back-propagation through time algorithm with perturbation.
 Our main goal is to design differentially private tensor-based
RNN model. Our system involves three main entities: Data
owner, trusted server, and data user. The following system model
(See Fig. 1) is considered in this article: A data owner has a mass
of data involving business information, medical information, Fig. 3. Structure of many-to-one tensor RNN model.
and education information. Suppose the data owner would like
to publish the tensor-based RNN model based on the data
for collaboration with a data user. The data owner sends the
 A. Tensor-Based RNN Model
data to a trusted server. Because of data privacy concerns,
the differentially private tensor-based RNN is computed and A tensor-based RNN model is proposed to deal with high
the differentially private results are released to the data user order data by using tensor computations [11], [24]. Tensors
by the trusted server. Specifically, the following requirements (multidimensional arrays) are generalized forms of one dimenshould be met in the work. sional arrays (vectors) and two dimensional arrays (matrices).
 r Privacy: The core concern in the proposed scheme is to Tensor order is defined as the number of dimensions of a tensor.
 protect data privacy. The released results (trained tensor- Other names for tensor order are ways or modes. The tensorbased RNN model) should satisfy differential privacy to based RNN is the tensor space extension of RNN. The tensorprevent the membership inference attack of the data user. based RNN models comprise many-to-many tensor-based RNN
 r Utility: The tensor-based RNN should be correctly trained. model, many-to-one tensor-based RNN model, and one-to-many
 The released results should retain as much accurate infor- tensor-based RNN model. Fig. 2 shows the structure of one
 mation as possible for subsequent analysis. tensor RNN model.
 The type of model required by data analyzer must be known In this work, we concentrate on one many-to-one tensor-based
beforehand by the data owner. For instance, if the requirement RNN model. The structure of the many-to-one tensor-based
of the data analyzer implies a model that uses patient status to RNN model is shown in Fig. 3. A simple many-to-one tensorestimate possible diseases, the matching model must be built by based RNN model has three layers: Input tensor layer, hidden
the data owner. Even though tensor-based RNN model presents tensor layer, and output tensor layer. Specically, the related
a minimal risk in the sense of leakage of personal informa- definitions of many-to-one tensor-based RNN model are given as
tion, there exists a potential to publish two tensor-based RNN follows. The input tensor is X ∈ RI1 ×I2 ×···×IN ×1 . The variable
models trained from similar databases. Personal attribute values of hidden tensor layer is H ∈ RJ1 ×J2 ×···×JH ×1 . The activation
included only in one database for our case, maybe estimated function of the hidden tensor layer is fh (·). The hidden-tothrough comparison of the published tensor-based RNN models. hidden fully-connected weight tensor is W ∈ Rα×J1 ×J2 ×···×JH .
By using differential privacy techniques, we can guarantee that The input-to-hidden weight tensor is U ∈ Rα×I1 ×I2 ×···×IN ,
the risk of private information leakage caused by the tensor- where α = J1 × J2 × · · · × JH . The variable of output tensor
based RNN model is lower than a predefined threshold. layer is O ∈ RL1 ×L2 ×···×LM ×1 . The activation function of the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
FENG et al.: TENSOR RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY 687

output tensor layer is fo (·). The hidden-to-output weight tensor updated by:
is V ∈ Rβ×J1 ×J2 ×···×JH , where β = L1 × L2 × · · · × LM . ∂L
 Definition 4. Tensor Multi-Dot Product ( ): Assume Uγ = Uγ − η ,
 ∂Uγ
Y ∈ Rϕ×K1 ×K2 ×···×KM represents (M + 1)-order tensor having ϕ sub-tensors, every sub-tensor is expressed as Yδ ∈ ∂L
 Wγ = Wγ − ξ ,
RK1 ×K2 ×···×KM , and B represents a tensor of size K1 × K2 × ∂Wγ
· · · × KM . The multi-dot product ( ) of the tensors Y , B
 ∂L
produces a new M -order tensor T ∈ RI1 ×I2 ×···×IM (I1 × I2 × Vμ = Vμ − λ , (17)
 ∂Vμ
· · · × IM = ϕ). T is delineated as T = Y B, ∀ti1 i2 ···iM ∈
  −1 M
T, ti1 i2 ···iM = Yδ · B, (δ = iM + M k=1 (ik − 1) j=k+1 Ij ).
 where η, ξ, λ indicate learning rate parameters.
 The many-to-one tensor-based RNN model includes forward
calculation and backward propagation. B. Tensor-Based RNN Under Differential Privacy
 The forward calculation for the tensor-based RNN model is Differential privacy offers a strong standard for privacy progiven as follows. Given the hidden layer Ht−1 at time t − 1, tection for training tensor-based RNN model on aggregate
the hidden layer Ht at time t can be calculated. As illustrated Big Data. A differentially private tensor-based RNN model is
in Fig. 3, the forward calculation at time t (t < T ) can be proposed in this subsection. The popular privacy mechanisms,
formulated as: Laplace mechanism and functional mechanism, are applied as
 H(t)∗ = U Xt + W Ht−1 , concrete construction.
 A Straightforward Scheme: We may propose a differentially
 Ht = fh H(t)∗ , private scheme, which directly injects random noise only into
 the final results gotten from the users’ sensitive data, to protect
 H0 = 0. (9) the training data privacy in tensor-based RNN model. However,
 this straightforward scheme may compromise the availability of
And the forward calculation at time T can be formulated as the learned tensor-based RNN model. An Advanced Scheme: We
follows: prefer an alternative advanced differentially private tensor-based
 O = fo V HT . (10) RNN scheme in this article. More specifically, a sophisticated
 tensor-based back-propagation through time (TBPTT) algo-
 In the tensor-based RNN model, backward propagation is rithm with perturbation is designed to achieve privacy guarantees
utilized to compute gradients to achieve a better parameter for the tensor-based RNN models by relying on the -differential
update. The backward propagation for the model is given as privacy.
follows. Let M be the number of samples. The loss function is The softmax function, a monotonically increasing activation
defined to be: function, is widely used in multi-class classification problems.
 M T We denote the result of the softmax function on tensor O as
 1  t
 L= L. (11) sof tmax(O). The tensor cross-entropy of two tensors O, Y ∈
 M m t=1 RI1 ×I2 ×···×IN is defined as:
Using gradient chain rule, the partial derivatives of L with CrossEntropy(O, Y ) = −Y · ln(softmax(O)). (18)
respect to each tensor and element can be calculated by the
following equations: Let the model parameter θ = {U, W, V }. The loss function,
 which denotes the penalty for mismatching the training samples,
 ∂Lt ∂Lt (t)∗ is defined to be:
 (t)∗
 = (t)
 fo (ol1 l2 ···lM ), (12) 
 ∂ol1 l2 ···lM ∂ol1 l2 ···lM M  β m
 eo p
 m
 L(θ) = − yp · ln  , (19)
 eop + βq=1,q=p eoq
 m m
 T
 ∂L ∂Lt ∂Lt ∂Lt m=1 p=1
 = , = (t)∗ · H t, (13)
 ∂Vμ ∂Vμ ∂Vμ ∂o M −1 t=M
 t=1 l1 l2 ···lM where om m
 p = V p · H , p = lm + j=1 (lj − 1) t=j+1 Lt ,
 ∂Lt ∂Lt β = L1 × L2 × · · · × LM . In order to use differential privacy,
 (t)∗
 (t)∗
 = (t)∗
 · vμj1 j2 ···jH · fh (hj1 j2 ···jH ), (14) omp is seen as independent variable in (19). Then we get the
 ∂hj1 j2 ···jH ∂ol1 l2 ···lM following form:
 T t−1
  
 ∂L ∂Lt ∂Lt ∂Lt β m
 eo p
 = , = · Xk, (15) m m m
 L o1 , om , . . . , o β = − m
 yp · ln  .
 ∂Uγ ∂Uγ ∂Uγ ∂h
 (k)∗
 eop + βq=1,q=p eoq
 m m
 t=1 k=1 j1 j2 ···jH p=1

 T t−1
  (20)
 ∂L ∂Lt ∂Lt ∂Lt
 = , = · H k−1 . (16) Applying the Taylor expansion on (20) and truncating the Taylor
 ∂Wγ t=1
 ∂Wγ ∂Wγ ∂h
 (k)∗
 series, we obtain the following low-order polynomial approxik=1 j1 j2 ···jH
 mation:
In the tensor-based RNN model, parameters are updated by
utilizing stochastic gradient descent. The weight tensors are  m , om , . . . , om ) = L (0, 0, . . . , 0)
 L(o 1 m β

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 where the polynomial coefficients can be computed as follows:
 Algorithm 1: Tensor-Based Back-Propagation Through
 Time Algorithm With Perturbation.
 L (0, 0, . . . , 0) = ln β,
 Input: Examples D = {Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zm , . . . , ZM }.
 Parameters: maximum number of iterations iterM ax, (1) 1
 Lo m (0, 0, . . . , 0) = − ypm ,
 privacy budget cb, total privacy budget tb, learning rate
 p
 β
 
 η, ξ, λ, threshold thr. β−1
 (2) 2 ,p = q
 Output: Model parameter θ = {U , W, V}. Lo m m
 p oq
 (0, 0, . . . , 0) = β 1 . (22)
 − β 2 , p = q
 1: Initialize θ, H0 , Δ;
 2: for iter = 1, 2, . . . , iterM ax do
 Let Δ be the global sensitivity. In order to achieve -differential
 3: for m = 1, 2, . . . , M do
 privacy, Laplace noises are injected into the polynomial coeffi-
 4: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 cients:
 5: Compute H t according to (9);
  
 6: for j1 = 1, 2, . . . , J1 do (0) 0 Δ
 7: ··· ωm = L (0, 0, . . . , 0) + Lapm ,
 ε
 8: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do  
 9: for l1 = 1, 2, . . . , L1 do (1) (1) 1 Δ
 ωm = Lo m (0, 0, . . . , 0) + Lap m ,
 10: ··· p
 ε
 11: for lN = 1, 2, . . . , lM do (2)  
 (t) Lom om (0, 0, . . . , 0) Δ
 12: Compute ol1 l2 ···lM according to (10); ωm(2)
 = p q + Lap0m , (23)
 (0) (1) (2) 2 ε
 13: Compute ωm , ωm , ωm according to
 (23); where Lap( Δε ) follows the Laplace distribution with mean 0 and
 14: Compute the perturbed loss function L
 scale parameter Δ ε.
 according to (24);
 ∂L
 Using (23), we can construct the following perturbed loss
 15: Compute the derivative (t)∗ function, which is employed in the differentially private tensor
 ∂ol l ···l
 1 2 M
 according to (12); RNN:
 ∂L
 16: Compute the derivative β
 (t)∗
 ∂hj j ···j 
 L(om m m (0) (1)
 · om
 1 2 H
 according to (14); 1 , o m , . . . , o β ) = ωm + ωm p
 17: end for p=1

 18: ··· β β
 1   (2) m m
 19: end for + ω ·o o . (24)
 20: end for 2 p=1 q=1 m p q
 21: ···
 22: end for After the perturbed loss function is obtained, the model param-
 23: end for eter θ can be derived by minimizing the perturbed loss function.
 ∂L
 24: Generate the gradients ∂V ∂L
 , ∂L , ∂W
 μ ∂Uγ γ
 according to The main steps of the proposed TBPTT algorithm
 equations (13, 15, 16); with perturbation are highlighted in Algorithm 1. The
 25: end for input and parameters of our algorithm are examples
 26: Update cb; D = {Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zm , . . . , ZM }, Z m = (X m , Y m ), maxi-
 27: if L > thr and cb < tb then mum number of iterations iterM ax, privacy budget , learning
 28: Update the weight tensors Uγ , Wγ , Vμ according to rate η, ξ, λ, and threshold thr. The output of our algorithm is
 (17). the model parameter θ = {U , W, V}. By employing functional
 29: else mechanism, Laplace distribution noises are added in order to
 30: RETURN 0. achieve differential privacy in Line 13 in Algorithm 1. The gra-
 31: end if dients ∂L ∂L ∂L
 ∂V , ∂U , ∂W are computed by exploiting the chain rule in
 32: end for Line 24 in Algorithm 1. We take a step in the opposite direction of
 33: RETURN 0. each gradient to update the model parameters including tensors
 Uγ , Wγ , Vμ in Line 28 in Algorithm 1. If the privacy cost is more
 than the total privacy budget or L < thr, the algorithm will be
 stopped.
 β
 
 (1) The correctness of the proposed differentially private tensor-
 + Lo m
 p
 (0, 0, . . . , 0) · om
 p based RNN is based on Theorem 1. Before Theorem 1 is stated
 p=1
 and proven, the definition of adjacent tensor sets is given firstly.
 β β Definition 5. Adjacent Tensor Sets: For any two sets D, D ,
 1 
 + Lom om (2) (0, 0, . . . , 0) ·om m
 p oq , (21) where every element in the sets is one tensor of the same order
 2 p=1 q=1 p q
 and the same dimension, if the two sets D, D contain at most

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
FENG et al.: TENSOR RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY 689

one different tensor, then the two sets D, D are adjacent tensor We can derive that:
sets, which is written as D ≈ D .  (R) (R) 
 T 2 ε ωT −ωt 
 D
 Theorem 1. The proposed tensor-based back-propagation Pr(L(θ)|D) R=0 e 
 Δ
 = t=1 
through time (TBPTT) algorithm with perturbation satisfies Pr(L(θ)|D ) ω(R) −ω(R) 
-differential privacy. T 2  TD t 
 ε

 R=0 e
 Δ
 Proof. Assume tensor sets D, D are adjacent tensor sets t=1
  (R) (R) 
(i.e. D ≈ D ). To prove that the proposed algorithm sat- εω 
 2 T
 −ω
 Dt
isfies -differential privacy, the global sensitivity Δ on the R=0 e 
 Δ
 = 
adjacent tensor sets D, D is computed firstly. Without loss ω(R) −ω(R) 
 2
 ε TD t 
of generality, assume that D and D differ only in their
 R=0 e
 Δ
last tensor element, X TD = X TD , |D| = |D | = T, β = L1 ×
 2    
L2 × · · · × LM . Then, we have ε   (R) (R)   (R) (R) 
 Δ ωT −ωt −ωT −ωt 
 =e R=0 D D
 . (27)
 2 
  
  (R) (R) 
 Δ= max ωt1 − ωt2  By the triangle inequality, we have the following inequal-
 X t1 ∈D,X t2 ∈D (R) (R) (R) (R) (R) (R)
 R=0 ity ωTD − ωt  − ωTD − ωt  ≤ ωTD − ωTD . There-
 2 
   fore, we have that:
  (R) (R) 
 = ωTD − ωTD  2 
   (R) (R) 
 
 R=0 Pr(L(θ)|D) ε
 Δ ωT −ωT 
 ≤ e R=0 D D

 2
      Pr(L(θ)|D )
  (R)   (R) 
 ≤  ωT D  +  ωT D  ε
 = e Δ ·Δ
 R=0
 2   = eε . (28)
   (R) 
 ≤ 2 tmax ωt . (25) Pr{U =U (D)}
 X ∈D,D
 R=0 Pr{U =U (D )}is less than or equal to e . Consequently, we
 obtain the conclusion: The resulting model satisfies -differential
 The outputs of hidden layer are normalized. According to (22), privacy. Therefore, the proposed scheme can be used to train a
 (0) (0)
we have ωTD  = ωTD . Therefore, we have the following tensor RNN model while guaranteeing the differential privacy
inequality: preservation of the user’s data. The scheme can protect against
 2 
 a strong adversary who has the complete knowledge of training
  
  (R)  the tensor-based RNN model.
 Δ ≤ 2 tmax ωt 
 X ∈D,D
 R=0
 
 2 
  
  (R)  IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
 = 2 tmax ωt 
 X ∈D,D
 R=1 In this section, we report the experimental results of the dif-
  β   
    ferentially private tensor-based RNN model. To validate the pro-
  1  β β
 1 
  t  
 = 2 tmax  ( − yp ) +  − 2 posed model, rigorous experimental evaluations were conducted
 X ∈D,D 
 p=1
 β  
 p=1 q=1,q=p
 β  on two well-known real-world action recognition datasets: KTH
  β  [25] and UCF11 [26], which are used extensively in IoT-enabled
   β − 1 smart city monitoring systems research.
  
 +  The real-world KTH dataset [25] comprises six categories
  β 
 2
 p=q=1 of human actions i.e jogging, boxing, hand clapping, walking,
   running and hand waving each of which is performed sever-
 1 β−1
 ≤ 2 β + 2 · β · (β − 1) + ·β ally by 25 subjects under 4 different conditions: Outdoors c1 ,
 β β2
 outdoors with varying scale c2 , outdoors using different clothes
 2β 2 + 4β − 4 c3 and finally indoors c4 . The current database contains 2391
 = . (26)
 β sequences taken on similar backgrounds using a static camera
 having a frame rate of 25 fps. The composition of the UCF11
The sensitivity of one function provides an upper bound on how
 dataset includes 1600 video clips divided into 11 action groups.
much we should disturb the output of the function to preserve
 They include horse riding, diving, jumping and others. Every
privacy. According to (26), the sensitivity Δ has upper bound.
 group consists of 25 video categories, whereby each category
For multi-class problem, β is the number of classes. The number
 contains 4 or more clips. For a detailed explanation about UCF11
of classes is usually limited, therefore we can get appropriate
 dataset, please refer to [26].
sensitivity Δ.
 (R) (R) We programmed all of the algorithms in tensor-based RNN
 Let ωt be the real output, ωTD be the output of the algorithm and differentially private tensor-based RNN in Python. Our
 (R)
with perturbation on the tensor set D, and ωTD be the output of code is executed on a machine with a 3.6 GHz Quad-Core i7
the algorithm with perturbation on the tensor set D . Intel processor. For each dataset, we varied iteration counts,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 Fig. 5. Accuracies of the differentially private tensor-based RNN models for
Fig. 4. Accuracies of the differentially private tensor-based RNN models for
 varying size of hidden units.
varying learning rate.

learning rate, hidden size, and privacy budget  in a series of units, we conducted experiments that varied the size of hidden
experimental evaluations. The tensor-based RNN model does units in the differentially private tensor-based RNN model from
not enforce -differential privacy while the differentially private 100 to 400 on the KTH dataset and the UCF11 dataset. Fig.
tensor-based RNN model enforces -differential privacy. It is 5(a) and (b) show the algorithm’s classification accuracy, as a
obvious that our differentially private tensor-based RNN mainly function of the iteration number, for varying size of hidden units
incurs the following side-effect on tensor-based RNN: It incurs on the KTH dataset and the UCF11 dataset, respectively. The
inaccuracies due to the noise injection in training tensor-based results from Fig. 5(a) and (b) indicate that increasing the size
RNN model. Therefore, accuracy as the key metric is employed of hidden units in the differentially private tensor-based RNN
in our performance evaluations. model does not decrease the classification accuracy, and that the
 To determine how the accuracy of the differentially private effects of the size of hidden units on the differentially private
tensor-based RNN model was affected by the learning rate, we tensor-based RNN models are insignificant on the KTH dataset
conducted experiments that varied the learning rate. Fig. 4(a) and and the UCF11 dataset.
(b) show the algorithm’s results on classification accuracy, as a To determine how the accuracies of the tensor-based RNN
function of the iteration number, for privacy budget  = 6.4 and models and the differentially private tensor-based RNN models
varying learning rate on the KTH dataset and the UCF11 dataset, were affected by the privacy budget , we conducted experiments
respectively. We observe that when the learning rate is 0.001, the that varied the privacy budget . Fig. 6(a) shows each algorithm’s
algorithm has higher accuracies than when the learning rates are classification accuracy as a function of the privacy budget 
0.01, 0.0001, 0.00001 on the KTH dataset. We observe that when on the KTH dataset. As can be observed from the figure, the
the learning rate is 0.002, the algorithm has higher accuracies tensor-based RNN scheme’s accuracies remain unchanged with
than when the learning rates are 0.02, 0.0002, 0.00002 on the the varying privacy budget . This is simply because tensor-based
UCF11 dataset. We also observe that the learning rates have RNN scheme does not enforce -differential privacy. Since the
significant influence on accuracies of algorithm on the KTH size of  is inversely proportional to the amount of noise (i.e.
dataset and the UCF11 dataset. small values of privacy budget  requires more noise to be
 To determine how the accuracy of the differentially private injected), the differentially private tensor-based RNN model that
tensor-based RNN model was affected by the size of hidden enforces -differential privacy suffers from inaccuracies with

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
FENG et al.: TENSOR RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY 691

 combining LSTM and edge computing to analyze data features
 for industrial IoT. Alazab et al. [27] presented a novel multidirectional long short-term memory model for the stability prediction
 of smart grid network, and this model has shown to be very
 superior to prior approaches. Gong et al. [1] proposed a novel
 hybrid deep neural network model for friend recommendation,
 and the resulting model has shown to be effective. The existing
 RNN models are almost designed based on matrix operations,
 therefore they are not suitable for heterogeneous IoT data.
 There have been some efforts to protect data privacy using
 differential privacy. With regard to existing literature, Dwork
 et al. [16] proposed a -differential private scheme and showed
 that the Laplace method (supporting queries having real numbers
 as outputs) can be used to enforce the privacy. Although this
 method has been used in a wide range of existing work, it
 is limited to aggregate queries (such as sum, histograms) or
 queries that are reducible into simple aggregates. As a way
 of complementing the Laplace method, the exponential method
 (supporting queries with discrete output spaces) was proposed
 by McSherry and Talwar [19]. This made it possible for implementation of various difficult differential privacy problems
 whose outputs are not real numbers. Despite the two methods
 having achieved substantial success in implementing differential
 privacy solutions, it is still challenging to use them in neural
 network tasks as a result of complex correlations between the
 inputs and outputs through the objective functions. There are
 several related efforts where differential privacy is used with
 neural networks. Abadi et al. in the literature [30] employed the
Fig. 6. Results on accuracies of the tensor-based RNN models and the differ- gradient approximation method based on differential privacy,
entially private tensor-based RNN models for varying privacy budget . which is first to add Gaussian noise to perturb the gradients at
 each iteration of neural network training to provide provable
 privacy guarantees. Furthermore, they also proposed moments
decreasing . It is worth noting that the differentially private tenaccountant method to tightly estimate the cumulative privacy
sor RNN model is competitive with the non-privacy preservation
 loss. Li et al. [31] proposed an efficient secure computation
model. Fig. 6(b) shows each algorithm’s classification accuracy
 scheme for differentially private data publishing in a cloud enas a function of the privacy budget  on the UCF11 dataset. The
 vironment. Phan et al. [22], [23] presented differentially private
experimental results on the UCF11 dataset are consistent with
 deep neural networks based on functional mechanism. Recently,
those on the KTH dataset. Therefore, the proposed differentially
 Chen et al. [3] proposed a differentially private recurrent neural
private tensor RNN model is feasible.
 network model for the privacy protection of dynamic trajectory.
 Unlike the existing schemes, our proposed scheme focuses on
 V. RELATED WORKS high order data in IoT. The existing schemes are different from
 In this section, we present some of the most recent related the scheme proposed in our paper in the target model.
works done in our line of research.
 There have been a number of efforts to develop and use
RNN in IoT [27]. The main distinguishing feature of RNN from
standard neural networks is the persistence of information about VI. CONCLUSION
previous states used to determine the current state i.e. hidden Processing heterogeneous IoT data and ensuring IoT data
layers are interconnected with each connection associated with a security and privacy become more fundamental concerns in
time delay [28]. By utilizing these connections, the model is able practical IoT systems. In this article, we have presented a
to remember past states which enables it to discover temporal tensor-based RNN model and a mechanism of preserving privacy
correlations among events that are far away from each other of information in training of tensor-based RNN, differentially
in the dataset. The RNN is thus an extension of a feedforward private tensor-based RNN (DPTRNN), for IoT systems for the
neural network that is capable of handling a variable-length input first time. Our proposed scheme is able to process heterogeneous
sequence by utilizing a recurrent hidden state whose activation at IoT data and achieve stronger privacy guarantees by enforcing
any given time depends on that of previous time [27]. Recently, -differential privacy, the most promising privacy metric used in
Cao et al. [29] proposed a RNN based short-term forecasting privacy-preserving machine learning tasks, during the training
method for land use change. Lai et al. [21] proposed a method process of the tensor-based RNN model. By using the scheme,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 73, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

membership inference attack exposure can be reduced. Exten- [18] X. Yang, T. Wang, X. Ren, and W. Yu, “Survey on improving data utility in
sive experiments were conducted by using the KTH dataset and differentially private sequential data publishing,” IEEE Trans. Big Data,
 vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 729–749, Oct. 2021.
the UCF11 dataset. The results of our experiments demonstrated [19] M. Li, L. Zhu, Z. Zhang, and R. Xu, “Achieving differential privacy of
the accuracy and effectiveness of the proposed tensor-based trajectory data publishing in participatory sensing,” Inf. Sci., vol. 400,
RNN with differential privacy. pp. 1–13, 2017.
 [20] Q. Feng, D. He, Z. Liu, H. Wang, and K. R. Choo, “SecureNLP: A
 As future work, we would like to set our sights on the schemes system for multi-party privacy-preserving natural language processing,”
under differential privacy that can improve the efficiency of IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3709–3721, 2020.
the tensor-based RNN models while still preserving privacy of [21] C.-F. Lai, W.-C. Chien, L. T. Yang, and W. Qiang, “LSTM and edge computing for Big Data feature recognition of industrial electrical equipment,”
IoT user data. We would like to present several optimization IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2469–2477, Apr. 2019.
strategies (such as adaptive learning rate to improve the training [22] N. Phan, Y. Wang, X. Wu, and D. Dou, “Differential privacy preservation
procedure) to enhance the accuracy of the differentially private for deep auto-encoders: An application of human behavior prediction,” in
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016, pp. 1309–1316.
tensor-based RNN model. We also plan to adapt our proposal [23] N. Phan, X. Wu, H. Hu, and D. Dou, “Adaptive Laplace mechanism:
to other commonly used tensor-based deep computation algo- Differential privacy preservation in deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
rithms for IoT systems. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 385–394.
 [24] S. Oh, N. Park, J.-G. Jang, L. Sael, and U. Kang, “High-performance tucker
 factorization on heterogeneous platforms,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
 REFERENCES Syst., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 2237–2248, Oct. 2019.
 [25] C. Schuldt, I. Laptev, and B. Caputo, “Recognizing human actions: A local
 [1] J. Gong et al., “Hybrid deep neural networks for friend recommendations SVM approach,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2004,
 in edge computing environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 10 693–10 706, pp. 32–36.
 2020. [26] J. Liu, J. Luo, and M. Shah, “Recognizing realistic actions from videos
 [2] M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, J. Wu, G. M. Weiss, T. Hayajneh, T. Wang, and G. Wang, in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009,
 “Event detection through differential pattern mining in cyber-physical pp. 1996–2003.
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 652–665, Dec. 2020. [27] M. Alazab, S. Khan, S. S. R. Krishnan, Q. Pham, M. P. K. Reddy, and T. R.
 [3] S. Chen, A. Fu, J. Shen, S. Yu, H. Wang, and H. Sun, “RNN-DP: A new Gadekallu, “A multidirectional LSTM model for predicting the stability
 differential privacy scheme base on recurrent neural network for dynamic of a smart grid,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 85 454–85 463, 2020.
 trajectory privacy protection,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 168, 2020, [28] Z. Wang, M. Song, S. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, and Q. Wang, “Invisible
 Art. no. 102736. adversarial attack against deep neural networks: An adaptive penalization
 [4] S. Huang, K. Ota, M. Dong, and F. Li, “MultiSpectralNet: Spectral approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3,
 clustering using deep neural network for multi-view data,” IEEE Trans. pp. 1474–1488, May/Jun. 2021.
 Comput. Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 749–760, Aug. 2019. [29] C. Cao, S. Dragićević, and S. Li, “Short-term forecasting of land use change
 [5] A. Azmoodeh, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Robust malware using recurrent neural network models,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 19,
 detection for Internet of (Battlefield) Things devices using deep eigenspace 2019, Art. no. 5376.
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 88–95, First [30] M. Abadi et al., “Deep learning with differential privacy,” in Proc. 23rd
 Quarter 2019. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2016, pp. 308–318.
 [6] A. Graves, A.-R. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with deep [31] J. Li et al., “Efficient and secure outsourcing of differentially private data
 recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech publishing with multiple evaluators,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 Signal Process., 2013, pp. 6645–6649. Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 67–76, Jan./Feb. 2022.
 [7] Z. M. Fadlullah, B. Mao, F. Tang, and N. Kato, “Value iteration architecture based deep learning for intelligent routing exploiting heterogeneous
 computing platforms,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 939–950,
 Jun. 2019.
 [8] R. Nallapati et al., “Abstractive text summarization using sequence-to-
 Jun Feng (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 sequence RNNs and beyond,” 2016, arXiv:1602.06023.
 from the School of Computer Science and Tech-
 [9] K.-C. Li, H. Jiang, L. T. Yang, and A. Cuzzocrea, Big Data: Algorithms,
 nology, Huazhong University of Science and Tech-
 Analytics, and Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2015.
 nology, Wuhan, China. He is an associate professor
[10] N. Park, S. Oh, and U. Kang, “Fast and scalable method for distributed
 with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 Boolean tensor factorization,” VLDB J., vol. 28, pp. 549–574, 2019.
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
[11] J. Feng, L. T. Yang, R. Zhang, W. Qiang, and J. Chen, “Privacy preserving
 He is particularly interested in privacy-preserving
 high-order Bi-Lanczos in cloud-fog computing for industrial applications,”
 machine learning, cyber-physical-social systems, dif-
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 7009–7018, Oct. 2022.
 ferential privacy, deep learning, blockchain, and Big
[12] L. Kong, X.-Y. Liu, H. Sheng, P. Zeng, and G. Chen, “Federated tensor
 Data.
 mining for secure industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
 vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 2144–2153, Mar. 2020.
[13] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, and L. Y. Zhang, “A stream cipher algorithm
 based on 2D coupled map lattice and partitioned cellular automata,”
 Nonlinear Dyn., vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 1383–1396, 2020. Laurence T. Yang (Fellow, IEEE) received the BE
[14] J. Feng, L. T. Yang, Q. Zhu, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Privacy-preserving tensor degree in computer science and technology from
 decomposition over encrypted data in a federated cloud environment,” Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the PhD
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 857–868, degree in computer science from the University of
 Jul./Aug. 2020. Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada. He is a professor
[15] D. Liu, Z. Yan, W. Ding, and M. Atiquzzaman, “A survey on secure with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 data analytics in edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 pp. 4946–4967, Jun. 2019. Wuhan, China, and with the Department of Computer
[16] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating noise to Science, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish,
 sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Proc. Theory Cryptogr. Conf., 2006, NS, Canada. His research focuses on cyber-physicalpp. 265–284. social systems, Big Data, parallel and distributed
[17] F. Zhang, V. E. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Jo-DPMF: Differentially private computing, and embedded and ubiquitous/pervasive computing. His research
 matrix factorization learning through joint optimization,” Inf. Sci., vol. 467, has been supported by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council,
 pp. 271–281, 2018. Canada, and the Canada Foundation for Innovation.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
FENG et al.: TENSOR RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY 693

 Bocheng Ren received the master’s degree from Mianxiong Dong received the BS, MS and PhD in
 the School of Computer Science and Technology, computer science and engineering from The Uni-
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, versity of Aizu, Japan. He is currently a professor
 Wuhan, China, in 2020. He is currently working with the Department of Sciences and Informatics,
 toward the PhD degree with the School of Com- Muroran Institute of Technology, Japan. He was seputer Science and Technology, Huazhong University lected as a foreigner research fellow (a total of 3
 of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. He is recipients all over Japan) by NEC C&C Foundation
 particularly interested in deep learning, differential in 2011. He is the recipient of IEEE TCSC Early Caprivacy, Big Data trust, security, and privacy. reer Award 2016, IEEE SCSTC Outstanding Young
 Researcher Award 2017, The 12th IEEE ComSoc
 Asia-Pacific Young Researcher Award 2017, Funai
 Research Award 2018 and NISTEP Researcher 2018 (one of only 11 people
 in Japan) in recognition of significant contributions in science and technology
 from MEXT. He is 2019 Highly Cited Researcher (Web of Science).

 Deqing Zou received the PHD degree from the
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology in
 2004. He is currently a professor with the School of
 Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. His Shunli Zhang received the PhD degree from
 main research interests include cloud security, virtu- the School of Computer Science and Technology,
 alization, system security, and trusted computing. He Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 has been the leader of one 863 project of China and Wuhan, China. He is a lecturer with the School of
 three National Natural Science Foundation of China Computer and Big Data Science, Jiujiang University,
 projects, and core member of several important na- China, and a postdoctoral researcher with Hainan
 tional projects, such as National 973 Basic Research University. His research focuses on artificial intel-
Program of China. He has applied almost 80 patents, published four books and ligence, cloud computing security and privacy, and
more than 100 papers, including papers published by NDSS, ASE, ASPLOS, applied cryptography.
TDSC, TPDS, and TOSEM.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.