15964 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 Time Series Anomaly Detection in Vehicle Sensors
 Using Self-Attention Mechanisms
 Ze Zhang , Yue Yao , Windo Hutabarat, Michael Farnsworth , Divya Tiwari , and Ashutosh Tiwari

 Abstract— Connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) offer sig- advanced sensors, vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications,
nificant enhancements in coordinated traffic and safety through vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications, and Artificial
real-time vehicle-to-vehicle or vehicle-to-infrastructure communi- Intelligence (AI) for autonomous navigation and decisioncations, establishing them as a potent tool for augmenting driving
tasks. However, the extensive information-sharing framework making [3]. By leveraging connectivity, real-time traffic
inherent in CAVs amplifies the risk associated with sensor information such as changing road conditions, unforeseen
anomalies, posing challenges to the reliability and security of the events, and safety warnings can be shared among vehicles,
system. Responding to this timely research challenge, this study enabling the global optimisation of traffic flow, reduced
proposes a novel anomaly detection method, namely Dual-channel congestion, and enhanced road safety [4], [5]. Therefore,
Self-attention-based Convolutional Neural Network (DSA-CNN)
for multivariate time series data. Through the introduction of the compared with conventional autonomous vehicles, CAVs offer
Dual-channel Self-attention Mechanism, DSA-CNN can progres- considerable advantages to the future of transportation.
sively and autonomously extract spatiotemporal features from Due to the extensive information-sharing framework inhermultivariate time series data. The proposed method was tested ent in CAVs, the reliability of sensors, which can be
under a variety of common threatening sensor anomaly patterns intrinsically tied to the safety and security of CAVs, has
of CAVs summarised in the literature, and evaluated under
multiple different performance metrics. The results demonstrate emerged as a matter of concern in recent years [2]. However,
its advantages in detecting minor anomalies and enhancing given a large amount of data transmission [6], cyber-attacks,
sensitivity, outperforming previously reported methods in the and the highly complex operating environment of the vehicles,
literature. Across all experimental scenarios, an average sensi- sensor anomalies which refer to where sensor readings fail
tivity improvement of 2.53% was observed, complemented by an to accurately represent the actual physical processes they are
average F1 score increase of 1.47%. In CAV settings, maintaining
high sensitivity to ensure fewer undetected anomalies, alongside monitoring can be difficult to avoid and pose a significant
the ability to detect small anomalies, can be more important for threat to the core functions of CAVs, such as autopilot control
the robustness and safety measures of CAV systems. system and traffic coordination [6]. As a result, sensor anomaly
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, connected and autonomous detection for CAVs has become a research focus in recent
vehicles (CAVs), deep learning, attention mechanism, multi- years.
sensor system, intelligent transportation system (ITS). The aim of sensor anomaly detection is to identify the readings that deviate from the expected values, which can result
 from many reasons, such as sensor malfunction and cyber-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 attacks [7]. By doing so, timely intervention can be enabled

C ONNECTED and Automated Vehicles (CAVs), reflecting
 a convergence of automation and connectivity advancements, are receiving a surge in interest from academia,
 to avoid potentially severe consequences. Anomaly detection
 has been extensively researched in the literature and commonly used methods include, but are not limited to, statistical
industry, and governments. For example, the CAVs are antic- methods, signal processing, time series analysis (TSA), and
ipated by the UK government to create a multi-billion pound data-driven methods, especially deep learning. In a statistical
industry [1] and ranked top 10 in KPMG’s Autonomous Vehi- method, sensor data can be modelled by a statistical model and
cles Readiness Index 2020 [2]. The center of this paradigm readings that deviate from the model prediction can be considcan be the incorporation of a variety of technologies, such as ered anomalous according to a pre-defined threshold [8]. The
 statistical models for this type of method can either be built
 Manuscript received 2 June 2023; revised 11 November 2023 and 24 March
2024; accepted 20 May 2024. Date of publication 2 September 2024; date from domain knowledge or statistically derived from the data
of current version 1 November 2024. This work was supported in part by collected, such as the Gaussian model [9], histogram-based
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) through model [10], or Hypothesis testing method [11]. Generally
the Made Smarter Innovation–Research Centre for Connected Factories under
Grant EP/V062123/1, and in part by the Royal Academy of Engineering speaking, most of them can be interpretable and computa-
(RAEng) and Airbus under the Research Chairs and Senior Research Fel- tionally efficient. However, this type of method requires that
lowships Scheme under Grant RCSRF1718/5/41. The Associate Editor for the sensor data can be characterised by a specific distribution,
this article was F. Xia. (Corresponding author: Ze Zhang.)
 The authors are with the Department of Automatic Control and which may not be the case for many applications, especially
Systems Engineering, The University of Sheffield, S1 3JD Sheffield, U.K. for data of high dimensionality [12]. Signal processing-based
(e-mail: ze.zhang@sheffield.ac.uk; yue.yao@sheffield.ac.uk; w.hutabarat@ anomaly detection, such as the Fourier transform and the
sheffield.ac.uk; m.j.farnsworth@sheffield.ac.uk; d.tiwari@sheffield.ac.uk;
a.tiwari@sheffield.ac.uk). wavelet transform is another commonly used method, which
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3415435 can be used for a variety of sensor data, such as acoustic,
 © 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15965

vision, and physical parameters data. In [13], a wavelet-based gradient problem [26], [27]. Due to the advantages of CNN
method was proposed to detect anomalies in the presence of in local feature extraction, our proposed DSA-CNN combines
noise, and they achieved remarkable performance with respect two different deep learning building blocks, self-attention, and
to detection rate and computational efficiency. As signal CNN, to improve its performance for anomaly detection in
processing methods attempt to form unique descriptions of multi-sensor time series, especially for small anomalies. The
different signals, they often have an advantage when deal- main contributions can be summarised as follows:
ing with unseen anomalies. However, similar to statistical • A new method, the DSA-CNN, has been developed,
methods, their performance may heavily depend on making incorporating the self-attention mechanism specifically
assumptions (e.g. quasi-stationarity) to processes such as noise for detecting anomalies in multivariate time series sensor
distribution, which may limit their applications [12]. In terms data. This model effectively identifies anomalous readings
of time-series analysis-based anomaly detection, it can also be within the sensor data streams over a given time window.
a prevailing methodology [14], such as Kalman filtering [15], • In our proposed method, the spatiotemporal features
autoregressive moving average [16], symbolic TSA [17]. How- which can be vital for anomaly detection [28] can be
ever, according to [12], this type of method may suffer from extracted and integrated progressively and automatically
degrading performance when the anomaly causes dramatic with the help of separate attention channels during the
changes to the original sensor readings. learning process, eliminating the artificial signal process-
 Deep learning as a promising option for sensor anomaly ing stage for extracting the spatiotemporal features before
detection has received more attention recently, particularly designing an anomaly detection algorithm.
in scenarios where there are large amounts of data with • This study has achieved a notable incremental improvecomplex patterns and high dimensionality [18], [19]. This is ment in performance compared to existing methods
because deep learning methods typically can learn feature applied to the dataset used by this study. The experiment
representations of the data that contain complex patterns results show that our proposed DSA-CNN has a clear
and dependencies automatically. Compared with conventional advantage in handling small anomalies, and improves
methods, deep learning-based methods normally do not require the sensitivity significantly among all the experimental
any assumptions on the distribution of input data or noise, conditions being evaluated. This means our proposed
making it applicable in most areas with a certain amount of method has fewer undetected anomalies which can be
data. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) can be one of harmful in real systems compared with the other methods
the most commonly used methods and it has been shown to in the literature.
be effective in sensor anomaly detection [20], especially for The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II
multivariate inputs. For example, in [21], Chen et al. proposed formulates the problem being worked on and describes the
a CNN-based anomaly detection algorithm for multiple sensor dataset being used in this paper. Section III provides the details
streams. However, CNN can be limited in its ability to model of our methodology, including the model architecture design
global features due to its reliance on a large number of local and computation flow. Section IV provides the experiment
kernels to extract features, resulting in difficulty in capturing settings and results comparison of the proposed method.
long-range dependencies, such as inter-sensor dependencies A comprehensive discussion as well as the drawbacks of the
and time dependencies. The above shortcomings of CNNs proposed method can be found in Section V before Section VI
can be well compensated by the Recurrent Neural Networks where the conclusion is presented.
(RNNs), which model time dependence through a recurrent
structure. The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) can be one II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND DATASET D ESCRIPTION
of the representative RNNs. In [22], LSTM and CNN were The concept of sensor anomaly refers to the situation in
combined to detect sensor anomalies for CAVs. They achieved which sensor readings deviate from their expected values by
a state-of-the-art performance on a public CAV dataset. How- producing faulty data and failing to reflect the actual physical
ever, since LSTM can be an RNN structure, despite the processes, causing potential errors in decisions that depend
advantage over CNNs of introducing time-dependent mod- on these readings. Addressing sensor anomaly, as a subset of
elling, the vanishing gradient may be non-negligible, which Corner Cases, can be a necessary part of the consideration
inherently limits its ability to retain information over long in the design of autonomous systems [29]. This work focuses
sequences [23], resulting in small anomalies in the time series on developing a supervised learning-based method to identify
being difficult to detect. Therefore, this work proposes a Dual- anomalous data in multi-sensor time-series signals to avoid
channel Self-attention-based CNN (DSA-CNN) to mitigate serious consequences. The output of our proposed model can
the limitations of both CNNs and RNNs in sensor anomaly be the anomaly conditions of the current time window, hence
detection, aiming to enhance the detection of small anomalies we formulated the anomaly detection problem as a multiand reduce the incidence of undetected faults. variate time series classification (TSC) problem. According
 Transformer architectures have shown great potential for to [30], [31], [32], and [33], in CAV settings, the commonly
anomaly detection [24], [25]. In the self-attention mechanism observed sensor abnormal patterns caused by cyber-attacks
of the Transformer method, data from all time points can be and sensor malfunctions can be summarised by the 4 types,
processed in parallel, instead of the recurrent computation in namely Instant, Constant, Gradual drift, and Bias. A detailed
RNNs, making it significantly better than RNNs in captur- description of the above-mentioned patterns in CAVs can be
ing long-range dependence without suffering from vanishing found in [15].
15966 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 Algorithm 1 Anomaly Injection
 t ← time step
 T ← total number of data points
 p ← anomaly possibility
 i ← sensor index
 n ← number of sensors
 xi ← sensor data
 x i ′ ← sensor anomaly # A full description of the anomaly
Fig. 1. Snippet of the raw data. patterns can be found in [15] and [22]
 for t ∈ T do
 if a ∼ U (0, 1) ≤ p then
 In order to maintain comparability, the CAVs dataset used i ← randint (n)
in [15] and [22] was employed. This dataset was provided x i ′ ← xi + Anomaly
by the Safety Pilot Model Deployment (SPMD) program as else
reported in [34] and can be found in their research data x i ′ ← xi
exchange (RDE) database [35]. This dataset was composed end if
of a variety of information generated during the driving end for
process of vehicles, including the Basic Safety Messages
(BSM), driving trajectories, driver-vehicle interaction data,
and environmental information, collected by the onboard Data become extremely small, thus increasing the demand for the
Acquisition System (DAS), Global Positioning System (GPS), precision of the data processed by the model and resulting in
and roadside units. To keep consistent with [15] and [22], an unnecessary computational burden.
in this work, we employed three sensors to evaluate our proposed sensor anomaly detection method, namely, (1) Sensor 1: III. M ETHODOLOGY
speed measured on the vehicle, (2) Sensor 2: speed given by
GPS, and (3) Sensor 3: in-vehicle acceleration. A snippet of In this section, an introduction to the overall model archithe raw sensor data is shown in Figrue 1. tecture of DSA-CNN is provided along with a detailed
 It is important to mention here that, in this work, no infor- explanation of the two fundamental building blocks of DSAmation about driving control, road conditions, environment, CNN, namely DAM block and CNN block. This is followed by
trajectory, or car dynamics was employed, and the external an explanation of how the DAM block extracts and integrates
environment of driving was not controlled. Given that a car’s the temporal patterns (time-wise attention) and spatial patterns
driving decisions can be influenced by numerous factors such (sensor-wise attention) based on the self-attention mechanism.
as traffic conditions, driving behavior, weather conditions, road
quality, and legal speed limits, it is highly likely that the A. Overall Architecture of DSA-CNN
statistical properties of the speed of a car will vary over time, The overall architecture can be described by Figure 2. The
making it a non-stationary process which can be expressed by multiple sensor time series data will be first passed into the
the following equation: class token concatenation function, which will be explained in
   detail in a later section, to add a class token that will be used
 yt = yt−1 + ut , ut ∼ IID 0, σ 2 (1)
 as the feature representation for classification. Then, the output
where yt denotes the speed at time t, IID means independent of class token concatenation can be fed to the Dual-channel
and identically distributed. attention mechanism (DAM) block to generate the feature
 Since this dataset did not provide anomalous sensor data, maps of the attention mechanism, followed by a CNN block
to keep consistent with [15] and [22], the anomaly injection to further extract features. The DAM block and CNN block
algorithm was kept the same as theirs as shown in Algorithm 1. will be repeated several times before using a linear layer to
Four common sensor anomalies caused by cyber-attacks and perform the final classification. The output of this model can
sensor failures were injected in this work, namely instant, be the anomaly conditions of the data being passed to this
constant, gradual drift, and bias. As stated in [15] and [22], model.
in a practical system, the probability of two sensors being In terms of the input, let X denote the multiple sensor
abnormal at the same time can be very low due to the high streams as shown in the following expression:
reliability of the sensors, so we assume that only one sensor X = [X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X C ] (2)
can be abnormal at the same time point.
 It is important to note here that, in this study, no data where X C denotes the C-th sensor data stream. Each sensor
normalization operations were employed. This is because, stream can be composed of a series of readings over a
firstly, if sensor anomalies were injected after normalisation, predefined time window as shown in the following equation:
those severe outliers would be significantly different from the
 X C = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x L ] (3)
normal values and thus make the task less difficult. Secondly,
if the data were normalised after anomaly injection, the severe where L is the number of readings in a time window. Hence
outliers would cause the variance of the original data to the input space of the model can be expressed by X ∈ RC×L .
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15967

 In the proposed CNN blocks, the dimensionality of the
 output feature map can be kept equal to the dimensionality of
 the input data to maintain extensibility. This can be achieved
 by: (1) organising the number of output channels of the
 second convolutional layer to be equal to the number of input
 channels of the first convolutional layer, (2) configuring the
 convolutional kernels to 3 in size with a stride of 1 and padding
Fig. 2. Architecture of dual-channel self-attention-based convolutional neural of 1. This means the length of input and output can be kept
network (DSA-CNN) for sensor anomaly detection. the same as shown in the following equation:
 L in + 2 × padding − (ker nel_si ze − 1) − 1
 L out = +1
 stride
 (5)
 2) Activation Layer: As the convolution operation can be
 considered as a linear mapping, a non-linear activation layer is
 used after the first 1d convolution layer to introduce non-linear
Fig. 3. CNN block.
 modelling capabilities and thus enhance the representativeness
 of the learned features, enhancing the capacity to model
 complex input space. In the CNN Blocks of our proposed
B. CNN Block model, the ReLU is employed as the activation function, which
 The proposed CNN Blocks employ 1d-CNN as a basic can be expressed by the following equation:
building element, and the architecture can be demonstrated
 ReLU(H ) = max(0, H ) (6)
by Figure 3. As shown in Figure 3, the inputs can be first
processed by a 1d-CNN layer and fed into a ReLU activation where H is the feature map passed to ReLU. This is because
layer, before passing to the second 1d-CNN layer. Then, after ReLU has a significant advantage over other activation functhe dropout operation, the original inputs can be added to tions such as tanh and sigmoid in terms of computational
the current feature maps via a shortcut connection. Finally, complexity, mitigation of the gradient saturation problem, and
a normalisation layer is employed to form the final feature sparsity [40].
maps. The computation flow can be described by the following 3) Layer Normalisation: The normalisation layer can be a
equation: critical component in the deep neural network. By normalising
 the inputs to a layer to zero mean and unit variance, the
 OutC N N = LN(Dropout(Conv2(ReLU(Conv1 (X )))) + X ) training process can be stabilised and the performance of the
 (4) network can also be improved [41], [42]. Batch Normalisation
 (BN) and Layer Normalisation (LN) can be the prevailing norwhere L N denotes the Layer normalisation, Conv1() and malisation methods. While BN normalises each feature within
Conv1() are the convolution operation, ReLU () is the activa- a sample, LN normalises all features within each sample.
tion function, X is the input multiple sensor time series. To be specific, BN erases the relative magnitudes of the dif-
 1) 1d-CNN: CNNs have been proven effective and achieved ferent features but preserves the relative magnitudes of the
some of the state-of-the-art results for TSC among data-driven different samples. Hence, BN can be more effective when
methods in literature [36], [37]. This is because the sensitivity the statistical behaviours among different samples are more
of CNNs to local features can be higher and their feature important. In contrast, LN wipes out the relative magnitudes
learning can be spatial invariant, compared with ANNs that between different samples but keeps the relative magnitudes
treat all features equally [38]. In this study, 1d-CNN was between different features within a sample. Therefore, it can
used instead of the normal CNNs with two-dimensional con- be more suitable for tasks where the features within a sample
volutional kernels. This is because the attention mechanism are closely related, such as anomaly detection for multiple
was relied on to model the spatial dependencies, CNNs were sensors. Speaking to the TSC task on CAV with unmanaged
only expected to focus on a single series. For using 1d- driving behaviour, as the speeds and acceleration can be
CNN to TSC, the kernel size can be a key factor affecting treated as non-stationary processes, the statistical features
performance [39]. Most of the works using 1d-CNN regarded among samples can be very uninformative for sensor anomaly
the kernel size as a hyper-parameter and optimised it by detection. As a result, LN can be more suitable for this task.
grid search which can be time-consuming and computation- LN performs normalisation over the last 2 dimensions based
expensive. As this work does not rely on 1d-CNN to capture on the following equation:
the major spatiotemporal features, a small kernel of size (1, 3)
 x − E[x]
was used. This is because, firstly, smaller kernels can be y=√ ∗γ +β (7)
computationally efficient. Secondly, as the speed was assumed Var[x] + ϵ
non-stationary, which means the signal behaviour is likely to where y and x denote the normalised matrix and input matrix
vary over a long period, and therefore the feature in a smaller respectively, ϵ is a minimum preventing the denominator to
perception field can be more representative. be zero, γ and β are trainable affine transform weight and
15968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 4. Dual-channel attention mechanism (DAM).

bias. E[x] and Var[x] denote the mean and variance of input
x, which can be defined by the following equations:
 t
 X
 E(x) = (1/t) xi (8)
 i=1
 Xt
 Var[x] = (1/t) (xi − E(x))2 (9)
 i=1

C. Dual-Channel Attention Mechanism (DAM)
 Fig. 5. (a) Sensor-wise attention. (b) Time-wise attention.
 In multiple sensor anomaly detection tasks, abnormal data
can appear at any time and in any sensor, making both temporal and spatial (sensor-wise) features very important. In this vectors linked to these keys. In the context of the selfwork, the Dual-channel Attention Mechanism (DAM) was attention framework, input sequences can be converted via
proposed to integrate the learning of spatiotemporal features linear projection into query vectors (Q), key vectors (K), and
into the training process, hence the spatiotemporal features can value vectors (V), which is visually represented in Figure 5a
be extracted progressively and automatically. and elaborated on in the following equations:
 The overall architecture of DAM can be illustrated by
 Y = XWT + B (11)
Figure 4. The input can be passed to two attention modules
simultaneously, namely sensor-wise attention and time-wise where X ∈ RC×L , W ∈ R3L×L , Y, B ∈ RC×3L , and
attention. The former is responsible for extracting spatial
dependencies among different sensors and the latter is for Q, K , V = Y [0 : C, 0 : L], Y [0 : C, L : 2L], Y [0 : C, 2L : 3L]
extracting temporal dependencies among different time points. (12)
Then, the feature maps generated by these two modules and
 where Y [a : b, c : d] denotes the a to b rows and c to d
the original input will be added together, forming a shortcut
 columns of Y . Then, the attention weights can be calculated
connection, before normalisation. The output of the DAM
 by:
is therefore a feature map with integrated spatiotemporal
 QK T
  
features. The computation flow of DAM can be described by
 Attention_weight = so f tmax √ (13)
the following equation: dk
 √
 OU TD AM = LN(LP(SWA(X )) + LP(TWA(X T )T ) + X ) where dk represents the dimension of K and 1/ dk is a
 (10) scalar to prevent the predominance of a particular term in
 SoftMax calculation, which might challenge the calculation
where LP denotes linear projection, SWA and TWA mean of the gradient [26]. Given that Q and K are independent
sensor-wise attention and time-wise attention respectively. The and adhere to the Gaussian distribution, the variance of their
details of sensor-wise attention and time-wise attention will be dot product will be dk , posing a challenge when dealing with
explained in the following section. the data with high dimensionality [26]. Finally, the attention
 1) Sensor-Wise Attention: The sensor-wise attention pro- weight is multiplied by the V to form the output feature map
cesses the dependencies among different sensors based on of self-attention:
the self-attention mechanism proposed in [26] as shown in
 QK T
  
Figure 5a. Analogous to the operation of retrieval systems, Attention (Q, K , V ) = so f tmax √ V (14)
the self-attention mechanism utilizes a query vector to initiate dk
an information search. The mechanism subsequently identifies Clearly, the attention weights regulate the information transfer.
corresponding keys in its database to align with the query If a certain segment of the input data is assigned a weight of
vector, ultimately resulting in an output represented by value zero, the propagation of information to the subsequent network
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15969

layer can be impeded. Furthermore, each element (row) within Algorithm 2 Dual-Channel Attention CNN (DSA-CNN)
the attention output sequence integrates the information of all Input: X ← CAV Sensor Readings
elements in the entire input sequence. Hence, the dependencies Output: Normal reading, Anomalous reading
among different sensors can be modelled and integrated. It can X ← X + Anomalies # Anomaly injection
be found from the above calculations that, the dimension of Model Installation:
the output feature maps remains the same as the dimension of for l in range(Number of layers in DSA-CNN) do
the input data, namely Attention (Q, K , V ) ∈ RC×L . Initiate W eights (l) ∼ N (0, 1)
 2) Time-Wise Attention: Similarly, in time-wise attention, Perform Singular Value Decomposition to W eights (l)
the base unit for carrying out the calculation of the attention Ensure: W eights (l) W eights (l)T = I
mechanism can be replaced by the time steps, as shown in Class Token Concatenation
Figure 5. Time-wise attention can be simply achieved by trans- T oken ← rand((1, L))
posing the input and then performing similar computations to X ← Concatenate((X, T oken), dim = 0)
obtain the Q, K and V before calculating the attention weights: Forward:
 Y = XWT + B (15) for i in range(N) do
 # DAM block calculations
where X ∈ R L×C , W ∈ R3C×C , Y, B ∈ R L×3C , and X SW A ← L P(SW A(X ))
 X T W A ← L P(T W A(X T )T )
Q, K , V= Y [0 : L , 0 : C], Y [0 : L , C : 2C], Y [0 : L , 2C : 3C] X ← X SW A + X T W A + X
 (16) X ← L N (X )
 # CNN block calculations
Therefore, the feature maps with the integrated time depen-
 Residual ← X
dencies over the entire time window can be obtained.
 X ← ReLU (Conv1(X )) # Conv1
 Then, the feature maps of Time-wise attention can be
 X ← Dr opout (Conv2(X )) # Conv2
transposed to keep the equal dimensionality with Sensor-wise
 X ← L N (X + Residual)
attention, before adding them to the original input to make a
 Out puts = Classifier(X ) = X Wclassi f ier + bclassi f ier
shortcut connection. Finally, the constructed feature map can
 Training:
be normalised, forming the output feature map of the DAM
 for epoch in range(Number of epochs) do
block as shown in Figure 4.
 Calculate Loss
 Calculate Accuracy, Precision, Sensitivity, F-Score
D. Class Token Concatenation Backpropagation
 Based on equation 14, it can be found that each row of Return: Output
the output of the attention mechanism (corresponding to each
sensor in this work) is a weighted sum of all rows of the
feature map from the previous layer, and the weights are as a classification task, the cross entropy loss was used as the
calculated based on the data from each sensor. Theoretically, loss function which can be defined by the following equation:
it is reasonable to take any row in the final output of the C
 X
model’s feature map and use it as a multi-sensor feature
 
 Loss(y, ŷ) = − yi log ŷi (17)
representation to perform classification. However, to avoid the i=1
influence of specific sensor data on the feature representation
 where y and ŷ are the true labels and model prediction using
of multi-sensor data, a vector of random numbers was added
 one-hot encoding.
to the input data as a token for classification [26]. The features
 In terms of model initialisation, orthogonal initialisation was
of all sensors can be weighted and integrated into this token,
 employed, namely, the weight matrix W (l) of each layer will
hence this vector can be used as a final feature representation.
 be initialised to an orthogonal matrix, satisfying:
This operation is illustrated in Figure 2, and the details can
 W (l) W (l) = I
 T
be found in algorithm 2. (18)
 The overall computation flow of the proposed DSA-CNN
can be illustrated by algorithm 2. where I is an identity matrix, and l is the layer index. This
 is because the orthogonal initialisation is able to make the
 error term norm-preserving during the backpropagation pro-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
 cess [43], which can be expressed in the following equation:
 2 2 2
 δ (l−1) = W (l) δ (l) = δ (l)
 T
 (19)
A. Training Process
 This experiment was conducted on Google Colab environ- where δ (l) is the loss term of the l layer of the model, and it
ment with NVIDIA Tesla P100 PCIe 16 GB, and PyTorch has shown great efficiency practically for training the model
1.12 was used as the deep learning framework. The hyperpa- based on the attention mechanism [44], [45]. Since in our
rameters of the proposed model can be found in the Appendix. proposed model, the activation function was all ReLU and
As we formulated the sensor reading anomaly detection task the average gradient of ReLU around 0 can be approximated
15970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 √
as 0.5, we multiplied the initialised weight matrix by 2 to
preserve norm-preserving property. This is denoted by Gain =
1.41 in Table VI.

B. Results Evaluation Method
 The performance of the proposed method was evaluated by
the following scores which can be normally used for assessing
classification algorithms:
 TP +TN
 Accuracy = (20)
 T P + FP + FN + T N
 TP
 Sensitivity = (21)
 T P + FN
 TP
 Precision = (22)
 T P + FP
 2( Sensitivity ∗ Precision ) Fig. 6. Performance comparison of different models for single anomaly
 F1 Score = (23)
 Sensitivity + Precision detection.
where TP, TN, FP, and FN mean True Positive, True Negative,
False Positive and False Negative respectively. In terms of the
sensor anomalies detection domain, as undetected abnormali- 2) Bias Anomaly Detection: Table II shows the performance
ties are far more damaging than classifying normal readings as comparison for bias anomaly detection. For all methods in
abnormal, the sensitivity score was highlighted in the results. this table, the longer the duration of the anomaly, the higher
As the F1 score can be a comprehensive measure of precision the detection performance of the models for the same magand sensitivity, it was used as a reference to compare the nitude. Similarly, for anomalies of the same duration, the
performance of different models. Additional evaluations, such higher the magnitude of the anomaly, the higher the detection
as the ROC curve and the FPR95 metric (the false positive rate performance. Based on the results in this table, our proposed
at the true positive rate equal to 95%), which can be critical DSA-CNN achieves improvements in both sensitivity and
in anomaly detection tasks can be found in the Appendix. F1 scores among most of the severity, compared to SOTA
 performance in the literature, except for the magnitude of
C. Single Anomaly Detection U (0, 1) with a duration of 3, where MSALSTM-CNN achieves
 In this section, the performance of DSA-CNN is evaluated the best F1 score (90.57%) and ours is 90.38%. However,
with respect to the occurrence of a single type of anomaly. it can be found that DSA-CNN has significant advantages in
To ensure comparability, the same anomaly pattern, severity, anomaly detection of small duration. In anomalies of duration
and possibility (5%) were used as in the current state of 3 and 5, DSA-CNN improved on average by 2.57% and
the art [15] and [22]. The results from CNN Kalman Filter 1.28% in sensitivity and F1 score respectively compared to
(CNN-KF) [15], Multi-stage attention mechanism with an MSALSTM-CNN.
LSTM-based CNN (MSALSTM-CNN) [22], and our proposed 3) Constant Anomaly Detection: Table III shows the per-
DSA-CNN, in instant, bias, constant and drift detection are formance comparison for Constant anomaly detection. It can
compared in Table I to IV respectively. The mean F1 score and be observed that the performance of CNN-KF, MSALSTMsensitivity comparison for each type of anomaly is summarised CNN, and DSA-CNN methods consistently improves as the
in Figure 6. anomaly duration increases while keeping the anomaly mag-
 1) Instant Anomaly Detection: Table I shows the perfor- nitude constant (U(0,5)). Their performance decreases as the
mance of DSA-CNN compared with the methods working on anomaly magnitude reduces while keeping the duration conthe same dataset in literature for instant anomaly detection. stant (d=10). The DSA-CNN method, however, demonstrates
As the severity of the anomaly increases, an improvement superior performance in terms of sensitivity and F1 score
in the performance of all methods can be observed. How- across all experiments. In addition, our proposed method
ever, the proposed DSA-CNN achieves higher F1 scores for displays consistency in its performance, whereas the CNN-KF
all severity levels of instant anomaly, compared with the and MSALSTM-CNN methods exhibit some variation. Nev-
SOTA performance achieved by MSALSTM-CNN in the lit- ertheless, all three methods show slightly declining perforerature [22]. Speaking to sensitivity, except for the magnitude mance in the last row with the lowest anomaly magnitude
of 500 × N (0, 0.01), DSA-CNN can be also better than the (U(0,1)).
other methods significantly. It is worth noting that DSA-CNN 4) Drift Anomaly Detection: Table IV shows the results
shows outstanding performance in detecting mild anomalies. of gradual drift anomaly detection using the CNN-
While the F1 score of the MSALSTM-CNN at severity 25 × KF, MSALSTM-CNN, and DSA-CNN models. The
N (0, 0.01) is 70.18%, the DSA-CNN achieves 78.82%, and MSALSTM-CNN and DSA-CNN methods exhibit satisfactory
the sensitivity at this severity can also be improved by 16.65% performance, while DSA-CNN outperforms MSALSTM-CNN
by DSA-CNN. In case of severe anomalies, DSA-CNN shows in sensitivity and F1 score for all experiments. The highest
a slight improvement. F1-score of 98.97% is observed in row 2 by the DSA-CNN
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15971

 TABLE I
 I NSTANT

 TABLE II
 B IAS

 TABLE III
 C ONSTANT

 TABLE IV
 D RIFT

method when the duration is 20 and the anomaly magnitude is D. Mixed Anomaly Detection
linespace(0,4). The lowest F1-score is observed in row 3, with In our experiment, the performance of DSA-CNN was also
94.2% achieved by the CNN-KF method when the anomaly examined for the occurrences of all types of anomalies. The
magnitude is the smallest. Furthermore, compared with the performance evaluation of different algorithms with respect
MSALSTM-CNN and CNN-KF, the DSA-CNN demonstrates to different sensors is given in Table V. As this type of
consistent performance throughout the experiments, with experiment is not provided in [22], only [15] and our proposed
minor fluctuations. In [15], Wyk et al. stated that detecting method are shown in this table. Based on the results, DSAgradual drift can be one of the most challenging tasks of CNN outperforms the other algorithms on all three sensors,
anomaly detection. In the hardest situation, namely the achieving the highest scores on almost all performance metmagnitude of linespace(0,2) with a duration of 20, DSA-CNN rics, especially for sensitivity and F1 scores. This suggests that
can still improve the sensitivity and F1 score by 2.2% and DSA-CNN provides a more accurate and robust approach to
1.12% respectively. anomaly detection than the other algorithms evaluated.
15972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 TABLE V
 M IX

 V. D ISCUSSION TABLE VI
 H YPER PARAMETERS
 It is clear that the DSA-CNN proposed in this paper
offers significant advantages in terms of sensitivity and F1
score, especially in minor sensor anomalies. Higher sensitivity
means fewer undetected anomalies, which can be crucial for
safety-critical application scenarios, such as the CAV velocity
and acceleration data used in this work, which can be the
important decision bases for autonomous driving systems [46].
 As an important sensor anomaly detection algorithm,
Kalman filtering has the advantages of being easy to implement and computationally efficient, making it widely used.
It can predict the near future or current system state by tracing
back to a few past system state data, so by comparing the
difference between the estimated data and the measurements
and setting a threshold, it can determine if the sensor reading
now is in an abnormal state. However, Kalman filtering has
three disadvantages in sensor anomaly detection. Firstly, its
performance relies on artificial noise estimations, for example
in [15] where the sensor noise was assumed to be Gaussian
white noise, which is sometimes not representative of the real
noise in the actual system. Secondly, plain Kalman filtering
often requires the assumption that the system is linear and
time-invariant [47]. This assumption can be satisfied when
the time window taken for the analysis of CAV velocities
is small enough, but the time window for the analysis of
time-series data often cannot be too small to ensure that
sufficient information can be incorporated, so the non-linearity
introduced by the large time window becomes a source of error
in the Kalman filter estimations. Finally, defining thresholds
for normal intervals can be often difficult, as the intensity
of noise in a real system can be likely to vary according
to environmental conditions. These might be the reason why filter-based method in [15]. However, since LSTM can be
the Kalman filter-based approach in [15] achieves relatively still recursive in nature, the features of the initial time steps
poor performance despite the fact that the use of CNNs to can still be difficult to learn, especially for small anomalies.
extract a representation of the system state can overcome to In terms of the proposed DSA-CNN, it combines the strengths
some extent the problems of noise and non-linearity within of CNNs in local feature extraction with the self-attention
the time window. Since deep learning-based methods do mechanism’s ability to model global context. This synergy
not require the aforementioned assumptions, they offer great enhances the model’s sensitivity to small anomalies in multipotential for anomaly detection due to their fewer restrictions sensor data. Traditional methods might overlook these small
on applications and enhanced applicability. anomalies due to their reliance on local patterns and inability
 LSTM is an RNN algorithm that excels in time series data to capture long-range dependencies effectively. In addition, the
modelling, and plays an important role in the detection of integration of a dual-channel self-attention mechanism allows
anomalies in time-series sensor data. LSTM-based methods for the extraction of spatiotemporal features from sensor data,
do not require an accurate estimation of noise, unlike Kalman enabling the system to extract subtle but crucial details that
filtering, and do not rely on the assumption of linear time- might indicate an anomaly. This is particularly important for
invariant systems. This can be the possible reason why the small anomalies that may not produce significant changes
LSTM-based method used in [22] outperforms the Kalman in sensor readings. The DSA-CNN method leverages these
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15973

Fig. 7. ROC curves and FPR95 metrics of the experiments conducted in this study.

advancements, offering a more robust and sensitive approach not be treated as prior knowledge, giving this type of method
to anomaly detection. Additional experiments to verify the the potential to detect arbitrary anomalies. The performance
effectiveness of the proposed dual-channel self-attention mech- of DSA-CNN in this type of methodology can be an important
anism can be found in the Appendix. future direction to be evaluated. In addition, the assumption
 However, due to the current supervised learning-based of anomaly that only one sensor can be abnormal at the same
training approach, the performance of the proposed model time can be violated in real-world applications. This setting
in dealing with unknown complex anomalous patterns has was adopted to maintain consistency with the two baselines
not been evaluated, which can be important in real applica- referenced in this study, thereby enabling the comparison of
tions [48]. A common deep learning-based approach in the algorithmic performance. Extending the proposed approach to
literature for handling anomalies of unknown patterns can scenarios with multiple simultaneous sensor anomalies can be
be the unsupervised learning-based autoencoder architecture. another valuable direction for further research.
In this type of approach, the original normal signal can be
mapped to latent spaces using a deep learning model, and then, VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
one of the latent spaces can be used as a feature representation. Anomaly detection in multi-sensor data streams can be
The distance between the latent space of the anomalous data an important foundation for CAVs and many safety-critical
and the latent space of the normal data can be calculated as systems. In this paper, a method, DSA-CNN, was proposed
a criterion for the occurrence of anomalies [49], [50], [51]. based on the self-attention mechanism and CNN to detect
It can be found that the patterns of anomaly behaviour will the anomalous behaviour of CAV velocity and acceleration
15974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE D IFFERENCE A MONG DSA-CNN, I TS S ENSOR -W ISE ATTENTION -O NLY V ERSION , AND I TS T IME -W ISE ATTENTION -O NLY V ERSION

sensors. We proposed a dual-channel self-attention structure employed sensor-wise attention across both channels, focusing
to enhance the sensitivity of the model with respect to small on the individual characteristics of each sensor. Conversely,
anomalies, and this structure can integrate the learning of the second experiment solely utilized time-wise attention in
spatiotemporal features into the training process of deep learn- both channels, concentrating on temporal dynamics. This
ing, eliminating artificial feature engineering. Our proposed ablation study was designed to rigorously assess the impact
method was tested on a publicly available CAV dataset, and the and effectiveness of combining sensor-wise and time-wise
sensor anomaly was simulated based on the 4 most damaging attention, providing a comprehensive understanding of their
anomalies for CAVs [32], [33]. Based on the experimental synergistic potential in the proposed model.
results, our proposed DSA-CNN achieved 2.57%, 2.07%, To maintain comparability, all training parameters, data, the
1.78%, and 3.83% performance gains in sensitivity for drift, rest of the model architecture, as well as the environment were
constant, bias, and instant anomalies, and 1.53%, 1.32%, kept the same. The ablation experiments were only conducted
0.94%, and 2.21% gains in F1 score, compared with the SOTA on the most challenging tasks on each of the anomaly types
performance model in the literature proposed in [22]. The (The tasks that received the lowest F1 scores). The results
experimental results also show that DSA-CNN has a clear can be found in Table VII. It can be found that neither the
advantage in handling small anomalies. use of sensor-wise attention alone nor time-wise attention can
 However, due to the current supervised-learning-based clas- achieve the performance of using them simultaneously, which
sification training scheme, it can be difficult to evaluate the validates the effectiveness of the proposed DAM in anomaly
performance in the presence of unknown anomaly patterns in detection.
a convincing manner. By reorganizing the deep learning model
proposed in this paper into an unsupervised learning form, all R EFERENCES
sensor data can be mapped to a latent space. By comparing
 [1] T-Scotland, A CAV Roadmap for Scotland, Transp. Scotland, Glasgow,
the distance of anomalous data to normal data in the latent U.K., 2019.
space, the presence of sensor anomaly can be determined. As a [2] Connected & Automated Mobility 2025: Realising the Benefits of Selfresult, this type of model can be no longer limited by specific Driving Vehicles in the UK, HM Government, London, U.K., 2022.
anomaly patterns, improving the generalisation ability. This [3] C-Advanced Automotive Technology. Connected and Automated
 Vehicles. Accessed: May 25, 2023. [Online]. Available:
can be an important future research direction. http://autocaat.org/Technologies/Automated_and_Connected_Vehicles/
 [4] A. Coppola, D. G. Lui, A. Petrillo, and S. Santini, “Eco-driving control
 A PPENDIX architecture for platoons of uncertain heterogeneous nonlinear connected
 H YPER PARAMETERS OF DSA-CNN autonomous electric vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
 no. 12, pp. 24220–24234, Dec. 2022.
 The hyperparameters of the model proposed in this work [5] RM Infrastructure and W-Management. Mobility. Accessed: May 25,
are shown in Table VI. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.rijkswaterstaat.nl/en/mobility
 [6] C. Yan, W. Xu, and J. Liu, “Can you trust autonomous vehicles:
 Contactless attacks against sensors of self-driving vehicle,” Defcon,
 A DDITIONAL E VALUATIONS vol. 24, no. 8, p. 109, 2016.
 This section provides additional evaluations, namely the [7] S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie, and M. Palaniswami, “Anomaly detection
 in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 4,
ROC curve and the FPR95 metric (the false positive rate at pp. 34–40, Aug. 2008.
the true positive rate equal to 95%), which can be critical in [8] I. C. Paschalidis and Y. Chen, “Statistical anomaly detection with sensor
anomaly detection tasks. The ROC and FPR95 can be found networks,” ACM Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–23, Aug. 2010.
in Figure 7. [9] R. Zhang, P. Ji, D. Mylaraswamy, M. Srivastava, and S. Zahedi, “Cooperative sensor anomaly detection using global information,” Tsinghua
 Sci. Technol., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 209–219, Jun. 2013.
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT [10] M. Xie, J. Hu, and B. Tian, “Histogram-based online anomaly detection
 In order to verify the positive effect of one of the core in hierarchical wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf.
 Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., Jun. 2012, pp. 751–759.
modules of the model proposed in this paper, namely the [11] K. Cohen and Q. Zhao, “Active hypothesis testing for anomaly detec-
DAM module, on performance, this section presents ablation tion,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1432–1450, Mar. 2015.
experiments. [12] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multi-
 Two distinct experiments were conducted to validate the perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, Mar. 2021.
 [13] V. Rajagopalan and A. Ray, “Symbolic time series analysis via waveletefficacy of integrating sensor-wise and time-wise atten- based partitioning,” Signal Process., vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 3309–3320,
tion mechanisms. In the initial experiment, we exclusively Nov. 2006.
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN VEHICLE SENSORS 15975

[14] N. Mohamudally and M. Peermamode-Mohaboob, “Building an [39] W. Tang, G. Long, L. Liu, T. Zhou, M. Blumenstein, and J. Jiang,
 anomaly detection engine (ADE) for IoT smart applications,” Proc. “Omni-scale CNNs: A simple and effective kernel size configuration
 Comput. Sci., vol. 134, pp. 10–17, Jan. 2018. for time series classification,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10061.
[15] F. Van Wyk, Y. Wang, A. Khojandi, and N. Masoud, “Real-time sensor [40] A. F. Agarap, “Deep learning using rectified linear units (ReLU),” 2018,
 anomaly detection and identification in automated vehicles,” IEEE Trans. arXiv:1803.08375.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1264–1276, Apr. 2019. [41] S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, A. Ilyas, and A. Madry, “How does batch
[16] K. Thiyagarajan, S. Kodagoda, and L. Van Nguyen, “Predictive analytics normalization help optimization?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 for detecting sensor failure using autoregressive integrated moving Syst., vol. 31, 2018, pp. 1–11.
 average model,” in Proc. 12th IEEE Conf. Ind. Electron. Appl. (ICIEA), [42] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016,
 Jun. 2017, pp. 1926–1931. arXiv:1607.06450.
[17] N. Mohamudally, Introductory Chapter: Time Series Analysis (TSA) for [43] A. M. Saxe, J. L. McClelland, and S. Ganguli, “Exact solutions to the
 Anomaly Detection in IoT. London, U.K.: IntechOpen, 2018. nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks,” 2013,
 arXiv:1312.6120.
[18] D. Bogdoll, M. Nitsche, and J. M. Zöllner, “Anomaly detection in [44] K. Lu, A. Grover, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Pretrained transformers
 autonomous driving: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. as universal computation engines,” arXiv preprint arXiv: 2103. 05247,
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 4488–4499. vol. 1, 2021.
[19] Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Cheng, G. Peng, and D. Yao, “Deep learning-based [45] Y. Fei, Y. Liu, X. Wei, and M. Chen, “O-ViT: Orthogonal vision
 anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems: Progress and opportuni- transformer,” 2022, arXiv:2201.12133.
 ties,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021. [46] L. Nie, J. Guan, C. Lu, H. Zheng, and Z. Yin, “Longitudinal speed
[20] T. Wen and R. Keyes, “Time series anomaly detection using convolu- control of autonomous vehicle based on a self-adaptive PID of radial
 tional neural networks and transfer learning,” 2019, arXiv:1905.13628. basis function neural network,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 6,
[21] F. O. Ozkok and M. Celik, “Convolutional neural network analysis pp. 485–494, Aug. 2018.
 of recurrence plots for high resolution melting classification,” Comput. [47] Q. Li, R. Li, K. Ji, and W. Dai, “Kalman filter and its application,”
 Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 207, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 106139. in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Intell. Netw. Intell. Syst. (ICINIS), Nov. 2015,
[22] A. R. Javed, M. Usman, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, and M. S. Haghighi, pp. 74–77.
 “Anomaly detection in automated vehicles using multistage attention- [48] D. Bogdoll et al., “Description of corner cases in automated driving:
 based convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., Goals and challenges,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4291–4300, Jul. 2021. Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2021, pp. 1023–1028.
[23] M. Schak and A. Gepperth, “A study on catastrophic forgetting in deep [49] W. Yu, I. Y. Kim, and C. Mechefske, “An improved similarity-based
 LSTM networks,” in Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning. prognostic algorithm for RUL estimation using an RNN autoencoder
 Munich, Germany: Springer, 2019, pp. 714–728. scheme,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 199, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 106926.
[24] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [50] W. Yu, I. Y. Kim, and C. Mechefske, “Analysis of different RNN autoennetworks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” 2022, coder variants for time series classification and machine prognostics,”
 arXiv:2201.07284. Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 149, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 107322.
[25] M. Ma, L. Han, and C. Zhou, “BTAD: A binary transformer deep neural [51] S. E. Huang, Y. Feng, and H. X. Liu, “A data-driven method for falsified
 network model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” vehicle trajectory identification by anomaly detection,” Transp. Res. C,
 Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 56, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 101949. Emerg. Technol., vol. 128, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 103196.
[26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[27] Z. Zhang, M. Farnsworth, B. Song, D. Tiwari, and A. Tiwari, “Deep
 transfer learning with self-attention for industry sensor fusion tasks,”
 IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 15, pp. 15235–15247, Aug. 2022.
[28] L. Jiang, H. Xu, J. Liu, X. Shen, S. Lu, and Z. Shi, “Anomaly detection Ze Zhang received the B.Sc. degree from Jiangof industrial multi-sensor signals based on enhanced spatiotemporal fea- nan University in 2012 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
 tures,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8465–8477, Jun. 2022. degrees in electronic and electrical engineering from
[29] J. Pfeil, J. Wieland, T. Michalke, and A. Theissler, “On why the The University of Sheffield in 2018 and in 2024,
 system makes the corner case: AI-based holistic anomaly detection respectively.
 for autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), Before his research career, he was with electric
 Jun. 2022, pp. 337–344. power industry after graduating the B.Sc. degree.
[30] A. B. Sharma, L. Golubchik, and R. Govindan, “Sensor faults: Detection He is currently a Research Associate with the
 methods and prevalence in real-world datasets,” ACM Trans. Sensor Department of Automatic Control and Systems
 Netw., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1–39, Jun. 2010. Engineering, The University of Sheffield, and Airbus
 on industrial applications. He is a Research Theme
[31] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Network anomaly
 Lead with the EPSRC Made Smarter Innovation–Research Centre for Condetection: Methods, systems and tools,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 nected Factories. His main research interests are AI, sensor fusion, computer
 vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 303–336, 1st Quart., 2014.
 vision for digital manufacturing, and manufacturing robot systems.
[32] J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential cyberattacks on automated
 vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 546–556,
 Apr. 2014.
[33] Y. Mo, E. Garone, A. Casavola, and B. Sinopoli, “False data injection
 attacks against state estimation in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc.
 49th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (CDC), Dec. 2010, pp. 5967–5972.
[34] D. Bezzina and J. Sayer, “Safety pilot model deployment: Test conductor Yue Yao received the M.Sc. degree in robotics from
 team report,” Rep. DOT HS, vol. 812, no. 171, p. 18, 2014. The University of Sheffield in 2022.
 Prior to embarking on his research career,
[35] UD Transportation. (Jan. 24, 2022). Safety Pilot Model Deployment
 he gained invaluable industry experience as a
 Data. [Online]. Available: https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/safety-pilot-
 Robotics Engineer with the energy sector. Currently,
 model-deployment-data
 he was a Research Assistant with the Department of
[36] J. Wang, S. Li, W. Ji, T. Jiang, and B. Song, “A T-CNN time series Automatic Control and Systems Engineering, The
 classification method based on Gram matrix,” Sci. Rep., vol. 12, no. 1, University of Sheffield. In this role, he actively
 p. 15731, Sep. 2022. contributes to cutting-edge research projects, with
[37] L. Xi, Z. Yun, H. Liu, R. Wang, X. Huang, and H. Fan, “Semi-supervised a specific focus on robotics and sensing in digital
 time series classification model with self-supervised learning,” Eng. manufacturing, particularly in the context of assem-
 Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 116, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 105331. bly systems. He is interested in robotics, assembly systems, digital twin and
[38] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge, sensing for robots, and digital manufacturing. He received the Nicholson Prize
 MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016. for masters studies.
15976 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 Windo Hutabarat received the bachelor’s degree in Divya Tiwari received the B.Eng. degree in elecaeronautical engineering in 2001. tronics and communication in 2002 and the Ph.D.
 He worked in the aviation industry before join- degree from Cranfield University in 2010.
 ing academia. He is a Research Associate with Before joining academia, she was with electronics
 the Department of Automatic Control and Systems industry on aerospace and automotive applications
 Engineering, The University of Sheffield. He is part in the U.K. She is a Research Fellow with the Digof the Airbus/RAEng Research Team in Digitization itization Laboratory for Manufacturing, Department
 of Manufacturing and is an Application Research of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering,
 Lead with the EPSRC Made Smarter Research Cen- The University of Sheffield. Her work focuses on
 tre for Connected Factories. In addition to his role as sensors and simulation for high-value manufacturing
 a Researcher, he is also a part-time Doctoral Student. processes. Previously, she has worked in the area of
He has over 16 years of experience as an Applied Researcher, collaborating development of photonic sensors for manufacturing and automotive appliclosely with industry in the U.K. Inspired by the innovative use of sensors cations. She has authored over 21 peer-reviewed articles. She received the
in gaming devices, he has pioneered the use of affordable sensors to digitize Daphne Jackson and Royal Academy of Engineering Fellowship in 2013 for
complex manufacturing processes. This innovative approach has led to six the development of novel photonic sensors for industrial applications.
collaborative research projects supported by Innovate U.K.

 Ashutosh Tiwari is a Deputy Vice-President for
 Michael Farnsworth received the degree in bio- Innovation at the University of Sheffield and
 chemistry with molecular biology from Cardiff holds the prestigious Royal Academy of Engineer-
 University in 2004, the M.Sc. degree in computer ing (RAEng) and Airbus Research Chair. He is
 science from the University of the West of England internationally renowned for research in digital manin 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science ufacturing and works in partnership with industry
 from Cranfield University in 2013. to develop new techniques and solutions for digital-
 He is currently a Research Associate with the isation, instrumentation, in-process monitoring and
 Department of Automatic Control and Systems real-time simulation of skill-intensive manufacturing
 Engineering, The University of Sheffield; and a processes, such as wing manufacture and engine
 Research Lead with the EPSRC Future Electrical assembly. He has a strong track record of leading
 Machines Manufacturing Hub. He has published research and innovation projects across technology readiness levels, and
over 30 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests cover the field of digital serves on the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
manufacturing and the application of machine learning and bioinspired arti- Strategic Advisory Team for Manufacturing and the Circular Economy. He is
ficial intelligence. His interest also includes understanding how evolutionary the Deputy Director of the EPSRC Future Electrical Machines Manufacturing
processes can be used to develop systems of general intelligence that are Hub, Sheffield Lead of the Made Smarter Research Centre for Connected
able to tackle hard problems within the field of manufacturing and robotics. Factories, and was awarded an EPSRC High-Value Manufacturing Catapult
He is a Chartered Scientist and an Associate Fellow of the Higher Education Fellowship. He is passionate about training people for manufacturing research
Authority and a member of IET. and has graduated 38 Ph.D. students.