IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024 2213

 Toward Video Anomaly Retrieval From Video
 Anomaly Detection: New Benchmarks and Model
 Peng Wu , Jing Liu , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiangteng He , Member, IEEE,
 Yuxin Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Peng Wang , and Yanning Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Video anomaly detection (VAD) has been paid I. I NTRODUCTION
increasing attention due to its potential applications, its current
dominant tasks focus on online detecting anomalies, which
can be roughly interpreted as the binary or multiple event
classification. However, such a setup that builds relationships
between complicated anomalous events and single labels, e.g.,
 V IDEO anomaly detection (VAD) plays a critical role
 in video content analysis, and has become a hot topic
 being studied due to its potential applications, e.g., danger
“vandalism”, is superficial, since single labels are deficient early-warning. VAD, by definition, aims to identify the
to characterize anomalous events. In reality, users tend to location of anomaly occurrence, which can be regarded as
search a specific video rather than a series of approximate the frame-level event classification. VAD can be broadly
videos. Therefore, retrieving anomalous events using detailed
descriptions is practical and positive but few researches focus divided into two categories, i.e., semi-supervised [1], [2], [3],
on this. In this context, we propose a novel task called [4], [5] and weakly supervised [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The
Video Anomaly Retrieval (VAR), which aims to pragmatically former typically recognizes anomalies through self-supervised
retrieve relevant anomalous videos by cross-modalities, e.g., learning or one-class learning. The latter, thanks to massive
language descriptions and synchronous audios. Unlike the current normal and abnormal videos with video-level labels, achieves
video retrieval where videos are assumed to be temporally
well-trimmed with short duration, VAR is devised to retrieve better detection accuracy.
long untrimmed videos which may be partially relevant to Impressive progress has been witnessed for VAD, however,
the given query. To achieve this, we present two large-scale an event in videos generally captures an interaction between
VAR benchmarks and design a model called Anomaly-Led actions and entities that evolves over time, simply utilizing
Alignment Network (ALAN) for VAR. In ALAN, we propose single labels in VAD may be insufficient to explain the
an anomaly-led sampling to focus on key segments in long
untrimmed videos. Then, we introduce an efficient pretext sequential events depicted. Besides, compared with VAD,
task to enhance semantic associations between video-text fine- offline video search thus far is still more commonly used in
grained representations. Besides, we leverage two complementary real-world applications. Imagining the case when searching for
alignments to further match cross-modal contents. Experimental related videos, we prefer to use comprehensive descriptions to
results on two benchmarks reveal the challenges of VAR task and accurately search, e.g., “At night, two topless men smashed
also demonstrate the advantages of our tailored method. Captions
are publicly released at https://github.com/Roc-Ng/VAR. the door of the store.”, rather than use a single coarse word,
 e.g, “vandalism”, to get a large collection of rough results.
 Index Terms— Video anomaly retrieval, video anomaly Based on VAD, we propose a new task called Video
detection, cross-modal retrieval.
 Anomaly Retrieval (VAR) and present two large-scale benchmark datasets, UCFCrime-AR and XDViolence-AR, to further
 facilitate the research of video anomaly analysis. The goal
 Manuscript received 29 July 2023; revised 7 January 2024; of VAR is to retrieve relevant untrimmed videos given crossaccepted 21 February 2024. Date of publication 18 March 2024; date modal queries, e.g., text captions and synchronous audios, and
of current version 25 March 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62306240, Grant vice versa. Unlike VAD, VAR depicts anomalies from multiple
U23B2013, Grant U19B2037, Grant 62272013, Grant 61925201, and Grant viewpoints and sufficiently characterizes sequential events.
62132001; in part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant We illustrate the advantage of video anomaly retrieval in
2023TQ0272; and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities under Grant D5000220431. The associate editor coordinating Figure 1. VAR task has high value to real-world applications,
the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was especially for smart ground and car surveillance. Generally
Prof. Heng Tao Shen. (Corresponding author: Yanning Zhang.) speaking, for surveillance, the recorded video will be stored
 Peng Wu, Peng Wang, and Yanning Zhang are with the National
Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data in the hard disk or memory card as a series of segments with a
Application Technology, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Poly- certain time length. After an abnormal event occurs, we need
technical University, Xi’an 710060, China (e-mail: xdwupeng@gmail.com; to search the corresponding video segment that contains the
peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn; ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn).
 Jing Liu is with Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, queried abnormal event through the descriptions, such as a
Guangzhou 510555, China (e-mail: neouma@163.com). white car crashed into the rear of a van, a group of people
 Xiangteng He and Yuxin Peng are with the Wangxuan Institute of breaking into a house at night, etc.
Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail:
hexiangteng@pku.edu.cn; pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn). Our VAR is considerably different from traditional video
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2024.3374070 retrieval (VR) [11], [12], [13]. In traditional video retrieval,
 1941-0042 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 encoding phase, the retrieval system maintains holistic views,
 meanwhile, focuses on key anomalous segments, so that
 cross-modal representations can be well aligned in the joint
 embedding space. Therefore, vanilla fixed-frame sampling,
 e.g., uniform sampling and random sampling, is not flexible
 to focus on specific anomalous segments. Inspired by dynamic
 neural networks [18], [19], [20], [21], we propose an
 anomaly-led sampling, which simply resorts to frame-level
Fig. 1. VAD vs. VAR. Single labels may be unable to describe sequential anomaly priors generated by an ad-hoc anomaly detector
anomalous events in VAD, but text captions or synchronous audios can and does not require intensive pairwise interactions between
sufficiently depict events in VAR.
 cross modality, to select key segments with large anomaly
 identification degree. We then couple these two win-win
 sampling mechanisms for videos and audios, where anomalyled sampling focuses on anomalous segments, and fixed-frame
 sampling pays attention to the entirety as well as normal
 videos. Furthermore, to establish associations between videotext fine-grained representations as well as maintain high
 retrieval efficiency, we also propose a pretext task, i.e.,
 video prompt based masked phrase modeling (VPMPM),
 serving the model training. Particularly, a new module
 termed Prompting Decoder takes both frame-level video
 representations and contextual text representations as input
 and predicts the masked noun phrases or verb phrases by
 the cross-modal attention, where video representations serve
 as fixed prompts [22], [23]. In this paper, video frames are
Fig. 2. Comparison of VAR with video retrieval and video moment retrieval. regarded as the fine granularity as frames usually reflect
 more detailed content of videos, meanwhile noun phrases
 and verb phrases in texts, e.g., “a black car” and “left
videos are assumed to be temporally pre-trimmed with short quickly”, are regarded as the fine granularity, which reflect
duration, and thus the whole video is supposed to be the local spatial contents and temporal dynamics in the video,
completely relevant to the paired query. In reality, videos are respectively. Notably, compared with nouns and verbs, noun
usually not well-trimmed and may only exist partial fragments phrases and verb phrases contain more contents, and can also
to fully meet the query. In VAR, the main goal is to retrieve particularly illustrate the subtle differences. Finally, such a
long and untrimmed videos. Such a setup more meets realistic proxy training objective optimizes the encoder parameters and
requirements, and also evokes the new challenge. Concretely, further promotes the semantic associations between local video
the length of relevant fragments is variable in videos w.r.t. frames and text phrases by cross-modal interactions.
given paired queries. For normal videos, the relevant fragment To summarize, our contributions are three-fold:
is generally the whole video; For abnormal videos, the relevant • We introduce a new task named video anomaly retrieval
fragment may occupy only a fraction or a lion’s share of the to bridge the gap between the literature and real-world
entire video since the length of anomalous events is inconstant applications in terms of video anomaly analysis. To our
in videos. Besides, our VAR task also differs from video knowledge, this is the first work moves towards VAR
moment retrieval (VMR) [14], [15], [16], [17] since the latter from VAD;
is to retrieve moments rather than untrimmed videos. Because • We present two large-scale benchmarks, i.e., UCFCrimeboth abnormal videos and normal videos (no anomaly) need AR and XDViolence-AR, based on public VAD datasets.
to be retrieved in VAR, video moment retrieval methods are The former is applied to video-text VAR, the latter is to
hard to tackle this task. Traditional video retrieval and video video-audio VAR;
moment retrieval methods cannot solve this new challenge • We propose a model called ALAN, aiming at challenges
well, detailed results are listed in Tables II and III. The in VAR, where anomaly-led sampling, video prompt
differences between video retrieval, video moment retrieval based masked phrase modeling, and cross-modal alignand video anomaly retrieval are shown in Figure 2. ment are introduced for the attention of anomalous
 To overcome the above challenge, we propose ALAN, segments, enhancement of fine-grained associations, and
an Anomaly-Led Alignment Network for video anomaly multi-perspective match, respectively.
retrieval. In ALAN, video, audio, and text encoders are
intended to encode raw data into high-level representations, II. R ELATED W ORK
and cross-modal alignment is introduced to match cross-modal
representations from different perspectives. Since videos A. Video Anomaly Detection
are long untrimmed and anomalous events have complex Aided by the success of deep learning, VAD has made
variations in the scenario and length, we expect that, in the much good progress in recent years, which is usually classified
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2215

into two groups, semi-supervised anomaly detection and video understanding can often be an ill-defined task with
weakly supervised anomaly detection. In semi-supervised low annotator consistency [68]. Therefore, we start with
anomaly detection, only normal event samples are available two acknowledged datasets in VAD community, i.e., UCFfor model training. Recent researchers mainly adopt deep Crime [6] and XD-Violence [7], and construct our benchmarks
auto-encoders [2], [4], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30] for VAR. We adopt these two datasets as the base since they
for self-supervised learning, e.g., reconstruction, prediction, thus far are the two most comprehensive VAD datasets in
jigsaw, etc. Weakly supervised anomaly detection can be terms of length and scene, where the total duration of them
regarded as the problem of binary classification, to obtain are 128 and 217 hours, respectively. Besides, they are also
frame-level predictions given coarse labels, and multiple collected from a variety of scenarios. For example, UCF-Crime
instance learning [6], [8], [9], [31], [32], [33], [34] is widely covers 13 real-world anomalies as well as normal activities,
used to train models. Unlike VAD that utilizes single labels and XD-Violence captures 6 anomalies and normal activities
to distinguish whether each frame is anomalous or not, our from movies and YouTube. In addition, both of them contain
proposed VAR uses elaborate text descriptions or synchronous half normal videos and half abnormal videos, therefore,
audios to depict the sequential events. retrieval systems retrieve both abnormal and normal videos
 from the video gallery given related cross-modal queries in
B. Cross-Modal Retrieval VAR. Large and diverse video databases allow us to construct
 We mainly introduce cross-modal retrieval [35], [36], [37], more practicable benchmarks for VAR.
[38] built on videos, texts, and audios. There are some
works [39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [44] focus on audio-text A. UCFCrime-AR
and audio-video retrieval. Specifically, Tian et al. [45] pro-
 UCF-Crime dataset consists of 1900 untrimmed videos with
pose an audio-to-video/video-to-audio cross-modality local-
 950 abnormal videos and 950 normal videos. Notably, for
ization/retrieval task [46], i.e, given a sound segment, locate
 anomaly videos in the training set, the start timestamp and
the corresponding visual sound source temporally within
 duration of anomalous activities are unavailable. For normal
a video, and vice versa. Then Wu et al. [47] introduce a videos, they are totally anomaly-free. We directly use the
novel dual attention matching method for this task. Recently, total videos as the video search base. To achieve cross-modal
Lin et al. [48] propose a latent audio-visual hybrid adapter retrieval, we require pairwise text descriptions.
that adapts pre-trained vision transformers to audio-visual We invite 8 experienced annotators who are proficient in
tasks, this method focuses on audio-video event localization Chinese and English to annotate these videos. The annotators
task rather than cross-modal retrieval. In addition, text-video watch the entire video and make the corresponding captions
retrieval is a key role in cross-modal retrieval. Generally, in both Chinese and English. Specifically, annotators are
text-video retrieval can be divided into two categories, i.e., required to focus on anomalous events when describing
dual-encoder and joint-encoder. Dual-encoder based methods anomaly videos. Due to the subtle differences in videos for
usually train two individual encoders to learn video and text the same anomaly category, we need to obtain quality sentence
representations and then align these representations in joint annotations to distinguish fine differences and avoid being into
embedding spaces. Among them, some works [13], [49], a one-to-many dilemma [69] which often appears in the current
[50], [51] focus on learning single global representations, video retrieval. To be specific, there are at most two annotators
but they lack the consideration of fine-grained information. to describe videos in the same category. For two similar videos
Thereby, several works devote efforts to aligning fine-grained in the same category, describe their differences in detail as
information [52], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58]. Joint- much as possible. Take the scene of a fighting between two
encoder based methods [59], [60], [61], [62] typically feed people as an example, e.g., “At a party, the yellow-haired
the video and text into a joint encoder to capture their man suddenly attacked a man opposite him.”, “A young man
cross-modal interactions. In comparison to dual-encoder based suddenly beat another man with glasses in the elevator.” The
methods, joint-encoder based methods explicitly learn fine- above two annotations clearly describe the difference between
grained associations and achieve more impressive results, but two similar videos. Finally, we double-check each sentence
sacrifice the retrieval efficiency since every text-video pair description to guarantee the quality.
needs to be fed into the encoder at the inference time. Following the partition of UCF-Crime, UCFCrime-AR
 Different from the above video retrieval, we consider a includes 1610 training videos and 290 test videos. Each video
more realistic scenario, where most videos contain anomalous is annotated with captions in both English and Chinese. In this
events, and a more realistic demand, where videos are work, we only use captions in English.
long untrimmed and partially relevant to the cross-modal
query [63]. Such a new task poses extra challenges as well as
multi-field research points. In addition, our ALAN also differs B. XDViolence-AR
from video moment retrieval methods [64], [65], [66], [67] in As for XD-Violence, we found that it is very hard to
that it does not require complex cross-modal interactions. describe videos in a few sentences due to their complicated
 contents and scenarios. Hence we changed focus and started
 III. B ENCHMARK a new line of audio-to-video retrieval due to its natural audio-
 Manually collecting a large-scale video benchmark is labor- visual information, that is, we use videos and synchronous
intensive and time-consuming, it is also subjective since audios for cross-modal anomaly retrieval. Unlike texts, audios
2216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF UCFC RIME -AR AND XDV IOLENCE -AR
 W ITH S EVERAL V IDEO -T EXT AND V IDEO -AUDIO R ETRIEVAL /
 L OCALIZATION DATASETS

have the same granularity as videos. Similar to UCF-Crime,
XD-Violence is also a weakly supervised dataset, namely,
frame-level annotations are unknown. XDViolence-AR is split
into two subsets, with 3954 long videos for training and
800 for testing.

C. Benchmark Statistics
 We compare two benchmarks with several cross-modal
retrieval/location datasets in Table I. As we can see that, Fig. 3. Statistical histogram distributions on UCFCrime-AR. Left: text
video databases in UCFCrime-AR and XDViolence-AR are captions in English; Right: text captions in Chinese.
both large-scale and are made public in recent years, where
the former is applied to video-text (V-T) anomaly retrieval,
and the latter is applied to video-audio anomaly retrieval (V- A. Encoders
A). Notably, the average length of videos in VAR benchmarks
is significantly longer than that of videos in traditional video 1) Video Encoder: Unlike images, videos possess spaceretrieval datasets. For example, the average length of videos time information [75], [76]. As a consequence, we consider
of UCFCrime-AR and XDViolence-AR are 242s and 164s, both appearance and motion information to encode videos.
whereas that of MSR-VTT [70], VATEX [71], VAE [45], Specifically, given an video v, we use I3D-RGB and I3D-
AudioCaps [72], and LLP [73] are in the range of 10s to 20s, Flow pre-trained on Kinetics [77] to extract frame-level object
and TVR [74] is mainly applied to video moment retrieval and motion features, respectively, then project these features
task, its average length of videos is still much shorter than into a d-dimensional space for the subsequent operations.
our benchmarks. Longer videos emphasize again the goal Here, object and motion feature sequences are denoted as
of VAR is to retrieve long and untrimmed videos, such a F o (v) and F m (v), respectively. Both sequences contain T clip
setup meets realistic requirements, and also reveals VAR is a features. For the sake of clarity, we use F(v) to denote F o (v)
more challenging task. For video-text UCFCrime-AR, we also and F m (v). Taking into account the variety of anomalous
present histogram distributions of captions in Figure 3. The event duration in untrimmed videos, we sample two sparse
average caption lengths of UCFCrime-AR-en, UCFCrime-AR- video clips with different concerns, i.e., U and R, from
zh are 16.3 and 22.4, which are longer than those of previous F(v) by means of the fixed-frame sampling and our proposed
datasets in video retrieval. e.g., the average caption lengths anomaly-led sampling.
of VATEX-en [71], VATEX-zh [71], and MSR-VTT [70] are As demonstrated in Figure 4, the video encoder is a
15.23, 13.95, and 9.28, respectively. symmetric two-stream model, one stream takes as input
 object, and the other takes as input motion. In order to fuse
 features in different modalities and different temporalities
 IV. M ETHOD for final representations, we employ the Transformer [78]
 In this section, we introduce ALAN in detail. In Sec. IV-A, as the base model, which has been widely used in
we first introduce three encoders in ALAN, namely, video VAD and VR tasks with good results. For example,
encoder, text encoder, and audio encoder, the goal of these Huang et al. [34], [79] and Zhao et al. [80] used Transformer
encoders is to project raw videos, texts, and audios into to tackle VAD and VR tasks, respectively. We first concatenate
high-level representations. In Sec. IV-B, we introduce the two different sampling clips as a new sequence, i.e.,
anomaly-led sampling mechanism which is utilized in both [UC L S , U1 , . . . , R N , RC L S , R1 , . . . , R N ], where UC L S and
video encoder and audio encoder. In Sec. IV-C, we describe RC L S are [CLS] tokens, which are the average aggregation of
a novel pretext task, i.e., VPMPM, which is applied to video- all features in U and R, respectively. Then, we add positional
text anomaly retrieval. At last, we describe the cross-modal embeddings [78] and sequence embeddings to this sequence.
alignment and training objectives in Secs. IV-D and IV-E. Here positional embeddings provide temporal information
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2217

Fig. 4. Overview of our ALAN. It consists of several components, i.e., video encoder, text encoder, audio encoder, pretext task VPMPM, and cross-modal
alignment.

about the time in the video, and sequence embeddings depict The gated embedding unit is also applied to match the object
that features in U and R stem from different sequences. and motion representations of videos.
In video encoder, Self Encoder is devised to capture contextual
information, which is a standard encoder layer in Transformer.
The following Cross Encoder takes the self-modality as the B. Anomaly-Led Sampling
query, and cross-modality contextual features as the key As mentioned, only fixed-frame sampling (FS) cannot
and value to encode cross-modal representations through capture variable anomalous events in anomaly videos.
cross-modal attention. Cross Encoder is composed of multi- We make use of anomaly priors and propose an anomaly-led
head attention, a linear layer, a residual connection, and a sampling (AS) to enable that anomalous clips are more likely
layer normalization. Finally, we obtain two different video to be selected. Since frame-level annotations are unknown, it is
representations, one is the average of output from UC L S and impossible to directly identify anomalous clips. To solve this
RC L S , denoted as g v (including g vo and g vm ), the other is problem, we leverage a weakly supervised anomaly detector
the mean of average pooling aggregation of output from U to predict clip-level anomaly confidences l ∈ RT , where
and R, denoted as h v (including h vo and h vm ). Such a simple li ∈ [0, 1]. With l in hands, we expect that for a clip, the
pooling operation is parameter-free and effective in our work, probability of being selected is positively correlated with its
enabling h v to involve local fine-grained information. anomaly confidence. A natural way is to select the top several
 2) Text Encoder: Give a text caption t, we aim to clips with the highest anomaly confidence, but such a solution
learn the alignment between it and a related video at two is too strict to be flexible. We believe that those clips with low
different levels. At first, we leverage a pre-trained BERT [13] anomaly confidences should also have a certain probability to
to extract features aided by its widespread adoption and be selected, on the one hand for data augmentation, on the
proven performance in language representations. Following other hand for salvaging false negatives of the anomaly
the video encoder, we obtain g t from the [CLS] output of detector. Taking inspiration from the selection strategy of
BERT, and h t by using the average pooling operation for evolutionary algorithms [82], [83], our anomaly-led sampling
word-level representations. To match the object and motion is based on the classical roulette-wheel selection [84]. To be
representations of videos, here we use the gated embedding specific, we regard anomaly confidences l as the fitness,
unit [11] acting on g t and h t to produce g to , g tm and h to , and then normalize all values to the interval [0,1] to ensure
h tm , respectively. summation of selection probabilities equals one,

 3) Audio Encoder: Give an audio a, we first extract audio exp (li /τ )
 pi = PT (1)
 k=1 exp (lk /τ )
features using a pre-trained VGGish [81], and project these
features into the d-dimensional space. As shown in Figure 4,
the audio encoder is similar to video encoder in terms of where p is selection probabilities, and τ is a temperature
structure. The difference lies in that audio encoder is a single- hyper-parameter [85]. Then calculate cumulative probabilities,
stream model and has no Cross Encoder. In a similar vein,
 qi = ik=1 pk
 P
two different audio representations g a and h a are obtained. (2)
2218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

Algorithm 1 Anomaly-led sampling based on roulette-wheel Prompting Decoder needs to process noun phrases and verb
selection. phrases separately in a parameter-shared manner. Given the
 final video frame-level representations X v and text word-level
 X t , we first randomly replace a noun phrase or verb phrase
 representations with mask embeddings [86], where each mask
 token is a shared, learned vector. Here we denote this masked
 X t as the query, and
 X t . Then we take b
 text representation as b
 v
 X as the key and value, feed them into Prompting Decoder
 to predict the masked contents.

 D. Cross-Modal Alignment
 In this paper, cross-modal alignment is used to match
 representations of different modalities, e.g., video-text and
 video-audio, from two complementary perspectives. Hence,
 we deal with CLS alignment and AVG alignment. Unless
 otherwise stated, here we take video-text as an example to
 describe these two alignments.
 1) CLS Alignment: CLS alignment is intended to compute
 the similarity between g v and g t , and the similarity between
 them is a weighted sum [13], which is computed as,

It should be noted that q0 = 0 and qT = 1. The final step, s g (v, t) = wta cos(g vo , g to ) + wtm cos(g vm , g tm ) (3)
then, is to generate N uniformly distributed random numbers where cos(·, ·) is the cosine similarity between two vectors.
in the interval [0, 1]. For each generated number r , the i-th wta and wtm are weights, which are obtained from g ta and
feature in F(v) is selected if qi−1 < r ≤ qi . A sequence with g tm , respectively. Specifically, we pass g ta (g tm ) through a
N clip-level features is assembled in such a way, where the linear layer with softmax normalization, and output wta (wtm ).
larger the anomaly confidence of a clip is, the more likely is 2) AVG Alignment: AVG alignment is intended to compute
its selection. We present the algorithm flow of Anomaly-led the similarity s h (v, t) between h v and h t , which is same as
sampling in Algorithm 1. CLS alignment. Notably, AVG alignment introduces more fine-
 This feature sequence based on anomaly-led sampling are grained information. The similarity is presented as,
mainly applied to cover anomalous segments, meanwhile,
we also use fixed-frame sampling, e.g., uniform or random, s h (v, t) = wta cos(hvo , hto ) + wtm cos(hvm , htm ) (4)
to generate another sequence with N clips for the entirety and
normal scenarios.
 E. Training Objectives
 The final similarity between v and t is the weighted sum of
C. Video Prompt Based Masked Phrase Modeling
 s g (v, t) and s h (v, t), namely,
 We propose a novel pretext task, i.e., video prompt
based masked phrase modeling, for cross-modal fine-grained s(v, t) = αs g (v, t) + (1 − α)s h (v, t) (5)
associations in video-text anomaly retrieval. VPMPM takes where α is a hyper-parameter, which lies in the range of [0,1].
video representations and text representations as input and Following the previous work [13], we obtain the bi-directional
predicts the masked phrases, which is related to the prevalent max-margin ranking loss, which is given by,
masked language modeling in nature language processing.
 B
The main difference lies in that (1) VPMPM masks and 1 X X h  i
 si j − sii + 1 + + s ji − sii + 1 +
  
 Lalign =
predicts noun phrases and verb phrases instead of randomly B
 i=1 j̸ =i
selected words. Unlike single words, noun phrases and verb
phrases comprise words of different parts of speech, e.g., (6)
nouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs, etc., better correspond to where B is batch size, si j = s(vi , ti ).
the local objects and motions in video frames; (2) VPMPM To optimize the weakly supervised anomaly detector in
fuses video representations with text representations through video encoder, we use the top-k strategy [32], [87] to obtain the
cross-modal attention, where video representations serve as video-level prediction from frame-level confidences l, which
fixed prompts [23]. Such two specific designs encourage is calculated as,
video encoder and text encoder to capture cross-modal and
 k
contextual representation interactions. 1 X topk
 l= li (7)
 To achieve this pretext task, we introduce a Prompting k
 i=1
Decoder, which is a standard decoder layer used in the
Transformer. Since VPMPM involves the objectives of where k = ⌊ 16 T
 ⌋, and l topk is the set of k-max framepredicting masked noun phrases and masked verb phrases, level confidences in l for the video v. We train this detector
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2219

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISONS W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS ON UCFC RIME -AR

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISONS W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS ON XDV IOLENCE -AR

with binary cross-entropy loss Ltopk between the video-level 3) Training: We train our model with a batch size of
prediction ρ v and video-level binary label y v , 64 using Adam [88] optimizer. The initial learning rate is set
 as 5 × 10−5 and decays by a multiplicative factor 0.95 per
 Ltopk = − y v log ρ v + (1 − y v )log 1 − ρ v
   
 (8) epoch. For hyper-parameters, hidden size d is set as 768, and
 temperature parameter τ in Eq. 1 is set as 0.7. Empirically,
 For VPMPM in video-text anomaly retrieval, we adopt
 we found the weight ratio α = 0.5 in Eq. 5 and sampling length
the cross-entropy loss Lmpm between the model’s predicted
 N = 50 worked well across different benchmarks. As the setup
 X t , X v ) and ground truth y mask , which is
probability ρ t ( b
 in [13], the margin 1 in Eq. 6 is set as 0.05. λ1 and λ2 in
presented as follows,
 Eq. 10 is set as 0.1 and 0.01, respectively, such a setup achieves
 Lmpm = −y mask log ρ t ( b Xt , Xv) optimal performance.
 
 (9)

where y mask is a one-hot vocabulary distribution.
 At last, the overall loss is shown as follows, B. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
 We conduct experiments on UCFCrime-AR and
 Ltotal = Lalign + λ1 Ltopk + λ2 Lmpm (10) XDViolence-AR and compare our ALAN with several
 recent methods that are widely used in video retrieval,
 V. E XPERIMENTS video moment retrieval and VAD. CE [12], MMT [13],
 T2VLAD [89], and X-CLIP [58] are video retrieval methods;
A. Experimental Settings XML [74] is a video moment retrieval method, here it is
 1) Evaluation Metrics: Following prior works, we use the used to retrieve videos, where the moment localization part is
rank-based metric for performance evaluation, i.e., Recall at removed since moment annotations are unavailable in VAR.
K (R@K, K = 1, 5, 10), Median Rank (MdR), and Sum of HL-Net [7] is a VAD method, since VAD is quite distinct
all Recalls (SumR) to measure the overall performance. from VAR, it is hard to directly use VAD method for VAR,
 2) Implementation Details: We use Spacy1 to extract noun here, we modify it as a video encoder for VAR. All methods
phrases and verb phrases. In video encoder and audio encoder, use BERT to extract language features except CE that uses
the anomaly detector is composed of 3 temporal convolution the word2vec word embeddings [90]. We present comparison
layers with kernel size of 7, the first layer has 128 units results in Tables II and III, and observe that our ALAN shows
followed by 32 units and 1 unit layers. The first two layers are a clear advantage over comparison methods in both text-video
followed by ReLU, and the last layer is followed by Sigmoid. and audio-video VAR. Specifically, ALAN outperforms CE,
Dropout with rate of 0.6 is applied to the first two layers. MMT, T2VLAD, X-CLIP, HL-Net, and XML on UCFCrime-
In the text encoder, we use the “BERT-base-cased model” and AR by 44.4, 17.6, 12.8, 10.6, 32.9, and 11.4 in terms of
fine-tune it with a dropout rate of 0.3. SumR, respectively. Furthermore, ALAN also achieves clear
 improvements against competitors on XDViolence-AR, which
 1 https://spacy.io/ achieves a significant performance improvement of 41.5 in
2220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 C OMPARISONS OF D IFFERENT S AMPLINGS ON UCFC RIME -AR VPMPM S TUDIES ON UCFC RIME -AR

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 C OMPARISONS OF D IFFERENT S AMPLINGS ON XDV IOLENCE -AR C OMPARISONS OF D IFFERENT A LIGNMENTS ON UCFC RIME -AR

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISONS OF D IFFERENT A LIGNMENTS ON XDV IOLENCE -AR
terms of SumR over the previous best method. Moreover,
It can be found that, in comparison to the video and text, the
video and audio are easier to align. We argue that video and
audio are synchronous with concordant granularity, thereby
leading to better align performance in VAR.

C. Ablation Studies
 1) Study on Anomaly-Led Sampling: As aforementioned,
we propose a novel sampling mechanism, i.e., anomalyled sampling, which combines with the ordinary fixed-frame
sampling, and the joint effort is devoted to capturing
local anomalous segments as well as overall information.
To investigate the effectiveness of anomaly-led sampling,
we conduct experiments on two benchmarks, and show results
on Tables IV and V. As we can see from the first two rows,
only using fixed-frame sampling or anomaly-led sampling
results in a clear performance drop on both UCFCrime-AR Fig. 5. Influences of α on both UCFCrime-AR and XDViolence-AR.
and XDViolence-AR. Besides, using anomaly-led sampling
is inferior to using fixed-sampling on XDViolence-AR,
we discover that the main reason for this problem is that 2) Study on VPMPM: Here we conduct experiments to
the anomaly-led sampling mechanism is applied to both certify the advantage of VPMPM for video-text fine-grained
video and audio, resulting in key segments misalignment associations. When ALAN removes VPMPM at training time,
to some extent. Moreover, we also investigate the effect we observe the performance clearly drops as shown in
of sampling length. From the third row, we found that Table VI. Besides, masking and predicting in the form of
increasing the sampling length from 50 to 100 does not random words rather than noun phrases and verb phrases
dramatically improve performance, and fixed-frame sampling in VPMPM hurts performance. We can also see that, using
still lags behind the combination of fixed-frame sampling and noun phrases and verb phrases are superior to noun and verb
anomaly-led sampling, even though they both have the same words on most evaluation metrics. This demonstrates that noun
sampling length at the moment. It also clearly demonstrates phrases and verb phrases, as the sequences of words with
that the joint effect between anomaly-led sampling and fixed- different parts of speech, can better align with related local
frame sampling enables our model to capture key anomalous contents in videos.
segments as well as holistic data information, thus facilitating 3) Study on Cross-Modal Alignment: Tables VII and VIII
cross-modal alignment under local-anomaly and global-video present the performance of two different alignments in our
perspectives. For example, in Figure 8, video frames that are ALAN. We found that CLS alignment and AVG alignment
selected by anomaly-led sampling are aligned with the key obtain worse results when used alone in comparison to the
anomaly descriptions, e.g., two car collided violently, a man in model of jointly using both. Such results demonstrate the
black lay on the ground and shot. On another hand, these video complementarity of these two alignments. A key observation
frames selected by fixed-frame sampling are aligned with the is the AVG alignment performs better than CLS alignment on
complete descriptions. XDViolence-AR, but the opposite is true on UCFCrime-AR,
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2221

 Fig. 6. Some retrieval examples on UCFCrime-AR. We visualize top 3 retrieved videos (green: correct; pink: incorrect).

 TABLE IX
 D ETAILED I NFLUENCES OF α ON UCFC RIME -AR

 TABLE X
 D ETAILED I NFLUENCES OF α ON UCFC RIME -AR

 Fig. 7. Some coarse caption retrieval examples on UCFCrime-AR.

 2) Visualization of Coarse Caption Retrieval: In VAR task,
 the purpose of using accurate captions is to distinguish fine
 differences and avoid being into a one-to-many dilemma [69].
 To further verify the generalization capacity of ALAN,
 we use several coarse captions that are not directly applied
we suspect that video and audio are easier to align at the fine- in model training to retrieve videos, results in Figure 7 clearly
grained level due to their concordant granularity. Moreover, show that ALAN works very well with different lengths of
we also investigate the influence of α. We try α with its value coarse captions, and also demonstrate ALAN has learned
ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 with an interval of 0.1. As shown in several abstract semantic information, e.g., explosion, fighting,
Figure 5, with the increase of α, the performance gradually traffic. This also convincingly indicates our methods can meet
improves and then decreases, when α is set as 0.5, our method practical requirements where users cannot provide a complete
achieves the best performance. In order to further explore how text description of the videos they intend to search, such as
to choose α, we also show the detailed retrieval results of the example in the lower right of Figure 7, users give the the
different α in Tables IX and X. It is not hard to see that it retrieval model a incomplete description “man robbed people”,
is a balanced choice to set the value range of α to 0.4-0.6, and the model returns top 3 related videos, in which the
where two different cross-modal alignments make nearly the contents correspond to robbery, steal, man, and people.
same contribution. 3) Visualization of Anomaly-Led Sampling: We visualize
 video frames selected by fixed-frame sampling and anomalyled sampling in Figure 8. These examples are taken from
D. Qualitative Analyses
 videos of road accident and shooting scenes. It can be seen
 1) Visualization of Retrieval Results: Some text-to-video from the second row that the duration of anomalous event
retrieval examples on UCFCrime-AR are exhibited in Figure 6, accounts for less than one-fifth of the entire video length,
where retrieval results of a normal video is shown at the far therefore, frames related to the anomalous event are hard
right. We observe ALAN successfully retrieves the related to select based on fixed-frame sampling. In stark contrast
video given a text query, and there are considerable similarities to fixed-frame sampling, anomaly-led sampling is based on
between the top 3 retrieved videos. This also demonstrates anomaly confidences generated by the anomaly detector, and
VAR is a challenging task as some scenes are similar with it can select more frames related to anomalous events since
delicate differences. the probability of being selected has positive correlations with
2222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 Fig. 8. Different samplings for video frame selection. Left: road accident; Right: Shooting.

Fig. 9. Zero-shot retrieval results. The left two columns present zero-shot text-to-video anomaly retrieval, and the right two columns present zero-shot
video-to-text anomaly retrieval.

anomaly confidences, where anomaly detector generates high on both datasets, showing its higher efficiency. The reason
confidences in anomalous segments which is shown in the why our method remains high retrieval efficiency is that
second row. it has a dual-encoder structure during the test stage, that
 4) Visualization of Zero-Shot Retrieval: ALAN is trained on is, using two separate encoders to embed video and text
UCFCrime-AR and XDViolence-AR for text-video and audio- features and project them into the latent joint space, and
video anomaly retrieval, respectively. Moreover, scenarios in only the cosine similarity between video and text features is
these two benchmarks are different, because videos from calculated as similarity, without complicated and inefficient
UCFCrime-AR are captured with fixed cameras, whereas cross-modal interactions. However, it is worth noting that,
videos from XDViolence-AR are collected from movies and during the training phase, our method integrates text and
YouTube. Here we explore that, given a cross-modal query video as inputs to a joint encoder for the cross-modality
from UCFCrime-AR (or XDViolence-AR), is ALAN trained fusion, which can establish local correlation between videoon UCFCrime-AR (or XDViolece-AR) capable of retrieving text features and improve retrieval accuracy. Therefore, our
some relevant videos from XDViolence-AR (or texts from method obtains the advantages of the above two kinds of
UCFCrime-AR)? We show the top 2 retrieval results in methods, that is, achieving fine-grained video-text interactions
Figure 9. In text-to-video anomaly retrieval, we found that while maintaining high retrieval efficiency.
given text queries from UCFCrime-AR, ALAN can retrieve
some videos from XDViolence-AR that look semantically VI. C ONCLUSION
plausible, even if there are no completely relevant videos
 In this paper, we introduce a new task called video
in XDViolence-AR. Interestingly, the video in the bottom
 anomaly retrieval to remedy the inadequacy of video anomaly
left is an animation. ALAN learns several local semantic
 detection in terms of abnormal event depict, further facilitate
contents and retrieves videos based on these local semantic
 video anomaly analysis research in cross-modal scenarios.
contents, such as “huge fire” and “mushroom cloud”. In video-
 We construct two VAR benchmarks, i.e., UCFCrime-AR and
to-text anomaly retrieval, although retrieved text descriptions
 XDViolence-AR, based on popular VAD datasets. Moreover,
are not completely related, ALAN captures partial semantic
 we propose ALAN which includes several components, where
information from movie videos, such as “a man”, “a female
 anomaly-led sampling is used to capture local anomalous
companion”, “knock down somebody with fists”, etc.
 segments, which coordinates with ordinary fixed-frame
 sampling to achieve complementary effects; Video prompt
E. Running Time based masked phrase modeling is used to learn cross-modal
 We report the retrieval time for UCFCrime-AR with fine-grained associations; Cross-modal alignment is used to
290 video-text test pairs and XDViolence-AR with 800 video- match cross-modal representations from two perspectives. The
audio test pairs, our method costs 2.7s and 5.6s, respectively. future work will lie in two aspects, 1) exploiting cross-modal
Generally, it only needs about 0.008s to process a pair pre-trained models to capture more powerful knowledge for
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2223

VAR; 2) leveraging VAR to assist VAD methods for more [23] Z. Hou, F. Sun, Y.-K. Chen, Y. Xie, and S.-Y. Kung, “MILAN:
precise anomaly detection. Masked image pretraining on language assisted representation,” 2022,
 arXiv:2208.06049.
 [24] S. Lee, H. G. Kim, and Y. M. Ro, “BMAN: Bidirectional multi-scale
 R EFERENCES aggregation networks for abnormal event detection,” IEEE Trans. Image
 Process., vol. 29, pp. 2395–2408, 2020.
 [1] M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, and R. Klette, “Deep-cascade: [25] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
 Cascading 3D deep neural networks for fast anomaly detection and auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
 localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 no. 4, pp. 1992–2004, Apr. 2017. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
 [2] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for [26] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryanomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 [3] P. Wu, J. Liu, and F. Shen, “A deep one-class neural network for pp. 1705–1714.
 anomalous event detection in complex scenes,” IEEE Trans. Neural [27] G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Qin, D. Zhang, X. Bao, and D. Huang,
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2609–2622, Jul. 2020. “Video anomaly detection by solving decoupled spatio-temporal jigsaw
 [4] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 494–511.
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [28] Z. Yang, P. Wu, J. Liu, and X. Liu, “Dynamic local aggregation network
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381. with adaptive clusterer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 [5] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 404–421.
 and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multi- [29] Z. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wu, P. Wu, and X. Liu, “Video event restoration based
 task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., on keyframes for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Jul. 2021, pp. 12742–12752. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 14592–14601.
 [6] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in [30] C. Yan, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Pang, and W. Wang, “Feature prediction
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern diffusion model for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 5527–5537.
 [7] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal [31] H. Lv, C. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Localizing anomalies
 violence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. from weakly-labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
 Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 322–339. pp. 4505–4515, 2021.
 [8] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance [32] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature
 self-training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021.
 pp. 14009–14018. [33] C. Cao, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive graph
 [9] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro, convolutional networks for weakly supervised anomaly detection in
 “Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal videos,” 2022, arXiv:2202.06503.
 feature magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. [34] C. Huang et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via self-
 (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4955–4966. guided temporal discriminative transformer,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early
[10] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in access, 2022.
 surveillance video,” 2021, arXiv:2108.03825. [35] Y. Peng, X. Huang, and Y. Zhao, “An overview of cross-media retrieval:
[11] A. Miech, I. Laptev, and J. Sivic, “Learning a text-video embedding Concepts, methodologies, benchmarks, and challenges,” IEEE Trans.
 from incomplete and heterogeneous data,” 2018, arXiv:1804.02516. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2372–2385, Sep. 2018.
[12] Y. Liu, S. Albanie, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman, “Use what you have: [36] Y.-X. Peng et al., “Cross-media analysis and reasoning: Advances
 Video retrieval using representations from collaborative experts,” 2019, and directions,” Frontiers Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng., vol. 18, no. 1,
 arXiv:1907.13487. pp. 44–57, Jan. 2017.
[13] V. Gabeur, C. Sun, K. Alahari, and C. Schmid, “Multi-modal transformer [37] J. Yu, Z. Wang, V. Vasudevan, L. Yeung, M. Seyedhosseini, and Y. Wu,
 for video retrieval,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: “CoCa: Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation models,” 2022,
 Springer, 2020, pp. 214–229. arXiv:2205.01917.
[14] X. Yang, S. Wang, J. Dong, J. Dong, M. Wang, and T.-S. Chua, “Video [38] R. Zuo et al., “Fine-grained video retrieval with scene sketches,” IEEE
 moment retrieval with cross-modal neural architecture search,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 3136–3149, 2023.
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 1204–1216, 2022. [39] M. Monfort et al., “Spoken moments: Learning joint audio-visual
[15] A. Yang, A. Miech, J. Sivic, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Tube- representations from video descriptions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 DETR: Spatio-temporal video grounding with transformers,” in Proc. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14866–14876.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, [40] A.-M. Oncescu, A. Sophia Koepke, J. F. Henriques, Z. Akata, and
 pp. 16421–16432. S. Albanie, “Audio retrieval with natural language queries,” 2021,
[16] R. Cui et al., “Video moment retrieval from text queries via single frame arXiv:2105.02192.
 annotation,” in Proc. 45th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., [41] V. Gabeur, A. Nagrani, C. Sun, K. Alahari, and C. Schmid, “Masking
 Jul. 2022, pp. 1033–1043. modalities for cross-modal video retrieval,” 2021, arXiv:2111.01300.
[17] G. Wang, X. Xu, F. Shen, H. Lu, Y. Ji, and H. T. Shen, “Cross-modal [42] A. Rouditchenko et al., “Cascaded multilingual audio-visual learning
 dynamic networks for video moment retrieval with text query,” IEEE from videos,” 2021, arXiv:2111.04823.
 Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24, pp. 1221–1232, 2022. [43] P. Morgado, N. Vasconcelos, and I. Misra, “Audio-visual instance
[18] Y. Han, G. Huang, S. Song, L. Yang, H. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Dynamic discrimination with cross-modal agreement,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 neural networks: A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2102.04906. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
[19] Y. Rao, W. Zhao, B. Liu, J. Lu, J. Zhou, and C.-J. Hsieh, “DynamicViT: pp. 12470–12481.
 Efficient vision transformers with dynamic token sparsification,” 2021, [44] W. Shen, J. Song, X. Zhu, G. Li, and H. T. Shen, “End-to-end prearXiv:2106.02034. training with hierarchical matching and momentum contrast for text-
[20] Y. Zhi, Z. Tong, L. Wang, and G. Wu, “MGSampler: An explainable video retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 5017–5030,
 sampling strategy for video action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. 2023.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 1493–1502. [45] Y. Tian, J. Shi, B. Li, Z. Duan, and C. Xu, “Audio-visual event
[21] M. Fayyaz et al., “Adaptive token sampling for efficient vision localization in unconstrained videos,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 transformers,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: (ECCV), 2018, pp. 247–263.
 Springer, 2022, pp. 396–414. [46] Y. Wei, D. Hu, Y. Tian, and X. Li, “Learning in audio-visual context:
[22] J. Li, R. Selvaraju, A. Gotmare, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi, A review, analysis, and new perspective,” 2022, arXiv:2208.09579.
 “Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with [47] Y. Wu, L. Zhu, Y. Yan, and Y. Yang, “Dual attention matching for audiomomentum distillation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, visual event localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 2021, pp. 9694–9705. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 6291–6299.
2224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

[48] Y.-B. Lin, Y.-L. Sung, J. Lei, M. Bansal, and G. Bertasius, “Vision [73] Y. Tian, D. Li, and C. Xu, “Unified multisensory perception: Weaklytransformers are parameter-efficient audio-visual learners,” in Proc. supervised audio-visual video parsing,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, Vis., Glasgow, U.K., 2020, pp. 436–454.
 pp. 2299–2309. [74] J. Lei, L. Yu, T. L. Berg, and M. Bansal, “TVR: A large-scale dataset
[49] X. Li, C. Xu, G. Yang, Z. Chen, and J. Dong, “W2VV++: Fully for video-subtitle moment retrieval,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput.
 deep learning for ad-hoc video search,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 447–463.
 Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 1786–1794. [75] A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, G. Heigold, C. Sun, M. Lucic, and C. Schmid,
[50] J. Dong et al., “Dual encoding for video retrieval by text,” IEEE Trans. “ViViT: A video vision transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4065–4080, Aug. 2022. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 6836–6846.
[51] S. Liu, H. Fan, S. Qian, Y. Chen, W. Ding, and Z. Wang, [76] D. Neimark, O. Bar, M. Zohar, and D. Asselmann, “Video transformer
 “HiT: Hierarchical transformer with momentum contrast for video-text network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops
 retrieval,” 2021, arXiv:2103.15049. (ICCVW), Oct. 2021, pp. 3156–3165.
[52] M. Wray, G. Csurka, D. Larlus, and D. Damen, “Fine-grained [77] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
 action retrieval through multiple parts-of-speech embeddings,” in Proc. model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 450–459. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2017, pp. 6299–6308.
[53] P. Wu, X. He, M. Tang, Y. Lv, and J. Liu, “HANet: Hierarchical [78] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 alignment networks for video-text retrieval,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2021, pp. 3518–3527. [79] C. Huang et al., “Hierarchical graph embedded pose regularity learning
[54] N. Han, J. Chen, G. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Zeng, and H. Chen, “Fine- via spatio-temporal transformer for abnormal behavior detection,” in
 grained cross-modal alignment network for text-video retrieval,” in Proc. Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 307–315.
 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2021, pp. 3826–3834. [80] S. Zhao, L. Zhu, X. Wang, and Y. Yang, “CenterCLIP: Token clustering
[55] J. Yang, Y. Bisk, and J. Gao, “TACo: Token-aware cascade contrastive for efficient text-video retrieval,” in Proc. 45th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf.
 learning for video-text alignment,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2022, pp. 970–981.
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 11562–11572. [81] J. F. Gemmeke et al., “Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled
[56] W. Wang et al., “Dig into multi-modal cues for video retrieval with dataset for audio events,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
 hierarchical alignment,” in Proc. Thirtieth Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Process. (ICASSP), Mar. 2017, pp. 776–780.
 Aug. 2021, pp. 1113–1121. [82] K. Wu, J. Liu, X. Hao, P. Liu, and F. Shen, “An evolutionary
[57] Y. Ge et al., “Bridging video-text retrieval with multiple choice multiobjective framework for complex network reconstruction using
 questions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. community structure,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 25, no. 2,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16167–16176. pp. 247–261, Apr. 2021.
[58] Y. Ma, G. Xu, X. Sun, M. Yan, J. Zhang, and R. Ji, “X-CLIP: End-to- [83] Y. Jin, H. Wang, T. Chugh, D. Guo, and K. Miettinen, “Data-driven
 end multi-grained contrastive learning for video-text retrieval,” in Proc. evolutionary optimization: An overview and case studies,” IEEE Trans.
 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 638–647. Evol. Comput., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 442–458, Jun. 2018.
[59] L. Li, Y.-C. Chen, Y. Cheng, Z. Gan, L. Yu, and J. Liu, “HERO: [84] T. Back, Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and Practice: Evolution
 Hierarchical encoder for video+language omni-representation pre- Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Genetic Algorithms. London,
 training,” 2020, arXiv:2005.00200. U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996.
[60] J. Lei et al., “Less is more: CLIPBERT for video-and-language learning [85] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
 via sparse sampling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 7331–7341. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
[61] H. Luo et al., “UniVL: A unified video and language pre-training model [86] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 for multimodal understanding and generation,” 2020, arXiv:2002.06353. autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[62] K. Ji et al., “CRET: Cross-modal retrieval transformer for efficient text- Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
 video retrieval,” in Proc. 45th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. [87] S. Paul, S. Roy, and A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, “W-TALC: Weakly-
 Retr., Jul. 2022, pp. 949–959. supervised temporal activity localization and classification,” in Proc. Eur.
[63] J. Dong et al., “Partially relevant video retrieval,” in Proc. 30th ACM Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 563–579.
 Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 246–257. [88] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
[64] J. Gao, C. Sun, Z. Yang, and R. Nevatia, “TALL: Temporal activity 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 localization via language query,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. [89] X. Wang, L. Zhu, and Y. Yang, “T2VLAD: Global-local sequence
 Vis., Oct. 2017, pp. 5267–5275. alignment for text-video retrieval,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
[65] D. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Y.-F. Wang, and L. S. Davis, “MAN: Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 5079–5088.
 Moment alignment network for natural language moment retrieval via [90] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
 iterative graph adjustment,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1247–1257.
[66] N. C. Mithun, S. Paul, and A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, “Weakly supervised
 video moment retrieval from text queries,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 11592–11601.
[67] X. Ding et al., “Exploring language hierarchy for video grounding,”
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 4693–4706, 2022.
[68] A. Miech, D. Zhukov, J. Alayrac, M. Tapaswi, I. Laptev, and J. Sivic,
 “HowTo100M: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred
 million narrated video clips,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 2630–2640. Peng Wu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
[69] M. Wray, H. Doughty, and D. Damen, “On semantic similarity in video Xidian University in 2017 and 2022, respectively.
 retrieval,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 3649–3659. School of Computer Science, Northwestern Poly-
[70] J. Xu, T. Mei, T. Yao, and Y. Rui, “MSR-VTT: A large video description technical University. He has authored over 20 papers
 dataset for bridging video and language,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. in the top-tier journals and conferences, including
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 5288–5296. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING,
[71] X. Wang, J. Wu, J. Chen, L. Li, Y.-F. Wang, and W. Y. Wang, “VaTeX: IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS
 A large-scale, high-quality multilingual dataset for video-and-language AND L EARNING S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 research,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, ON M ULTIMEDIA , CVPR, ECCV, ACM MM, and
 pp. 4581–4591. AAAI. His current research interests include video
[72] C. D. Kim, B. Kim, H. Lee, and G. Kim, “AudioCaps: Generating anomaly detection and video retrieval. He was one of the recipients
 captions for audios in the wild,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter of 2023 China Education Society of Electronics (CESE) Outstanding Doctoral
 Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. Technol., 2019, pp. 119–132. Dissertation Award.
WU et al.: TOWARD VAR FROM VAD: NEW BENCHMARKS AND MODEL 2225

 Jing Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. Peng Wang received the B.E. degree in electrical
 degree in computer science and technology and the engineering and automation and the Ph.D. degree
 Ph.D. degree in circuits and systems from Xidian in control science and engineering from Beihang
 University in 2000 and 2004, respectively. In 2005, University in 2004 and 2011, respectively. He is
 she joined Xidian University as a Lecturer and was currently a Professor with the School of Computer
 promoted to a Full Professor in 2009. From April Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University.
 2007 to April 2008, she was with The University of He has authored/coauthored more than 100 papers
 Queensland, Australia, as a Postdoctoral Research in top-tier journals and conferences on CV and
 Fellow. From July 2009 to July 2011, she was AI, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN
 with the Australian Defence Force Academy, The A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE, IJCV,
 University of New South Wales, as a Research IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING,
Associate. She is currently a Full Professor with Guangzhou Institute of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING, IEEE
Technology, Xidian University. Her research interests include evolutionary T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE
computation, complex networks, fuzzy cognitive maps, and computer vision. T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA, CVIU, CVPR, ICCV, ECCV, AAAI,
 and IJCAI. His current research interests include computer vision, machine
 Xiangteng He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. learning, and artificial intelligence.
 degree in computer application technology from
 Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is
 currently a Research Assistant Professor with the
 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking
 University. He has authored over 20 articles,
 including IJCV, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE
 P ROCESSING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M UL -
 TIMEDIA , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS
 AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY , CVPR,
 ICCV, ICDE, ACM MM, ACM SIGIR, IJCAI, and
AAAI. His research interests include multi-modal content analysis, finegrained visual analysis, image and video recognition and understanding, and
computer vision. He was one of the recipients of 2020 China Computer
Federation (CCF) Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award and 2018 Baidu
Scholarship and awarded Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by
CAST in 2022.

 Yuxin Peng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in computer application technology
 from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2003.
 He is currently the Boya Distinguished Professor
 with the Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University. He has authored over
 200 papers, including more than 100 papers in the
 top-tier journals and conference proceedings. He has
 submitted 51 patent applications and been granted
 39 of them. His current research interests include Yanning Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 cross-media analysis and reasoning, image and video the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Northwestern
recognition and understanding, and computer vision. He led his team to Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 1993 and
win the first place in video semantic search evaluation of TRECVID ten 1996, respectively. She is currently a Professor with
times in the recent years. He won the First Prize of Beijing Science and the School of Computer Science, Northwestern Poly-
Technology Award in 2016 (ranking first) and the First Prize of the Scientific technical University. She has authored/coauthored
and Technological Progress Award of Chinese Institute of Electronics in more than 200 papers in international journals,
2020 (ranking first). He was a recipient of the National Science Fund for conferences, and Chinese key journals. Her research
Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2019 and the Best Paper Award interests include signal and image processing,
at MMM 2019 and NCIG 2018. He serves as an Associate Editor for EEE computer vision, and pattern recognition. She is
T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS also the Organization Chair of the Ninth Asian
AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY . Conference on Computer Vision in 2009.