IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 697

 Towards Efficient Cross-Modal Anomaly Detection
 Using Triple-Adaptive Network and Bi-Quintuple
 Contrastive Learning
 Shu-Juan Peng, Ye Fan, Yiu-ming Cheung , Fellow, IEEE, Xin Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Zhen Cui , Member, IEEE, and Taihao Li

 Abstract—Cross-modal anomaly detection is a relatively new and learning method is designed to enhance the feature correlation
challenging research topic in machine learning field, which aims between the same attribute data, while maximally enlarging the
at identifying the anomalies whose patterns are disparate across feature difference between different attribute data. Besides that, the
different modalities. As far as we know, this topic has yet to be bidirectional learning scheme is employed to significantly improve
well studied, and existing works often suffer from the incomplete the data utilization. Through the joint exploitation of the above,
anomalous data detection and low data utilization problems. To different kinds of anomalous samples can be well detected across
alleviate these limitations, this paper proposes an efficient deep different modalities. Extensive experiments show that the proposed
cross-modal anomaly detection approach via Triple-adaptive Net- framework outperforms the state-of-the-art competing methods,
work and Bi-quintuple Contrastive Learning (TN-BCL), which lies with a large improvement margin.
among the earliest attempt to detect various cross-modal anomalies within the heterogeneous multi-modal data. To be specific, a Index Terms—Cross-modal anomaly detection, triple-adaptive
triple-adaptive network is explicitly designed to identify various network, bi-quintuple contrastive learning, shared residual block.
anomalies, whose patterns are disparate in both single-modal scenario and cross-modal scenario. On the one hand, the top branch
network is utilized to adaptively detect the attribute anomalies I. INTRODUCTION
and part of mixed anomalies in multi-modal data samples. On the
 NOMALY detection aims to identify the abnormal samother hand, the bottom two-branch network, with shared residual
blocks, is leveraged to learn the discriminative cross-modal embeddings. At the same time, an efficient bi-quintuple contrastive
 A ples that are significantly different from the other normal
 instances, which is an important data analysis technique due
 to the fact that anomalies often provide significant and critical
 Manuscript received 21 September 2022; revised 3 January 2023; accepted information [1]. For instance, anomaly detection in driving
3 March 2023. Date of publication 24 March 2023; date of current version 23 behaviours is of paramount importance to reduce millions of
January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Open Project of Zhejiang
Lab under Grant 2021KH0AB01, in part by the National Science Foundation of
 vehicle accidents occurring in worldwide [2], while anomalous
China under Grants 61673185 and 61672444, in part by RGC General Research pattern identification in medical imaging system plays a crit-
Fund under Grants 12201321 and 12202622, in part by the NSFC/RGC Joint ical role in diagnosing a certain disease [3]. Note that, these
Research Scheme under Grant N_HKBU214/21, in part by the Innovation and
Technology Fund of Innovation and Technology Commission of the Government
 anomaly detectors predominately focus on examining the data
of the Hong Kong SAR under Grant ITS/339/18, and in part by the National Sci- from a single source, i.e., single-view data [4]. As shown in
ence Foundation of Fujian Province under Grants 2020J01083 and 2020J01084. Fig. 1, data samples are practically acquired from different
(Corresponding authors: Yiu-ming Cheung; Xin Liu.)
 Shu-Juan Peng is with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Huaqiao sources, and the ability to detect anomalies in multi-modal
University, Xiamen 361021, China, also with the Artificial Intelligence Research data is highly desirable in many applications, such as micro-
Institute, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311121, China, and also with the Key Labo- expression detection [5], purchase behavior analysis [6] and
ratory of Computer Vision and Machine Learning (Huaqiao University), Fujian
Province University, Xiamen 361021, China (e-mail: pshujuan@163.com). malicious intruder detection [7]. As such, traditional single view
 Ye Fan is with the Xiamen Key Laboratory of Computer Vision, and Pattern detectors cannot discover multi-model anomalies, and existing
Recognition, Xiamen 361021, China, and also with the Fujian Key Laboratory multi-modal anomaly detectors are mainly designed to identify
of Big Data Intelligence and Security, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361021,
China (e-mail: yfan@hqu.edu.cn). possible anomalies in case where the instances in one modalities
 Yiu-ming Cheung is with the Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong are temporarily not available or include noise [8].
Baptist University Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk). In this paper, we focus on a relatively new topic in the anomaly
 Xin Liu is with the Department of Computer Science, Huaqiao University,
Xiamen 361021, China, also with the Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, detection field, i.e., cross-modal anomaly detection. It aims at
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311121, China, and also with the Department of identifying the anomalies whose patterns are disparate across
Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University Hong Kong SAR, China different modalities. That is, some anomalous data instances
(e-mail: starxliu@163.com).
 Zhen Cui is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Sys- from multi-modal data are often not anomalous when they are
tems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, Nanjing viewed separately in each individual modality, but which may
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China (e-mail: zhen. contain inconsistent semantic patterns when these multi-modal
cui@njust.edu.cn).
 Taihao Li is with the Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Zhejiang Lab, instances are considered jointly. In practice, anomaly detection
Hangzhou 311121, China (e-mail: lith@zhejianglab.com). across multi-modal data often benefits lots of valuable appli-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TETCI.2023.3256466 cations, such as transaction record detection [9] and mobile
 2471-285X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Illustration of difference between the multi-view and cross-modal
anomaly detection mechanisms.

robot navigation [10]. For instance, there are increasingly more
people consuming news through social media, and the news Fig. 2. Illustration of three types of outliers and the process of detection task
 across heterogeneous modalities.
with images, video and text information can provide a better
storytelling and attract more attention from readers. In this case,
if the image profile is not consistent with other sources of the
same news, e.g., the image behaving inconsistently with its only designed to detect the cross-modal outliers. To the best
textual description, might cause a fake news to mislead readers of our knowledge, there is still a lack of approaches that can
and may therefore bring negative effects to the public events. simultaneously detect all kinds of outliers across heterogeneous
 From the research perspective, a straightforward approach modalities. Although multi-modal data instances belonging to
for multi-modal anomaly detection is to concatenate all modal- the same category have high semantic relevance, it is still a nonities together and convert it to single-view anomaly detection trivial task to perform efficient cross-modal anomaly detection,
task [11], [12]. However, this concatenation often neglects the mainly due to the complex integration of heterogeneous data
inconsistent information across multiple modalities, which often distributions, modality heterogeneity and semantic gap problem.
fails to detect the anomalous samples that behave inconsistently In this paper, we propose an efficient deep cross-modal
across different modalities. Recently, a number of multi-view anomaly detection approach via Triple-adaptive Network and
anomaly detection methods have been proposed to detect the Bi-quintuple Contrastive Learning (TN-BCL), which lies among
outliers that have abnormal behaviors in each view or have the early attempts to detect various kinds of cross-modal anomainconsistent behaviors across different views. Note that, most lies within the heterogeneous multi-modal data. To be speexisting approaches rely on the assumption that multi-view data cific, the proposed framework seamlessly unifies the unimodal
of a normal instance share consistent clustering structures, while anomaly detection and cross-modal anomaly detection together,
the anomalous samples tend to fall into different clusters or in which the attribute outliers are isolated from the neighborhood
consistently deviate from all clusters. Nevertheless, if there are structures of one modality data while cross-modal outliers and
no clusters in data, it is difficult for these approaches to detect the mixed outliers are detected via the inconsistent behaviors across
anomalous samples. Besides, these anomaly detectors mainly different modalities. The main contributions are summarized as
focus on splitting the object feature representation into different follows:
subsets and consider each subset as one particular view of the r A triple-adaptive network is designed to explicitly identify
data, but very few works pay attention to completely heteroge- various kinds of anomalies whose patterns are disparate in
neous multi-modal data acquire from different modalities. both single-modal scenario and cross-modal scenario. To
 Linking the heterogeneous, not directly comparable sources the best of our knowledge, this work is the first attempt
of multi-modal data, cross-modal anomaly detection remains to detect three types of anomalies simultaneously across
a challenging task. As shown in Fig. 2, there are three types heterogeneous modalities.
of outliers possibly existing in multi-modal anomalies. For r An efficient bi-quintuple contrastive learning method is
terminological convenience, they are 1) Attribute outliers: proposed to guide the cross-modal embedding learning,
these samples have abnormal behaviors in each modality, which which significantly enhances the feature correlation among
will be considered as outliers in each modality individually. 2) the similar attribute data and maximally enlarges the fea-
Cross-modal outliers: this kind of samples may not be identified ture difference between different attribute data.
as outliers when they are viewed separately, but which will be r The bidirectional learning scheme is developed to signifiidentified as anomalies when their mutual behaviors do not be- cantly improve the data utilization, which can well promote
have consistently across different modalities. 3) Mixed outliers: the outlier detection performance.
these samples look like an attribute outlier in some modality r Extensive experiments verify the advantages of the proand exhibit cross-modal outlier property in another modality. posed approach under various abnormal scenarios and
Note that, the outliers resulted from the missing modality cannot show its superiority over state-of-the-arts.
support the cross-modal anomaly detection task, and this kind The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows:
of outlier is not considered. Recently, the work [9] specifies Section II makes an overview of the existing multi-view and
the concept of cross-modal anomaly detection, but which is cross-modal anomaly detection works, and Section III elaborates
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 699

the proposed deep cross-modal anomaly detection framework which make these detectors unsuitable to handle completely
in detail. The experimental results are provided in Section IV. heterogeneous data acquire from different modalities.
Finally, we draw a conclusion in Section V.
 B. Multi-Modal Anomaly Detection
 II. RELATED WORK Multi-modal anomaly detectors mainly aim to identify pos-
 Anomaly detection across different modalities is a relatively sible anomalies from completely heterogeneous multi-modal
new topic, and this section mainly surveys the most relevant data. Deep neural networks are capable of learning nonlinear
multi-view or multi-modal anomaly detection works. mappings by extracting high-level abstractions from the input
 raw features, which have dramatically improved the multimodal representation performance [20]. Along this line, Wang
A. Multi-View Anomaly Detection et al. [21] investigate two-branch neural networks (TBNN) to
 Traditional anomaly detection methods mainly focus on de- learn an explicit shared latent embedding, and predict a simtecting the unusual samples from a single view. With the popu- ilarity score between image and text data. Nevertheless, this
larity of multi-view learning, a number of multi-view anomaly approach is incapable of discovering the inherent anomalous
detectors have been developed, and the earlier efforts mainly samples across different modalities. Until very recently, Li
attempt to find the samples that have inconsistent cross-view et al. [9] specify the concept of cross-modal anomaly deteccluster memberships. For instance, Gao et al. [13] present a hor- tion (CMAD), which aims to identify the anomalies whose
izontal anomaly detection (HOAD) approach to identify objects patterns are disparate across different modalities. This approach
that exhibit inconsistent characteristics across different views. leverages a series of nonlinear mapping functions to map the
This approach constructs a combined similarity graph in mul- heterogeneous information of each modality into a comparable
tiple views and calculates the anomalous score of each sample consensus feature space, whereby the cross-modal anomalies
with the cosine distance. Alvarez et al. [14] propose an affinity can be identified by measuring the similarity with a pre-defined
propagation (AP) algorithm to detect multi-view anomalies by threshold. Noted that, this method is only designed to detect the
analyzing the affinity vectors of each sample in different views. abnormal samples with inconsistent behaviors across different
Note that, these approaches perform the clustering in different modalities, which cannot identify the attribute or mixed outliers.
views, which may fail to detect the possible anomalies when To the best of our knowledge, there is still a lack of efficient
there are no clusters in data. models to adaptively detect different kinds of outliers across
 In general, a normal sample usually serves as a good con- different modalities.
tributor in representing the other normal samples while the
outlier fails. Accordingly, Zhao et al. [11], [15] utilize the III. DEEP CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION
dual-regularization and consensus regularization on the latent Cross-modal anomaly detection across heterogeneous modalrepresentations to achieve multi-view outlier detection. Specif- ities is a relatively new topic in data mining field. Without loss of
ically, these two methods first characterize the outlier by the generality, this section mainly focuses on cross-modal anomaly
latent coefficients or intrinsic cluster assignments, and then detection with only two modalities, particularly for visual and
quantify the inconsistency by a well-designed outlier criterion. textual modalities. Note that, the proposed learning framework
Similarly, Li et al. [16] represent the multi-view data by a global can be easily extended to other different modalities, e.g., visual
low-rank representation shared by all views and define an outlier and audio data. First, this section clarifies the notations and
score function for anomalous sample detection. Although these formal definitions of multi-modal anomalies. Then, the proposed
approaches are able to detect data-anomalies that have incon- triple-adaptive network architecture and bi-quintuple contrastive
sistent features across multiple views, they still cannot identify learning method are introduced in tandem. Finally, the detection
the mixed outliers and often suffer from low data utilization of anomalous data and its optimization process are explicitly
problem. To detect different outliers, Sheng et al. [17] first build provided.
a nearest neighbor-based anomaly criterion and then exploit
the nearest neighbor based MUlti-View Anomaly Detection A. Notation and Problem Formulation
(MUVAD) approach to identify various kinds of outliers. Wang
et al. [18] first build a hierarchical Bayesian model to represent Suppose that we have training data X = {XA , XB } with
the multi-view data, and then employ variational inference to two modalities XA ∈Rn×d1 and XB ∈Rn×d2 , with n being the
evaluate anomalous scores of multi-view instances. In recent numbers of data samples and d1 , d2 (in general d1 =d2 ) the
years, non-linear mapping has been widely employed in repre- dimensions of these two modalities, the i-th input multi-modal
sentation learning for complex data structures. Along this line, data Xi = {XA i , Xi } is regarded as an anomaly, if one of the
 B

Ji et al. [19] perform multi-view outlier detection in deep intact following cases is appeared:
space (MODDIS), and define an outlier score to detect different Case 1:: If XA B
 i and Xi are both the abnormal samples in
outliers. Note that, these anomaly detectors mainly focus on each modality individually, Xi is regarded as attribute outlier.
splitting the feature representation into different subsets, and Case 2: Suppose XA B
 i and Xi both behave normally in each
consider each subset as one particular view of the data. Evidently, modality, Xi is regarded as the cross-modal outlier if XA i and
the different feature subsets often share the similar distributions, XBi have inconsistent behaviors across different modalities.
700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3. The schematic architecture of the proposed deep cross-modal anomaly detection approach (TN-BCL).

 Case 3: Suppose XA B
 i (resp. Xi ) is an abnormal sample in
 semantic label yi , and N represents the total number of multi-
 B
modality A (resp. B), and Xi (resp. XA i ) is a normal sample
 modal samples. Often, there are three types of outliers possibly
in modality B (resp. A), Xi is regarded as the mixed outlier existing in multi-modal anomalies. To tackle this problem, as
if the mutual behaviors between XA B
 i and Xi do not behave
 shown in Fig. 3, a triple-adaptive network, is explicitly designed
consistently across different modalities. to identify different kinds of anomalies whose patterns are dis-
 After an in-depth study of these cases, it can be easily found parate in both single-modal scenario and cross-modal scenario.
that if XAi is an abnormal sample in modality A, Xi can be
 On the one hand, the top branch network is utilized to adaptively
regarded as the anomalous data, regardless of whether XB i is an
 detect the attribute anomaly and part of class-attribute anomaly
abnormal sample or not. To be specific, if XB i is an abnormal
 in multi-modal data samples. On the other hand, the bottom
sample, Xi falls into the first case. If XBi is a normal sample,
 two-branch network associated with shared residual blocks, is
and the mutual behaviors between XA B
 i and Xi are abnormal,
 leveraged to detect the cross-modal outlier and other outliers.
Xi corresponds to the third case. To find these potential outliers, As discussed in Section III-A, if an abnormal sample xvi (resp.
we propose an efficient deep cross-modal anomaly detection ap- xi ) is appeared in one modality, this multi-modal data {xvi , xti }
 t

proach via triple-adaptive network and bi-quintuple contrastive can be regarded as the anomalous data, regardless of whether
learning (TN-BCL), which lies among the early attempts to its corresponding data xti (resp. xvi ) is an abnormal sample or
detect various kinds of cross-modal anomalies within the het- not. Specifically, if a normal sample xvi (resp. xti ) is appeared
erogeneous multi-modal data. in one modality, while its corresponding data xti (resp. xvi ) is
 an abnormal sample in another modality, the input data pair
 {xvi , xti } can be identified via the cross-modal outlier detection
 network if xvi and xti do not behave consistently across different
B. Triple-Adaptive Network Architecture modalities. Since the image data is the most popular data in
 The goal of the proposed framework is to align the high-level various applications, we therefore select image data as a typical
representations of all semantically relevant samples from het- example to perform anomaly discriminator in the top branch
erogeneous modalities, while enlarging the distance between network. First, we utilize transformer network to encode the
semantically irrelevant ones. Multi-modal deep neural networks visual features, and employ the BERT encoder to extract the
have been successfully utilized to learn the compatible features text features. Then, these heterogeneous features are fed into
among different types of data, including text, image and audio the cross-modal shared residual network (CM-SRN) to learn the
data. For multi-modal data from heterogeneous sources, we compatible cross-modal representations. At the meantime, the
mainly focus on cross-modal anomaly detection with visual and network outputs are regularized by the bi-quintuple contrastive
other modalities, e.g., image and text, face and voice. Without loss, which can well enlarge the feature difference between
loss of generality, we select the image and text data to introduce different attribute data, while enhancing the feature correlation
the proposed learning framework. Let Xv = {xvi }N i=1 represent between the similar attribute data.
the visual image data, Xt = {xti }N i=1 denote the text data, where Visual Transformer and Anomaly Discriminator: Given an
{xvi , xti } represents the i-th input image-text data pair with its image, it is well accepted that not all information is equally
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 701

important for image representation. By considering this nature far away from the data point. Alternatively, the k-NN model is
of the visual data representation problem, transformer is a new a classic data-driven method which is relatively effective yet
kind of neural architecture which can encode the input data simple to exploit neighborhood relationship among the data.
into discriminative features via the attention mechanism. For Inspired by this distribution property, we utilize ball-tree based
the input visual data, we utilize transformer network to encode k-NN to search the local geometric structures in the dataset:
the visual feature. Formally, the transformer utilizes the linear  k  
 c,1
projections to compute a set of queries (K), keys (Q) and values vi,r = Rank min d(vic,1 , vjc,1 )j=i,j∈[1,N ] (5)
 r=1 1,...,k
(V), and calculates the scaled dot products to obtain the attention
 c,1
weights, followed by the value aggregation for each query: where vi,r represents the r-th nearest neighbor for the i-th in-
   stance, d(vic,1 , vjc,1 ) denotes the Euler distance between feature
 QKT
 Att(Q, K, V) = softmax √ V (1) vectors vic,1 and vjc,1 . Then, we compute the averaged distance
 dk
 between each point and its k-nearest neighbor data, and search
where dk is the dimension of K. The transformer applies the the results recursively. More specifically, we first utilize all the
attention mechanism multiple times throughout the architecture normal data in the verification set to construct the ball-tree, and
and results in a multi-head self-attention model. Accordingly, set the contamination at a small value (e.g., 0.001) to calculate
image transformer allows the model to jointly attend to informa- the threshold. If the distance is less than the threshold, the
tion from different representations at different positions, which neighboring data points around the current data point are densely
has h parallel attention ‘heads’ to generate several Q, K and distributed, and this data is not anomalous. On the contrary, if the
V values, and their values are concatenated to aggregate the distance is greater than the threshold, the data distribution around
attended representations: the data point is sparser and this data is anomalous. Under such
 headi = Att(QWQ K V
 i , KWi , VWi ) (2)
 circumstances, the proposed learning framework shall perform
 the subsequent cross-modal anomaly detection.
 MultiAtt(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1 , . . ., headh )W Cross-modal Network Encoder: Cross-modal anomalies often
 (3) present inconsistent behaviors across different modalities. If the
where WiQ , WiK , WiV and W are the projection matrices. multi-modal instances are learned separately, such inconsistent
Accordingly, each image is divided into several image patches, behaviors cannot be well detected. In order to explore the
and the position of each patch is encoded by the transformer semantic associations between different modalities, we utilize
representation. Specifically, the number of transformer block is the cross-modal shared residual network (CM-SRN) with four
varied for different datasets, which is generally set at a small layers to learn the compatible cross-modal representations. In
value if the dataset is simple, and set at a large value if the particular, a series of nonlinear mapping functions are employed
dataset is complex. The head number is fixed at 6 and MLP to map the data points of different modalities into a consensus
layer is set at 4. Finally, the transformer utilizes the non-linear feature space, in which the instance pairs with consistent pattransformation to calculate the output features. Remarkably, terns are pulled together while the data pairs with inconsistent
ReLU is a non-linear function that will output the input directly cross-modal patterns are pushed away.
if it is positive, otherwise, it will output zero. In practice, ReLU For the text data, we utilize the BERT encoder to extract the
is favored for its simple computation, fast implementation and textual features ti = BERT(xti ), and then feed this feature into
efficiency, and it can also avoid vanishing gradient problem in the CR-SRN module. Note that, the networks with the shared
the network learning process. Besides, training a deep network weight parameters can well reduce the semantic gap between the
with ReLU tends to converge much more quickly and reliably heterogeneous modalities, while enhancing their the semantic
than training a deep network with sigmoid activation. Therefore, associations:
    
we utilize the ReLU as the nonlinear transformations to train the vic,2 = σ FC vic,1 + CM-SRN vic,1 (6)
learning model, and the high-level image semantic feature vector
is obtained by: tc,2
 i = σ (FC (ti + CM-SRN (ti ))) (7)
 vic,1 = ReLU(TNT(xvi )) (4) where vic,2 and tc,2
 i are respectively the feature output of image
 and text data, σ is the non-linear action function such as ReLU or
where vic,1 represents the high-level image feature vector de-
 Tanh, and FC is a fully connected layer. Note that, the nonlinear
rived from the top network branch. Within the visual data, the
 mapping functions could help to fully capture the nonlinear
distribution of normal data points is relatively dense, while the
 correlations among different modalities, and we utilize ReLU
distribution of outliers is relatively scattered. Accordingly, the
 to train the network model.
distance of each data point with its local neighborhood can reflect
the states that the data point is normal or abnormal.
 C. Bi-Quintuple Contrastive Learning
 Specifically, if the distance between one data point and its
local neighborhood is small, it means that the neighbors of the The purpose of cross-modal anomaly detection is to find
data point are distributed around it. In contrast to this, if the the anomalous instances whose patterns are inconsistent across
distance between the data point and its local neighborhood is different modalities. Towards this end, an efficient cross-modal
large, it means that the neighbors of the data point are distributed embedding learning method should pull together the instances
702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 derived by:
  
 c,2
 tc,2
 pos = argmax S v c,2
 ,
 anc j t |j∈[1,N ] (9)
 yjt =yanc
 v

  
 neg = argmin S
 tc,2 c,2
 vanc , tc,2
 j |j∈[1,N ] (10)
 yjt =yanc
 v

   c,2
 vanc · tc,2
 j
 S vanc
 c,2
 , tc,2
 j = c,2 . (11)
Fig. 4. Illustration of the proposed bi-quintuple contrastive learning. ||vanc || · ||tc,2
 j ||

 Accordingly, the image-to-text contrastive loss is defined as:

with consistent pattern, while pushing away the instances with Lvt (vanc
 c,2
 pos , tneg ) = γ0 −S vanc , tpos
 , tc,2 c,2 c,2 c,2

inconsistent patterns. It has been theoretically and practically
 +max 0, S(vanc
 c,2
 neg )−γ . (12)
 , tc,2
validated that the contrastive learning can be well utilized
for better cross-modal representation learning, which allows Similarly, we also construct the text-to-image similarity triple
the model to flexibly define powerful losses by contrasting anc , vpos , vneg ) to perform corresponding constraint, and its
 (tc,2 c,2 c,2

the positive pairs from sets of negative samples. Nevertheless, corresponding contrastive loss is defined as follows:
most previous cross-modal contrastive learning methods mainly  
 c,2
map the features of heterogeneous modalities into a common
 c,2
 vpos = argmax S tc,2 anc , v j |j∈[1,N ]
 yjt =yanc
 v
embedding space, but which do not simultaneously consider
the intra-modal similarity and inter-modal similarity to learn (13)
efficient embeddings. To tackle this problem, as shown in Fig. 4,  
 c,2
we design an efficient bi-quintuple contrastive learning method
 c,2
 vneg = argmin S tc,2
 anc , vj |j∈[1,N ]
 yjt =yanc
 v

to maximally enlarge the feature distance between different at-
 (14)
tribute data, while enhancing the feature correlation between the
   c,2
 anc · vj
 tc,2
similar attribute data. More specifically, the proposed learning c,2
method consists of multiple triple losses, which yield a flexible S tanc , vj
 c,2
 = c,2 (15)
 ||tanc || · ||vjc,2 ||
principle: pull an anchor and a positive sample in the embedding
space together, and push apart the anchor from many negative Ltv (tc,2
 2,anc , vpos , vneg ) = γ0 −S tanc , vpos
 c,2 c,2 c,2 c,2
samples. Let o represent an anchor sample, p denotes a positive
sample that belongs to the same attribute with o, n represents anc , vneg )−γ .
 +max 0, S(tc,2 c,2

a negative sample that belong to different attributes from o, the (16)
formal definition of the triple loss is formulated as follows:
 Accordingly, the inter-modal contrastive loss across different
  modalities can be expressed as:
 Ltri = (γ0 −S(o, p)) +max (0, S(o, n)−γ) (8)
 1 
 o,p,n N
 Linter = Lvt vanc
 c,2
 , tc,2 c,2
 pos , tneg
 N anc=1
where S(·, ·) measures the similarity between a pair of observations, γ0 and γ are the regularization parameters. Evidently,
 1 
 N
the sample o is orthogonal to the negative sample n in case + Ltv tc,2 c,2 c,2
 anc , vpos , vneg . (17)
where S(o, n) = 0. In practice, γ is utilized to accelerate the N anc=1
convergence. For each triplet < o, p, n >, the optimization of Recent studies have demonstrated that the intrinsic manifold
the triplet loss is to make S(o, p) as large as possible, and force structure residing in individual modalities is also able to pro-
S(o, n) as small as possible. mote the cross-modal learning. Therefore, the proposed learning
 For contrastive learning across heterogeneous modalities, we framework also exploit the intra-modal contrastive learning to
design multiple triples to discriminatively regularize the cross- promote the representation learning. Given any text data tc,2 2,anc
modal representations. Without loss of generality, taking any as an anchor sample, we construct text-to-text similarity triple
 c,2
image data vanc as an anchor point in visual modality, we con- (tc,2
 anc , tpos , tneg ), where tpos and tneg respectively denote the
 w,2 w,2 w,2 w,2
struct image-to-text similarity triple (vanc c,2
 pos , tneg ), where
 , tc,2 c,2
 positive sample and negative sample within the text data. If the
 c,2
text data tpos shares the consistent semantic with the image attributes of tw,2 c,2
 c,2 anc and tj are the similar, it is expressed as
example vanc , and tc,2
 neg behaves inconsistent behavior with c,2
 yjt = yanct
 . On the contrary, if the attributes of tw,2anc and tj
 c,2
vanc . To be specific, when the attributes vanc c,2
 and tc,2
 j exhibit are different, it is expressed as yjt =yanct
 . Accordingly, twc,2
 pos
consistent behaviors, their labels are expressed as yjt = yanc v
 . w,2
 c,2 c,2
 and tneg can be obtained by:
On the contrary, if the attributes panc and tj do not behave  
consistently across different modalities, their semantic labels c,2
 pos = argmax S tanc , tj
 tw,2 |j∈[1,N ]
 c,2
 (18)
are expressed as yjt = yancv
 . Accordingly, tc,2 c,2
 pos and tneg can be yjt =yanc
 t
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 703

  
 c,2 Through the joint exploitation of the bi-quintuple loss, the proneg = argmin S tanc , tj
 tw,2 |j∈[1,N ]
 c,2
 (19)
 yjt =yanc
 t posed TN-BCL framework can well push the representations of
 normal instance pairs closer while pulling those representations
   c,2
 c,2 anc · tj
 tc,2 of abnormal instance pairs away.
 S tc,2 ,
 anc j t = . (20)
 ||tc,2 c,2
 anc || · ||tj ||
 D. Optimization and Anomaly Detection
Accordingly, the text-to-text contrastive loss is defined as:
 The objective of the proposed TN-BCL framework is to mini-
 Ltt (tc,2
 anc , tpos , tneg ) = γ0 −S(tanc , tpos )
 w,2 w,2 c,2 w,2
 mize (28). Similar to work [9], the proposed model is optimized
 +max 0, S tc,2 by Adam optimizer [22], which is an adaptive stochastic gradient
 anc , tneg −γ . (21)
 w,2
 descent method and its optimization process can be iteratively
 Similarly, we also construct the image-to-image similarity solved until the convergence is reached. The whole network is
triple (vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos w,2
 , vneg ) to perform intra-modal constraint on trained in an end-to-end manner and network parameters are
 w,2 w,2
image data, where vpos and vneg respectively denote the positive updated by the backpropagation. On the one hand, the instances
sample and negative sample within the image data: with consistent patterns will be pulled together within a small
   distance, and their cross-modal similarity in the transformed
 w,2
 vpos = argmax S vanc c,2
 , vjc,2 |j∈[1,N ] (22) feature space should be very high. On the other hand, the
 yjv =yanc
 v
 instances with inconsistent patterns will be pushed away from
  
 w,2
 vneg = argmin S vanc
 c,2
 , vjc,2 |j∈[1,N ] (23) each other, and their cross-modal similarity in the transformed
 yjv =yanc
 v feature space should be very small. Since the Youden index [23]
 provides the best tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity, we
   c,2
 vanc · vjc,2 utilize the validation set to obtain the ROC curve, and select
 S c,2
 vanc , vjc,2 = c,2 (24)
 ||vanc || · ||vjc,2 || the Youden index [23] to optimize the threshold value. For
 the testing, we calculate the similarity between heterogeneous
Similarly, the image-to-image contrastive loss is defined as: data pairs, and utilize the derived threshold to detect various
 Lvv vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos w,2
 , vneg = γ0 − S(vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos ) cross-modal anomalies.

 +max 0, S(vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vneg )−γ . IV. EXPERIMENT
 (25)
 This section conducts a series of quantitative experiments to
 Consequently, the intra-modal contrastive learning and cross- investigate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed deep
modal contrastive learning not only increases the data us- cross-modal anomaly detection method. The experiments and
age, but also enhances discrimination power of the entire analysis will be detailed in the following subsections.
learning framework. Further, we seamlessly combine these
intra-modal triples and inter-modal triples to form a quin- A. Datasets and Implementations
tuple representation. Let (vanc c,2 w,2
 , vpos w,2 c,2
 , vneg neg ) and
 , tpos , tc,2
(tanc , tpos , tneg , vpos , vneg ), respectively, denote the quintuple
 c,2 w,2 w,2 c,2 c,2 The popular MNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR10 [24] and
combination for each image and text sample, their quintuple Voxceleb [25] datasets are selected for evaluation. The main
contrastive loss formulations are defined as: description of each dataset is briefly described as follows:
 1) MNIST dataset: It consists of 70,000 original digital images
Lv (vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos w,2 c,2
 , vneg neg ) = Lvt vanc , tpos , tneg
 , tpos , tc,2 c,2 c,2 c,2
 to represent 10 different numbers of pixels. The entire MNIST
 dataset is divided into a training set of 60,000 images and a test
 +Lvv vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos w,2
 , vneg . set of 10,000 instances. We randomly selects 5000 pieces of data
 (26) from the training set as the validation set.
 Lt (tc,2 2) FashionMNIST dataset: This dataset replaces the MNIST
 anc , tpos , tneg , vpos , vneg ) = Ltv tanc , vpos , vneg
 w,2 w,2 c,2 c,2 c,2 c,2 c,2
 handwritten digit set with fashion products derived from 10
 +Ltt tc,2 w,2 w,2
 anc , tpos , tneg . categories, which covers a total of 70,000 product images. The
 (27) size of the training set, testing set and validation set are set as
 the same as the MNIST dataset.
 By integrating the (26) and (27), the entire bi-quintuple con- 3) CIFAR10 dataset: It is a computer vision dataset that
trastive loss is defined as follows: contains 60,000 RGB color images from 10 categories. The
 1 
 N entire dataset is divided into a training set of 50,000 images and
 Lquintuple = Lv vanc
 c,2 w,2
 , vpos , tpos , tc,2
 w,2 c,2
 , vneg neg a test set of 10,000 instances. We also randomly selects 5000
 N anc=1
 pieces of data from the training set as the validation set.
 4) Voxceleb dataset: It is a popular face-voice dataset collected
 1 
 N
 + Lt tc,2 w,2 w,2 c,2 c,2
 anc , tpos , tneg , vpos , vneg . from 1251 celebrities. We utilize MTCNN [26] to crop RGB
 N anc=1 faces with a size of 224 × 224 × 3 from the video frames, and
 (28) employ the voice activity detector [27] to eliminate the voice
704 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

segment with 64-dimensional log melspectrograms. We select TABLE I
 THE AUC, FPR, TPR AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED ON
901 celebrities as the training set, 100 people as the validation MNIST DATASET
set, and 250 people as the test set. The identities between these
splits are fully disjoint.
 For MNIST, FashionMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, the text
tag is added to each image example by GloVe word embedding [28], and the BERT encoder [29] is utilized to map the
tag information into a 100-dimensional vector. Accordingly,
the image-text dataset can be synthetically generated for multimodal data analysis. Note that, the paired instances derived
from these datasets exactly share the same semantic information TABLE II
between each other, which can be well utilized to detect the THE AUC, FPR, TPR AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED ON
anomalous samples that behave inconsistently across different FASHIONMNIST DATASET
modalities. Specifically, some other multi-label multi-modal
datasets may not have exactly the same semantic information
for the paired instances, which are therefore unsuitable for
evaluating the cross-modal anomaly detection tasks. Since there
is no ground truth of anomalies in these datasets, we refer to
work [19] and select the popular injection method to create a
number of inconsistent multi-modal data pairs. For the imagetext data, we modify a certain proportion of one modality data
and randomly inject other data to generate attribute anomalies
and mixed anomalies. Meanwhile, we randomly scramble a For these methods, we utilize the propposed threshold optimizacertain proportion of image-text pairs to generate cross-modal tion scheme to detect the possible anomalous samples across
anomalies, in which the scrambled image-text pairs do not match different modalities.
semantically. For the Voxceleb datasets, we replace a certain In the experiment, the hyperparameter γ is set at 0.4 for
proportion of faces with different celebrities and randomly gen- MNIST, FashionMNIST, and CIFAR10 dataset, and set at 0.2
erate the disguised voice sequence of the same dimensionality to for Voxceleb dataset. The quantitative performance is evaluated
generate attribute anomaly and mixed anomaly data. Meanwhile, by the popular true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate
we shuffle a certain proportion of face-voice pairs to generate (FPR):
cross-modal anomaly data. In the experiments, the number of TP FP
 TPR = , FPR = (29)
transformer blocks is set at 3 for MNIST and FashionMNIST TP + FN TN + FP
datasets, set at 5 for CIFAR10 dataset, and set at 7 for Voxceleb where TP, FN, TN, and FP, respectively, represent the number of
dataset. true positives, false negatives, true negatives, and false positives.
 In general, the larger TPR values generally indicate the better
 detection performance, while the smaller FPR values show
B. Baseline Methods and Evaluation Metrics
 the better detection results. Consequently, the accuracy is also
 To the best of our knowledge, there exist limited cross-modal utilized to evaluate the detection performances:
anomaly detection methods, except for CMAD [9]. For mean- TP + TN
ingful comparison, we select three multi-view outlier detection Accuracy = (30)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
algorithms that can be utilized for cross-modal anomaly detection, i.e., MUVAD [17], MODDIS [19] and TBNN [21]. Besides, In addition, we also utilize the ROC curves and AUC values
cross-modality metric learning (CMML) [30] is also selected to evaluate the detection performances [31]. Specifically, AUC
to learn the relative distance between the positive and negative is the area of the ROC curve, with larger values indicating the
pairs, which can be utilized to detect the cross-modal outliers. better outlier detection performance.
To be concept, MUVAD exploits the nearest neighbor based
 C. Performance Comparison and Analysis
multi-view anomaly detection to identify multi-view outliers,
while MODDIS utilizes the neural networks to integrate multi- 1) Results of Detection Performances: The anomaly detection
view data into a latent intact space and defines an outlier score results tested on different datasets are shown in Tables I, II,
measurement to detect different outliers. For these two methods, III, and IV, respectively. It can be found that the competing
we consider each modality as one particular view of data to multi-view anomaly detection methods have delivered relatively
process the multi-modal data, and attempt to detect various lower AUC, TPR and Accuracy values, while generating a large
anomalous samples in the datasets. TBNN [21] constructs two bit FPR values. Specifically, MUVAD [17] exploits an anomaly
network structures to learn the shared latent embedding space measurement criterion to estimate the set of normal instances,
and measures the similarity between image and text. CMML [30] while MODDIS [19] construct a multi-view latent intact space to
applies the bi-directional triplet variants to optimize the relative encode outlier information. For the FashionMNIST dataset, the
distance between the cross-modal positive and negative pairs. AUC score and accuracy value obtained by MUVAD approach
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 705

 TABLE III Comparatively speaking, the proposed TN-BCL method al-
 THE AUC, FPR, TPR AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED ON CIFAR10
 DATASET
 ways yields the better cross-modal outlier detection performance
 than the competing multi-view outlier detection methods. To
 be specific, the proposed TN-BCL approach with Lquintuple loss
 always delivers the better AUC scores in most tested datasets,
 and yields the highest accuracies in most cases. For instance,
 the AUC values obtained by TN-BCL (Lquintuple ) reach up to
 0.9878 and 0.8845, respectively, evaluated on the FashionM-
 NIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Comparing with the Fashion-
 MNIST dataset, CIFAR10 dataset has more complex visual
 TABLE IV appearances, and such complexity makes it difficult to identify
 THE AUC, FPR, TPR AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED ON VOXCELEB
 DATASET
 the anomalies whose patterns are disparate across different
 modalities. Noted that, the CMAD and TN-BCL methods are
 both designed to identify the abnormal samples across different
 modalities. It can be found that the AUC, TPR and accuracy
 values obtained by the proposed TN-BCL approach are all higher
 than that produced by the CMAD method, which indicates
 that the proposed TN-BCL approach is able to identify more
 complex abnormal samples across heterogeneous modalities.
 As shown in Fig. 5, the similar detection performance can
are respectively equal to 0.8077 and 0.8067, while the AUC be also evaluated using the ROC curve, which graphically
score and accuracy value obtained by MODDIS method are demonstrates the changes of true positive rate with respect to
respectively equal to 0.8367 and 0.8448. These two multi-view the changes of false positive rate in the detection. It can be
outlier detection methods are able to detect some easy-to- observed that the proposed approach has achieved the best
identify outliers, but which often fail to detect some inconsistent detection performances and improved the state-of-the-art resemantic patterns. As a result, their detection performances are sults significantly. That is, the cross-modal embedding derived
uncompetitive when processing the heterogeneous modalities. from the proposed TN-BCL framework are more discrimina-
 Specifically, TBNN [21] encodes both bidirectional ranking tive and semantically meaningful, which can well guarantee
constraints and neighborhood-preserving constraints to regu- the semantic consistency between the similar heterogeneous
larize the correspondence between different modalities, which samples and inconsistency between dissimilar heterogeneous
can learn their semantic similarity to differentiate the possible samples.
anomalous samples. Accordingly, the accuracy scores obtained 2) Results of Different Anomaly Ratios: We also sample
by this approach are only equal to 0.8837 and 0.7428, respec- different ratio of anomaly samples in the dataset to evaluate
tively, tested on FashionMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Note the effectiveness of the proposed TN-BCL framework. For
that, this approach ignores the intra-modal structure embedded simplicity, the ratio is defined as the sample proportion bein real-world data and therefore results in a lower detection tween normal instance and abnormal instance in the dataset.
performance. CMAD [9] exploits a deep structured framework As shown in Table V, it can be observed that the accuracy value
to characterize the feature representations between heteroge- changes under different anomaly ratios. Remarkably, the CMAD
neous data samples, which can identify the anomalies whose method [9] is specifically designed to identify cross-modal
patterns are disparate across different modalities. It can be found anomalies whose patterns are disparate across different modalthat CMAD has yielded the better anomalous sample detec- ities, which can achieve very competitive performances than
tion performance than the results obtained by the competitive the competing multi-view outlier detection methods, i.e., MUmulti-view outlier detection methods. Nevertheless, CMAD has VAD and MODDIS, especially when there exist large anomaly
delivered very poor detection performance on the inconsistent examples. For instance, the accuracies obtained by MUVAD
behavior matching across face and voice modalities, and the and MODDIS, are respectively equal to 0.5969 and 0.7322,
detection accuracy is only equal to 0.6991. The main reason lies when tested on Cifar10 dataset with 1:4 ratio. The main reason
that CMAD is only designed to detect the cross-modal outliers, lies that multi-view anomaly detectors mainly consider each
which cannot differentiate the attribute outliers. Besides, CMAD feature subset as one particular view of the data, but which often
just utilizes the cross-modal negative samples to penalize the degrade their performance on completely heterogeneous data
instance pairs with inconsistent patterns, whereby some con- acquired from different modalities. TBNN [21] constructs two
fused outliers cannot be well detected. CMML [30] applies the network structures to measure the similarity between different
bi-directional triplet variants to optimize the relative distance modalities, which can well differentiate the anomaly samples
between the cross-modal positive and negative pairs, which can within the multi-modal datasets. Nevertheless, this approach
promote the outlier detection performances. Nevertheless, this is very sensitive to the anomaly ratio values, and the detecapproach ignores the intra-modal negative samples to enlarge tion accuracies vary significantly under different ratio values.
the feature distance between different attribute data, and its Although CMAD approach [9] and CMML [30] are able to
detection performances need further improvement. identify the cross-modal anomalies, such approach ignores the
706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 5. The ROC curves obtained by different approaches and tested on four datasets.

 TABLE V
 ANOMALY DETECTION ACCURACIES OBTAINED BY DIFFERENT APPROACHES AND DIVERSE ABNORMAL RATIOS

intra-modal negative samples to enlarge the feature distance outliers. Comparatively speaking, our proposed TN-BCL apbetween different attribute data and therefore may result missing proach has achieved very stable anomaly detection performance
outlier detections. and the detection accuracies are always higher than the results
 In contrast to this, the proposed TN-BCL approach always de- obtained by the competing baselines. That is, our proposed
livers the better detection performances under different anomaly TN-BCL approach not only can identify different kinds of
ratios, which again demonstrates the effectiveness of the pro- anomalous samples, but also could produce relatively stable
posed model. For the MNIST dataset, the proposed TN-BCL detection performance on different anomaly detection tasks.
approach with Linter loss delivers the best detection performance 3) Analysis on Training Time: Further, we record the execuwith different anomaly ratios. For the Voxceleb dataset, the tion times on each training epoch and 1000 testing examples
proposed TN-BCL approach with Lquintuple loss yields the best to show the time complexity of the different framework. The
detection accuracy under different anomaly ratios. Further, we proposed model and the competing baselines are trained on
also sample different types of anomaly instances separately. GPU NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti. Since the proposed model aggre-
Specifically, we utilize the learnt representations of CMAD as- gates more modules to discriminatively learn the cross-modal
sociated with optimized threshold to detect the attribute outliers representations, the execution time of training time or testing
and mixed outliers. The similar results tested on FashionMNIST time could be much higher than that obtained by the competing
and CIFAR10 datasets can be also found in Fig. 6, it can be found methods. Fortunately, as illustrated in Table VI, the proposed
that MODDIS, TBNN and CMAD approaches have induced an TN-BCL framework does not significantly increase the training
obvious fluctuations on the detection accuracies. For instance, time and testing time to a large extent, while achieving the best
if the anomaly ratios are different, CMAD has resulted different outlier detection performances. From a practical viewpoint, the
accuracies when detecting the cross-modal outliers and mixed proposed TN-BCL method achieves a good balance between the
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 707

Fig. 6. Anomaly detection results obtained by different approaches and tested on diverse anomaly types.

 TABLE VI the text modality, the proposed TN-BCL framework is able to
 EVALUATION OF EXECUTION TIMES ON FASHIONMNIST DATASET
 identify the semantically irrelevant examples (i.e., cross-modal
 outliers) that show inconsistent meanings in the visual modality,
 e.g., ‘camel’ and ‘cattle’. It indicates that the proposed network
 structure exhibits high discriminability to learn the semantically
 differentiable embeddings, which can well push representations
 of the semantically relevant examples closer while pulling those
 of semantically irrelevant instances away. The experiments constantly show its outstanding performance.

 D. Further Discussion
time cost and outlier detection performance, which is suitable
for identifying the anomalies whose patterns are disparate across Cross-modal anomaly detection across heterogeneous modaldifferent modalities. ities is a very challenging topic in the anomaly detection field.
 4) Visualization and Analysis: To visually verify the supe- The extensive experiments show that the proposed TN-BCL
riority of the proposed TN-BCL model, we show some rep- framework is able to detect all kinds of outliers from the heteroresentative cross-modal anomaly detection examples obtained geneous multi-modal data. The main advantages contributed to
by the proposed TN-BCL framework. As shown in Fig. 7, these very competitive performances are three-fold: 1) The dethe right parts show the visual detection results specified by signed triple-adaptive network is able to identify different kinds
text or voice query. On the one hand, it can be found that the of anomalies whose patterns are disparate in both single-modal
proposed TN-BCL approach is able to identify the semantically scenario and cross-modal scenario. Accordingly, the proposed
similar examples from one modality to another modalities. For network structure can well promote the outlier detection perinstance, given a ‘ship’ query in the text modality, the proposed formance. 2) The proposed bi-quintuple contrastive learning is
TN-BCL method is able to match the relevant visual examples. capable of enhancing the feature correlation between the same
This indicates that the proposed framework aggregates more attribute data, while maximally enlarging the feature distance
semantic relationships within semantically relevant multi-modal between different attribute data. As a result, the instance pairs
data, which can explicitly learn the semantic correspondence with consistent patterns across different modalities are pulled
to correlate heterogeneous data samples. On the other hand, together, while the data pairs with inconsistent cross-modal
the proposed TN-BCL framework is capable of detecting the patterns are pushed away. 3) The designed bidirectional learning
abnormal examples that exhibit inconsistent behaviors across scheme is able to significantly improve the data utilization,
different modalities. For instance, given an ‘Horse’ query in which can well benefit the network to learn the discriminative
708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 7. Visualization of representative cross-modal anomaly detection examples on different datasets. For each text query or voice query, the detected anomalous
samples are marked with red rectangle.

cross-modal embeddings and therefore promote the outlier de- dataset is very large, the updating of model parameters will need
tection performance. The experimental results consistently val- more computational load. Besides, if the multi-modal datasets
idate the advantage and effectiveness of the proposed TN-BCL have more than three modalities or incorporate the imbalanced
framework in detecting different kinds of anomaly examples. multi-modal data collections, the current work will need more
 designs to tackle these problems. These investigations will be
 studied in our future works.
 V. CONCLUSION
 In this paper, we have proposed an efficient deep cross-modal REFERENCES
anomaly detection approach via triple-adaptive network and
 [1] P. Jain, S. Jain, O. R. Zaiane, and A. Srivastava, “Anomaly detection
bi-quintuple contrastive learning. Within the proposed framein resource constrained environments with streaming data,” IEEE Trans.
work, a triple-adaptive network is explicitly designed to identify Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 649–659, Jun. 2022.
different kinds of anomalies whose patterns are disparate in both [2] C. Ryan, F. Murphy, and M. Mullins, “End-to-end autonomous driving
 risk analysis: A behavioural anomaly detection approach,” IEEE Trans.
single-modal scenario and cross-modal scenario. Meanwhile, an
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1650–1662, Mar. 2021.
efficient bi-quintuple contrastive learning method is discrimina- [3] H. D. P. d. Santos, A. H. D. P. S. Ulbrich, V. Woloszyn, and R. Vieira,
tively designed to guide the cross-modal embedding learning “DDC-outlier: Preventing medication errors using unsupervised learning,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 874–881,
process, which can maximally enlarge the feature distance be-
 Mar. 2019.
tween different attribute data and enhance the feature correlation [4] W. Lin, J. Gao, Q. Wang, and X. Li, “Learning to detect anomaly
between the same attribute data. As a result, the multi-modal events in crowd scenes from synthetic data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 436,
 pp. 248–259, 2021.
data pairs with consistent patterns are pulled together, while
 [5] Y. Zong, W. Zheng, X. Huang, J. Shi, Z. Cui, and G. Zhao, “Domain rethe data pairs with inconsistent patterns are pushed away. In generation for cross-database micro-expression recognition,” IEEE Trans.
addition, the bidirectional learning scheme is able to improve the Image Process., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 2484–2498, May 2018.
data utilization significantly and therefore benefit the abnormal [6] Q. Li, M. Gu, K. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Multi-classes feature engineering
 with sliding window for purchase prediction in mobile commerce,” in
sample detection in a more interpretable and plausible way. Ex- Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining Workshop, 2015, pp. 1048–1054.
tensive experiments conducted on various kinds of cross-modal [7] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach to
anomaly detection tasks have shown its promising performance. network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
 vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
 Along the line of the present work, several open problems [8] A.-U. Rehman, H. S. Ullah, H. Farooq, M. S. Khan, T. Mahmood, and H.
also deserve our further research. For example, the missing O. A. Khan, “Multi-modal anomaly detection by using audio and visual
modality problem is another challenging topic in cross-modal cues,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 30587–30603, 2021.
 [9] Y. Li, N. Liu, J. Li, M. Du, and X. Hu, “Deep structured cross-modal
outlier detection field, and the adaptive cross-modal anomaly anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019,
detection method should also consider this practical problem. pp. 1–8.
Also, the current learning framework aggregates multiple mod- [10] J. Simanek, V. Kubelka, and M. Reinstein, “Improving multi-modal data
 fusion by anomaly detection,” Auton. Robots, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 139–154,
ules to promote the outlier detection performance. If the training 2015.
PENG et al.: TOWARDS EFFICIENT CROSS-MODAL ANOMALY DETECTION USING TRIPLE-ADAPTIVE NETWORK 709

[11] H. Zhao and Y. Fu, “Dual-regularized multi-view outlier detection,” in Ye Fan received the M.S. degree in computer science
 Proc. 24th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015, pp. 4077–4083. from Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China, in 2023. He
[12] X. Li, H. Zhang, R. Wang, and F. Nie, “Multiview clustering: A scalable is currently a Research Fellow with the Xiamen Key
 and parameter-free bipartite graph fusion method,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Laboratory of Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 330–344, Jan. 2022. nition, Xiamen, and also a Research Fellow with
[13] J. Gao, W. Fan, D. Turaga, S. Parthasarathy, and J. Han, “A spectral frame- the Fujian Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligence
 work for detecting inconsistency across multi-source object relationships,” and Security, Xiamen. His research interests include
 in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2011, pp. 1050–1055. multimedia content analysis, pattern recognition, and
[14] A. M. Alvarez, M. Yamada, A. Kimura, and T. Iwata, “Clustering-based deep learning.
 anomaly detection in multi-view data,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Manage., 2013, pp. 1545–1548.
[15] H. Zhao, H. Liu, Z. Ding, and Y. Fu, “Consensus regularized multi-view
 outlier detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 236–248, Yiu-ming Cheung (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Jan. 2018. degree from the Department of Computer Science and
[16] K. Li, S. Li, Z. Ding, W. Zhang, and Y. Fu, “Latent discriminant subspace Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
 representations for multi-view outlier detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Hong Kong. He is currently a Chair Professor (Arti-
 Intell., 2018, pp. 3522–3529. ficial Intelligence) with the Department of Computer
[17] X. R. Sheng, D.-C. Zhan, S. Lu, and Y. Jiang, “Multi-view anomaly Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong.
 detection: Neighborhood in locality matters,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. His research interests include machine learning, pat-
 Intell., 2019, pp. 4894–4901. tern recognition and visual computing. He is the
[18] W. Zhen and L. Chao, “Towards a hierarchical Bayesian model of multi- Editor-in-Chief (since 2023) of IEEE Transactions
 view anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence,
 pp. 2420–2426. and is an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS
[19] Y. X. Ji et al., “Multi-view outlier detection in deep intact space,” in Proc. ON CYBERNETICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1132–1137. SYSTEMS, Pattern Recognition, Knowledge and Information Systems, to name
[20] X. Liu, Y.-m. Cheung, Z. Hu, Y. He, and B. Zhong, “Adversarial tri-fusion a few. He is an IET Fellow, AAAS Fellow and BCS Fellow. For details, please
 hashing network for imbalanced cross-modal retrieval,” IEEE Trans. visit: https://www.comp.hkbu.edu.hk/ymc.
 Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 607–619, Aug. 2021.
[21] L. Wang, Y. Li, J. Huang, and S. Lazebnik, “Learning two-branch neural
 networks for image-text matching tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Xin Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Intell., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 394–407, Feb. 2019. degree in computer science from Hong Kong Baptist
[22] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” University, Hong Kong, in 2013. He was a Visiting
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015, pp. 1–15. Scholar with Computer & Information Sciences De-
[23] J. Yin and L. Tian, “Joint inference about sensitivity and specificity at partment, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
 the optimal cut-off point associated with Youden index,” Comput. Statist. from 2017 to 2018. Currently, he is a Professor with
 Data Anal., vol. 77, pp. 1–13, 2014. the Department of Computer Science and Technol-
[24] E. F. Carvalho and P. M. Engel, “Convolutional sparse feature descriptor ogy, Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China, and also
 for object recognition in CIFAR-10,” in Proc. IEEE Braz. Conf. Intell. a Research Fellow with Department of Computer
 Syst., 2013, pp. 131–135. Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
[25] A. Nagrani, J. S. Chung, W. Xie, and A. Zisserman, “Voxceleb: Large-scale SAR, China. His present research interests include
 speaker verification in the wild,” Comput. Speech Lang., vol. 60, 2020, multimedia data analysis, anomaly detection, pattern recognition and deep
 Art. no. 101027. learning based data mining. He is a senior member of the IEEE.
[26] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Joint face detection and alignment
 using multitask cascaded convolutional networks,” IEEE Signal Process.
 Lett., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1499–1503, Oct. 2016. Zhen Cui (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
[27] X. L. Zhang and J. Wu, “Deep belief networks based voice activity from Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China, in
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., vol. 21, no. 4, 2004, the M.S. degree from Sun Yat-sen University,
 pp. 697–710, Apr. 2013. Guangzhou, China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree
[28] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. Manning, “GloVe: Global vectors for from the Institute of Computing Technology (ICT),
 word representation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in
 Process., 2014, pp. 1532–1543. 2014. He also spent half a year as a Research Assistant
[29] J. Devlin, M. W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre- on Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singatraining of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” pore, from June 2012 to December 2012. He was a
 in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2019, Research Fellow with the Department of Electrical
 pp. 4171–4186. and Computer Engineering, National University of
[30] M. Ye, W. Ruan, B. Du, and M. Z. Shou, “Channel augmented joint learning Singapore (NUS), Singapore, from 2014 to 2015. He is currently a Professor with
 for visible-infrared recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. His research
 2021, pp. 13547–13556. interests include deep learning, computer vision, and pattern recognition.
[31] X. Liu, Z. Hu, H. Ling, and Y.-M. Cheung, “MTFH: A matrix trifactorization hashing framework for efficient cross-modal retrieval,” IEEE
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 964–981, Mar. 2021. Taihao Li received the Ph.D. degree in information
 science and systems engineering from National University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan, in 2006.
 Shu-Juan Peng received the Ph.D. degree in com- He was a Researcher with Harvard University, Camputer science from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, bridge, MA, USA, from 2006 to 2011. He was a
 in 2009. She is currently an Associate Professor with Principle Scientist with Flatley Discovery Lab from
 the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Huaqiao 2011 to 2019. He is currently the Deputy Direc-
 University, Xiamen, China, and also a Research Fel- tor of Cross-Media Intelligence Research Center in,
 low with the Key Laboratory of Pattern Recognition Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China. He has published
 and Computer Vision, Xiamen, and also a Research authored or coauthored more than 30 related papers
 Fellow with the Key Laboratory of Computer Vision in well-known journals and conferences around topics
 and Machine Learning (Huaqiao University), Fujian like affective computing, image processing, and multi-modal information fusion,
 Province University, Xiamen. Her research interests etc. He also hosted or participated in 18 projects in the United States, Japan and
 include multimedia data analysis, pattern recognition, China and has applied more than 30 patents for multi-modal emotion recognition.
and computer animation.