IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024 2497

 Transforms-Based Bayesian Tensor Completion
 Method for Network Traffic Measurement
 Data Recovery
 Zecan Yang , Student Member, IEEE, Laurence T. Yang , Fellow, IEEE, Lingzhi Yi , Member, IEEE,
 Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Chenlu Zhu , and Yiheng Ruan

 Abstract—Network traffic measurement is regarded as the efficient updating method is presented. Finally, two cases of the linbedrock of next-generation network systems. Its purpose is to ear transforms-based tensor completion model are implemented in
monitor the network traffic and provide data support for traf- the experiments. Experimental results on two real-world network
fic engineering. For this reason, monitoring traffic data from a traffic datasets validate that the proposed method can efficiently
network-wide perspective is particularly important. However, the and accurately recover network traffic data.
proliferation of network services has led to the explosive growth
of network traffic, which has brought significant challenges to the Index Terms—Network traffic measurement, tensor completion,
measure of network-wide traffic. Therefore, how to infer network- sparse Bayesian learning, variational Bayesian inference.
wide traffic from partial traffic data is extremely important. In this
article, a transforms-based Bayesian tensor completion (TBTC)
method is proposed to infer network traffic data. First, the hetero- I. INTRODUCTION
geneous network traffic data with missing entries are organized into
 S THE bedrock of the next-generation network system,
observation tensors according to temporal dimensions and other
attributes. Second, the sparse hierarchical prior is used to induce
lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors, which makes the tubal rank
 A traffic measurement has received increasing attention [1],
 [2]. It measures the traffic data from the physical layer to
of the observation tensor can be estimated. Further, a variational
Bayesian inference method is developed for model learning, and an
 the application layer from the network-wide perspective and
 provides a data foundation for network anomaly monitoring,
 load balancing, intrusion detection, traffic engineering, etc. For
 this reason, it is particularly important to measure traffic data
 Manuscript received 26 October 2022; revised 9 January 2023; accepted 5
February 2023. Date of publication 6 March 2023; date of current version 30 from a network-wide perspective [3].
April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program In recent years, with the rapid development of the 5 G network,
of China under Grant 2022YFE0138600, in part by the Fundamental Research Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) tech-
Funds for the Central Universities, under Grant HUST: 2022JYCXJJ020, in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61901210, nologies, the demand for mobile devices and network services
and 62272182, in part by the Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Transportation has grown rapidly [4], [5], [6], [7]. At the same time, network
Joint Technical Center of HUST and in part by the Hubei Chutian Intelligent traffic data is also showing explosive growth, which brings huge
Transportation Company, LTD through Project Intelligent Tunnel Integrated
Monitoring and Management System. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. challenges to network-wide traffic measurement. However, the
Haipeng Dai. (Corresponding author: Lingzhi Yi.) measurement of large network traffic needs a huge overhead [3].
 Zecan Yang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Therefore, how to infer network-wide traffic data from part of
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
zecanyang@gmail.com). the network data has become the focus of the next-generation
 Laurence T. Yang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, network systems.
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, also Some studies have shown that end-to-end network measurewith the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the Department ment data such as traffic, delay and other network information
of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, have hidden spatial and temporal correlations [8]. This drives
Canada (e-mail: ltyang@ieee.org). some research on network measurement traffic data inference
 Lingzhi Yi is with the School of Information and Safety Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, Hubei 430073, China (e-mail: based on Spatio-temporal correlations [9], [10]. At the same
lzyi@zuel.edu.cn). time, these methods can infer other network traffic data by using
 Xianjun Deng is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, a few randomly monitoring network traffic data. Therefore,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
dengxj615@hust.edu.cn). inferring the network-wide traffic data from part of the network
 Chenlu Zhu is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong traffic data can be considered a missing data recovery task [3].
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the In addition, some studies have focused on network load bal-
Hubei Chutian Expressway Digital Technology Company LTD, Wuhan 430050,
China (e-mail: zhu_cl@hust.edu.cn). ancing [11], confident coverage [12], [13], and communication
 Yiheng Ruan is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong optimization [14], [15], [16], etc, which usually require complete
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the network traffic data. However, the traffic data is often missing
Hubei Chutian Smart Communication Company LTD, Wuhan 430050, China
(e-mail: ruanyiheng@hust.edu.cn). and corrupted during the collection due to various factors such as
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2023.3253163 network transmission interruption, network attacks, and signal
 2327-4697 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

coverage problems. It seriously affects the monitoring and acquisition of network-wide traffic data. To improve the quality of
traffic measurement data and better support the next-generation
network systems, recovery of missing traffic data has become
one of the great challenges in network science and engineering.
 Recently, a class of matrix completion methods was proposed for missing traffic measurement data recovery [10], [17].
However, matrix-based completion methods for traffic data
recovery destroy the original structure and correlation. As a
multi-dimensional data representation tool, tensor has great
 Fig. 1. Illustration of different tensor representations of network traffic data.
advantages to represent multi-dimension and heterogeneous data
in network systems [18], [19]. Tensor completion, as one of
the important branches of tensor analysis, aims to fill in the
missing entries of the observed data and can be regarded as a II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
multi-dimensional data recovery task. Therefore, the recovery
 In this section, we will briefly introduce some relevant backof missing network traffic measurement data based on tensor
 ground information, including tensor and representing traffic
completion has received extensive attention [3], [9]. In [20],
 data as tensors. In addition, we also introduce some related works
an outliner-robust tensor completion method is proposed to
 of tensor completion for network traffic data recovery.
recover network traffic data concurrently with network anomaly
detection. For highly skewed with heavy tails traffic data, Xie,
et al. [21] proposed an expectile tensor completion method to A. Tensor and Representing Traffic Data as Tensor
recover missing data. However, these tensor completion meth- Tensor (multidimensional arrays) [22], as an effective tool for
ods suffer from low efficiency or low accuracy. To address all multi-dimensional and heterogeneous data representation and
challenges above under a unified framework, in this work, a calculation, is widely applied in the real world. For example, a
transforms-based Bayesian tensor completion method is pro- hyperspectral image can be regarded as a third-order tensor by
posed to recover missing network traffic measurement data. The its channels, width, and height; a color video can be viewed as a
main contributions of this article are summarized as follows: fourth-order tensor indexed by width × height × channels ×
 r Heterogeneous traffic measurement data with missing enf rames; the time-varying urban traffic data can also be repretries are represented by observation tensors according sented as a tensor indexed by road-ID, time interval and day;
 to temporal dimensional and other attributes, which ef- manufacturing process data can be represented as a third-order
 fectively preserves the data structure and correlation. A tensor based on product ID, process parameters and timestamp.
 Bayesian tensor completion method is proposed to re- Similarly, tensors are also applied in network traffic engineering.
 cover missing network traffic data. The observation tensor For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the time-varying network traffic
 is decomposed into two small factor tensors by linear data can be represented as a third-order tensor indexed by origin,
 transforms-based T-SVD. By sparse hierarchical prior and destination, and times interval; the network anomaly data can be
 Bayesian inference, the factor tensors obtain lateral slices viewed as a third-order tensor by its OD (Origin and Destination
 sparsity, which makes the tubal rank of the observation pair), time interval and days.
 tensor can be estimated during the tensor completion.
 r By diagonalization of the block matrix, an efficient variational Bayesian inference algorithm is presented in the B. Related Work
 arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain, which effec- In this subsection, we review the related work on matrix comtively reduces the algorithm complexity and improves the pletion, tensor completion, and their application in the recovery
 missing traffic measurement data recovery efficiency. of missing network traffic data. In addition, we also briefly
 r Our proposed Bayesian tensor completion model can be identify the differences between our work and existing work.
 extended to arbitrary invertible linear transforms and is not Traffic data at a certain time can be naturally represented
 limited to a specific linear transform. In the experiment, we as a matrix according to its source ID and destination ID.
 implement two cases of linear transforms-based (includ- Therefore, matrix completion is often used to recover missing
 ing Cosine-transforms and Random Orthogonal Matrix traffic data. A matrix completion-based method for estimating
 (ROM) transforms) Bayesian tensor completion method. missing network latency data for personal devices is proposed
 This article is structured as follows. Section II presents back- in [17]. Based on correlations Spatio-temporal of internet traffic
ground and related work. Some notations and basic definitions data, a compressive sensing-based missing data recovery method
are introduced in Section III. In Section IV, the details of our for traffic matrix is proposed in [10]. A fast network monitoring
proposed model including the probabilistic model, priors, ap- data matrix completion method for acceleration on GPU is
proximate Bayesian inference, and an efficient updating method proposed in [23]. With the subspace-based matrix completion,
in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain are presented. a low-cost online network traffic measurement data prediction
The experiments on the performance of our model under dif- method is proposed by Jin, et al. [24]. However, for the traffic
ferent linear transforms are discussed in Section V. Finally, this data with time series, the matrix-based data representation makes
article is summarized in Section VI. the matrix dimension imbalanced, which is not enough to capture
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2499

the correlations inside the traffic data, and also reduces the TABLE I
 NOTATIONS
performance of the algorithm.
 Tensor completion, as one of the important tasks in tensor
analysis, has received a lot of attention and has also been applied
in many different fields such as internet traffic data recovery [18], network anomaly detection [20], Spatio-temporal data
imputation [25], and visual data inpainting [26], etc. For traffic
data recovery, a novel sequential tensor completion method
is proposed to improve computing efficiency and capture
the temporal correlation of traffic data [27]. Considering the
Spatio-temporal correlation of traffic data, a low-rank tensor
factorization-based tensor completion method is proposed to
estimate the missing traffic data [9]. A tripartite graph aided
tensor completion method is proposed for sparse network measurement data recovery [28]. However, based on CANDE-
COMP/PARAFAC (CP) [22] decomposition, these methods
have the problem that the rank is difficult to estimate. Recently, a
class of tensor completion methods based on Bayesian learning
with automatic rank estimation has also received some atten- B. Basic Definitions
tion. In [29], a hierarchical full Bayesian probabilistic model is
 This subsection introduces some basic definitions. For a tensor
proposed for tensor completion based on the CP factorization.
 X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , the bvec-operation is forming a n1 n3 × n2
Similarly, a Bayesian Gaussian CP tensor decomposition apmatrix by the frontal slices of tensor X , leading to
proach for the missing traffic data recovery method is proposed  
in [25]. However, the model inference method based on Gibbs bvec(X ) = X (1) ; X (2) ; · · · ; X (n3 ) ∈ Rn1 n3 ×n2 .
sampling makes the model converge slowly and is hard to be
applied to large datasets. Definition III.1: (Face-wise product [30]) The face-wise
 To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to combine product of tensors A ∈ Rn1 ×r×n3 and B ∈ Rr×n2 ×n3 can be
Bayesian learning and tensor completion to recover missing net- denoted by X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 = A  B, i.e.,
work traffic data, which effectively mines the hidden structural
information inside the traffic data and improve accuracy. For the X (i) = A(i) B (i) , i = 1, . . . , n3 . (1)
efficiency of the algorithm, a method for posterior estimation in Definition III.2: (Block diagonal matrix) Given a thirdarbitrary invertible linear transformation domain is developed, order tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , we define its block diagonal mawhich reduces the time overhead of the model. Furthermore, trix as
with the benefit of sparse Bayesian learning, our model can ⎡ (1) ⎤
effectively estimate the rank of traffic data tensors. X̂
 ⎢ X̂ (2) ⎥
 ⎢ ⎥
 X̂ = bdiag(X̂ ) = ⎢ .. ⎥,
 ⎣ . ⎦
 III. NOTATIONS AND PRELIMINARIES X̂ (n3 )
 In this section, we summarize the commonly used notations
and briefly introduce some basic definitions and tensor opera- where X̂ ∈ Rn1 n3 ×n2 n3 , bdiag-operation maps X̂ to X̂.
tions in this article. Definition III.3: ( Mat -operation) If a tensor X ∈
 Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , we will use mat(X ) to denote the following block
 Toeplitz-plus-Hankel matrix, which is
 ⎡ (1) ⎤
A. Notations X X (2) ··· X (n3 )
 In this article, we denote the fields of real numbers as R. ⎢ X (2) X (1) · · · X (n3 −1) ⎥
 ⎢ ⎥
 mat(X ) = ⎢ . . .. .. ⎥
The lowercase, uppercase, and calligraphic letters (x, X, X ) are ⎣ .. .. . . ⎦
denoted by vectors, matrices, and tensors, respectively. Xijk , X (n3 ) X (n3 −1) · · · X (1)
x(ij) denotes the (i, j, k)th entry and (i, j)th tube fibers of tensor
X . X † , X̂ , and X̃ denote the tensor transport, cosine transform, Block Toeplitz

and arbitrary invertible linear transforms of tensor X along with ⎡ (2)
 ⎤
 X ··· X (n3 ) 0
the third order.  and ◦ denote the Face-wise product [30] ⎢ .. · · ⎥
 ⎢ . ·· ·· X (n3 ) ⎥
and Hadamard product. The expectation of latent variables is +⎢
 ⎢ .. ⎥,
 ⎥
denoted by E(·). The operation diag(X) denotes a vector for ·
 ⎣X (n3 ) 0 ·· . ⎦
the main diagonal of matrix X. The identity matrix and identity (n3 )
 0 X ··· X (2)
tensor are denoted as I, I, respectively. The notations used in
this article are summarized in Table I. Block Hankel
2500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

 Algorithm 1: Ten-Operation. upshift matrix1 . Therefore, we can get a more concise calculation
 method as D = W −1 diag(Cn (I + Z)v).
 Definition III.5: (Cosine-transform) Given a vector v ∈ Rn ,
 we can define a linear transformation Φ as
 Φ(v) = W −1 Cn (I + Z)v. (4)
 In this article, the Φ is defined as the cosine-transform. In
 addition, this transform is not a direct DCT, but based on DCT.
 The Φ is an invertible linear transformation, and the inverse
 operation can be described as
where the X (k) is the kth frontal faces of X , 0 denotes the Φ−1 (v) = (I + Z)−1 (Cn−1 (W v)). (5)
zero matrices whose size is n1 × n2 . It is worth noting that
 For simplicity, we denote v̂ = Φ(v). Similarly, for a tensor X ,
the mat-operation is invertible, the inverse operation denoted
 linear transformation Φ can be described as
by ten(·). Algorithm 1 presents the specific implementation of
ten-operation [30]. X̂ = Φ(X ) = Φ(x(ij) ) = W −1 Cn (I + Z) vec(x(ij) ). (6)
 According to the above description, we can obtain the con-
C. Cosine Transform Product
 cise and efficient form of cosine transform product by a linear
 This subsection introduces Discrete Cosine Transformation transformation Φ, which is
(DCT) and cosine transform product, which plays an important
role in our proposed model. The discrete cosine transformation X = A ∗c B = Φ−1 (Φ(A)  Φ(B)). (7)
on a vector v ∈ Rn can be defined by For cosine transform product, from the transform domain, we
 n
 v̄ = Cn v ∈ R , (2) can obtain more brief representation as follow
 X̂ (k) = Â(k) B̂ (k) ; k = 1, . . . , n3 . , (8)
where Cn is the discrete cosine transform matrix, whose size is
n × n and entries are as follow where X̂ denotes block diagonal matrix [33]. It is known that
    Cn th(v)Cn−1 = diag(Φ(v)), then, we have
 2 − δi1 (i − 1)(2j − 1)π  
(Cn )ij = cos , 1 < i, j < n,
 n 2n (Cn3 ⊗ In1 ) mat(X ) Cn−1
 3
 ⊗ In2 = X̂. (9)
where δi1 is the Kronecker delta.
 IV. TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION
 Definition III.4: (Cosine transform product [30]) Cosine
 ALGORITHM
transform product is similar to T-product in [31], which is
operation between two third-order tensors. Let A ∈ Rm×r×h In this section, a transforms-based Bayesian tensor compleand B ∈ Rr×n×h , cosine transform product can be defined as tion algorithm is proposed as follows. First, the probabilistic
 model and priors based on the cosine transform product are
 X = A ∗c B = ten (mat(A) mat (B)) ∈ Rm×n×h . (3) presented. Second, a method is developed for estimating factor
 The cosine transform product in the original domain is present tensors based on Bayesian inference. Third, through the tensorin above. As we know, T-product can be calculated efficiently tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms theory,
without explicitly forming the block matrices by fast Fourier our proposed model can be naturally generalized to arbitrary intransform. Whether exist a similar transformation that can make vertible linear transforms. Finally, an efficient updating method
the cosine transform product more efficient and concise? in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain is developed.
 For a vector v ∈ Rn , we define th-operation (Toeplitz-plus- In addition, Fig. 2 shows the main process in our proposed
Hankel matrix) similar to mat-operation as model for tensor completion, including tensor arbitrary invert-
 ⎤ ⎡v · · · ⎤ ible linear transforms for incomplete tensor, tensor low-tubal-
 ⎡ vn 0
 v1 v2 · · · vn 2 rank model for tensor factorization, variational Bayesian infer-
 ⎢ v2 ⎢ .. · · ⎥
 ⎢ v1 · · · vn−1 ⎥ ⎥ ⎢ . ·· ·· vn ⎥ ence for model learning to induce the lateral slices sparsity of
 th(v) = ⎢ . .. ⎥+⎢ ⎢ ⎥.
 .. .. ⎥ factor tensors, and tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible
 ⎣ .. . . . ⎦ ⎣vn 0 ··· vv ... ⎦ linear transforms.
 vn vn−1 · · · v1 0 vn · · · v2
 Toeplitz matrix Hankel matrix
 A. Probabilistic Model and Priors

 It is known that Cn th(v)Cn−1 = D from [32], where D In this article, the tensor completion problem is considered in
is a diagonal matrix, which can be computed from the a probabilistic framework, all unknown observed data and quan-
DCT of the first column of th(v). More specifically, D = tities are treated as random variables and their joint distributions
W −1 diag(Cn (th(v)e1 )), where W = diag(Cne1 ), e1 is the ba- are specified. Let X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 be an incomplete third-order
sis vector. By the definition of the Toeplitz-plus-Hankel matrix,
we can find that th(v)e1 = (I + Z)v, where Z is the circulant 1 In Matlab, Z = diag(ones(n − 1, 1), 1).
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2501

 which is given by
 minimize X ∗
 subject to YΩ = X ◦ O. (12)
 To optimize the problem in (12), the Bayesian theory is used
 as follows. Since a low-tubal-rank estimate of tensor X is sought,
 we should achieve lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors A
 and B. In order to fit sparsity-inducing prior distribution, we
 associate each tube of factor tensors A and B with Gaussian
 priors of λ, which can be described as follows
 n1 
  R  
 p(A|λ) = N a(ir) |0, λ−1
 r In3 , (13)
 i=1 r=1
 n2 
  R  
 p(B|λ) = N b(jr) |0, λ−1
 r In3 , (14)
 j=1 r=1

 where a(ir) and b(jr) denote the (i, r)th and (j, r)th tube of factor
 tensors A and B, In3 denotes the identity matrix. In addition,
 to fit the probabilistic model, we use the Gamma hyperprior to
 describe λ, as follow
 R
   
 p(λ) = Gamma λr |aλ0 , bλ0 , (15)
 r=1
Fig. 2. Graphical illustration of the main process of our proposed model for
tensor completion. (1) arbitrary invertible linear transforms for incomplete tensor where ∀r ∈ [1, R], the λr follows an independent Gamma distri-
X ; (2) low-tubal-rank model for tensor factorization; (3) lateral slices sparsity βα
 bution, Gamma(x|α, β) = Γ(α) xα−1 e−βx , x > 0 denotes the
of factor tensors induced by variational Bayesian inference; (4) tensor-tensor  ∞ α−1 −x
product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms. Gamma distribution, Γ(α) = 0 x e dx is the Gamma
 function. Then, the expectation of the latent variable x can be
 α
 described as E[x] = .
 β
tensor. Xijk is observed entry if (i, j, k) ∈ Ω, where Ω denotes 2) Noise and Observation Models: Noise is inevitable during
a set of indices. The O is a binary tensor that indicates which data acquisition, to better meet the demand of recovering missing
entries of X are observed. data in practical applications and improve the robustness of the
 1) Optimization Model: Based on the low-tubal-rank model, the observation model is generated according to
model [33], our proposed tensor completion model can be YΩ = PΩ (X + N ), (16)
described as
 where YΩ is the observation tensor with noise, N is the noise
 X = A ∗c B , †
 (10) term.
 According to the above description, the white Gaussian noise
 is incorporated into the observation model, then, we can obtain
where factor tensors A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 , B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 and ∗c
 conditional distribution for each tube of the observed tensor YΩ ,
denotes the cosine transform product. The incomplete low-rank
 which is
tensor recovering, which aims to exactly recover a low-rank   −−→ −→ 
tensor from incomplete observation, can be taken as solving the p(YΩ |A, B, τ ) = N y (ij) |Ai:: ∗c Bj:: † , τ −1 In3 . (17)
affine rank minimization problem. Its mathematical model can ij
be written as To complete the fully Bayesian treatment in our proposed
 model, the noise entries are assumed to be i.i.d random variables
 minimize rank(X ) obeying Gaussian distribution, where precision is τ and mean is
 subject to YΩ = X ◦ O, (11) zero. Further, we place a conjugate prior over the noise precision
 as
where the X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is an unknown low-rank tensor, ◦ p(τ ) = Gamma (τ |cτ , dτ ). (18)
denotes the tensor Hadamard product and YΩ is the observed
 Finally, the probabilistic graphical model of Bayesian tensor
tensor. However, minimizing the rank of a tensor is an NP-hard
 completion is shown in Fig. 3. According to the model described
problem [34], and no-know polynomial-time algorithms exist.
 above, the joint distribution of p(YΩ , S) can be written as follow
To overcome this difficulty, an approximate Tensor Nuclear
Norm (TNN) [35] based method is commonly used to solve, p(YΩ , S) = p(YΩ |A, B, τ )p(A|λ)p(B|λ)p(λ)p(τ ), (19)
2502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

 divergence is equal to zero, which implies that ln p(YΩ ) is equal
 to L(q).
 For tractable inference under variational Bayesian framework
 and based on mean-field approximation, it is assumed that all of
 the latent variables in q(S) can be factorized as
 q(S) = q(A)q(B)q(λ)q(τ ). (24)
 It means that all of the latent variables in S are independent,
 therefore, we can update each latent variable by keeping others
Fig. 3. Graphical illustration of our proposed tensor completion model. fixed. The posterior of each latent variable approximation q(Si )
 can be obtained as follow
 ln q (Si ) = ES\Si [ln p(YΩ , S)] + const , (25)
where S = {A, B, λ, τ } is the collection of all of the unknown
hyper-parameters and latent variables in our proposed Bayesian where the Si denotes the ith latent variable in S. The expectation
model. ES\Si [·] denotes the variational distribution of all latent variables
 Through the analysis above, the aim of our proposed model is in set S expect Si . Since all distributions in our model given
to estimate the full posterior distribution of S from the observed above belong to the conjugate exponential family, it is easy to
data YΩ , which can be described as follow find a posterior approximation for each latent variable.
 1) Inference for Factor Tensors A and B: From the probap (S, YΩ )
 p (S|YΩ ) =  . (20) bilistic graph model shown in Fig. 3 and observation modeling
 p (S, YΩ ) dS
 join distribution in (19), we can find the inference of the factor
 Therefore, missing entries can be predicted based on the tensor A can be performed by receiving the messages from
posterior distribution of S, which is observed data and its co-parents, including hyper-parameter τ ,
  and factor tensor B. By applying the (25), and combining the
    
 p Y\Ω |YΩ = p Y\Ω |S p (S|YΩ ) dS, (21) prior in (13) and observation model in (17), the posterior of
 q(A) can be found as a Gaussian distribution as
where Y\Ω denotes the predictive missing entries from incom- n1
  → 
plete observed tensor YΩ . q(A) = ai:: | E [−
 N − a→
 i:: ] , Σ
 A
 , (26)
 i=1
B. Model Learning Via Bayesian Inference whose posterior parameters are given by
 a→] = E [τ ] ΣA mat (E [B])† −
 E [− y→,
 Actually, the marginalizing of all variables of p(Y\Ω ) can’t
 i:: i:: (27)
be computed directly. Therefore, the inference joint distribution
    −1
in (19) by Bayesian theory is intractable. For this problem, the ΣA = E [τ ] E mat(B)† mat(B) + E [Γ] . (28)
maximum a posteriori (MAP), variational Bayesian inference,
and other approximate estimation methods are used to solve Similar to the inference of factor tensor A, by combining the
frequently. prior in (14) and observation model in (17), the posterior q(B)
 In this subsection, a deterministic approximate inference can be obtained as
method for the probabilistic tensor completion model learning n2
  −→ −→ 
is developed under the variational Bayesian inference frame- q(B) = N bj:: | E bj:: , ΣB , (29)
 j=1
work. Therefore, our objective is to find a distribution q(S) to
approximate the posterior distribution p(S|YΩ ) by minimizing with mean and covariance as
 −→
 y→
 E bj:: = E [τ ] ΣB mat (E [A])† −
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which can be described
 :j: , (30)
as
     −1
 KL (q(S)p (S|YΩ )) = q(S) ln
 q(S)
 dS ΣB = E [τ ] E mat(A)† mat(A) + E [Γ] , (31)
 p (S|YΩ )
 where E[Γ] = mat(diag(E[λ1 ], E[λ2 ], . . . , E[λR ])).
 = ln p (YΩ ) − L(q), (22) 2) Inference for Hyper-Parameters λ: Similarly to the above,
 the inference of λ can be performed by incorporating messages
where ln p(YΩ ) represents our model evidence, q(S) is probafrom its hyperprior and receiving messages from factor tensors
bility density function, and L(q) represents the lower bound of
 A and B. By applying (25), the posterior of λr follows an
ln p(YΩ ), which is defined by
  independent Gamma distribution, which can be described as
 p (YΩ , S) R
 L(q) = q(S) ln dS. (23)   
 q(S) q(λ) = Gamma λr | aλr , bλr , (32)
 r=1
Since the model evidence ln p(YΩ ) is a constant, minimizing
the KL divergence is equal to maximizing the lower bound of aλr
 the expectation of λ can be obtained by E[λ] = .
L(q), the maximum of the lower bound occurs when the KL bλr
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2503

 completion model under arbitrary invertible linear transforms,
 Algorithm 2: Bayesian Tensor Completion Model Under
 the following introduces some basic definitions of tensor com-
 ∗c .
 putation in arbitrary invertible linear transforms.
 Definition IV.1: (Tensor invertible linear transform) Consider an arbitrary invertible linear transform L : Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 →
 Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , then tensor invertible linear transform can be defined as

 X̃ = L(X ) = X ×3 L, (34)

 where ×3 is the model-3 product [22], and L ∈ Rn3 ×n3 is an
 arbitrary invertible matrix. Obviously, we can easily get the
 inverse transform of L, which is

 L−1 (X ) = X ×3 L−1 , (35)

 where L−1 is inverse of matrix L.
 Suppose L = Fn3 , where Fn3 is a discrete Fourier transform
 matrix whose size is n3 × n3 . Given tensor A ∈ Rn1 ×r×n3 and
 B ∈ Rr×n2 ×n3 , t-product [31] between them can be denoted
 3) Inference for Noise Precision τ : Similarly to inference as X = A∗F B, which can also be written as L(X ) = L(A) 
λ, the noise precision τ can be performed by incorporating the L(B) in frequency domain. If L is an arbitrary invertible linear
information from its hyperprior and receiving messages from matrix, tensor-tensor products with arbitrary invertible linear
the observed data. By applying (25), the posterior of noise τ transforms [30] can be denoted as X = A∗L B.
obeys a Gamma distribution, which can be described as Definition IV.2: (Identity tensor) Suppose L is an arbitrary
 invertible linear transform in (34), the tensor I ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3
 q(τ ) = Gamma(τ |cτ , dτ ), (33) is an identity tensor, if I satisfies all frontal slices of L(I) are
 cτ identity matrices.
the expectation of τ can be obtained by E(τ ) = τ . Definition IV.3: (Orthogonal tensor [31]) Suppose a tensor
 d
 The Bayesian tensor completion model under ∗c can be sum- Q ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 and L is an arbitrary invertible linear transform
marized as follows: First, estimate the factor tensors A and B in (34). If Q satisfies Q† ∗ Q = Q ∗L Q† = I, Q is defined as
by (26) and (29), whose covariance is updated by (28) and (31), an orthogonal tensor.
and mean is updated via (27) and (30). Second, the posterior Definition 4.4: (Tensor transport) L is an arbitrary indistribution of hyper-parameters λ is updated via (32). Finally, vertible linear transform in (34), the tensor transpose of X ∈
the posterior distribution of noise precision τ is updated via (33), Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 under L can be denoted as X † ∈ Rn2 ×n1 ×n3 , which
until convergence. For clearly, the Bayesian tensor completion satisfies L(X † )(k) = L(X (k) )† , k = 1, . . . , n3 .
model under ∗c is summarized in algorithm 2. Definition IV.5: (Tensor Singular Value Decomposition (T-
 SVD) [31]) Suppose L is an arbitrary invertible linear transform
C. Arbitrary Invertible Linear Transforms-Based Bayesian in (34), tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 can be factorized as
Tensor Completion Model
 X = U ∗L Σ ∗L V † , (36)
 The cosine transform product is introduced in Definition
III.4, as well as the t-product, which can replace the complex
block-structured matrix operation in the origin domain with a where U ∈ Rn1 ×n1 ×n3 and V ∈ Rn2 ×n2 ×n3 are orthogonal tenspecific invertible linear transform. In practical applications, sors, Σ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is the f-diagonal tensor.
the algorithm implementation of t-product and cosine transform Based on the above definition, our model can be naturally
product can be performed by matrix product in the transform generalized to arbitrary invertible linear transforms. The lowdomain through linear transforms for each tube fibers. Is it tubal-rank model with arbitrary invertible linear transforms can
possible to define a tensor-tensor product that is not limited to be described as
a specific linear transform? If so, can our proposed Bayesian
tensor completion model also not be limited to the tensor-tensor X = A ∗L B † , (37)
product under a specific linear transform?
 In this subsection, for these questions, through the definition where A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 , B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 , and ∗L denotes the
of tensor-tensor product with an arbitrary invertible linear trans- tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms.
form presented in [30], our proposed Bayesian tensor completion At model initialization, the factor tensors can be set as A0 =
 1/2 1/2
model is also extended to arbitrary invertible linear transforms. U0 ∗L Σ0 , and B0 = V0 ∗L Σ0 , in arbitrary invertible linear
 1/2 1/2
To better illustrate the extension of our proposed Bayesian tensor transforms domain Ã0 = Ũ0 ∗ Σ̃0 , and B̃0 = Ṽ0 ∗ Σ̃0 .
2504 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

D. Efficient Updating Method in Arbitrary Invertible Linear
 Algorithm 3: Transforms-Based Bayesian Tensor Comple-
Transforms Domain
 tion (TBTC).
 Although the algorithm of the Bayesian tensor completion
model under ∗c has been given in Subsection IV-B, it is still
too time-consuming. In this subsection, an efficient updating
method for Bayesian tensor completion in arbitrary invertible
linear transforms domain is developed.
 From (27), we group all the horizontal slices of factor tensor
A together in cosine transform domain can be obtained by

 bvec(E[Ã]† ) = M · bvec(E[A]† )
 a→, . . . , −
 = M · E[− a−→]
 i:: m::

 A
 = E[τ ] · M · Σ̃ · opt(E[B])† · bvec(Y † ), (38)

where the M = Cn3 ⊗ IR , M −1 is inverse of M , opt(·) means
mat(·) operation, with the (9), the block Toeplitz-plus-Hankel
matrix mat(E[B])† and covariance ΣA can be block diagonalized.
 Similarly, for an arbitrary invertible linear transform L, M =
L ⊗ IR . Therefore, we can infer the distribution of factor tensor
A in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain efficiently.
The mean and covariance of kth frontal slice of factor tensor A
in arbitrary linear transforms domain is updated by follows
     (k)
 E Ã(k) = E [τ ] X̃ (k) O E B̃ (k) Σ̃A , (39) With the (32), we can obtain the posterior parameters in
     −1 arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain as
 (k)
 Σ̃A = E [τ ] E B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) + E Γ(k)
 r , (40) n1 + n2
 aλr = + aλ0 ,
 2
where X O = X ◦ O + Y ◦ (E − O), and the Y denotes re-     
 1
covery tensor. bλr = diag E B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) + E Ã(i)† Ã(i) + bλ0 . (45)
 Similarly, for inferring the distribution of factor tensor B, the 2n3
kth frontal slice expectation of E[B] and covariance matrix in With (33), the posterior parameters cτ and dτ can be updated by
arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain can be updated by 1
follows cτ = Oijk + cτ0 ,
     2
 ijk
   
 (k)
 E B̃ (k) = E [τ ] X̃ (k) O E Ã(k) Σ̃B , (41) →† 
 τ 1  (ij) − → − 2
     −1 d = E x − A i:: ∗ B j::  + dτ0 , (46)
 (k) 2 ij
 Σ̃B = E [τ ] E Ã(k)† Ã(k) + E Γ(k)
 r , (42)
  →
 − →
 −
 (k) where ij E[x(ij) − A i:: ∗ B †j:: 2 ] is the error measurement
where E[Γr ] = diag(E[λk1 ], E[λk2 ], . . . , E[λkR ]), (k)
 E[Ã ] ∈ of our model.
 (k)
Rn1 ×R and E[B̃ ] ∈ R n2 ×R
 , which denote the kth frontal In summary, based on the algorithm updated by (39)–(46), and
slice of E[Ã] and E[B̃] respectively. The expectations of the low-tubal-rank model proposed in (37), the Bayesian tensor
E[B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) ] and E[Ã(k)† Ã(k) ] can be written as follows completion model can be generalized to arbitrary invertible
       (k) linear transforms domain, not only limited in cosine transforms
 E B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) = E B̃ (k)† E B̃ (k) + n2 n3 Σ̃B , (43)
 domain. Algorithm 3 shows the details of TBTC model.
       (k)
 E Ã(k)† Ã(k) = E Ã(k)† E Ã(k) + n1 n3 Σ̃A . (44) E. Rank Estimation and Parameters Initialization
 Based on the above analysis, for Bayesian tensor completion Based on (32) and (45), the expectation of λr is
under ∗c , we replace (27) and (30) with (39) and (41), which given by E(λr ) = aλr /bλr , which depends on E[B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) ]
can avoid directly calculating covariance matrices in the original and E[Ã(i)† Ã(i) ]. While the algorithm iterating, smaller
domain, and turn to fast updating in cosine transforms domain. diag(E[B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) ] + E[Ã(i)† Ã(i) ]) will lead to a larger E(λr ),
With this, the (39)–(44) are not only limited to the Bayesian which induces lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors A and B.
tensor completion model under cosine transform, but also are With the lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors, it naturally leads
applicable to the Bayesian tensor completion model with arbi- to low-tubal-rank of completion tensor. However, in practical
trary invertible linear transforms. application, the main diagonal of Σ is hardly equal to zero, but
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2505

 TABLE II
 RECOVERY RESULTS OF TBTC-COSINE AND TBTC-ROM ON THE SYNTHETIC DATA

very close to zero. This yield tubal rank is not suitable for our
Bayesian tensor completion model. To address this problem,
truncated T-SVD is used in our model. By applying truncated T-
SVD, some values in Σ those are close to zero can be set to zero,
which ensures that the low-tubal-rank model can perform better.
 In order to achieve better performance for our proposed model
while avoiding getting stuck in a local optimum, it is essential to
choose the appropriate initialization parameters. In our model,
the top-level hyper-parameters aλ0 , bλ0 , cτ0 , dτ0 are set to 10−5 with
model precision E[τ ] = cτ0 /dτ0 = 1 and E[λ] = diag(I). Fig. 4. Illustration of PlanetLab network latency data and Abilene network
 traffic data as third-order tensors.

 V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
 In this section, to evaluate our proposed model for the missing
network-wide traffic measurement data completion, we conduct
experiments on synthetic data and two real-world networkwide traffic measurement datasets and compare them with
other state-of-the-art matrix/tensor completion models, including FBCP [29], BGCP [25], TCTF [26], TMac [36], FGSR [37],
and FNN [37]. In particular, the TMac has two versions, TMac-
Dec and TMac-Inc, the former uses the decreased rank to obtain
the optimal rank, while the latter uses the increased rank. FGSR
and FNN are matrix-based methods, which cannot deal with Fig. 5. Illustration of fiber missing scenario.
tensor-based data. Therefore, in the experimental part, for FGSR
and FNN, we flatten the tensors into matrices according to the 
third dimension. Ŷijk − Yijk Ŷ − Y2
 Moreover, in our proposed model, we consider two cases of MAE = ; RRSE = ,
 n1 × n2 × n3 Y2
linear transforms: (1) Cosine-transform (Cosine), which is based
on the linear transform proposed in Definition III.5; (2) Random where θ = 0.05.
Orthogonal Matrix transform (ROM), the transform matrix L is Our proposed algorithm is implemented in Matlab. All expera random orthogonal matrix gotten by QR decomposition. In iments are performed on PC with Intel-Core i5-10600KF CPU
our experiments, the Successful Recovery Rate (SRR), Mean and 48 GB RAM, and the operating system is Win10.
the Absolute Error (MAE) [27], Root Relative Squared Error
(RRSE) [38], and computation time are used as performance A. Synthetic Data
metrics, which are defined as follows In this subsection, we assess performance of our proposed
   model on synthetic datasets. The ground-truth low-rank tensor
 ηijk 1, Ŷijk − Yijk < θ X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is generated by two small size factor tensors
 SRR = where ηijk = ;
 n1 × n2 × n3 0, otherwise A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 and B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 . In addition, A and B obey
2506 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

Fig. 6. Performance comparison of our model and other models on PlanetLab dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. The top row is the performance
of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the random missing scenario, while the bottom row is the performance of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the fiber missing scenario.

 80% than missing rate with 60%. By analyzing the experimental
 process, it can be found that under the same circumstances, the
 result of rank estimation with the missing rate 60% is worse than
 that with the missing rate 80%, which is the main reason for the
 poor effect.
 Notice that our algorithm can recover most of the data even
 when the missing rate is 80%. In addition, by comparing the
 with or without of noise, it can be found that by adding noise
 σε2 = 1E − 02, our algorithm is affected extremely weakly. This
 shows that our proposed algorithm has strong robustness.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the computation time of our model and other models on
the PlanetLab dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. (a) Random
missing scenario. (b) Fiber missing scenario. B. Real Network Traffic Measurement Data
 1) Datasets Description: We conduct experiments on two
Uniform distribution, and low-rank components are constructed real-world network traffic measurement datasets, including a
by A ∗ B † . To better reflect the robustness of our model, some network latency trace dataset (PlanetLab [17]) and network
noise is added to observed data, the observed tensor is given traffic dataset (Abilene2 ).
by Y = X ◦ O + ε, where ε ∼ N (0, σε2 ) with noise parame- The PlanetLab dataset consist of round trip times (RTTs)
ter σε2 = 10−2 . The missing entries obey the Uniform distri- between 490 nodes in the PlanetLab network over 18-time
bution, which is marked by binary tensor O. The synthetic slices, which can be represented as a third-order tensor according
datasets includes tensors whose sizes are 100 × 100 × 10 and to origin-ID, destination-ID, and time-interval. Specifically, as
200 × 200 × 20, and we generate different incomplete tensors shown in Fig. 4(a), its size is 490 × 490 × 18.
with missing rate ρ = [20%, 40%, 60%, 80%]. The Abilene network traffic data consists of 12 nodes traffic
 Table II shows the recovery result of our model (Cosine matrices, with the measured every fifth minute over 168 days,
and ROM based) on the synthetic datasets. It can be seen that which can be represented as a third-order tensor with a size of
the ROM-based model performs better than the Cosine-based 144 × 288 × 168. The details are shown in Fig. 4(b).
model performance on incomplete tensors which have different
sizes with or without noise. For the Cosine-based method, the
recovery performance is better when the data missing rate is 2 http://abilene.internet2.edu/observatory/datacollections.html
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2507

Fig. 8. Performance comparison of our model and other models on Abilene dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. The top row is the performance
of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the random missing scenario, while the bottom row is the performance of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the fiber missing scenario.

 missing will miss more information, and it will be more difficult
 to recover.
 3) Experiments on PlanetLab Dataset: We evaluate our proposed model and other matrices/tensor-based completion models on the PlanetLab network latency trace dataset. Fig. 6 shows
 the performance of our model and other models under different
 missing rate. It is clearly shown that our model (ROM-based)
 obtain the highest performance with the least MAE and RRSE.
 Fig. 6(a) and (d) compare the successful recovery performance
 with different missing rates under random missing and fiber
Fig. 9. Comparison of the computation time of our model and other models missing scenarios. Obviously, our proposed ROM-based transon the Abilene dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. (a) Fiber
missing scenario. (b) Fiber missing scenario. forms model achieves the best results on the evaluation index of
 SRR.
 Fig. 7 shows the computation time of all algorithms under
 2) Random Missing V.s. Fiber Missing: In Section V-A, the missing rate from 10% to 50%. Although the algorithm
our proposed model uses random missing for synthetic data. TCTF consumes the least computation time, its performance
However, in practical applications for recovery of missing on network traffic data recovery is ordinary. From a comprehennetwork-wide traffic measurement data, data missing can be sive point of view, compared with other algorithms, our model
the result of faults in network communications. Therefore, the (ROM-transform based) has achieved the best performance.
missing data in network-wide traffic measurement data is often 4) Experiments on Abilene Dataset: To better evaluate the
continuous over time. Considering the above situation, two kinds recovery performance of our proposed model on the missing
of data-missing scenarios (random missing and fiber missing) network-wide traffic measurement data, we also conduct experare applied in this subsection. For random missing, ρ% of the iments on the Abilene dataset. Fig. 8 shows the performance
data entries are missed while missing entries obeying normal of our model and other models under different missing rate
distribution. For fiber missing, we represent the network traffic scenarios. Obviously, our proposed algorithm outperforms other
data as a third-order tensor, and then ρ% fibers are missed algorithms in terms of SRR, MAE, and RRSE.
randomly in the time interval dimension. The details about fiber Fig. 9 shows the computation time of all algorithms under
missing are shown in Fig. 5. In fact, under the same missing the missing rate from 10% to 50% in Abilene dataset. It clearly
ratio, compared with the random missing scenario, the fiber shows the superiority of our algorithm and TCTF in terms of
2508 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

computation time. However, the performance of the TCTF in [11] M. Adil et al., “Enhanced-AODV: A robust three phase priority-based
recovering missing network traffic data is much lower than our traffic load balancing scheme for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things
 J., vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 14426–14437, Aug. 2022.
algorithm. Therefore, our model exhibits efficient and accurate [12] Y. Xia et al., “AI-driven and MEC-empowered confident information
performance on the task of missing Abilene network traffic data coverage hole recovery in 6G-enabled IoT,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
recovery. early access, Feb. 28, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2022.3154760.
 [13] X. Deng, Y. Jiang, L. T. Yang, M. Lin, L. Yi, and M. Wang, “Data fusion
 based coverage optimization in heterogeneous sensor networks: A survey,”
 VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK Inf. Fusion, vol. 52, pp. 90–105, 2019.
 [14] X. Wang et al., “The joint optimization of online traffic matrix measure-
 Inferring network-wide traffic data from partial network traf- ment and traffic engineering for software-defined networks,” IEEE/ACM
fic plays an important role in next-generation network systems. Trans. Netw., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 234–247, Feb. 2020.
 [15] H. Dai, K. Sun, A. X. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zheng, and G. Chen,
At the same time, missing network traffic measurement data is “Charging task scheduling for directional wireless charger networks,”
inevitable in network systems. In this article, a transforms-based IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 3163–3180,
Bayesian tensor completion method is proposed to recover Nov. 2021.
 [16] H. Dai, X. Wang, A. X. Liu, H. Ma, G. Chen, and W. Dou, “Wireless charger
missing network-wide traffic measurement data. Experiments on placement for directional charging,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26,
synthetic data and two real-world network traffic datasets show no. 4, pp. 1865–1878, Aug. 2018.
that our proposed model outperforms other matrix/tensor-based [17] R. Zhu, B. Liu, D. Niu, Z. Li, and H. V. Zhao, “Network latency estimation
 for personal devices: A matrix completion approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
methods, which can effectively improve network traffic data Netw., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 724–737, Apr. 2017.
quality and provide network traffic data assurance for network [18] W. Sun, J. Tao, Y. Xu, Y. Gao, and Z. Wang, “Network latency estimation:
monitoring, traffic analysis and intrusion detection. A tensor-based weighted singular value thresholding method,” in Proc.
 IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 7th Int. Conf.
 Since the tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear Data Sci. Syst.; 19th Int. Conf. Smart City; 7th Int. Conf. Dependability
transforms and tubal rank are defined on a third-order tensor, Sensor Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl., 2021, pp. 431–438.
we only consider recovery 3D data in this article. With the [19] B. Agbo, H. Al-Aqrabi, R. Hill, and T. Alsboui, “Missing data imputation
 in the Internet of Things sensor networks,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 5,
tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms 2022, Art. no. 143.
and tubal rank defining in high-order space, the TBTC can [20] Q. Wang, L. Chen, Q. Wang, H. Zhu, and X. Wang, “Anomalynaturally recover high-order data. In addition, the tensor-tensor aware network traffic estimation via outlier-robust tensor completion,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2677–2689,
product and tensor tubal rank depend on given invertible lin- Dec. 2020.
ear transforms, and the different types of data and tasks may [21] K. Xie, S. Li, X. Wang, G. Xie, and Y. Ouyang, “Expectile tensor comdepend on appropriate linear transforms. Therefore, it is also pletion to recover skewed network monitoring data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
an interesting work to explore different linear transforms for [22] T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader, “Tensor decompositions and applications,”
different network traffic data analysis tasks, such as network SIAM Rev., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455–500, 2009.
traffic anomaly monitoring, attack detection, etc. [23] K. Xie, Y. Chen, X. Wang, G. Xie, J. Cao, and J. Wen, “Accurate
 and fast recovery of network monitoring data: A GPU accelerated matrix completion,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 958–971,
 REFERENCES Jun. 2020.
 [24] K. Jin et al., “Low cost online network traffic measurement with subspace-
 [1] H. Huang et al., “An efficient k-persistent spread estimator for traffic based matrix completion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1,
 measurement in high-speed networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 28, pp. 53–67, Jan./Feb. 2023.
 no. 4, pp. 1463–1476, Aug. 2020. [25] X. Chen, Z. He, and L. Sun, “A Bayesian tensor decomposition approach
 [2] H. Huang et al., “Spread estimation with non-duplicate sampling in high- for spatiotemporal traffic data imputation,” Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg.
 speed networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2073–2086, Technol., vol. 98, pp. 73–84, 2019.
 Oct. 2021. [26] P. Zhou, C. Lu, Z. Lin, and C. Zhang, “Tensor factorization for low-
 [3] K. Xie et al., “Accurate recovery of missing network measurement data rank tensor completion,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 3,
 with localized tensor completion,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1152–1163, Mar. 2018.
 pp. 2222–2235, Dec. 2019. [27] K. Xie et al., “Accurate recovery of internet traffic data: A sequential
 [4] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative sensing tensor completion approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 2,
 in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys pp. 793–806, Feb. 2018.
 Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, thirdquarter 2022. [28] X. Li et al., “Tripartite graph aided tensor completion for sparse net-
 [5] W. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Duan, T. Liu, X. Tong, and Z. Cai, “A triple real-time work measurement,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 34, no. 1,
 trajectory privacy protection mechanism based on edge computing and pp. 48–62, Jan. 2023.
 blockchain in mobile crowdsourcing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early [29] Q. Zhao, L. Zhang, and A. Cichocki, “Bayesian CP factorization of inaccess, Jun. 28, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2022.3187047. complete tensors with automatic rank determination,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 [6] X. Deng, B. Wang, W. Liu, and L. T. Yang, “Sensor scheduling for multi- Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1751–1763, Sep. 2015.
 modal confident information coverage in sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. [30] E. Kernfeld, M. Kilmer, and S. Aeron, “Tensor–tensor products with
 Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 902–913, Mar. 2015. invertible linear transforms,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 485, pp. 545–570,
 [7] S. He, J. Chen, F. Jiang, D. K. Yau, G. Xing, and Y. Sun, “Energy pro- 2015.
 visioning in wireless rechargeable sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile [31] M. E. Kilmer and C. D. Martin, “Factorization strategies for third-
 Comput., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1931–1942, Oct. 2012. order tensors,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 435, no. 3, pp. 641–658,
 [8] K. Xie et al., “Sequential and adaptive sampling for matrix completion 2011.
 in network monitoring systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., [32] M. K. Ng, R. H. Chan, and W.-C. Tang, “A fast algorithm for deblurring
 2015, pp. 2443–2451. models with neumann boundary conditions,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 21,
 [9] H. Zhou, D. Zhang, K. Xie, and Y. Chen, “Spatio-temporal tensor com- no. 3, pp. 851–866, 1999.
 pletion for imputing missing internet traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. [33] Y. Zhou and Y.-M. Cheung, “Bayesian low-tubal-rank robust tensor factor-
 Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–7. ization with multi-rank determination,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
[10] M. Roughan, Y. Zhang, W. Willinger, and L. Qiu, “Spatio-temporal Intell., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 62–76, Jan. 2021.
 compressive sensing and internet traffic matrices (extended version),” [34] C. J. Hillar and L.-H. Lim, “Most tensor problems are NP-hard,” J. ACM,
 IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 662–676, Jun. 2012. vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1–39, 2013.
YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY 2509

[35] C. Lu, J. Feng, Y. Chen, W. Liu, Z. Lin, and S. Yan, “Tensor ro- Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 bust principal component analysis with a new tensor nuclear norm,” Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Infor-
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 925–938, mation and Communications, Huazhong University
 Apr. 2020. of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
[36] Y. Xu, R. Hao, W. Yin, and Z. Su, “Parallel matrix factorization for low- He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
 rank tensor completion,” Inverse Problems Imag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 601– Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
 624, 2015. Science and Technology. He has authored or coau-
[37] J. Fan, L. Ding, Y. Chen, and M. Udell, “Factor group-sparse regularization thored more than 50 technical papers in international
 for efficient low-rank matrix recovery,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. top journals and conferences. His research interests
 Syst., 2019, pp. 5104–5114. include security and reliability, coverage optimiza-
[38] Q. Zhao, G. Zhou, L. Zhang, A. Cichocki, and S.-I. Amari, “Bayesian tion, parallel and distributed computing in wireless
 robust tensor factorization for incomplete multiway data,” IEEE Trans. sensor networks (WSNs) and Internet of Things (IoT). He was the recipient of
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 736–748, Apr. 2016. the IEEE TCSC Award.

 Zecan Yang (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 B.E. degree in computer science and technology from Chenlu Zhu received the B.S. degree in computer
 the College of Computer and Information Sciences, science and technology from the Beijing University
 Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, and
 China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the the M.S. degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science China. He is currently working toward the Ph.D deand Technology, Huazhong University of Science and gree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineer-
 Technology, Wuhan, China. His research interests ing, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 include tensor analysis, Big Data, and machine learn- Wuhan, China. He is currently the General Manager
 ing. of Hubei Chutian Expressway Digital Technology
 Company LTD, China. His research interests include smart city, Big Data, intelligent transportation,
 and IoT.

 Laurence T. Yang (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.E.
 degree in computer science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
 science from the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Yiheng Ruan received the B.S. degree in communi-
 Canada. He is currently a Professor with the School of cation engineering from the China University of Geo-
 Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong Uni- sciences, Wuhan, China, and the M.S. degree from the
 versity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, the University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. He is
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
 University of Science and Technology, and the De- School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
 partment of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University of Science and Technology, Wuhan. He
 University, Antigonish, NS, Canada. His research is currently the General Manager of Hubei Chutian
interests include parallel and distributed computing, embedded and ubiquitous Smart Communication Company LTD, China. His
computing, Big Data. Dr. Yang is a Fellow of Canadian Academy Engineering research interests include Big Data and intelligent
and Engineering Institute of Canada. transportation.

 Lingzhi Yi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 M.S. degrees in civil engineering from the University
 of South China, Hengyang, China, in 2005 and 2008,
 respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in safety science
 and engineering from the University of South China,
 in 2018. She is currently an Associate Professor with
 the School of Information and Safety Engineering,
 Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan,
 China. Her research interests include IoT and CPSSbased environmental safety smart monitoring and
 bridge structural healthy intelligent monitoring.