IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 1983

TS-DP: An Efficient Data Processing Algorithm for
 Distribution Digital Twin Grid for Industry 5.0
 Lijun Xiao , Dezhi Han , Member, IEEE, Ce Yang , Jiahong Cai , Wei Liang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Kuan-Ching Li , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—As known, the smart Grid is an essential scenario
for Industry 5.0. With its rapid development, the huge number
of sensors and smart devices widely used in the industrial field
generate significant amounts of data that sharply increase. Facing
the power grid environment with a high amount of data, it is
easy to cause abnormal conditions in the power grid system
and even cause the system to collapse abruptly. To tackle this
problem, we simulate a layered digital twin power grid model,
using the comparative learning method to process the time series
in the power grid and select the positive and negative time
series samples using a new slider. In the extended Convolution
Neural Network (CNN), we use the Atrous Convolution model,
limiting the receptive field and concentrating more data close
to the dimension of the model. The time series and process
classification tasks are predicted on Electricity Transformer
Temperature (ETT), electricity, and University of California,
Riverside (UCR) data sets, and experimental results show that Fig. 1. Grid architecture diagram.
the proposed method reduces the error rate of 4.38% and 5.21%
in the prediction task and improves the accuracy of 8.39% and
12.73% in the classification task, indications to control the power layer, platform layer, and application layer. With the rapid
grid model more accurately, predicting the power grid operation development of power IoT technology, the number of sensors
in the future, and take corresponding measures in time.
 and nodes in it has increased rapidly, whilst the amount of
 Index Terms—Contrastive learning, digital twin (DT), industry data has risen sharply, which is prone to problems such as
5.0, smart grid, time series. data leakage and excessive data load. In recent years, there
 have been many cases at home and abroad. For example,
 in March 2019, hackers exploited a known vulnerability in
 I. I NTRODUCTION Cisco’s firewall to launch a Denial of Service (DoS) attack
 ITH the growing demand for renewable energy,
W the smart grid is a crucial application of Industry
5.0 [1], [2], effectively integrating power system resources
 against a renewable energy utility in Utah, USA, forcing the
 device to reboot multiple times, causing the group’s control
 center and The communication between the field devices at its
and communication infrastructure resources to meet the power various sites is interrupted [3]. In June 2020, hackers extorted
consumption needs of users during different periods, as shown 14 million from Brazil-based electricity company Light SA
in Figure 1 the power Internet of Things (IoT) architecture to redeem the use of servers and the hacker’s ransomware
diagram, with the efficient operation of energy and market Sodinokibi ransomware. At the same time, the researchers
and the efficient use of system resources. The power IoT (also found that the software can enhance privileges by taking
architecture mainly includes the perception layer, network advantage of the 32-bit and 64-bit vulnerabilities of cve-
 2018-8453 vulnerability in Windows win32k components.
 Manuscript received 22 September 2023; accepted 15 October 2023. The existence of this vulnerability will pose a huge security
Date of publication 16 November 2023; date of current version
26 April 2024. This work was supported by the Top-Notch Innovative risk to the power IoT [4]. The existing physical power grid
Talent Training Program for Graduate Students of Shanghai Maritime model cannot predict the situation in the future and take
University under Grant 2023YBR019. (Lijun Xiao and Dezhi Han are co-first corresponding measures.
authors.) (Corresponding authors: Wei Liang; Kuan-Ching Li.)
 Lijun Xiao and Dezhi Han are with the College of Information Engineering, Therefore, it is urgent to adopt a model that combines
Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 200135, China. physical and virtual power grids, and the digital twin distri-
 Ce Yang, Jiahong Cai, and Wei Liang are with the School of Computer bution network model is suitable for this scenario [5]. As a
Science and Engineering and the Hunan Key Laboratory for Service
Computing and Novel Software Technology, Hunan University of Science and multi-dimensional and multi-attribute simulation technology,
Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China. (e-mail: wliang@hnust.edu.cn). digital twin technology uses sensor data, network communi-
 Kuan-Ching Li is with the Department of Computer Science and cation architecture, entity attributes, and other characteristics
Information Engineering, Providence University, Taichung 43301, Taiwan
(e-mail: kuancli@pu.edu.tw). to model the actions and states of physical entities and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3332099 integrates physical entity models and twins through interactive
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

channels. The model is mapped and connected in real-time, grid development, realizing the “digital twin” of “physical
and the physical system interacts with the virtual space in real- power grid” and “online power grid”, supporting the hightime to form a closed-loop [6]. The digital twin power grid quality development of power grid business. Pan et al. [10]
model can predict the system state in the future, simulate the combined digital twin technology with power systems and
countermeasures to be taken on the virtual power grid, and applied it to other services such as grid optimization design,
feedback to the physical power grid according to the execution grid fault simulation and simulation, virtual power plants, and
results of the virtual power grid so that the hidden dangers smart device monitoring. Danilczyk et al. [11] proposed a
such as data leakage and overloading of data in the system are framework for adapting digital twin technology to microgrid
discovered as soon as possible, the resulting property losses security applications, in which digital twin technology is able
and personnel losses are minimized, and the safety, reliability, to update and improve simulation using real-time bidirectional
power quality, and transmission efficiency of the power grid coupling between simulation and physical systems, resulting
system are effectively guaranteed [7]. in more Well applied to physical systems. Ma et al. [12]
 There are many sensors in the power IoT, and the data of realized the interaction between the physical engineering site
each interrelated sensor affect each other. When a sensor is and the virtual engineering model based on the digital twin
attacked or the sensor crashes, the data of the sensor will not be technology, improving planning accuracy and coordination. In
available until the sensor returns to normal. How to accurately system infrastructure and IoT applications, Borth et al. [13]
predict the data of single or multiple sensors based on the discusses the challenges of many tasks related to digital twins
connections and characteristics of each interrelated sensor has and the strategies and architectures for these tasks. From
become a challenge in the data management of the power IoT. the perspectives of standardized description, knowledge reuse,
 We simulate a digital twin power grid model to solve and data integration, Jiang et al. [5] proposed a digital twin
the abovementioned problems, including hierarchical physical (DTB)-oriented digital portal (DP) model, which supports
distribution network entities, a data interaction layer, and a the construction of DTBs from equipment units to complex
digital twin power distribution network. In the model, we systems. Ahmadi et al. [14] proposed a scheme to use digital
use the contrastive learning method. We propose a new data twin technology at the equipment and system level of electriperturbation method to select positive and negative samples. fied railway power systems (ERPS). By analyzing the security
The obtained hidden layer vector is sent to the decoder risks and characteristics of edge computing, Sun et al. [15]
for time series reconstruction through the input projection constructed a power grid digital twin security control model
layer and timestamp masking. We performed UniVariate and including an application layer, function layer, model layer,
MultiVariate time series prediction and classification tasks on data layer, and physical layer based on the security protection
multiple datasets, and this paper has high time series prediction architecture of edge computing, so as to Make sure all aspects
accuracy and classification accuracy. of the grid are under control. Aiming at problems such as
 The remainder of this work is organized as follows: power outages, damage to sensitive equipment, and power
Section II introduces the research status of the digital twin grids that cannot maintain normal operation, Sleiti et al. [16]
power grid and sensor data prediction technology, Section III proposed a method using deep learning algorithms and a vector
introduces the digital twin power grid architecture adopted, autoregressive model to predict the dynamic system model of
and Section IV shows the sensor data prediction algo- digital twin technology, which effectively solves the problem.
rithm. Experimental results and data analysis are depicted Anomaly detection for power plant data.
in Section V, and finally, the full text is summarized in
Section VI, including directions for future work.
 B. Sensor Data Prediction Method
 II. R ELATED W ORK The wireless sensor layout is a key link in the construction
 of the energy Internet and an important support for the
 As an essential technology to promote the social econpower grid’s digital, networked, and intelligent development.
omy, the power industry has gradually become the focus of
 During the power grid’s operation, the power data analysis
academia on the information processing method in the smart
 and prediction improve the smart grid’s effective utilizagrid. During the operation of the power grid, data analysis and
 tion. Kumar Gilbert et al. [17] proposed a new method for
processing can effectively improve the data support for power
 security data prediction in wireless sensor networks, which
dispatching, but the existing methods cannot predict the data
 uses a Toeplitz matrix-based time series trust model (TSTM)
of power grid sensors well in the future. For such, we propose
 and a trust-based autoregressive (TAR) process to Better
in this work an efficient grid sensor data prediction method.
 performance in data prediction and Compressed Sensing (CS)
 based aggregation and reconstruction. Reference [18] proposed
A. Digital Twin Power Grid a deep long short-term memory (DLSTM) network-based
 The Digital Twin (DT) Power Grid is the mirror image of RUL prediction method using multiple sensor time-series
the physical power grid system based on sensors in the digital signals. The model fuses multi-sensor monitoring signals for
space. Jia et al. [8] introduced the concept of digital twins accurate RUL prediction, which can discover hidden longand discussed the construction and application of digital twin term dependencies between sensor time-series signals through
technology in the power grid. Yz and Wang [9] introduced the a deep learning structure, improving data prediction accuresearch and application of digital twin technology in power racy. Reference [19] developed a single-stage detector and
XIAO et al.: TS-DP: AN EFFICIENT DATA PROCESSING ALGORITHM FOR DISTRIBUTION DT GRID FOR INDUSTRY 5.0 1985

predictor that utilizes 3D point clouds produced by LiDAR
sensors and a dynamic map of the environment, achieving
better accuracy and saving computation. To extract generalized
features and latent relationships in power load-related edgesensing data, Liu et al. [20] proposed a power-load forecasting
scheme based on edge-sensing data-imaging conversion (DIC)
to improve the smart city and social forecasting precision.
Darvishi et al. [21] proposed a real-time generalized machine
learning architecture for sensor-based validation based on
a series of neural network estimators and classifiers. Ren
and Cao [22] proposed a method to process Computational
Fluid Dynamics data using the LLVM method to generate
further a low-dimensional database for ANN predictions Fig. 2. Digital twin grid model.
using monitored concentrations from different sensor layouts
(i.e., location and number) for a series of ANN predicts sensor networks, which uses a sleep mechanism to save
the input and improves the accuracy of data prediction. energy and optimize energy consumption. Since data and
Aiming at the problems of multi-party sensor data sharing and energy consumption can be minimized in wireless sensor
privacy protection, and realizing cross-organizational traffic networks, Palanisamy et al. [31] proposed a Multi-Sensor Data
data fusion and prediction, Wang et al. [23] proposed an Synchronization Scheduling (MSDSS) framework for efficient
accurate traffic prediction method based on LSH (locality- scheduling at the receivers of heterogeneous sensor networks
sensitive hashing). Feasibility of prediction accuracy and data aggregation. Due to the lack of spatial and temporal
efficiency while maintaining the privacy of sensor data. synchronization of roadside sensors due to different in-vehicle
Balogun et al. [24] preprocessed some data from IoT sensors, devices, Du et al. [32] proposed a novel spatiotemporal
such as weather and traffic data corresponding to time, and synchronization method for asynchronous roadside mmWave
used these data to develop a machine learning prediction model radar cameras for sensor fusion, which utilizes scene. The
for NO2 pollution concentration. Bodenstedt and Wagner [25] feature extraction of lane line corners to pre-calibrate the
proposed a context-aware method based on a convolutional camera solves the problem of spatiotemporal synchronizaneural network that can analyze the intervention workflow tion of roadside sensors. Aiming at the dataset analysis
online and automatically predict the remaining duration, problem of multiple sensor systems in synchronizing the
improving the prediction accuracy of online surgery duration. Internet of Vehicles, Ishiwatari et al. [33] proposed a method
Yang et al. [26] proposed a digital twin-driven composite fault for synchronizing video data with acceleration data from ondiagnosis method by combining virtual and real data, which is board sensors of a moving vehicle, which uses image features
extremely effective for composite faults in subsea production to detect synchronization point and then match it with the
control systems. corresponding point in the acceleration data. Since the data
 of IoT devices are all sent to cloud storage, Wang et al. [34]
 proposed a new architecture for data synchronization based
C. Sensor Data Synchronization Method on fog computing, aiming at the privacy and security issues
 Sensor networks perform complex monitoring and sensing that may arise in this process. Offloading to the fog server can
tasks collaboratively through various integrated micro-sensors. ensure data privacy and security.
However, due to the unpredictability and imperfect measurability of message delays in the IoT environment, the
data synchronization problem of sensor nodes has caused III. G RID D IGITAL T WIN
researchers and scholars’ attention. Sguazza et al. [27] This section constructs the digital twin distribution network
proposed an offline data-driven synchronization solution, model, as shown in Figure 2. Firstly, a hierarchical distriwhich can process data of different nature and sample at bution network entity is established, including distribution
different frequencies, which not only solves the problem of network distributed generation, static var compensator, energy
data synchronization but also solves the problem of clock drift storage model, and distribution network hierarchical model,
caused by Data time alignment problem. Since the clock will which provides real-time data for the data interaction layer
be skewed, Skiadopoulos et al. [28] propose a lightweight and completes the dynamic adjustment of the relationship
synchronization algorithm for wireless sensors, which solves between physical entities. Secondly, the data interaction layer
the problem of time skew and corresponding variance in harsh is constructed, which is mainly divided into a data transmission
environments such as IoT systems. Due to the local clock module and a data perception module. According to the
synchronization problem of wireless sensor network nodes, data interaction layer mapping, the distribution network entity
Chalapathi et al. [29] proposed a time synchronization protocol model is transmitted to the digital twin, the digital twin model
called Efficient Simple Time Synchronization Algorithm (E- is constructed, the data of the physical distribution network
SATS) for cluster-based wireless sensor networks. Volume and is fully explored and extracted, the data characteristics of
energy consumption are significantly reduced. Xu et al. [30] the power system are extracted, and the results processed in
designed a data set synchronization protocol for wireless the virtual distribution network are fed back to the physical
1986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

distribution network through the data interaction layer. The SVC uses thyristors to control capacitors, reactance elements,
physical distribution network executes better strategies accord- and other equipments, mainly by adjusting the TSG situation,
ing to the results. changing the reactive power data QSVC of the SVC system,
 and finally controlling the bus voltage within a reasonable
A. Hierarchical Distribution Grid Entities range, and continuously adjusting.
 3) Energy Storage Model: The energy storage model set
 The power transmission network or power plant outputs in this paper fully considers the individual capacity, state of
power to the distribution network, and the distribution network charge (SOC), power and other factors, the energy storage
distributes electricity energy to various users utilizing step-by- individual q, the rated capacity Contentq of the individual q,
step distribution. The distribution network is mainly composed and Content is the total amount of energy storage individuals
of equipment such as cables, towers, overhead lines, power q
sources [35], reactive power compensators [36], and energy in the system. The adaptive filling function of the input
storage models [37], combined with a hierarchical topology (output) power of the energy storage individual q is as follows:
model [38]. Model key equipment in a hierarchical distribu-   Contentq Pq,rat Aq edq f (sq )
tion network for digital twinning of the physical entities of p sq =    (8)
the distribution network. Provide real-time real data for the Content × Pq,rat + Aq0 edi f (sq )
 p
data interaction layer, record the event occurrence process,
complete the dynamic adjustment of the relationship between Among them, Pq,rat is the rated power of the individual energy
physical entities, and execute the latest feedback instructions storage, Aq is the adaptive factor of the individual energy
in the digital twin through the data interaction layer. storage, and dq is the automatic distribution coefficient of
 1) Distributed Power Supply in the Distribution Network: the individual. According to the state of charge and state of
In this module, we use the micro-turbine as a representa- discharge, the adaptive charge-discharge function of the energy
tive to analyze the characteristics of distributed power in storage individual q is selected.
   
the distribution network. The Micro Gas Turbine (MGT) is   dq (sshc + smin )/2 − Pq
connected to the distribution network, and the active and p sq ch arg e = Contentq Pq Aq exp
 smin − smin
reactive power output can be adjusted independently using    
the inverter multiplexing method. Among them, the inverter dq −(sshc + smin )/2 − Pq
 Content × Pq,rat + Aq0 (9)
capacity still limits the active and reactive power output of p
 smin − smin
   
MTG. Pmax (MGT) and Pmin (MGT) are the upper and lower dq sq − (smid + sshd )/2
limits of the MGT active power output, S(MGT) is the inverter p(sq )disch arg e = Contentq Pq,rat Aq exp
 smin − smin
capacity, Pmax (MGT) and Pmin (MGT) are the upper and lower     
limits of the MGT ramp rate, and Pj,t (MGT) is the active dq sq − (smid + sshd )/2
 Content × Pq,rat + Aq0 e (10)
power output of the jth MGT in the t period, and Qj,t (MGT) p
 smax − smid
is the reactive power of the jth MGT in the t period. The MGT
 Among them, p(sq )ch arg e and p(sq )disch arg e are the chargemodel is expressed as follows:
 discharge functions in the charge and discharge states,
 Pmin (MGT) ≤ Pj,t (MGT) ≤ Pmax (MGT) (1) respectively.
 4) Layered Model of Distribution Network: For nodes in
pmin (MGT) ≤ Pj,t (MGT) − Pj,t−1 (MGT) ≤ pmax (MGT) (2)
 the distribution network, we use the adjacency matrix to
 P2j,t (MGT) + Q2j,t (MGT) ≤ S2 (MGT) (3) represent. The layered model of the distribution network takes
 a node as the core node, is layered according to the path
 2) Static Var Compensator (SVC): At present, the SVC length between other nodes and this node, and defines the
method with fast response speed and high stability is mainly layered identification matrix of the distribution network. The
the TSC (Thyristor Switched Capacitor) + TCR (Thyristor identification matrix is as follows:
Controlled Reactor) model, through which the switching of ⎧ l
 ⎨ gi,j , gi,j = 1i = j, l = 1, . . . , N − 1
 l
groups can be realized, and the TCR method can be used
for branch coordination. And can carry out continuous adjust- ideni,j = 0gli,j = 1i = j, l = 1, . . . , N − 1 (11)
 ◦ ◦ ⎩
ments of reactive power. Among them, α(90 ≤ a ≤ 180 ) 0, i = j,l = 1, . . . , N − 1
is the trigger delay angle of the thyristor, U is the voltage of
the connection point of the SVC, BC is the fundamental sus- where gli,j represents the path length l from node i to node j
ceptance of the TSC, and BL (α) is the equivalent fundamental ⎧  
 ⎪ Layer1 , di,j = d1,1 , d1,2 , . . . , d1,N 
 ⎪
 ⎪
susceptance of the TCR. ⎨ Layer2 , di,j I = d2,1 , d2,2 , . . . , d2,N
 .. (12)
 BC = ωC (4) ⎪
 ⎪ .
 ⎪
 ⎩  
 2(π − a) + sin 2α LayerN , di,j IN−1 = dN,1 , dN,2 , . . . , dN,N
 BL (α) = (5)
 π ωL
 π ω2 LC − 2(π − a) − sin 2α B. Data Interaction Layer
 B(SVC) = (6)
 π ωL The data interaction layer is mainly divided into a data
 Q(SVC) = [BC − BL (α)]U 2 = B2SVC U (7) transmission module [39] and a data perception module. As
XIAO et al.: TS-DP: AN EFFICIENT DATA PROCESSING ALGORITHM FOR DISTRIBUTION DT GRID FOR INDUSTRY 5.0 1987

the data transmission channel of the physical entities and represents the average value at a time, and σwin represents the
twins of the distribution network, the data transmission module standard deviation at time TD. At the time i, Vari > Vart +
can effectively acquire, transmit, and coordinate information. θ σwin indicates that the data fluctuation is greater than the
The data perception module can sense the data of sensors, set threshold, and θ indicates the threshold parameter, which
collectors, meters, and other equipment according to different needs to be corrected for the data in the TD time.
power grid scenarios and needs and share the resources
of the whole system through the collected data. The main C. Digital Twin Mapping Networks
data sensing operations include: installing signal collectors
 According to the data interaction layer mapping, the physon transmission equipment, installing protection measurement
 ical model of the distribution network is transferred to the
and control devices on power equipment at all levels, and
 digital twin, the data of the physical distribution network
installing sensors on terminal ring network cabinet equipment.
 is fully explored and extracted, and then the data of the
 The physical distribution network entity has incoming data
 physical distribution network is detected, identified, classified,
packets in the finite domain , and the data transmission
 repaired, etc. The operation, processing the related business
model fuses each broadcast data packet into a linear repreof the distribution network in the virtual distribution network,
sentation of the original data packet. M = {m1 , m2 , . . . , mn }
 extracting the data characteristics of the power system, and
represents the set of n original data packets, and Di represents
 feeding back the results processed in the virtual distribution
the linear combination of all data packets:
 network to the physical distribution network through the
 n
 data interaction layer, and the physical distribution network
 Di = mi ρj,i (13) according to the results. Implement better strategies.
 i=1
 Among them, ρj,i represents the random network cod- IV. TS-DP: G ENERAL S ENSOR DATA
ing coefficient of the data packet sent by node J in . P ROCESSING A LGORITHMS
Extracting the encoding vector {K1 , K2 , . . . , Kn } from the
 This section describes the sensor data processing algorithm
encoded message Di , a node with M encoded messages
 in the digital twin grid model for predicting future grid
e1 , e2 , . . . , eM solves the system of linear equations, which
 sensor data. The most common method in machine learning
can be expressed as:
 is supervised learning. Using the supervised learning method,
 MtM×1 = QM×n χn×1 (14) we can get a set of labeled data (X, Y), that is, feature-label
 pairs, and the main task is to learn the relationship between
Among them, all embedded coding vectors form a matrix features and label pairs. Model training using the supervised
QM×n . If the rank of the Q matrix is not less than n, it learning method requires running a large amount of data, and
means that the digital twin model successfully receives the data the process of labeling data for millions of data will consume
transmitted by the physical entity of the distribution network. a lot of computing power and time. The model trained by
 According to the real environment and usage requirements the supervised learning method is very good at solving the
of the distribution network, we deploy sensing nodes in current task, but because the network of supervised learning
important parts of the distribution network, collect sensor only focuses on the good representation of X and the (X, Y)
data that may affect the normal operation of the distribu- relationship, it cannot represent a general model for learning X,
tion network, and build a relationship database between the and cannot well generalize the model to related fields.
operating environment of the distribution network and the Self-supervised learning, a subcategory of supervised learnstatus of key sensors. We use the data perception method ing, is also suitable for learning (X, Y) label (X, Y)pairs, but
based on Moving Variance to compare the data of the same without the need for manual labeling of the dataset. The basic
node in different time windows through variance. When the idea of self-supervised learning is to hide a certain part of the
comparison result exceeds the set threshold, it means that the input data, and then use the hidden part to observe its value
data fluctuates greatly in the two-time windows. The data- of the hidden part. Using self-supervised learning can lead to
aware approach can be expressed as: a more general range of models that can be fine-tuned for
 TD = te − ts (15) downstream tasks. Self-supervised learning usually requires us
 k+win to consider the loss function of the supervised process. We do
 Si
 St = i=k (16) not pay much attention to the final performance of the task.
 win  
 k+win−1 More attention is focused on the intermediate data represeni=k Si − Si tations in the learning process. For these representations, we
 Vart = (17)
 win − 1 hope to cover more abundant semantics and can improve the
  te
 i=ts Vari performance of downstream tasks.
 Vart = (18) This paper improves the model depicted in [40], performs
 TD + 1
  te  2 perturbation processing on the collected data, and selects
 i=ts Vari − Vari
 σwin = (19) positive and negative sample data. Then the original data is
 win − 1 sent to the encoder, the input time series is mapped to a high-
 Among them, win represents the size of the time window dimensional latent vector through the input projection layer,
used, St is the average value of the data in the window, Vart and a random timestamp is selected to mask the latent vector
1988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1 Data Perturbation Method With Half of the
Positive and Negative Samples
 1: sections = input_data //Crop training data according to
 preset maximum processing length
 2: for i <= section do
 3: if input_date[x,y] == NaN then //If there are empty
 values, fill with the mean of the current column
 4: input_date[x, y] = mean(input_date[y])
 5: train_data=joint_as_dimation_0input_date[section]
 //The input data is cut into equal parts of sections, and
 the data is spliced according to the 0-dimension to
 obtain the training data
 6: crop_random=random(low=0,hight=size(train_data))
 //pick any point
 7: crop_left = random(0,random)
 8: crop_right = crop_left + crop_random //middle overlapping box
 9: crop_eleft = max(crop_left - crop_l-2×crop_left,0) Fig. 3. Atrous convolution.
10: crop_eright=min(2×crop_right+crop_l,size(
 train_data)) Algorithm 2 Prefer Atrous Convolution for Data of the Same
11: out1 = train_data[crop_eleft,crop_right] //get two Dimension
 slices 1: input_data[]= train_data[]
12: out2 = train_data[crop_left,crop_eright] 2: feature_extractor[]=DilatedConvEncoder(
 input_data_dimation, out_channels,kernel_size,dilation)
 3: if input_Data_type = multivar
 4: for i <= DilatedConvd eep do
to generate a context view. We use the representation learning 5: if i > 5
method to use the learned hidden layer vector, use the decoder 6: dilation = 2
to map the hidden layer vector back to the input vector, 7: else
reconstruct, and achieve the purpose of data dimensionality 8: 2i //Dilation=2 for more than 5 layers of Dilated
reduction and include more semantic features. convolution
 In the data perturbation module, we use the method of 9:
two sliders to select positive and negative samples. The two 10: for i <= DilatedConvd eep do
sliders represent two time periods [x1 , x2 ] and [y1 , y2 ], 0 < 11: dilation = 2i
x1 ≤ x2 ≤ y1 ≤ y2 ≤ Time, and Time represents the 12: return feature_extractor[] //return feature matrix
length of the time series. We use a new data perturbation
method, that is, [x1 , x2 ], the length of [x1 , y1 ] and [y1 , y2 ]
are consistent, we take [x1 , y1 ] as a positive sample, [x1 , x2 ] data dimension is smaller and can achieve better classification
and [y1 , y2 ] as a negative sample, and perform two positive accuracy in most datasets with smaller data dimensions, such
and negative samples in the two time periods of [y1 , y2 ] and as Algorithm 2 shown.
[y1 , y2 ] study comparison. The data perturbation method is In this section, a general sensor data processing algorithm
shown in Algorithm 1. First, the training data is cropped by is constructed. We use the contrastive learning method to
the preset maximum processing length. If there is a null value construct positive and negative samples through a special data
in the input data, the mean value of the column is used to fill perturbation method. The perturbed data is sent to the encoder,
in, and then the cropped data is processed, etc. The training and the input projection layer is mapped to high-dimensional
data is obtained by splicing according to dimension 0, a period data. Then pass in the Atrous Convolution layer. Since the
of time sequence is randomly selected from the training data, change of the Atrous Convolution is limited, this layer pays
and the data perturbation method is executed. more attention to the data of the same dimension, to reduce
 In the encoder, we use atrous convolution as an extended the interference caused by the data of other dimensions to the
CNN, adopting an atrous convolution that is more inclined to model training.
the same dimension data, as shown in Figure 3. In the first five
layers, the dilation of the Atrous Convolution is continuously
increased to enlarge the receptive field. The last five layers V. E XPERIMENT AND D ISCUSSION
of convolution stop expanding and lock the dilation number All experimentations in this work are performed on a
to 2; that is, in the later stage of feature extraction, we pay server equipped with one Intel CORE i9-11990K CPU, 64G
more attention to the same dimension as our data reduce memory, and one NVIDIA T4 GPU accelerator card, installed
the interference of other dimension data on model training. with CUDA version 11.3, Python 3.8, and PyTorch 1.8.2,
Since we limit the receptive field of Atrous convolution, we Max threads and batch size configuration set to 8 on each
have higher accuracy in univariate prediction, and when the dataset.
XIAO et al.: TS-DP: AN EFFICIENT DATA PROCESSING ALGORITHM FOR DISTRIBUTION DT GRID FOR INDUSTRY 5.0 1989

 TABLE I
 R ESULTS OF U NIVARIATE T IME S ERIES F ORECASTING BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS

 The dataset records electric load data for the power
 system over a period of time, usually sampled at hourly
 or 15-minute intervals.
 • UCR dataset [43]: is the “Imagnet” of the time series
 field, containing time series data from many different
 domains and applications. Each dataset contains a series
 of time series samples with corresponding labels.
 We perform time series prediction tasks in ETT and
 Electricity datasets and time series classification tasks in UCR
 datasets.
 We use the following methods for comparison in data
 prediction experiments:
 • TS2Vec [40]: is a universal framework for learning
 representations of time series in an arbitrary semantic
 level.
 • Informer [41]: Beyond Efficient Transformer for Long
 Sequence Time-Series Forecasting.
 • LogTrans [44]: improved the prediction accuracy of time
Fig. 4. Results of Univariate predictions performed by multiple series with limited memory budget.
methods on different datasets. Caption: Figure 4(a) shows the MSE results • N-BEATS [45]: Neural basis expansion analysis for
of Univariate prediction in ETTm1, Figure 4(b) shows the MAE results
of Univariate prediction in ETTm1, Figure 4(c) shows the MSE results of
 interpretable time series forecasting.
Univariate prediction in Electric, Figure 4(d) Represents the MAE result of • TCN [46]: is a sequence modeling benchmarks and
Univariate prediction in Electric. Temporal Convolutional Networks.
 • LSTnet [47]: is a Long- and Short-term Time-series
 The datasets used include: network.
 • ETT data set [41]: divided into multiple sub-datasets • StemGNN [48]: is a Spectral temporal graph neural
 ETTh1, ETTh2, and ETTm1, mainly related to param- network for multivariate time-series forecasting.
 eters such as oil temperature and six power load The following methods are used for comparison in
 characteristics, which can be predicted by the relevant data classification experiments: TS2Vec [40], T-Loss [49],
 data. TNC [50], TSTCC [51], DTW [52], TST [53].
 • Electricity dataset [42]: is used for research in areas such The accuracy of the model is usually measured using mean
 as electric load forecasting and energy market analysis. square error (L2 loss) MSE and mean absolute value error
1990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 R ESULTS OF M ULTIVARIATE T IME S ERIES F ORECASTING BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS

(also known as an L1 loss) MAE. MSE is less sensitive to
outliers than MAE and can be used to evaluate the global
accuracy of the model, while MAE can better reflect individual
outliers. The formula is as follows:
 i=1
 1  2
 MSE = yi − ŷi (20)
 m m

 1
 i=1
  
 MAE =  yi − ŷi  (21)
 m m

 We employ atrous convolutions that prefer samedimensional data, as shown in Algorithm 2. In the first five
layers, the dilation of the Atrous Convolution is continuously
increased to increase the receptive field. The last five layers of
convolution stop expanding and lock the dilation number to 2.
That is, in the later stage of feature extraction, we pay more
attention to the same dimension as ourselves. Data to reduce
the interference of other dimension data on model training. Fig. 5. Results of Multivariate predictions by multiple methods on different
As shown in Table I and Table II, we conducted time series datasets. Figure 5(a) shows the MSE results of Multivariate prediction
 at ETTh1, Figure 5(b) shows the MAE results of Multivariate prediction
prediction experiments on the ETT and the Electricity datasets, at ETTh1, Figure 5(c) shows the MSE results of Multivariate prediction at
then compared them with the current state-of-the-art methods. ETTm1, and Figure 5(d) represents the MAE result of Multivariate prediction
Since we limit the receptive field of the atrous convolution, at ETTm1.
the Higher accuracy when making univariate forecasts and
when data dimensions are smaller. data classification on 10 UCR. Compared with other methods,
 Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the Univariate and MultiVariate the method in this paper has the highest score in most UCR
prediction results of Our Model and TS2Vec, LogTrans, N- datasets except BeetleFly, PLAID, and Car, and the ranking
BEATS, and TCN methods on the ETTh1, ETTm1, and in BeetleFly, PLAID, and Car datasets is not the highest, but
Electricity datasets. With the increase of H, our method still it also achieves a relatively high score.
maintains a low value in terms of MAE and MSE, indicating As can be seen from Figure 7, our loss curve has signifithat the method in this paper has higher accuracy for prediction cantly smaller fluctuations than ts2vec, and can also converge
on ETTh1, ETTm1, and Electricity datasets. quickly. The fluctuation range of the Loss curve is often related
 Due to the reduced receptive field, our method can achieve to three factors: batch size, learning rate, and whether the data
better classification accuracy in most datasets with smaller passed to the model for learning is what the model needs. In
data dimensions. Figure 6 shows the accurate scores of Ours, order to exclude the influence of other factors, we reproduced
TS2Vec, T-Loss, TNC, TS-TCC, TST, and DTW methods for ts2vec on Nvidia T4 GPU with a consistent batch size set to
XIAO et al.: TS-DP: AN EFFICIENT DATA PROCESSING ALGORITHM FOR DISTRIBUTION DT GRID FOR INDUSTRY 5.0 1991

Fig. 6. Accuracy comparison of different methods for data classification on 10 UCR datasets. Caption: dataset1 represents BeetleFly, dataset2 represents
PickupGestureWiimoteZ, dataset3 represents Rock, dataset4 represents PLAID, dataset5 represents Car, dataset6 represents Herring, dataset7 represents Beef,
dataset8 represents PigAirwayPressure, dataset9 represents PigCVP, and dataset10 represents RefrigerationDevices.

Fig. 7. In this work, the proposed method is compared with the TS2Vec method for the prediction and training of Univariate and Multivariate loss values on
different datasets. Figures 7(a), (b), and (c) show the comparison of Loss values for model training on the ETTh1, ETTh2, and ETTm1 datasets, respectively,
while Figures 7(d), (e), and (f) show the comparison of Loss values for model training on ETTh1, ETTh2, and ETTm1 datasets, respectively.

8 and a learning rate set to 0.001. Every time we perturb the tasks and can handle time series better. Since we limit
data, we ensure that the ratio of positive and negative samples the expansion speed of atrous convolution, we have higher
is 1 to 1, which makes the model update more necessary when accuracy in univariate prediction and when the data dimension
we input the training data so that our loss can be smoothly is smaller. In the prediction task, our method improves the
attenuated with a smaller fluctuation range. This means that Univariate prediction of the dataset Electricity by 5.21%.
our data perturbation method is more robust in the face of The dataset ETTm1 improved by 4.38% for Multivariate
more unevenly distributed data. prediction. We performed the time series classification task on
 The experimental results show that the proposed method the UCR dataset, which improved by 12.73% on the dataset
better affects time series prediction tasks and classification PigAirwayPressure and 8.39% on the dataset Beef.
1992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 VI. E NGINEERING A PPLICATIONS [3] M. S. Express. “Brazilian power company hit by ransomware
 attack.” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://t.cj.sina.com.cn/articles/view/
 Digital Twin (DT) technology is a virtual modeling-based 2950093642/afd6db4a00100rqe6
technology that creates a virtual copy of the power system in [4] AQNIU. “A U.S. power system was attacked by a firewall vulnerability
a computer to simulate and optimize the entire power system. and the operation was interrupted.” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://
 www.sohu.com/a/340509510_490113
In this work, DT technology is used to simulate the operation [5] Z. Jiang, H. Lv, Y. Li, and Y. Guo,
of the power system and optimize the stability and safety of a “A novel application architecture of digital twin in smart grid,” J.
power system. The algorithms proposed in this research have Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 13, pp. 3819–3835, Aug. 2022.
suitable engineering applications for power grid fault diagnosis [6] C. Qian, X. Liu, C. Ripley, M. Qian, F. Liang, and W. Yu, “Digital
 twin—Cyber replica of physical things: Architecture, applications and
and prediction, intelligent dispatching, and control, which are future research directions,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 64, 2022.
detailed next. [7] N. Tzanis, N. Andriopoulos, A. Magklaras, E. Mylonas, and A. Birbas,
 • In fault diagnosis and prediction: digital twin technology “A hybrid cyber physical digital twin approach for smart grid fault
 prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Ind. Cyberphys. Syst. (ICPS), 2020,
 can identify faults in the power system and predict pp. 393–397.
 possible future faults by analyzing and processing the data [8] M. Jia, C. Shen, Y. Chen, S. Huang, and Y. Xiang, “Digital twin of the
 of the power system. In this investigation, we use digital energy Internet and its application,” Glob. Energy Interconnect., vol. 3,
 no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2020.
 twin technology to diagnose faults in the power system [9] H. Yz and L. Wang, “Application and development prospect of digital
 and predict the possible effects of faults on the power twin technology in aerospace,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 53, no. 5,
 system. pp. 732–737, 2020.
 • In terms of intelligent scheduling and control: digital [10] H. Pan, Z. Dou, Y. Cai, W. Li, and D. Han, “Digital twin and its
 application in power system,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Power Renew.
 twin technology can provide intelligent scheduling and Energy (ICPRE), 2020, pp. 21–26.
 management of the power system based on real-time [11] W. Danilczyk, Y. Sun, and H. He, “ANGEL: An intelligent digital twin
 data to optimize operational efficiency and energy saving. framework for microgrid security,” in Proc. North Amer. Power Symp.
 (NAPS), 2019, pp. 1–6.
 In this investigation, we use digital twin technology to [12] L. Ma, L. Zhou, X. Zhang, C. Xiong, X. Liao, and L. Sun, “Research
 optimize the load distribution of the power system and on power grid infrastructure project intelligent management platform
 improve the energy utilization efficiency of the power based on digital twin technology,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Power
 Electron. Comput. Appl. (ICPECA), 2022, pp. 1122–1128.
 system.
 [13] M. Borth, J. Verriet, and G. Muller, “Digital twin strategies for SoS 4
 challenges and 4 architecture setups for digital twins of SoS,” in Proc.
 VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK 14th Annu. Conf. Syst. Syst. Eng. (SoSE), 2019, pp. 164–169.
 [14] M. Ahmadi, H. J. Kaleybar, M. Brenna, F. Castelli-Dezza, and
 To solve the issue of the surge of data in the power grid M. S. Carmeli, “Adapting digital twin technology in electric railway
model leading to a significant increase in system risk, we power systems,” in Proc. 12th Power Electron. Drive Syst. Technol. Conf.
 (PEDSTC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
combined the Atrous Convolution method with the simulation [15] Y. Sun, X. Xu, R. Qiang, and Q. Yuan, “Research on security manageof the digital twin power grid and adopted a new positive ment and control of power grid digital twin based on edge computing,”
and negative sample selection method. Additionally, time in Proc. 2nd Int. Seminar Artif. Intell. Netw. Inf. Technol. (AINIT), 2021,
 pp. 606–610.
series prediction and classification tasks are performed on
 [16] A. K. Sleiti, J. S. Kapat, and L. Vesely, “Digital twin in energy
ETT, electricity, and UCR datasets. Experimental results show industry: Proposed robust digital twin for power plant and other comthat the algorithm proposed reduces the error rate by 4.38% plex capital-intensive large engineering systems,” Energy Rep., vol. 8,
and 5.21% in the prediction task and improves the accuracy pp. 3704–3726, Nov. 2022.
 [17] E. P. Kumar Gilbert, B. Kaliaperumal, E. B. Rajsingh, and M. Lydia,
by 8.39% and 12.73% in the classification task, which can “Trust based data prediction, aggregation and reconstruction using
forecast the power grid operation, and warns of potentially compressed sensing for clustered wireless sensor networks,” Comput.
dangerous situations, assisting in ensuring the stable operation Elect. Eng., vol. 72, pp. 894–909, Nov. 2018.
 [18] J. Wu, K. Hu, Y. Cheng, H. Zhu, X. Shao, and Y. Wang, “Data-driven
of the power grid system. remaining useful life prediction via multiple sensor signals and deep long
 The key issue of the proposed prediction method is to short-term memory neural network,” ISA Trans., vol. 97, pp. 241–250,
forecast the data set in its next steps. Anomaly detection and Feb. 2020.
 [19] S. Casas, W. Luo, and R. Urtasun, “Intentnet: Learning to predict
processing has always been a significant task of time series, intention from raw sensor data,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2018,
though it has not been involved in this work. Currently, most pp. 947–956.
models are trained offline using a large amount of historical [20] X. Liu, Z. Xiao, R. Zhu, J. Wang, L. Liu, and M. Ma, “Edge sensing
data in the smart grids field, which may not be applicable data-imaging conversion scheme of load forecasting in smart grid,”
 Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 62, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 102363.
to real-time online anomaly detection and also leads to the [21] H. Darvishi, D. Ciuonzo, and P. S. Rossi, “A machine-learning architecproblem of lack of data in the initial stage of collecting data ture for sensor fault detection, isolation, and accommodation in digital
for real-time detection. In future directions, we will conduct twins,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2522–2538, Feb. 2023.
 [22] J. Ren and S.-J. Cao, “Incorporating online monitoring data into
in-depth research on anomaly detection methods. fast prediction models towards the development of artificial intelligent ventilation systems,” Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 47, May 2019,
 Art. no. 101498.
 R EFERENCES
 [23] F. Wang et al., “Privacy-aware traffic flow prediction based on multi-
 [1] Y. Liu, X. Yang, W. Wen, and M. Xia, “Smarter grid in the 5G era: party sensor data with zero trust in smart city,” ACM Trans. Internet
 Integrating power Internet of Things with cyber physical system,” Front. Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1–19, 2022.
 Commun. Netw., vol. 2, p. 23, Jun. 2021. [24] H. Balogun, H. Alaka, and C. N. Egwim, “Boruta-grid-search least
 [2] I. Vaccari, E. Cambiaso, and M. Aiello, “Evaluating security of low- square support vector machine for NO2 pollution prediction using big
 power Internet of Things networks,” Int. J. Comput. Digit. Syst., vol. 8, data analytics and IoT emission sensors,” Appl. Comput. Inform., vol. 16,
 no. 2, pp. 101–114, 2019. pp. 1–13, Aug. 2021.
XIAO et al.: TS-DP: AN EFFICIENT DATA PROCESSING ALGORITHM FOR DISTRIBUTION DT GRID FOR INDUSTRY 5.0 1993

[25] S. Bodenstedt and M. Wagner, “Prediction of laparoscopic procedure [50] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representaduration using unlabeled, multimodal sensor data,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. tion learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” 2021,
 Radiol. Surg., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1089–1095, 2019. arXiv:2106.00750.
[26] C. Yang et al., “Digital twin-driven fault diagnosis method for composite [51] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 faults by combining virtual and real data,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 33, contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112.
 Jun. 2023, Art. no. 100469. [52] Y. Chen, B. Hu, E. Keogh, and G. E. Batista, “DTW-D: Time series
[27] S. Sguazza et al., “Sensor data synchronization in a IoT environment semi-supervised learning from a single example,” in Proc. 19th ACM
 for infants motricity measurement,” in Proc. EAI Int. Conf. IoT Technol. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2013, pp. 383–391.
 HealthCare, 2019, pp. 3–21. [53] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A
[28] K. Skiadopoulos et al., “Synchronization of data measurements in transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation
 wireless sensor networks for IoT applications,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 89, learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min.,
 pp. 47–57, Jun. 2019. 2021, pp. 2114–2124.
[29] G. Chalapathi, V. Chamola, S. Gurunarayanan, and B. Sikdar,
 “E-SATS: An efficient and simple time synchronization protocol for
 cluster- based wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19,
 no. 21, pp. 10144–10156, Nov. 2019.
[30] X. Xu, H. Zhang, T. Li, and L. Zhang, “Achieving resilient data
 availability in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2018, pp. 1–6. Lijun Xiao received the master’s degree from the
[31] T. Palanisamy, D. Alghazzawi, S. Bhatia, A. A. Malibari, P. Dadheech, Hunan University of Science and Technology in
 and S. Sengan, “Improved energy based multi-sensor object detection 2017. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
 in wireless sensor networks,” Intell. Autom. Soft Comput, vol. 33, no. 1, information management and systems with Shanghai
 pp. 227–244, 2022. Maritime University. Her main research interests
[32] Y. Du, B. Qin, C. Zhao, Y. Zhu, J. Cao, and Y. Ji, “A novel spatio- include blockchain technologies and cloud security.
 temporal synchronization method of roadside asynchronous MMW
 radar-camera for sensor fusion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22278–22289, Nov. 2022.
[33] Y. Ishiwatari, T. Otsuka, M. Abukawa, and H. Mineno, “A data
 synchronization method for a vehicle using multimodal data features,”
 Int. J. Informat. Soc., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 135–147, 2020.
[34] T. Wang, J. Zhou, A. Liu, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, G. Wang, and W. Jia,
 “Fog-based computing and storage offloading for data synchronization
 in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4272–4282, Jun.
 2019.
[35] L. Chong, “Research on robust active and reactive coordination Dezhi Han (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 optimization of active distribution network distribution,” M.S. thesis, degree from the Huazhong University of Science
 School Electron. Eng., Xi’an Petroleum Univ., Huyi, Xi’an, China, 2021. and Technology. He is currently a Professor with
[36] X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, and W. Luo, “New adaptive dynamic Shanghai Maritime University. His specific interests
 programming voltage control for static var compensator,” Power Syst. include storage architecture, blockchain technology,
 Protect. Control, vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 77–84, Jan. 2018. cloud computing security, and cloud storage security
[37] P. Ye, S. Liu, D. Guan, and Z. Jiang, “Distributed energy storage technology.
 aggregation model and evaluation method based on adaptive equalization
 technology,” J. Shanghai Jiaotong Univ., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 1689–1699,
 Dec. 2021.
[38] J. Lin, C. Cao, and B. Zhang, “Optimal algorithm for fault location
 of distribution network based on hierarchical topology model,” Relay,
 vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 6–9, Jan. 2002.
[39] J. Gong, W. Wu, and H. Junlin, “Vehicle ad hoc network data transmission algorithm in two-way broadcast mode,” Electron. Technol. Appl.,
 vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 107–111, 2018.
[40] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” Ce Yang received the bachelor’s and Ph.D. degrees
 2021, arXiv:2106.10466. from the University of Science and Technology
[41] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for of China in 2011 and 2017, respectively. He is
 long sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, currently a Lecturer with the School of Computer
 pp. 11106–11115. Science and Engineering, Hunan University of
[42] D. Dua et al., “UCI machine learning repository,” 2017. [Online]. Science and Technology. His research interests
 Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ include information security, privacy protection, and
[43] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. blockchain technology.
 Automatica Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019.
[44] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
 of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–44.
[45] B. N. Oreshkin, D. Carpov, N. Chapados, and Y. Bengio, “N-BEATS:
 Neural basis expansion analysis for interpretable time series forecasting,”
 2019, arXiv:1905.10437.
[46] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
 Jiahong Cai is currenlty purusing the Ph.D.
 arXiv:1803.01271.
 degree with the Hunan University of Science and
[47] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long-and short-
 Technology. He has published several high-quality
 term temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int.
 peer-reviewed papers in journals and conferences.
 ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2018, pp. 95–104.
 His research interests include deep reinforcement
[48] D. Cao et al., “Spectral temporal graph neural network for multivariate
 learning, Internet of Vehicles, and blockchain
 time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
 security.
 2020, pp. 17766–17778.
[49] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
 representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–12.
1994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Wei Liang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Kuan-Ching Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 Ph.D. degree in computer science and technol- the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
 ogy from Hunan University in 2013. He was a University of São Paulo, Brazil. He is currently
 Postdoctoral Scholar with Lehigh University from a Life Distinguished Professor with Providence
 2014 to 2016. He is currently a Professor with University. Besides publications in high-quality conthe School of Computer Science and Engineering, ferences and journals, he is a coauthor or co-editor of
 Hunan University of Science and Technology. His more than 50 books published by Taylor & Francis,
 research interests include intelligent transportation, Springer, Elsevier, and McGraw-Hill. His research
 security of IoV, blockchain, embedded system and interests include parallel and distributed computing,
 hardware IP protection, and security management in big data, blockchain, and emerging technologies. He
 wireless sensor networks. is a Fellow of the IET and a member of the AAAS.