IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024 3887

 UAC-AD: Unsupervised Adversarial Contrastive
 Learning for Anomaly Detection on Multi-Modal
 Data in Microservice Systems
Hongyi Liu , Xiaosong Huang, Mengxi Jia , Tong Jia , Jing Han, Zhonghai Wu , and Ying Li , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—To ensure the stability and reliability of microservice many instances (e.g., virtual machines or containers). Howsystems, timely and accurate anomaly detection is of utmost im- ever, with the scale and complexity of microservice systems
portance. Recently, considering the lack of labels in real-world expanding rapidly, failure is inevitable. When an instance fails,
scenarios and the collaborative and complementary relationships
of multi-modal data in reflecting system anomalies, unsupervised it may degrade the performance of the entire system, impact user
multi-modal anomaly methods have been proposed. However, ex- experience, and result in substantial financial losses. Therefore,
isting methods face challenges in effectively distinguishing normal it is crucial to proactively detect anomalies and mitigate failures
hard samples (they are normal but hard to classify correctly) from to guarantee the reliability of the microservice systems. In realanomalies. This is mainly caused by two aspects. First, the hard
 world microservice systems, many types of monitoring data,
sample patterns are complex. Second, the convergence speed is
inconsistent between hard and simple samples. To overcome these including metrics, logs, alerts, and traces, play an essential role
issues, we propose an unsupervised adversarial contrastive multi- in software reliability engineering. Especially for log and metric
modal anomaly detection method (UAC-AD). We utilize contrastive data, operators continuously collect them for prompt anomaly
learning to help learn the complex patterns of hard samples and en- detection. Metric data includes system-level metrics (such as
large the distance between hard and anomaly samples. Meanwhile,
 CPU utilization, memory usage, and network bandwidth) and
the adversarial framework automatically identifies hard samples
and fine-grained adjusts the training weights to each modality part user-perceived metrics (like average response time, error rate,
of these hard samples. In this case, The hard sample problems of etc.). Logs are semi-structure messages printed, which typically
two aspects can be alleviated. We extensively evaluate UAC-AD on capture operational information about hardware and software,
two open-source simulated datasets and a real industrial dataset including state changes, debug outputs, and system alerts.
from a large communication company. Extensive experimental
 As manually identifying anomalies is impractical and prone
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in anomaly
detection. We also release the code and dataset for replication and to errors, significant efforts are invested in automated anomaly
future research. detection. Some methods rely on metrics to detect anomalies
 by probability density estimation, outlier detection, or autore-
 Index Terms—Adversarial learning, anomaly detection,
contrastive learning, microservice systems, multi-modal data, gressive bias (more details are introduced in subsection II-A).
software reliability, unsupervised learning. Other methods rely on logging to detect anomalies through
 keyword matching or learning-based methods (more details
 are introduced in subsection II-B). However, in the context
 I. INTRODUCTION
 of microservice systems, relying on only one single modal
 ECENTLY, with more and more online applications mi-
R grating to cloud platforms, microservice architecture has
received great attention. They are widely adopted due to their
 data is insufficient. It is unable to depict the status of systems
 preciously to judge whether anomalies occur [1], [2]. Existing
 unsupervised multi-modal anomaly detection methods mainly
capability to allow development, deployment, update, and scale rely on reconstruction-based approaches [3], assuming that norfor each service. A microservice system is a large system with mal data is easier to reconstruct than anomalous data. These
 methods learn the distribution of normal data by fitting unla-
 Manuscript received 25 October 2023; revised 10 May 2024; accepted 28 beled data and identifying anomalies based on reconstruction
May 2024. Date of publication 7 June 2024; date of current version 30 December
2024. This work was supported by the PKU-ZTE Cooperation Research Rroject.
 errors.
(Hongyi Liu, Xiaosong Huang, and Mengxi Jia contributed equally to this work.) However, these existing reconstruction-based multi-modal
(Corresponding author: Ying Li.) anomaly detection methods struggle to distinguish between hard
 Hongyi Liu, Mengxi Jia, Zhonghai Wu, and Ying Li are with the
School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
 and anomalous samples in the decision space, leading to limited
China (e-mail: hongyiliu@pku.edu.cn; mxjia@pku.edu.cn; wuzh@pku.edu.cn; anomaly detection performance. In our work, hard samples refer
li.ying@pku.edu.cn). to normal hard samples, which are a part of normal samples, but
 Xiaosong Huang is with the School of Computer Science, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China (e-mail: hxs@stu.pku.edu.cn).
 are difficult for the model to classify correctly and can be easily
 Tong Jia is with Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing classified as abnormal samples [4], [5]. The underlying reasons
100871, China (e-mail: jia.tong@pku.edu.cn). for this limitation are twofold: (1) Complex Combination: In
 Jing Han is with the Department of Algorithm, ZTE, Shenzhen 518083, China
(e-mail: han.jing28@zte.com.cn).
 microservice systems, the combination of normal samples is
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2024.3411481 complex. (one log pattern can be combined with multiple metric
 1939-1374 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3888 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 improve the performance of anomaly detection. Some studies [6]
 have confirmed that time-aligned multi-modal data reflects the
 operational state of the system, while unaligned data reflects
 inconsistent system states. Therefore, we consider the timealigned combination of logs and metrics as positive (i.e., normal)
 samples and treat the unaligned combination as negative (i.e.,
 abnormal) samples. Then we increase the distance between
 positive and negative samples, alleviating the first challenge of
 hard samples.
 Moreover, in our adversarial training phase, the discriminator
 can judge the reconstruction performance of the generator and
 increase the weight of reconstruction learning for the parts
 with poor reconstruction performance (i.e., hard samples for
 the reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods). We furthermore design separate discriminators against each modality
 part of the multi-modal data to achieve a modality-level training
 optimization adjustment for hard samples.
Fig. 1. The Motivation of UAC-AD. The figure illustrates the fitting process
of Autoencoder (AE, i.e., Method5 in Table III) and GAN (i.e., Method6 in Our contributions are as follows:
Table III) for hard and simple samples in the training set of Dataset A (introduced r We clarify the problem of inconsistent convergence speed
in section IV-A1). The hard samples are marked according to the false positives of hard samples for multi-modal anomaly detection in
identified by the AE-based anomaly detection model that completed the first
epoch of reconstruction training, while the rest samples are considered as simple microservice systems, and we design a fine-grained adsamples. The top figure demonstrates the issue of inconsistent convergence speed versarial learning framework to adjust the convergence
between multi-modal hard and simple samples: both AE and GAN converge in speed of each modality part of multi-modal hard samples.
two epochs for simple samples, whereas hard samples require more epochs
to converge. The bottom figure presents the performance of AE and GAN for Extensive ablation studies verify the effectiveness of the
anomaly detection. These two figures demonstrate that adversarial learning could proposed adversarial learning strategy.
adjust the convergence speed between hard and simple samples and lead to a r Within the adversarial learning framework, we introduce
improved anomaly detection performance.
 contrastive learning to enhance the model’s understanding
 of complex combinations of the multi-modal hard sampatterns to represent normal system states, and similarly, one ples. This widens the gap between hard and anomalous
metric pattern can also be combined with multiple log patterns samples in the decision space, thereby achieving better
to represent normal system states). In consideration that hard anomaly detection performance. Moreover, we release our
samples are part of normal samples, the combination of hard code and related data sets for better replication and future
samples is also complex. Existing reconstruction-based meth- research [7].
ods fail to capture diverse and complex combinations of hard
samples, which may identify these hard samples as anomalies. II. RELATED WORK
(2) Inconsistent Convergence Speed: As shown in Fig. 1, the
 Recently, tremendous efforts have been devoted to anomaly
convergence speed of simple and hard samples in multi-modal
 detection to ensure the reliability of large-scale systems. The
data are inconsistent, leading to models overfitting simple samanomaly detection methods are usually based on logs, metrics, or
ples and underfitting hard samples, thus limiting the model’s
 both. In this section, we first review the anomaly detection works,
ability to model normal samples and consequently restricting
 including metric-based, logging-based, and multi-modal-based
the effectiveness of anomaly detection. For reconstruction-based
 methods, which are closely related to our work. We then inanomaly detection methods, multi-modal hard samples may
 troduce the key techniques we used in this paper, including
exhibit large reconstruction errors in both modalities or in one
 adversarial learning and contrastive learning.
single modality. For the latter case, fine-grained (modality-level
rather than sample-level) training optimization adjustments are
required to balance the fitting degrees of both modalities, achiev- A. Metric-Based Methods
ing unified modeling of normal samples and obtaining better Metric data is a typical time series data collected from the
anomaly detection performance. monitors to monitor the running state of the instances at the
 To address the two challenges of hard samples mentioned application or system level. According to the criterion for
above, we propose a novel unsupervised adversarial contrastive anomaly determination, the paradigms of metric-based anomaly
learning-based method for general log-metric multi-modal data detection can be categorized into three types. Density estimationanomaly detection (UAC-AD). Specifically, we propose an based methods [8], [9], [10], [11] assumed that the normal data
adversarial learning framework with contrastive learning. We conforms to a specific probability distribution and identified
utilize contrastive learning is to learn the complex combinations anomalies according to the probability density of the data points
of normal samples by enlarging the distance between normal or the likelihood of the data points appearing. Zong et al. [10]
and anomaly samples so that the model can better distinguish and Yairi et al. [11] introduced the Gaussian mixture models into
between hard and abnormal samples, reduce false positives, and their framework, facilitating the estimation of representation
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3889

densities. Clustering-based methods [12], [13], [14] assumed unexpected behaviors involving either logs, metrics, or both of
that the outlier data is the anomaly and identified the anomalies them. So, to achieve better performance, the researchers attempt
according to the distance from the data point to the cluster center. to analyze more than one data source comprehensively to reveal
Tax et al. [12] and Ruff et al. [13] constructed a cluster from the the actual anomalies. Some research [1], [29], [30], [31], [32]
representation of the normal data with nonlinear transformation. proposed integrating tracing data with logs or metrics to group
Reconstruction-based methods [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20] logs or metrics from the same execution context, aiming to better
assumed that the abnormal data is difficult to reconstruct, and learn data patterns in microservices systems and assist in pindetermined the anomalies according to the reconstruction error. pointing faulty nodes. However, acquiring tracing data requires
Park et al. [15], and Ya et al. [16] used the LSTM or GRU to pre-instrumentation, making it challenging to apply to already
capture the temporal dependency and the Variational AutoEn- deployed microservices. Moreover, the collection of tracing data
coder (VAE) to reconstruct. Hang et al. [17], and Jun et al. [18], imposes additional overhead on running services, potentially
both of which incorporated Graph Attention Networks (GAT) constraining service response times. Lee et al. [28] proposed
to capture spatial correlations among dimensions in multivariate a log-metric modal anomaly detector via a semi-supervised
time series. Estimation-based methods presuppose specific data learning method to effectively detect anomalies. In consideration
distributions, clustering-based methods rely on hyperparameter of scarce label data in practice, Zhao et al. [3] and Chen et al. [33]
configurations, and reconstruction-based methods are vulner- designed unsupervised anomaly detection methods based on log
able to hard samples within training data. Consequently, de- and metric data with a concatenation feature fusion strategy
ploying these approaches in practical production environments and reconstruction-based criterion. Zhang et al. [34] conducted
presents formidable challenges. autoregressive anomaly detection separately based on log and
 metric modalities and fused the results according to anomaly
B. Log-Based Methods density. However, existing unsupervised methods struggle to
 adapt to the intricate data disparities between multiple modalities
 Log data is semi-structured text collected by instances at the
 and are susceptible to the influence of hard samples, restricting
application or system level. Logs are widely adopted in practice
 the accuracy of anomaly detection.
for anomaly detection. Traditional log-based anomaly detection
methods are usually designed to identify keywords in logs like
“error” or “fail” or count the number of logs that appear during D. Adversarial Learning
a period of time. However, negative keywords or the number Adversarial Learning, exemplified by the Vanilla Generof logs within a period of time could not accurately imply in- ative Adversarial Network (GAN) proposed by Goodfellow
stance failures. Thus, advanced approaches are proposed, which et al. [35], is a fundamental technique in machine learning.
follow a similar workflow: log parsing, feature extraction, and This approach involves a generator and a discriminator. The
anomaly detection. These works mine the log patterns (e.g., generator reconstructs input data and attempts to deceive the
sequential feature, semantic feature) of normal executions and discriminator, while the discriminator discerns whether the input
judge whether an anomaly occurs when the current execution data originates from real or generated sources. Let G denote the
deviates from the learned normal execution. For example, Xu et generator network, and D denote the discriminator network. The
al. [21] constructed normal and abnormal space of log event optimization objective of GAN is:
count matrix using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to
detect anomalies. Lin et al. [22] and He et al. [23] designed min max V (G, D) = Ex∼p(x) [log(D(x))]
 G D
clustering-based methods to identify problems of online service
systems. Du et al. [24] predicted the logs that may appear after a + Ex∼p(x) [log(1 − D(G(x)))]. (1)
sliding window utilizing the LSTM model. Zhang et al. [25] took
the entire sequence into account and trained an attention-based Numerous studies have explored the application of GANs in
Bi-LSTM model on the log sequence for supervised learning. anomaly detection, primarily focusing on unimodal data types
Wei et al. [26] employed feature engineering to extract log such as images [36], [37] and time series [19], [20]. In contrast
feature vectors. They utilized a GRU-based Autoencoder to learn to these single-modal approaches, our proposed method delves
reconstruction and identified anomalies based on reconstruction into the realm of multi-modal data, investigating how GANs can
errors. Yuanyuan et al. [27] extracted semantic features of logs be harnessed to enhance the effectiveness of anomaly detection
using Transformers. They employed LSTM and CNN to cap- across diverse data modalities.
ture both global and local correlations within log sequences,
enhancing the performance of supervised anomaly detection. E. Contrastive Learning
However, existing methods for log-based anomaly detection are
 Contrastive learning is a self-supervised learning method in
constrained by their reliance on singular data sources, making it
 deep learning that does not require extra annotation information
challenging to meet the real-world demand for accuracy.
 to augment the representation of data. Triplet loss [38] is a
 typical method to achieve contrastive learning, which reduces
C. Multi-Modal Based Methods
 the distance between x and x+ , and increases the distance
 Although single-modal-based anomaly detection methods are between x and x− , as shown in (2). Where x+ is a positive sample
confirmed effective, [28] demonstrated that it may neglect some that is similar to x, x− is a negative sample that is dissimilar to
anomalies when only relying on single data. The Faults can cause x, α is a hyperparameter used to adjust the difference between
3890 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 2. The UAC-AD pipeline comprises a generator and a discriminator module. The goal is to accurately fit the normal sample distribution and distinguish
anomalies utilizing multi-modal data through an adversarial mechanism. The generator, with four components, i.e., log modeling, metric modeling, multi-modal
self-attention, and decoder, aims to fit multi-modal normal data through reconstruction. The discriminator, comprising log and metrics discriminator, effectively
guides the generator by distinguishing between original and reconstructed data.

two distances.

 L = max(0, d(f (x), f (x+ )) − d(f (x), f (x− )) + α). (2)

 To our knowledge, there are very few works [6], [39] that attempt to use contrastive learning in multi-modal anomaly detection for microservices. The most relevant work, CL-MMAD [6],
employs CNN and LSTM to extract features from metrics and
traces separately. It then utilizes contrastive learning to narrow
down the distance between these features in the feature space and
employs the distance of both features as anomaly scores. This
approach uses contrastive loss as the sole training loss, enabling
it to detect anomalies related to modal inconsistencies but struggling to adapt to anomalies that exhibit modal consistency but Fig. 3. Illustration of the training and inferring phase of UAC-AD. The
temporal anomalies. In our work, we fuse multi-modal features training phase incorporates multi-modal data modeling, reconstruction, and
 discrimination. The generator uses a mix of losses to fit the normal data, with the
through time alignment. We treat time blocks with matched logs discriminator differentiating between real and generator-generated samples to
and metrics as positive samples and those with unmatched logs refine this fitness. The inferring phase centers on the generator’s reconstruction
and metrics (generated in different time blocks) as negative sam- errors. Surpassing a predefined threshold indicates an anomaly.
ples. This fusion contributes to the reconstruction of multi-modal
input data within time windows, enabling further learning of the
temporal correlations in multi-modal data. Consequently, our reconstruction loss is employed to learn the distribution of norapproach yields improved representations of multi-modal data mal data by minimizing the error between input and output data.
and better overall performance. Simultaneously, the adversarial loss is employed to deceive the
 discriminator, enabling the generator to automatically adjust the
 III. METHODOLOGY convergence speeds for hard samples and simple samples. This
 further facilitates the fitting of the distribution of normal data.
A. Overview
 Moreover, the contrastive loss is utilized to aid the generator in
 Our approach consists of two key modules, the Generator learning multi-modal data combinations of log and metric data
and the Discriminator, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The Generator that correspond to normal operation states in microservices. This
serves as an autoencoder and is employed to reconstruct the is achieved by preventing the learning of abnormal combinaoriginal data. The Discriminator acts as a classifier, distinguish- tions, thereby enhancing the differentiation between normal and
ing between original and reconstructed data, thereby effectively abnormal data. This contrastive loss is computed based on model
guiding the Generator to fit the normal sample distribution. The outputs for matched pairs and unmatched pairs. A matched pair,
overview of the training and inference phases is illustrated in comprising logs and metric data collected at the same time
Fig. 3. block, represents a unified system state and is considered normal.
 • In the training phase, the Generator leverages a combination In contrast, an unmatched pair consists of logs and metrics
of reconstruction loss, adversarial loss, and contrastive loss. The collected at different time blocks, considered abnormal. The
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3891

Discriminator employs adversarial loss to distinguish whether templates and leveraging them to differentiate different system
input data originates from real or Generator-generated data. For statuses (normal or abnormal).
hard samples that are difficult to reconstruct and have larger Through the above data process, we convert raw logs and
reconstruction errors, the discriminator can distinguish them metrics to aligned matched time series data, X = (Xl , Xm ) =
 
between real or reconstructed well. To deceive the discriminator, {x1 , x2 , . . ., xt }, where X ∈ Rt×(n+n ) indicates the multithe generator is pushed to fit the normal data distribution closely. modal data, Xl ∈ Rt×n indicates the processed log template
 
 • In the inference phase, we primarily focus on the generator’s features, Xm ∈ Rt×n indicates the sampled metrics, t indicates
reconstruction errors, which indicates the gap between real data the total number of time blocks, n indicates the total number of
and reconstructed data. When these errors exceed a predefined log template types, n indicates the total number of metrics. The
threshold, we classify it as an anomaly, triggering an alert to goal of anomaly detection in multi-modal data is to construct a
notify operations personnel. model F (X i ) to predict whether X i contains anomalies or not,
 The proposed method follows an instance-based approach where X i = {xi , xi−1 , . . ., xi−w−1 } indicates the multi-modal
rather than a system-based approach. Therefore, we apply our data of the ith slide window, the w denotes the slide window
model separately to the real-time data generated by each ser- size.
vice instance within the system for anomaly detection. If any
instance reports an anomaly, we consider the entire system to C. Generator Module
be anomalous. The advantage of this instance-based approach is
 The structure of the generator module is shown in Fig. 2.
that it allows us to pinpoint the specific instance(s) experiencing
 It is divided into four parts: log modeling, metric modeling,
anomalies while also avoiding issues related to inconsistent
 multi-modal self-attention, and decoder.
timestamps across different services. Many existing methods
 Log Modeling: We designed a log encoder module to enfor anomaly detection in logs and metrics, such as Hades [28],
 code the relationships between time blocks further. For ith
OmniAnomaly [16], and DeepLog [24], also adopt an instancesliding window, we adopt a Convolutional Neural Network
based approach.
 (CNN) to map low-dimensional features to high-dimensional
 features. Then we apply a Transformer encoder to learn the
B. Data Preprocessing time-association features between blocks, and then we obtain
 the log hidden layer representation for the ith sliding window
 Given a sequence of logs and metrics from a microservice
 Zli ∈ Rw×h , as shown in (3). Where Xli indicates the ith slide
system, the first challenge of fusion multi-modal data is to align
 window of the log template feature, h denotes the hidden size
the logs and metrics at the same time block to indicate the
 of the neural network.
same system state. The metrics are in the typical time series
format with a certain sampling interval, which can be easily Zli = TransEncoder(CNN(Xli )). (3)
handled. However, the logs are semi-structured or unstructured
messages (texts) with the corresponding timestamp, which con- Metric Modeling: Similar to Log Modeling, we use CNN
tains variables and impedes log analysis. Therefore, we adopt and Transformer encoder to capture the correlation between
a widely adopted parser called Drain [40] to extract log events, indicators and generate metric hidden layer representations
as Drain has been proven to be effective and efficient in past Zmi
 ∈ Rw×h , as shown in (4). Where Xm
 i
 indicates the ith slide
evaluations. We first utilize the Drain to extract n log templates, window of sampled metric.
and then when a log message arrives, we could match it to i
 Zm = TransEncoder(CNN(Xm
 i
 )). (4)
the corresponding template. Subsequently, all log messages
are converted into log events arranged in chronological order. Multi-modal Self-attention: In order to learn the correlation
Then, we align the logs and metrics by setting the sampling between hidden variables in different modalities, we consider
interval of metrics as the size of the aligned time block and concatenating the hidden layer representations of both modaliassigning all log events and metrics to their respective time ties and applying self-attention fusion, resulting in a multi-modal
blocks. self-attention (MSA) mechanism. The formulas are as follows:
 Then, we uniform the data structure of log data and metric Zfi = Cat(Zli , Zm
 i
 ),
data by transforming log data into time series data. For each time
block, we assess the occurrence of each log template, marking it Q, K, V = Zfi WQ , Zfi WK , Zfi WV ,
as 1 if it appears and 0 otherwise. By doing so, we obtain a 1 × n  
 QK T
dimensional template feature for the specific time block, where Zfi = Softmax √ V,
the n is the number of template types. The motivation behind this d
stems from the fact that there is a significant difference between Zfi = LayerNorm(Zfi + Zfi ), (5)
the log templates in the normal and abnormal system status. For
example, when it comes to abnormal system status, there are log where Zli and Zm i
 are the hidden layer representations of the
templates containing error handling and fault tolerance-related two modalities. Cat() represents the concatenate function in the
information, while these log templates rarely appear in the last axis. Zfi ∈ Rw×2h is the concatenated representation of Zli
normal system state. Therefore, we focus on the occurrence of and Zm i
 . WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×d represent the trainable hypereach template, capturing the co-occurrence relationships among parameters, and Q, K, and V are the linear projections of Zfi . d
3892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

indicates the hidden size of the attention layer (in there, d equals to (6). We refer to the difference between reconstructed values
2h). Zfi ∈ Rw×2h is the output after attention operation. Finally, and real values as reconstructed errors. Then, we proceed to
we use residual connections [41] and layer normalization [42] jointly train it using the reconstruction errors for both the log
to generate the ultimate fused features Zfi ∈ Rw×2h . and metrics modalities, as shown in (9). Where Gl () denotes the
 Decoder: To achieve data reconstruction, we map the fused generator that outputs the logs portion, i.e., Rli , Gm () denotes the
 i
features back to the input space. Specifically, we employ a linear the generator that outputs the metrics portion, i.e., Rm , MSE()
 
transformation to map Zfi to Ri ∈ Rk×(n+n ) , and split Ri into is used to compute the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between two
 
Rli ∈ Rk×n and Rm i
 ∈ Rk×n . Rli and Rm i
 are the reconstructed inputs, and Lr represents the reconstruction loss, N represents
 i i
values of Xl and Xm , respectively. The formula is shown in (6): the total number of sliding windows.

 Ri = σ(Wd Zfi + bd ), 
 N
 Lr = [MSE(Gl (X i ), Xli ) + MSE(Gm (X i ), Xm
 i
 )]. (9)
 Rli , Rm
 i
 = Split(Ri ), (6) i

where R denotes the reconstruction of X, σ() denotes the ReLU Adversarial Learning: To enhance the fitting of hard samples
   without overfitting simple ones, we introduce the mechanism of
activation function, the Wd ∈ R2h×(n+n ) and bd ∈ R(n+n ) are
the learnable parameters, and the Split() indicates the split adversarial learning. The discriminator is viewed as a dynamic
operation of R in the last axis. detector for discerning hard and simple samples. When the generator performs poorly on hard samples, making it challenging
D. Discriminator Module to deceive the discriminator, the generator experiences higher
 training loss. Conversely, when the generator reconstructs suffi-
 In the framework of our discriminator, which serves to differ- ciently well on simple samples, easily deceiving the discriminaentiate real data from generated (fake) data, we introduce two tor, the generator experiences lower training loss. Through the
individual distinct components: the Log Discriminator and the adversarial game between the generator and the discriminator,
Metrics Discriminator. the model automatically adjusts the training loss concerning hard
 Log Discriminator: The log discriminator, denoted as Dl , and simple samples. This automatic adjustment balances the
consists of a feature embedding layer and a linear classification progress of fitting hard and simple samples, leading to a better
layer. It employs a CNN to embed log template features Ili into a fit for the distribution of normal data.
hidden representation denoted as Zli ∈ Rw×h , where Ili could be The discriminator, which operates on both log and metrics
Rli or Xli . Subsequently, a linear network followed by a Softmax modalities, is trained to differentiate between real data and
function is used for the purpose of classification. The specific generated data. We utilize cross-entropy loss for this purpose.
computational process is shown in (7). Where Y i ∈ [0, 1]2 in- The proposed adversarial learning architecture not only allows
dicates the confidence of real and fake, respectively, P i ∈ [0, 1] for the adjustment of fitting degrees between hard and simple
indicates the confidence of real, Wl ∈ Rwh×2 and bl ∈ R2 are multi-modal samples but also, with two separate discriminators,
the learnable parameters. enables the adjustment of fitting degrees between the log and
 Zli = CNN(Ili ), metric modality part of hard samples. This enhances the unified
 multi-modal representation learning. The adversarial loss for the
 Yli = Softmax(Wl Zli + bl ), discriminator Lad is defined as (10):
 i
 Pli = Yl,0 . (7) 
 N
 Lad = − [log(Dl (Xli )) + log(Dm (Xm
 i
 ))
 Metric Discriminator: The metrics discriminator, denoted as i
Dm , follows a structure similar to the Log Discriminator, with
 i + log(1 − Dl (Gl (X i ))) + log(1 − Dm (Gm (X i )))].
the distinction that its input is metric features Im that could
 i i (10)
be Rm or Xm . The specific computational process is shown
in (8). Where Wm ∈ Rwh×2 and bm ∈ R2 are the learnable The generator is trained to produce data that can effectively
parameters. fool both Dl and Dm . This is achieved by minimizing the
 i following adversarial loss for the discriminator Lag , as shown
 Zm = CNN(Im
 i
 ),
 in (11):
 i
 Ymi = Softmax(Wm Zm + bm ), 
 N
 i i Lag = log(1 − Dl (Gl (X i )))
 Pm = Ym,0 . (8)
 i

E. Model Training + log(1 − Dm (Gm (X i ))). (11)
 Reconstruction Learning: To effectively capture the distri- Contrastive Learning: Due to the complexity of multi-modal
bution of normal data, we employ a reconstruction task as a hard sample combinations, to further learn the distribution of
fundamental component of our generator’s training regimen. normal log-metric multi-modal samples and enhance the distin-
Specifically, for input data X i , our generator is tasked with guishing ability between normal and abnormal data, we employ
producing corresponding reconstructed data, as illustrated in (3) unmatched data to simulate one of the abnormal scenarios in the
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3893

multi-modal setting. Matched data is used to simulate normal TABLE I
 THE OVERVIEW OF THE EVALUATION DATASETS
scenarios. Through contrastive learning, we aim to increase
the reconstruction error of unmatched data and reduce the reconstruction error of matched data, thereby strengthening the
distinction between normal and abnormal data.
 Construction of Unmatched Pairs: To construct unmatched
time blocks, we keep the log modality data fixed, search for metrics modality data that does not match, and generate unmatched
time blocks. Specifically, for the ith time block xi = (xil , xim ), the continuous changes in the number of log templates and
we randomly select a time block xj = (xjl , xjm ) from all time monitoring metrics.
blocks. We require that xjl = xjl and abs(xim , xjm ) ≥ θ , and then
generate a new unmatched time block xi = (xil , xjm ), as shown F. Model Infering
in (12). Where θ is a threshold to define the difference between
xim and xjm . And then, for the ith matched slide window, we When performing inference with our model, we utilize the
generate unmatched time blocks for each matched time block to generator to reconstruct input data and then determine anomalies
 
achieve unmatched slide window X i ∈ Rw×(n+n ) . based on the reconstruction error (anomaly score Score), as
 shown in (16), compared to a predefined threshold. The threshxi = (xil , xjm ), old is typically determined by binary searching for the best-f1
 through whole dataset, like the prior researches [16], [17], [18],
 ∃ xj = (xjl , xjm ),
 [20].
 s.t. xil = xjl ,
 Score(X i ) = MSE(Xli , (Gl (X i )))
 abs(xim , xjm ) ≥ θ . (12)
 + MSE(Xm
 i
 , (Gm (X i ))). (16)
 Construction of Contrastive Loss: We utilize a triple loss to
construct the contrastive loss Lc , reducing the reconstruction
 IV. EVALUATION
loss for matched data while increasing the reconstruction loss
for unmatched data, with the constraint that it does not exceed We evaluate UAC-AD by answering the following research
α. The α represents the expected inter-class distance. This is questions (RQs):
expressed as shown in (13): r RQ1: How effective is UAC-AD in anomaly detection?
 r RQ2: What is the contribution of each component of UAC-
 
 N
 AD?
 Lc = max(0, MSE(Gm (X i ), Xm
 i
 ) r RQ3: How does UAC-AD perform in terms of time and
 i
 store efficiency?
 − MSE(Gm (X i ), Xm
 i
 ) + α). (13) r RQ4: How much is the method affected by parameter
 sensitivity?
 Loss function: In summary, during the training of the genera- r RQ5: Can we visually explain the impact of each compotor, we simultaneously employ reconstruction loss Lr , adversarnent in our proposed model?
ial loss Lag , and contrastive loss Lc as indicated in (14). Here,
we aim to minimize the whole loss of the generator LG . Where
λ1 and λ2 are weighting parameters that control the balance A. Experiments Setup
between the three losses. 1) Datasets: To evaluate the performance of UAC-AD, we
 LG = Lr + λ1 Lag + λ2 Lc . (14) conduct extensive experiments using two open-source data sets
 and a real industrial dataset from a large communication com-
During the training of the discriminator, we minimize the ad- pany, as shown in Table I. We partition 70% of each dataset for
versarial loss of discriminator Lad to distinguish whether data training and reserve the remaining 30% for testing.
comes from real sources or the generator, as expressed in (15), r Dataset A is an in-lab dataset publicly released by [28]
where the LD indicates the training loss of the discriminator. designed specifically for evaluating the effectiveness of
 multi-modal anomaly detection. It encompasses 11 met-
 LD = Lad . (15)
 rics, sampled at 10-second intervals, forming time blocks
 It is worth noting that during data preprocessing, it is crucial of 10 seconds. Its log data includes 117 log templates.
to determine the total number of log templates and monitoring r Dataset B is a complex multi-modal dataset simulated by
metrics. When these quantities change, the proposed method an intelligent operations company. It serves as an evaluarequires retraining. Alternatively, if new log templates emerge tion benchmark for multi-modal anomaly detection under
but there is no desire to retrain the model, similarity matching can intricate scenarios. The dataset comprises metric and log
be employed to map the new log templates to known templates, data from four distinct services, with 85 metrics sampled
ensuring the model’s availability. In the future, there is a need every 30 seconds. The log data consists of 20 log templates.
to design anomaly detection methods capable of adapting to This dataset incorporates a variety of artificially injected
3894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 faults, such as CPU stress, memory stress, logging failure, and metric model detected an anomaly for a time block, this
 and network failures. anomaly is considered to have been detected.
 r Dataset C is derived from a large-scale communication 3) Evaluation Measurements: We apply the widely used
 enterprise’s real-time computing service platform with 21 measurements to assess our method. We adopt true positive
 online services. It is utilized to allocate computational (TP), false positive(FP), and false negative(FN) to label the
 resources for the company’s online services. The dataset anomaly detection results according to the ground truth. TP
 spans three days and includes 115 metrics, sampled every denotes a failure both confirmed by ground truth and de-
 30 seconds. It also features log data with 639 unique tem- tected by a method. FP is a normal time block that is falsely
 plates. Notably, this dataset includes 6 genuine anomalies identified by a method. FN is a missed anomaly that should
 induced by factors such as disk partition stress, CPU stress, have been detected. We calculate precision = T P/(T P +
 and memory stress. F P ), recall = T P/(T P + F N ), and F 1 − score = (2 ·
 2) Baseline: To assess the effectiveness of our proposed precision · recall)/(precision + recall).
method, we conducted comprehensive comparisons with various 4) Implementation: UAC-AD is implemented in Pytorch,
types of baseline methods. These comparisons encompassed and all of the experiments are conducted on a Linux Server with
different data sources, including single-modal log data, single- an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 3090 GPU via Python 3.8. As for the
modal metric data, and multi-modal data. Additionally, we ex- hyper-parameters, UAC-AD adopts the unmatched α = 0.16,
plored diverse training strategies, spanning supervised learning, the window size w = 40, and the hidden size h = 32, and these
semi-supervised learning, and unsupervised learning paradigms. hyper-parameters are described in detail in section IV-E. We use
Next, we will introduce them in detail. the Adam optimizer [44] with an initial learning rate of 0.001. We
 r Deeplog [24] is a widely applied unsupervised log anomaly set the λ1 = λ2 = 1 to treat different learning strategies equally.
 detection method. It uses the LSTM neural network to We set the θ = 0.15 to balance the distinguishment between
 encode the log sequential information, predict the next log matched and unmatched pair samples and the time-coast for
 template, and determine the anomaly by judging whether finding the unmatched pair samples following (12). The batch
 the next log template is in top-k largest likely predicted log size is 256, and the epoch of each training phase is dynamically
 templates. adjusted by an early stop strategy.
 r LogRobust [25] is a supervised log anomaly detection For hyper-parameters of baselines, we adopt the public immethod, which encodes the log sequence features, classifies plementations of [3], [16], [17], [24], [25], [28], and determine
 them, and achieves robust and satisfactory performance on the hyper-parameter combination achieving the highest test F1-
 anomaly detection. score for each baseline.
 r OmniAnomaly [16] is an unsupervised anomaly detection based on metric. It seamlessly integrates Variational
 AutoEncoders (VAE) into time series anomaly detection. B. RQ1: The Overall Performance of the Proposed Method
 This integration serves to compress features effectively and To assess the effectiveness of our proposed method, we
 learn the intricate distribution patterns of normal samples. compared it with various types of baseline methods, including
 r MTAD-GAT [17] is an unsupervised anomaly detection single-modal methods for logs and metrics, multi-modal meththat relies on metric data, which incorporates the graph ods, and ensemble learning methods, as shown in Table II. The
 attention neural network (GAT) to capture the spatial cor- results demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms the
 relations among dimensions in multivariate time series. baseline methods on Dataset B and Dataset C, achieving imr SCWarn [3] and DAM [33] are unsupervised multi-modal provements of 4.5 and 19.3 percentage points, respectively. On
 anomaly detection methods that adopt the LSTM to encode Dataset A, our method surpasses existing unsupervised state-ofthe log and metric sequential features and fuse the features the-art methods by 6.7 points and approaches the performance of
 by concatenation or cross attention operation. existing multi-modal semi-supervised state-of-the-art methods.
 r Hades [28] is a semi-supervised multi-modal anomaly This highlights the effectiveness of our proposed approach.
 detection approach. This method employs FastText [43] for Compared to single-modal methods that consider only log or
 log text embedding, utilizes Transformer for log feature ex- metric data, our method simultaneously incorporates informatraction, employs CNNs for metric feature extraction, and tion from multiple modalities, leading to significant performance
 integrates these features through concatenation operations. gains. In contrast to existing multi-modal unsupervised methods,
 r Union: To further investigate the effect of our multi-modal our approach enhances fitness to hard samples and further learns
 method, we also design the ensemble methods as baselines. the distribution of normal multi-modal data through adversarial
 We split our model into two single models: the log model contrastive learning. Consequently, it improves the discriminaand the metric model. Then, we use them for anomaly tive power between normal and anomalous data, resulting in
 detection, respectively, and union their results as the final additional performance gains. It is interesting to note that the
 results: If one of the log model or the metric model detected proposed unsupervised method generally outperforms the semian anomaly for a time block, this anomaly is considered to supervised method Hades. This may be because semi-supervised
 have been detected. methods like Hades are prone to be influenced by sparsely
 r Intersection: Similar to the Union baseline, the difference labeled data, making it difficult to adapt to unseen anomalies.
 is we take the intersection of the results from the log model In contrast, our proposed unsupervised method learns implicit
 and the metric model as the final results: Both the log model patterns of multi-modal data more comprehensively through a
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3895

 TABLE II
 THE OVERALL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF OUR METHOD UAC-AD AND SEVERAL STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS

 TABLE III
 THE ABLATION STUDY ON EACH COMPONENT OF UAC-AD OVER THREE DATASETS

reconstruction task, without being affected by the scarcity of TABLE IV
 THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT FEATURE FUSION STRATEGIES
labeled data. This leads to superior performance compared to SHOWCASING THE F1 SCORE EVALUATION METRIC
Hades. Moreover, compared to methods directly performing result fusion, our proposed approach utilizes deeper feature fusion,
leading to more substantial improvements in performance. In
terms of the recall metric, only the union method surpasses our
method. This is because the union method splits our method
into two models, one for logs and one for metrics, and combines
the results using a logical OR operation. Consequently, it is less
likely to miss anomalies, resulting in a particularly high recall
rate. However, it may also lead to more false positives since
anomalies in either logs or metrics can trigger an alert, even if the
system is not actually experiencing an anomaly. Similarly, only Effectiveness of Adversarial Learning: Table III demonstrates
the intersection method outperforms our method in precision. that introducing adversarial learning significantly enhances the
This is because the intersection method only considers cases F1 score of anomaly detection, both in single-modal (comparing
where both models detect anomalies as actual anomalies. As a Method 1 with Method 3, or Method 2 with Method 4) and
result, its precision is high, but it tends to miss many anomalies, multi-modal scenarios (comparing Method 5 with Method 6).
resulting in a lower recall rate. This improvement is attributed to adversarial learning’s ability to
 help the generator balance the training of hard samples and simple samples, improving the fitting of the distribution of normal
C. RQ2: The Ablation Study of the Proposed Method
 data, and thereby enhancing anomaly detection effectiveness.
 To assess the effectiveness of each component in our proposed After the introduction of GAN, the significant increase in F1
method, we conducted comparisons using different variants of score in the multi-modal scenario is notably higher than the imour approach, as shown in Tables III and IV. provements seen in each individual modality. This is attributed
3896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE V
 THE COMPARISON OF THE TIME AND STORAGE EFFICIENCY BETWEEN
 UAC-AD AND BASELINE METHODS

Fig. 4. The comparison between Fused GAN and Separate GAN (i.e., Method6
in Table III) with 10 times running. The discriminator of Fused GAN utilizes two
1D CNNs to embed data from the log and metric modalities separately. These Table V. Time Efficiency: The results demonstrate that although
embeddings are then fused using MSA to obtain a unified representation, which the proposed method may not excel in training time due to its
is finally used by the classification layer to discriminate whether the input data focus on acquiring better representations of multimodal data,
is real or reconstructed.
 it still demonstrates efficient model inference time, making
 it well-suited for real-time applications. Store Efficiency: The
to the fact that separate discriminators also regulate the fitting results show that our proposed method requires fewer parameters
degrees of different modality parts of hard samples, facilitating than most baseline models (LogRobust, OmniAnomaly, MTADthe model to better learn the normal patterns of log and metric GAT, SCWarn, and Hades), indicating its relatively small storage
modal data. Fig. 4 provides a more straightforward comparison, overhead and facilitating the deployment of the model. Although
showing that compared to Fused GAN, Separate GAN exhibits DeepLog has a smaller number of parameters, the substantial
better anomaly detection performance across all three datasets, performance gains of our proposed method make it quite suitable
validating the effectiveness of fine-grained adversarial learning. for practical applications in real-world scenarios.
 Effectiveness of Contrastive Learning: Comparing Method 5
with Method 7 in Table III, the results indicate that introducing contrastive learning significantly improves the F1 score of E. RQ4: The Parameter Sensitivity of the Proposed Method
anomaly detection. Contrastive learning achieves this through
the matched pairs and the unmatched pairs, enhancing the To evaluate the sensitivity of our method’s hyperparameters,
learning of the distribution of multi-modal normal data. This in- we calculated the average F1-score under different hyperparamcreases the discriminative power between normal and anomalous eter settings, as shown in Fig. 5.
data, improving anomaly detection effectiveness. Additionally, The inter-class distances in contrastive learning: The pacomparing Methods 5, 6, 7, and 8, the results show that the rameter α introduced in (13) holds significant importance as
combination of contrastive learning and adversarial learning a hyperparameter in our contrastive learning module, exerting a
leads to further performance improvements. This demonstrates substantial impact on the performance of UAC-AD. We systemthe complementary contributions of these two components, con- atically varied α across a range from 0.02 to 0.2. Interestingly, as
firming their effectiveness. α increased, there was a noticeable improvement in F1-score for
 Effectiveness of MSA Design: To evaluate the effectiveness Dataset C. However, this improvement was limited in Dataset A.
of the Multi-Modal Self-Attention (MSA) design, we compared This divergence in performance may be attributed to the diverse
it with common multi-modal feature fusion methods, as shown nature of matched pairs within different datasets. In the case of
in Table IV. The results highlight the significant effectiveness Dataset A, the unmatched pairs may be similar to the matched
of MSA compared to other feature fusion mechanisms. This pairs. Consequently, enforcing a clear distinction between possuperiority is due to MSA’s ability to capture not only the itive and negative samples could potentially compromise the
correlations between latent variables across different modalities performance of UAC-AD. To strike a balance in performance
but also the correlations between latent variables within single across all datasets, we opted for α = 0.16, a choice that resulted
modalities. Consequently, MSA achieves superior feature fusion in a harmonious and optimal performance.
results. The time window sizes of adversarial learning generator: We
 systematically varied w within the range of 10 to 100. As observed, increasing the value of w initially led to an improvement
D. RQ3: The Time and Storage Efficiency of the
 in the F1-score, followed by a subsequent decline. This behavior
Proposed Method can be attributed to the fact that a larger time window can
 To evaluate the time and storage efficiency of our proposed provide a richer contextual understanding, thereby enhancing
method, we compared the inference time and the number of the model’s performance. However, if the time window becomes
parameters required with various baseline methods, as shown in excessively large, the model encounters challenges in capturing
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3897

Fig. 5. The evaluation of the impact of different inter-class distances α in contrastive learning, various time window sizes w, different hidden layer sizes h of
adversarial learning generators, different sample frequency, different λ1 and λ2 on anomaly detection performance across three datasets.

intricate and extensive temporal correlations, resulting in a de- Dataset B and dataset C initially exhibit an increase followed
crease in overall performance. To attain optimal model perfor- by a decrease in F1 score, demonstrating the effectiveness of inmance, we carefully evaluated the impact of different window troducing contrastive learning. However, dataset A consistently
sizes and determined that w = 50 yielded the best results. shows a decline with increasing λ2 . The underlying reason for
 The hidden layer sizes of adversarial learning gener- this trend may still be that the unmatched pairs are similar to the
ator: We systematically varied h within the range of matched pairs. Therefore, we choose λ2 = 1.0 to achieve better
[16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]. Our observations revealed that in- results.
creasing the value of h initially resulted in an improvement Sampling frequency: Although the original sampling frequenin the F1-score, followed by a rapid decline. This pattern can cies of different datasets have been fixed, for example, dataset
be attributed to the fact that larger hidden layer representation A is sampled every 10 seconds, while datasets B and C are
vectors can capture more intricate features, leading to enhanced sampled every 30 seconds, we attempted to explore the impact
model performance. However, an excessively large hidden layer of different sampling frequencies on the proposed method. Let
representation might encode excessive detail in the features, τ represent the original sampling interval of the dataset. We
resulting in a lack of high-level feature representation and a sub- systematically varied the sampling intervals as [τ , 3τ , 6τ , 9τ ,
sequent decline in overall model performance. Our evaluation 12τ ]. The results show that as the sampling interval increases,
indicated that h = 32 yielded the most favorable results, striking the overall F1 score of the proposed method tends to stabilize,
a balance between capturing detailed features and maintaining indicating that the proposed method is insensitive to sampling
high-level feature representation in the model. frequency.
 The weights of the training loss: We systematically varied
λ1 and λ2 within the range of [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2]. The results
indicate that as λ1 increases, the overall F1 score of the model F. RQ5: The Interpretability of the Proposed Method
initially increases, stabilizing around λ1 = 1.0. This suggests In order to better assess the effectiveness of the components
the effectiveness of adversarial learning in anomaly detec- we designed, we visually demonstrated the impact of different
tion. Therefore, we select λ1 = 1.0 to achieve better results. components on the reconstruction errors of input data, as shown
Meanwhile, as λ2 increases, the overall F1 score of the model in Fig. 6. In this context, normal samples interspersed with
transitions from stability to decline. This could be due to the anomaly samples can be regarded as hard samples. Introducing
unmatched pairs still retaining certain temporal characteristics the Adversarial Learning mechanism significantly reduced the
of metrics, and excessively magnifying the reconstruction per- reconstruction errors of normal data. This indicates that our
formance of unmatched pairs may disrupt the learning of un- designed Adversarial Learning enhances the model’s balance
derlying multi-modal patterns. Moreover, as λ2 increases, there between hard samples and simple samples, and strengthens the
are variations in model performance across different datasets. learning of normal data distribution. With the introduction of
3898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 take into account logs from middleware services to aid in the
 detection process.

 B. The Generality of the Proposed Method
 The proposed method exhibits a certain degree of generalization. First, in terms of feature quantity, our method collects all
 data from different datasets and inputs them into the generator,
 which automatically extracts a fixed number of features (determined by the hyperparameter hidden size). Second, in terms
 of anomaly types, our method does not restrict the types of
Fig. 6. The visualization of reconstruction errors for test set samples obtained anomalies it can detect and can identify anomalies in different
using various learning strategies on Dataset B. The magenta dots indicate microservices systems. Therefore, our method demonstrates a
anomaly samples, while the blue dots represent normal samples. The horizontal
axis signifies the reconstruction error, while the vertical axis is associated with certain level of generalization.
random values to enable a two-dimensional visualization of the reconstruction
error.
 C. Threats to Validity
 Threats to internal validity come from the annotation of
 anomalies. Labeling principles vary depending on the purpose,
the Contrastive Learning mechanism, the reconstruction errors
 system, person, and so on. Thus, the labeling may exist as
of abnormal data significantly increased, enhancing the disinconsistency when it comes to non-extreme anomalies or rare
tance between normal and abnormal samples. This demonstrates
 patterns, such as the slightly steep ups and downs in metrics,
that our designed Contrastive Learning improves the model’s
 metric variations between normal and abnormal fluctuation, log
understanding of multi-modal normal data. By expanding the
 statements rarely occurring, etc. To alleviate these concerns, the
distance between positive and negative samples, it enhances the
 adopted datasets are verified by experienced annotators, and we
distinguishability between normal and abnormal samples.
 further evaluate the correctness of the labeling of each dataset.
 The external threat mainly comes from our datasets. Though
 V. DISCUSSION our experiments are evaluated on three datasets, it is yet un-
A. Lessons Learned known whether the effectiveness of our method UAC-AD can
 be generalized across all other datasets. To mitigate the threat, we
 Complementarity of Multi-Source Data for Anomaly Detec- use different datasets with representative workloads and typical
tion in Microservices Systems: While impressive results can faults to evaluate UAC-AD, and the experimental results show
be achieved with single-modal data, as demonstrated by the the UAC-AD can work not only on simulated data but also on
metric-based anomaly detection (e.g., Method1) in Dataset A, or real industrial data. We will also evaluate our method on more
the log-based anomaly detection (e.g., Method2) in Dataset B, datasets in the future.
as shown in Table III, the effective fusion and learning of multimodal data still lead to a notable improvement in performance. VI. CONCLUSION
This emphasizes the complementary nature of multi-modal data
in microservices systems for anomaly detection. This insight In this paper, we primarily address the hard sample problem
suggests that future research in microservices system anomaly in anomaly detection of log-metric modalities in microservices
detection should focus more on the detection of anomalies using systems. To tackle the complexity of their combinations, we
multi-modal data rather than relying solely on single-modal data. design contrastive learning to capture the patterns of log-metric
 Utility of Middleware Service Logs for Anomaly Detection in combinations during normal system operation, while distancing
Other Services: In Dataset C, we collected metrics and logs from from abnormal combinations. To address the issue of incona total of 21 services, with most working services not generating sistent convergence speeds, we employ an adversarial learning
logs. The majority of collected logs were from a middleware framework to adjust the learning speeds of hard and simple
service of a message processor. Despite faults potentially occur- samples automatically. Moreover, we use separate discriminaring in working services that do not generate logs (for instance, tors to regulate the fitting degree of each modality part of the
if a container of a working service crashes and restarts, and multi-modal hard samples. Extensive experiments are conducted
coincidentally not reflected in the metric data due to inherent to validate the efficacy of our proposed method.
sampling intervals and imperfect configuration [45]), anomalies
can still be detected using logs from the message processor, as REFERENCES
evident from the log-based anomaly detection (Method1 and [1] G. Yu, P. Chen, Y. Li, H. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Zheng, “Nezha: Interpretable
Method3) recall rate of nearly 100% in Table III. This indicates fine-grained root causes analysis for microservices on multi-modal obthat logs from middleware services can be helpful for detecting servability data,” in Proc. 31st ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 553–565.
anomalies in other services. This insight suggests that future [2] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end-to-end
microservices’ multi-modal anomaly detection should not only troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source data,” in
consider metrics and logs from the target service but should also Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 1750–1762.
LIU et al.: UAC-AD: UNSUPERVISED ADVERSARIAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON MULTI-MODAL 3899

 [3] N. Zhao et al., “Identifying bad software changes via multimodal anomaly [28] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous
 detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised cross-modal
 Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 527–539. attention,” 2023, arXiv:2302.06914.
 [4] S. Jin et al., “Unsupervised hard example mining from videos for improved [29] C. Zhang et al., “DeepTraLog: Trace-log combined microservice anomaly
 object detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 307–324. detection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf.
 [5] C. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Tan, “MTHM: Self-supervised multi-task Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 623–634.
 anomaly detection with hard example mining,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. [30] J. Bogatinovski and S. Nedelkoski, “Multi-source anomaly detection
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023. in distributed it systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Serv.-Oriented Comput.,
 [6] S. Kong, J. Ai, and M. Lu, “CL-MMAD: A contrastive learning based Springer, 2020, pp. 201–213.
 multimodal software runtime anomaly detection method,” Appl. Sci., [31] J. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Yu, J. Li, and X. Zheng, “Twin graph-based anomaly
 vol. 13, no. 6, 2023, Art. no. 3596. detection via attentive multi-modal learning for microservice system,” in
 [7] “UAC-AD,” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/lhysgithub/UAC-AD Proc. 38th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 66–78.
 [8] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying [32] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “Swisslog: Robust anomaly
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. detection and localization for interleaved unstructured logs,” IEEE Trans.
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2762–2780, Aug. 2023.
 [9] J. Tang, Z. Chen, A. -C. Fu, and D. W. Cheung, “Enhancing effectiveness [33] Y. Chen, M. Yan, D. Yang, X. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “Deep attentive
 of outlier detections for low density patterns,” in Proc. Adv. Knowl. anomaly detection for microservice systems with multimodal time-series
 Discov. Data Mining: 6th Pacific-Asia Conf., PAKDD 2002 Taipei, Taiwan, data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2022, pp. 373–378.
 Springer, 2002, pp. 535–548. [34] Q. Zhang, J. Han, L. Cheng, B. Zhang, and Z. Gong, “Approach to anomaly
[10] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsu- detection in microservice system with multi-source data streams,” ZTE
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 85–92, 2022.
 2018. [35] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[11] T. Yairi, N. Takeishi, T. Oda, Y. Nakajima, N. Nishimura, and N. Takata, Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
 “A data-driven health monitoring method for satellite housekeeping data [36] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly: Semibased on probabilistic clustering and dimensionality reduction,” IEEE supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. 14th Asian
 Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1384–1401, Jun. 2017. Conf. Comput. Vis., Perth, Australia, Springer, 2019, pp. 622–637.
[12] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn., [37] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and G. Langs,
 vol. 54, pp. 45–66, 2004. “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks to
[13] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Med. Imag.,
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. Springer, 2017, pp. 146–157.
[14] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal [38] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “FaceNet: A unified embedhierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., ding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 2020, pp. 13016–13026. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2015, pp. 815–823.
[15] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for [39] S.-J. Peng, Y. Fan, Y.-M. Cheung, X. Liu, Z. Cui, and T. Li, “Towards
 robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder,” IEEE efficient cross-modal anomaly detection using triple-adaptive network and
 Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. bi-quintuple contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
[16] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Intell., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 697–709, Feb. 2024.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [40] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. web Serv., 2017,
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. pp. 33–40.
[17] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph atten- [41] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
 tion network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850. recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
[18] J. Zhan et al., “Stgat-mad: Spatial-temporal graph attention network for pp. 770–778.
 multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. [42] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,”
 Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2022, pp. 3568–3572. 2016, arXiv:1607.06450.
[19] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: [43] A. Joulin et al., “Fasttext.zip: Compressing text classification models,”
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adver- 2016, arXiv:1612.03651.
 sarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Springer, 2019, [44] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 pp. 703–716. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[20] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [45] M. Ma et al., “An empirical investigation of missing data handling in cloud
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in node failure prediction,” in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf.
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 1453–1464.
 pp. 3395–3404.
[21] W. Xu, “System problem detection by mining console logs,” University of Hongyi Liu received the MS degree from Peking
 California, Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2010–112, 2010. University, in 2021. Currently, he is working toward
[22] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based the PhD degree with the School of Software & Miproblem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. croelectronics, Peking University. His research in-
 Softw. Eng. Companion, 2016, pp. 102–111. terests include could computing, software reliability,
[23] S. He, Q. Lin, J.-G. Lou, H. Zhang, M. R. Lyu, and D. Zhang, “Identifying anomaly detection, and AI for software engineering.
 impactful service system problems via log analysis,” in Proc. 26th ACM
 Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2018,
 pp. 60–70.
[24] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298. Xiaosong Huang received the BS degree from the
[25] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log Beijing Institute of Technology, in 2021. He is curdata,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. rently working toward the PhD degree with the School
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817. of Computer Science at Peking University. His re-
[26] W. Guan, J. Cao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “GRASPED: A GRU-AE network search interests include AIOps, software reliability,
 based multi-perspective business process anomaly detection model,” IEEE AI for software engineering.
 Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3412–3424, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[27] Y. Fu, K. Liang, and J. Xu, “MLog: Mogrifier LSTM-based log anomaly
 detection approach using semantic representation,” IEEE Trans. Services
 Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3537–3549, Sep./Oct. 2023.
3900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 Mengxi Jia received the BS degree from Central Zhonghai Wu received the PhD degree from Zhe-
 South University, China. She is currently working to- jiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1997. Preward the PhD degree with the School of Software and viously he worked as a postdoctoral and associate
 Microelectronic, Peking University, Beijing, China. professor with the Institute of Computer Science and
 Her research interests include machine learning, deep Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China. He
 representation learning, AI for software engineering. is currently a professor and dean with the School
 of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University.
 His research interests include cloud computing, Big
 Data, AI and information security.

 Tong Jia received the PhD degree in software engineering from Peking University, China, in 2019. He
 is currently an assistant research professor with the
 institute for artificial intelligence, Peking University,
 China. His research interests include AIOps, anomaly
 detection, etc. He published more than 30 papers in
 international journals and conferences.

 Ying Li (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree in
 computer science and engineering from Northwestern
 Polytechnical University (NWPU), China, in 2001.
 She is currently a professor with the National En-
 Jing Han received the MS degree from the Nanjing gineering Research Center of Software Engineering
 University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, in 2000. and the School of Software and Microelectronics,
 Currently, she is working with ZTE. She is respon- Peking University, China. Before joining PKU in
 sible for AIOPS in the communications and cloud 2012, she worked as a STSM and senior manager
 domains. leading the department of distributed computing in
 IBM China Research Center. Her research interests
 include distributed computing and dependability engineering. She filed 40+ US/CN granted patents and was awarded as “IBM
 Master Inventor”. She published more than 90 academic papers in international
 journals and conferences and served as PC member of several international
 conferences and reviewer of international journals.