4062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Unsupervised Anomaly Detection on Attributed
 Networks With Graph Contrastive Learning
 for Consumer Electronics Security
 Bo Xu , Member, IEEE, Jinpeng Wang , Zhehuan Zhao , Member, IEEE, Hongfei Lin ,
 and Feng Xia , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The proliferation of consumer electronic products of financial fraudulent users and malicious consumer behavhas engendered a substantial surge in data generation and iors. This burgeoning landscape poses significant security
information exchange, concurrently escalating the potential for challenges for consumer electronics, consequently attractsecurity threats. Detecting anomalies effectively on attributed
networks has undeniable positive significance for consumer ing extensive research attention in recent years [3], [4], [5].
electronic security, such as fraudulent user detection, malicious Detecting anomalies on attributed networks can facilitate the
consumption actions analysis, and network threat detection. early identification of fraudulent users and financial fraud
However, the lack of real tags poses great challenges for detecting activities, which plays a crucial role in purifying the online
anomalies. Therefore, this paper introduces an unsupervised consumption environment and ensuring the safety of consumer
learning framework, namely ADVANCE, to jointly optimize the
graph contrastive learning module and the network reconstruc- electronics.
tion module to accurately discover the anomalies on attributed Attribute networks are prevalent across various pracnetworks in unsupervised scenarios. Specifically, ADVANCE first tical applications. Compared with the conventional plain
constructs the target view and the self-enhanced view to encode networks which solely encompass interactions between nodes,
view representations by maximizing the consistency between attributed networks contain rich feature information of each
the two views with graph contrastive learning. Subsequently,
a network reconstruction module is introduced to assess the node [6], [7], [8], providing possibilities for modeling more
anomaly status of each node based on the degree of consistency complex interaction systems. Detection of anomalous nodes
from both topological structure and node attributes perspectives. in attributed networks is of great significance for vari-
The nodes with higher reconstruction errors are considered as ous security-related applications, and has become an urgent
anomalous nodes. Finally, the two complementary modules are research question in recent years, such as social spam detecjointly trained to enhance the accuracy of anomaly detection.
Extensive experimental results on three benchmark datasets tion [9], [10], financial fraud detection [11], [12], and network
demonstrate the remarkable effectiveness of our proposed frame- intrusion detection [13], [14], [15]. However, the anomalous
work in unsupervised anomaly detection. patterns of nodes on attributed networks are related to not
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attributed networks, graph only the interactions between nodes but also the inconsistency
contrastive learning, unsupervised learning, consumer electronics of node attributes. Thus, detecting anomalies on attributed
security. networks is highly challenging.
 Early anomaly detection methods leverage shallow
 mechanisms such as CUR decomposition [16], subspace
 selection [17], ego-network analysis [18], and residual
 I. I NTRODUCTION analysis [19], [20] to identify anomalous nodes. However,
 ITH the popularity of consumer electronics [1], [2], a
W substantial volume of electronic consumption behaviors rapidly disseminate across the Internet, which constitutes
 these methods usually rely on feature engineering or observed
 node interactions, which exhibit insensitivity to the nonlinear
 characteristics of networks. Recently, graph neural networks
a complex attributed network and fosters an increasing number have found widespread application in anomaly detection [21],
 [22], [23], [24], which aim to capture network nonlinearity
 Manuscript received 8 September 2023; revised 7 November 2023; accepted
11 January 2024. Date of publication 17 January 2024; date of current and learn node representations for anomalous patterns with
version 26 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National deep neural networks. Due to the high cost and unreliability
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62072073, Grant 61906028, associated with labeling anomalies, unsupervised methods for
Grant 62076046, and Grant 62106034; and in part by the Dalian Innovation
Fund under Grant 2021JJ12GX016. (Corresponding author: Feng Xia.) anomaly detection are more reliable [25], [26].
 Bo Xu, Jinpeng Wang, and Zhehuan Zhao are with the School of Software, The rise of graph contrastive learning provides a new
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China (e-mail: boxu@ direction for unsupervised anomaly detection [28], [38]. Graph
dlut.edu.cn; wangjinpengdlut@163.com; z.zhao@dlut.edu.cn).
 Hongfei Lin is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, contrastive learning has promising properties for anomaly
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China (e-mail: hflin@ detection. First, maximizing mutual information strategy of
dlut.edu.cn). graph contrastive learning can effectively learn the deep
 Feng Xia is with the School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University,
Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: f.xia@ieee.org). information of graphs without the guidance of labels. Second,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3355122 graph contrastive learning models measure the consistency
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XU et al.: UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 4063

among elements within each instance pair and the consistency The results validate the effectiveness of ADVANCE,
is highly correlated with the abnormality of instance. However, which outperforms existing SOTA methods.
existing SOTA (state-of-the-art) methods based on contrastive The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II
learning typically constructed positive and negative instance summarizes related work. Section III introduces the concept
pairs based on node subgraphs. These methods learned node of attributed networks and formally formulates the problem
representations by maximizing the mutual information (MI) of unsupervised anomaly detection on attributed networks.
between the target node and positive instances and minimizing Section IV discusses our optimal solution (ADVANCE) and
the mutual information (MI) between the target node and describes its architecture in detail, and Section V represents
negative instances, which may not be effective for learning the experiments and results. Finally, Section VI concludes the
heterogeneous graphs, where the target node and its neighbors paper.
do not belong to the same category.
 To overcome the shortcomings, some studies have con-
 II. R ELATED W ORK
structed different view information to learn the embedding
representations of networks by maximizing the similarity A. Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
between different views [29], [56]. Based on this inspiration, Recently, how to detect anomalies on attributed networks
we can construct views with different structural information has aroused extensive research interest. Anomaly detection
and encode the node representations by maximizing the MI of can be regarded as a data mining process that aims to
different views, so as to detect anomalies more efficiently and identify data points deviating from the normal patterns
ensure the safety of consumer electronics. within a dataset [30], [31]. Early anomaly detection works
 In this paper, we propose a novel view-level unsuper- relied heavily on feature engineering constructed by domain
vised contrastive learning framework for anomaly detection experts [32], [33], which not only requires a lot of domain
on attributed networks (ADVANCE for abbreviation), which knowledge but also limits the performance of anomaly deteccontains a graph contrastive learning module and a network tion methods. Many machine learning techniques are also
reconstruction module. The graph contrastive learning module used to detect anomalies on attributed networks, Radar [19]
aims to maximize the consistency between the target view and characterized the residuals of attributes information and its
the self-enhanced view. The network reconstruction module coherence with network information, addressing the issue
measures the reconstruction error of nodes from both the of complicating the residual modeling process due to interstructural and attribute perspectives. Specifically, ADVANCE instance interactions. ANOMALOUS [16] combined CUR
first generates a target view with edge attributes information decomposition and residual analysis, treating them as a whole
from the original data as the learning guidance, and then for attribute selection and anomaly detection. However, these
constructs a self-enhanced view by using the full graph shallow methods cannot effectively be extended to highparameterization method and k-nearest neighbors algorithm. dimensional data and lack the ability to capture non-linear
Next, two weight-shared graph convolutional networks are attributes in networks.
used to generate representations of the two views. After To alleviate the above drawbacks, recent studies have
obtaining the representations of the two views, we construct adopted deep learning techniques to detect anomalies on
a contrastive loss to maximize the MI between the target attributed networks [25], [34]. Dual-SVDAE [36] introduced
view and the self-enhanced view, thereby encoding deeper a dual hypersphere learning mechanism to learn hyperspheres
potential information of the graph. The network reconstruction for normal nodes and measures the distances from nodes to
module receives the potential representations of the self- the learning centers of these hyperspheres to detect anomaenhanced view and reconstructs the original network from two lous nodes. CFAD [35] learned causal relations in attributed
perspectives: node attributes and network structure. Finally, networks and identified abnormal nodes from the perspective
the two complementary modules are integrated to detect of structure and context. GraphBEAN [37] focuses on the
anomalous nodes through reconstruction errors of nodes. Our rich interactions in bipartite graphs, which uses a bipartite
primary contributions can be summarized as follows: node-and-edge-attributed graph to generate anomaly scores
 • We design a view-level contrastive learning model for each edge and each bipartite node, respectively. Although
 that encodes view representations by maximizing the these methods have achieved better performance than shallow
 consistency between the self-enhanced view and the well- approaches by using deep neural networks, the single graph
 designed target view with edge attributes. convolutional network encoder still has the limitation of not
 • We propose a novel unsupervised learning framework, being able to fully model the complex attributes of the
 namely ADVANCE, for anomaly detection on attributed network. Furthermore, marking anomalous nodes is also a
 networks. ADVANCE can effectively integrate graph challenging task.
 contrastive learning-based and network reconstruction- With the popularization of contrastive learning, the applibased modules and enhance the efficiency of anomaly cation of this approach to anomaly detection on attributed
 detection by jointly optimizing the two complementary networks has attracted the attention of researchers. Submodules, which provides a high guarantee for the safety CR [38] established two contrastive learning views to encode
 of consumer electronics. local and global information related to anomalies, and then
 • We perform extensive experiments on three benchmark introduced a reconstruction module based on masked autoendatasets to evaluate the performance of the ADVANCE. coder to identify nodes with large reconstruction errors as
4064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
anomalous nodes. Hu and Shao [39] proposed an improved D ESCRIPTION OF N OTATIONS
unsupervised contrastive learning method, which comprehensively compared both the internal and external aspects of
subgraphs and leverages a trained teacher model as prior
knowledge to modify the sampling probabilities for selectively
aggregating neighbor nodes. However, related researches in
this field remain limited, and the development of new anomaly
detection methods based on contrastive learning is still worth
exploring.

B. Graph Contrastive Learning
 Contrastive learning models the general characteristics of
networks by letting the model learn which nodes are similar
or different without labels. The great success of contrastive
learning in computer vision [40], [41] has motivated its continuous migration to the field of graph learning. DGI [57]
maximized the mutual information between graph-enhanced
representations and the currently extracted graph information,
enabling the node representations learning in an unsupervised
setting. GMI [58] proposed a novel concept, Graphical Mutual
Information (GMI), which is trained by maximizing the GMI
between the input and output of a Graph Neural Encoder.
GIC [42] performed joint optimized clustering of nodes and
retained Infomax target items of MI between nodes of the same
clustering. The fundamental idea behind graph contrastive
learning is to maximize the mutual information between nodes,
which brings the representations of semantically similar nodes
closer while simultaneously distancing the representations of
semantically unrelated nodes. However, the above-mentioned networks. Table I lists the description of the notations mainly
methods aim to maximize the MI between the embeddings of used in this paper.
the target node and its neighboring nodes, which may not be Definition 1 (Attributed Networks): An attributed network
effective for learning heterogeneous graphs, where the target can be represented as G = (V, E, X), where V = {v1 , . . . , vN }
node and its neighbors do not belong to the same category. and E denote the set of nodes and edges, respectively. X ∈
 Recent studies have considered the above problems and con- RN×d is the attribute matrix, where N is the number of nodes
structed different view information to learn the representations in the attributed network and d is the dimension of attributes.
of graphs by maximizing the similarity between differ- The ith row vector xi ∈ Rd in the attribute matrix is the
ent views. MVGRL [29] proposed a contrastive multi-view attributes for the ith node vi .
representation learning method by contrasting embeddings Definition 2 (Unsupervised Anomaly Detection on Attributed
from two structural views of graphs. SAIL [43] per- Networks): The objective of this paper is to detect nodes
formed self-augmented graph contrastive learning through with significant differences in attributed networks based on
two complementary self-distilling regularization modules, structure and attribute vectors in an unsupervised setting.
i.e., intra-graph and inter-graph knowledge distillation. Specifically, given an attributed network G = (V, E, X),
SUBLIME [44] constructed an “anchor graph” from the ADVANCE learns an anomaly score function score(.) to
original data as a learning guide, and utilized contrastive calculate each node’s anomaly score score(vi ), which measures
learning to maximize the mutual information between the the degree of abnormality for each node without anomaly
anchor graph and the learned graph. Graph contrastive labels as training guidance. Generally, nodes with higher
learning is also beneficial for diverse applications, such as anomaly scores are more likely to be considered as anomalous
chemical prediction [45], [46], federated learning [47], [48], nodes.
and recommendation [49], [50], [51]. Numerous studies have
demonstrated the wide application of graph contrastive learn- IV. T HE F RAMEWORK OF ADVANCE
ing, but how to detect anomalies on attributed networks with This section elaborates on our proposed ADVANCE, which
graph contrastive learning is still a novel and challenging is shown in Fig. 1. The following subsections provide a
research topic. detailed overview of each module respectively.

 III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION A. Graph Contrastive Learning Module
 In this section, we formally define attributed networks and As a critical component of ADVANCE, Graph Contrastive
the unsupervised anomaly detection problem on attributed Learning Module aims to establish two distinct views to
XU et al.: UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 4065

Fig. 1. The overall pipeline of ADVANCE. The target is to predict the anomaly score of each node in attributed networks. In graph contrastive learning
module (a), “node v.s. node” consistency is learned by contrasting the target view with the self-enhanced view, thereby encoding deep information of the
graph. In network reconstruction module (b), the optimal graph representation encoded by the contrastive learning module is used to reconstruct node attributes
and topological structure, and to identify anomalous nodes through reconstruction loss.

 TABLE II
 C ALCULATION M ETHODS FOR S IX S IMILARITY I NDICES 2) Self-Enhanced View Learning Component: The main
 function of the Self-Enhanced View Learning Component is
 to generate a self-enhanced adjacency matrix S ∈ RN×N with
 a parameterized model to construct self-enhanced view Gs =
 (S, X) for graph contrastive learning. Inspired by previous
 work [44], we use the full graph parameterization method as
 the self-enhanced view learner:

 S = Fω (X) = σ (W) (2)

 where ω = W is a parameter matrix and σ is a noncontrast: the self-enhanced view that learns the optimal graph linear activation function. Full graph parameterization method
latent representations and the target view that guides represen- assumes that each edge exists independently in the graph, so
tation learning. Subsequently, node-level contrastive learning the adjacency matrix can be optimized directly without the
is employed to maximize consistency between the two views, participation of node features, which is very advantageous for
thus encoding graph information effectively. modeling attributed networks with node attribute anomalies.
 1) Target View Generating Component: A target view is However, the adjacency matrix S constructed by the full
defined as a view constructed directly from input data rather graph parameterization method is usually dense, which will
than being learned, which aims to provide correct guidance mask important interactions of the network and consume
for graph contrastive learning. In this paper, we fully con- computing resources extremely. Hence, we use the k-nearest
sider the interaction information between nodes and attributes neighbors (knn) algorithm to reserve the edges with top-k
information contained in the attributed network and construct connection values for each node as its neighborhood structure
the target view Gt = (At , X) with edge attributes information, to build the sparse self-enhanced adjacency matrix S:
where At ∈ RN×N denotes the adjacency matrix with edge 
 Sij , Sij ∈ top_k(Si )
attributes, X ∈ RN×d denotes the attribute matrix for nodes. Sij = (3)
 0, Sij ∈ / top_k(Si )
Specifically, six similarity indices are selected to calculate the
similarity of two connected nodes as edge attributes, including where top_k(Si ) is the set of top-k values of row vector Si .
the degree of node vi , the degree of node vi s neighbors, 3) Contrastive Learning Component: Given the target view
common neighbors (CN), Admaic-Adar Index, Jaccard Index, and self-enhanced view, we perform the normalization process
and Preferential Attachment Index (PA). TABLE II lists the to ensure that the adjacency matrix is symmetric and consists
calculation methods for six similarity indices, where the N(vi ) of non-negative elements:
denotes the neighbor’s set of node vi . Next, the adjacency
matrix At with edge attributes is constructed as: σ (A) + σ (A)T
 A = sym(nor(A)) = (4)
 2
 At = λ EA
 ◦A (1)
 where σ is a non-linear activation function that maps elements
where λEA is the edge attribute matrix calculated by the to [0, 1] and (.)T denotes the transposition operation.
similarity of two connected nodes, A denotes the original graph After obtaining normalized views (i.e., Gt and Gs ), two
adjacency matrix and ◦ represents the Hadamard product. To weight-shared Graph Convolutional Network Encoders [52]
ensure the stability and effectiveness of the learning process, are utilized to generate multi-view representations.
we implement a target view update mechanism to update the Specifically, we input the target view Gt and the self-enhanced
target view, which will be described in Section IV-A4. view Gs into GCN1 and GCN2 to perform neighborhood
4066 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

information aggregation and output corresponding view the constantly learning representations of self-enhanced view
representations Zt and Zs : Zs instead of keeping the target view Gt unchanged. The
 ⎧       assumption behind the target view update mechanism is that if
 ⎨ Zt = GCN1(Gt ) = MLP σ Ât σ Ât XW (0) W (1) W (2) there is a real link between two nodes, its connectivity patterns
     (5)
 ⎩ Zs = GCN2(Gs ) = MLP σ Ŝσ (ŜXW (0) )W (1) W (2) can be well reconstructed. On the contrary, if the probability of
 a connection existing between two nodes is low, it implies that
 −1/2 −1/2 −1/2 −1/2 there is no link or anomalous link between them. Specifically,
where Ât = Dt (At + I)Dt , Ŝ = Ds (S + I)Ds ,
X ∈ RN×d represents the attribute matrix of nodes, W (0) , W (1) , we take the latent representations of self-enhanced view Zs as
W (2) is the learnable weight matrix in Graph Convolutional input and predict whether there is a link between each pair of
Network Encoders. Here, Dt and Ds are the diagonal degree two nodes:
matrix of (At + I) and (S + I), respectively. We notice that
 P = sigmoid Zs ZsT (9)
using only A means that only the characteristic information of
all nodes’ neighbors is considered, but the nodes themselves
 Next, given a decay rate δ ∈ [0, 1], the target view structure
are neglected. Therefore, we add self-connections in the graph
 At is updated every ε iterations as follows:
(i.e., using (A+I)) to ensure that the nodes’ own characteristic
information also participates in aggregation. At = δAt + (1 − δ)P (10)
 The main objective of contrastive learning is to encourage
the representations of semantically similar pairs (x, x+ ) to Through the target view update mechanism, the selfbe close, while the representations of semantically dissimilar enhanced view Gs can constantly correct anomalous patterns
pairs (x, x− ) should be pushed apart. To achieve the above existing in the target view and alleviate structural anomaly.
goal, a contrastive loss is designed to maximize the similarity
between the same nodes’ representations from different views.
Specifically, in Eq. (6) and Eq. (7), after obtaining the B. Network Reconstruction Module
representations Zt and Zs , we apply a symmetric normalized The network reconstruction module consists of structure
temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss to design a node-level reconstruction component and attribute reconstruction compocontrastive loss function for the target view and self-enhanced nent, with the objective of decoding the self-enhanced view
view, which can pull the representations of the same nodes representations Zs to reconstruct network structure information
from different views close to each other while pushing the and node attributes information. After that, anomalous nodes
representation of one node far away from the representations can be identified by the reconstruction error of nodes.
of other nodes from both the same view and different views: 1) Structure Reconstruction Component: The structure
  
 v v
 sim Zt i ,Zs i /ϑ reconstruction component mainly discusses how to reconstruct
 e the original topological structure with the learned potential
 L1cl (vi ) = −log  vj  (6)
 N v
 sim Zt i ,Zs /ϑ representations Zs from the graph contrastive learning module.
 j=1 e If Ã denotes the reconstructed adjacency matrix, then the
  
 v v
 sim Zs i ,Zt i /ϑ structural anomalies on the network can be determined by
 e
 L2cl (vi ) = −log  vj  (7) using the structure reconstruction error RS = ||A − Ã||2F .
 N v
 sim Zs i ,Zt /ϑ
 j=1 e
 Specifically, if the neighborhood structural information of a
 certain node can be effectively approximated to the original
where ϑ represents the temperature factor that controls the structure through the structure reconstruction component, then
concentration level of the distribution, sim(.) is the similarity it is less likely that the node is an anomalous node. On
function to measure the similarity of representations of two the contrary, if the neighborhood structural information of a
nodes. Combining the above two losses, the objective function certain node cannot be effectively reconstructed, it implies the
of the graph contrastive learning module is defined as follows: presence of abnormal patterns in its structural information.
 N   Therefore, a larger norm of RiS = ||ai − ãi ||2F indicates a higher
 1
 Lcl = L1cl (vi ) + L2cl (vi ) (8) probability of network structural anomalies for the i-th node
 2N on the attributed network. Particularly, we first use a graph
 i=1
 convolutional network as a structure reconstruction decoder to
where N is the number of nodes in the attributed network.
 decode the input potential representation Zs :
Through the above equation, we can encode graph information
and learn the optimal graph representation without the guid-    
ance of labels. H = GCN3(Zs , A) = MLP σ ÂZs W (3) W (4) (11)
 4) Target View Update Mechanism: In order to make the
self-enhanced view learn the graph representations containing where W (3) , W (4) is the learnable weight matrix in the structure
fewer anomalous information, we design a target view update reconstruction decoder. Then, we predict whether there is a
mechanism during the contrastive learning process. The main link between each pair of nodes based on the decoding vector
idea of the target view update mechanism is to update H to generate the reconstructed adjacency matrix Ã:
the target structure slowly according to the probability of
edges existing between every pair of nodes calculated by Ã = sigmoid HH T (12)
XU et al.: UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 4067

 2) Attribute Reconstruction Component: In order to cal- Algorithm 1: The Calculation Process of ADVANCE
culate the attribute reconstruction error RA = ||X − X̃||2F Input: Node attributs matrix X; Original graph adjacency
to determine the attributed anomalies on the network, we matrix A; Number of nearest neighbors k; Control
propose an attribute reconstruction decoder to approximate parameters for balancing the structure
the original node attributes information according to the reconstruction and attribute reconstruction α;
potential representation Zs generated by the graph contrastive Tuning parameters for balancing graph contrastive
learning module. Similarly, if the reconstructed attributes of learning module and network reconstruction
a node are closer to the original attributes, the node is more module μ; Temperature factor ϑ; Target view
inclined to be a normal node. On the opposite side, if the update mechanism decay rate δ; Target view
reconstructed attributes of a node are quite different from the update mechanism interval ε; Epoch number ξ ;
original attributes, it is of high probability to be anomalous. Output: Anomaly score of all nodes score(V);
Specifically, we utilize another graph convolutional network as 1 Calculate edge attribute matrix λ
 EA by the similarity of
the attribute reconstruction decoder to reconstruct the original two connected nodes;
attributes of nodes as follows: 2 Initialize target view Gt = (At , X) by At = λ
 EA ◦ A;
      
 X̃ = GCN4(Zs , A) = MLP σ Âσ ÂZs W (5) W (6) W (7) 3 Initialize parameters
 ω, W (0) , W (1) , W (2) , W (3) , W (4) , W (5) , W (6) , W (7) ;
 (13) 4 for iter =1 to ξ do

where W (5) , W (6) , W (7) is the learnable weight matrix. To 5 Calculate S with Self-Enhanced View Learning
jointly learn the reconstruction errors, we combine the struc- Component;
ture reconstruction component and the attribute reconstruction 6 Establish self-enhanced view Gs = (S, X);
component to construct the objective function of the network 7 Normalize Gt , Gs with normalization operation;
reconstruction module: 8 Calculate view representations Zt , Zs with graph
 contrastive learning encoder;
Lres = αRA + (1 − α)RS = α||X − X̃||2F + (1 − α)||A − Ã||2F 9 Calculate graph contrastive loss Lcl ;
 (14) 10 Calculate reconstructed adjacency matrix Ã with
 Structure Reconstruction Component;
where α is an important control parameter to balance the
 11 Calculate reconstructed attribute matrix X̃ with
influence of structure and attribute reconstruction.
 Attribute Reconstruction Component;
 12 Calculate network reconstruction loss Lres ;
C. Anomaly Detection 13 Calculate total loss of ADVANCE framework L;
 To jointly train the graph contrastive learning module and 14 Update parameters
the network reconstruction module, we optimize the following ω, W (0) , W (1) , W (2) , W (3) , W (4) , W (5) , W (6) , W (7)
objective function: via back propagation;
 15 if iter mod ε = 0 then
 L = μLcl + (1 − μ)Lres (15)
 16 Calculate the probability P that there is a link
where μ is a non-negative tuning parameter that measures the between each pair of nodes according to Zs ;
importance of two complementary modules. Then an anomaly 17 Update Gt by target view update mechanism
score function is defined to detect anomalies. Inspired by [25], decay rate δ;
taking node vi as an example, we can calculate the anomaly 18 end
score of node vi according to the reconstruction error: 19 end
 20 Calculate the anomaly score of all nodes score(V)
 score(vi ) = α||xi − x̃i ||2 + (1 − α)||ai − ãi ||2 (16)
 according to the reconstruction error;
where x̃i (xi ) is the reconstructed (original) attributes vector of
the node vi , ãi (ai ) is the i-th row vector of the reconstructed
adjacency matrix Ã (original graph adjacency matrix A),
 aim to answer three research questions as follows: RQ1: How
which denotes the reconstructed (original) structure vector
 effective is ADVANCE for detecting anomalies on attributed
of node vi . Specially, nodes with higher scores are more
 networks under unsupervised settings? RQ2: How do key
likely to exhibit anomalous patterns, thus we can sort the
 hyper-parameters influence the performance of ADVANCE?
nodes according to the anomaly scores to identify anomalous
 and RQ3: How do the contrastive learning component, strucnodes. The calculation process of the ADVANCE framework
 ture reconstruction component, and attribute reconstruction
is summarized as Algorithm 1.
 component impact the performance of ADVANCE?
 V. E XPERIMENTS
 In this section, we first introduce the dataset, the comparison A. Datasets
algorithm, and the evaluation criteria used in the experiments. To assess the performance of ADVANCE in anomaly detec-
Next, we conduct numerous experiments to substantiate the tion, we employed three real-world attributed network datasets
superior validity of the proposed framework ADVANCE. We that have been widely utilized in previous studies [28], [53]:
4068 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE III
 T HE S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

 • Cora: Cora is an attributed network that contains seven
 categories of published papers related to machine learning. It takes the form of a citation network where each
 paper serves as a node, and edges denote the citation
 Fig. 2. Performance of different anomaly detection methods w.r.t. AUC.
 relations between different papers.
 • BlogCatalog: BlogCatalog constructs a social network
 by gathering data from the blog-sharing website
 • CoLA [28]: CoLA utilizes contrastive learning to learn
 BlogCatalog, where the users are represented as nodes,
 representations from node-subgraph instance pairs and
 and edges symbolize the following relationships between
 provides the discriminant scores of anomaly ranking.
 users.
 • Sub-CR [38]: Sub-CR utilizes multi-view contrastive
 • Flickr: Flickr serves as a website for image management
 learning to integrate local and global information so as
 and sharing. Similar to BlogCatalog, users on Flickr have
 to provide high features for detecting anomalous nodes.
 the ability to mutually follow each other, thereby forming
 Furthermore, we use the average of three evaluation metrics
 a social network.
 (i.e., AUC, Precision@K, and Recall@K) obtained from 5
 Given the absence of ground truth anomalies in the aforeindependent training cycles to measure the performance of the
mentioned datasets, it is necessary to inject anomalies into a
 ADVANCE framework and baseline. The details of these three
clean attributed network to evaluate our proposed framework.
 evaluation metrics are extensively elaborated in [25].
Specifically, we refer to two anomaly injection methods
commonly employed in previous researches [25], [54] to
inject structure anomaly and attribute anomaly for each C. Experiment Reproducibility
dataset. The statistics of the datasets are presented in For the proposed framework ADVANCE, the number of
TABLE III. epoch and learning rate are set as 3000 and 0.005 for
 BlogCatalog dataset and Flickr dataset and Cora dataset. To
 generate the target view, the common neighbors (CN) is
B. Baselines and Evaluation Criteria selected as the edge attributes for the Flickr dataset and the
 We conduct a comparative analysis of ADVANCE against average of the calculated results of six similarity indices as
nine mainstream anomaly detection methods: the edge attributes for the remaining datasets. For constructing
 • Radar [19]: Radar models the residuals of node attributes
 self-enhanced view, we use full graph parameterization learner
 and their coherence with network structure, serving the on all three datasets, and set the number of nearest neighbors
 purpose of anomaly detection. k to 40, 30, and 10 for the BlogCatalog dataset, Flickr dataset,
 • ANOMALOUS [16]: ANOMALOUS jointly optimizes
 and Cora dataset, respectively. The tuning parameter μ that
 attribute selection and anomaly detection using CUR measures the importance of graph contrastive learning module
 decomposition and residual analysis methods. and network reconstruction module are set to 0.8, 0.8, and 0.9
 • DOMINANT [25]: DOMINANT utilizes graph convolufor the BlogCatalog dataset, Flickr dataset, and Cora dataset,
 tional autoencoder to jointly reconstruct network structure respectively. For the control parameter α that balances the
 and node attributes to identify anomalous nodes. influence of structure reconstruction and attribute reconstruc-
 • DGI [57]: DGI maximized mutual information between
 tion, we follow the settings of previous work [25], [27]. For
 patch representations and corresponding high-level graph the BlogCatalog and Flickr datasets, a reasonable choice for
 summaries to characterize network information. α is approximately 0.4 to 0.7, while for the Cora dataset, a
 • DeepAE [55]: DeepAE uses Laplacian sharpening to
 reasonable choice is around 0.7 to 0.8. Finally, for the decay
 enlarge the difference between normal and anoma- rate δ and interval ε in the structure feedback mechanism,
 lous nodes and calculate reconstruction errors to detect the most suitable combination of parameters is selected for
 anomalies. each dataset according to Section V-E, which are {δ =
 • Deep2NAD [26]: Deep2NAD utilizes a Variational
 0.9999, ε = 0}, {δ = 0.9999, ε = 0}, and {δ = 0.999, ε =
 AutoEncoder (VAE) to detect anomalies by simulta- 0} for BlogCatalog dataset, Flickr dataset, and Cora dataset,
 neously considering both network structure and node respectively.
 attributes.
 • ANEMONE [27]: ANEMONE performs multi-scale con- D. Performance Comparison (RQ1)
 trastive learning at both patch and context levels for Fig. 2 illustrates the comparison results of these methods
 anomaly detection. in terms of AUC value on three datasets and TABLE IV
XU et al.: UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 4069

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS W. R . T. P RECISION @K AND R ECALL @K

shows the performance of our framework and baselines in occur on different scales. For example, in social networks,
terms of Precision@K and Recall@K for K = 50, 100, a user’s behavior may be considered normal within their
200, 300. From the comparison results, we summarize the circle of friends (i.e., local anomalies) but not across the
following conclusions: (1) Our proposed ADVANCE outper- entire network (i.e., global anomalies). Therefore, integrating
forms all baselines on the BlogCatalog dataset, and achieves local and global structural information can better capture
the runner-up position on the Flickr and Cora datasets. The structural features of different scales associated with anomaly
superior performance of ADVANCE verifies the effectiveness patterns.
of the joint optimizing graph contrastive learning module and
network reconstruction module, which can better capture node
attributes and topology structure of attributed networks for E. Parameter Analysis (RQ2)
anomaly detection. (2) Compared with the deep learning-based In this subsection, we investigate the impacts of four
methods, shallow methods such as Radar and ANOMALOUS important parameters on the performance of ADVANCE: the
can not achieve satisfactory results because these methods tuning parameter μ, the number of nearest neighbors k, the
lack the ability to model high-dimensional attributes vectors target view update mechanism decay rate δ, and the edge
and intricate network structures. Deep learning-based methods attributes.
(DOMINANT, DeepAE, and Deep2NAD) break through the Tuning parameter μ aims to balance the importance of
limitation of shallow mechanisms to capture the highly non- graph contrastive learning module and network reconstruction
linear attributes, which extensively leverages the intrinsic module. When μ = 1, we only use the information of
information of the network and achieves superior performance graph contrastive learning module to train ADVANCE while
than the shallow methods. (3) The performance of methods ignoring the network reconstruction error. When μ = 0,
based on contrastive learning (ANEMONE, COLA, Sub- we use graph convolutional networks to encode view repre-
CR, and ADVANCE) is superior to the shallow and deep sentations instead of using a contrastive learning mechanism
learning methods, which indicates that the idea of mining to mine the intrinsic information of graphs. Fig. 3(a) shows
hidden information from graph data by contrastive learning the effect of different μ values on the performance. The
to provide auxiliary guidance for anomaly detection is fea- performance of ADVANCE degrades either without training
sible. However, DGI, which also adopts contrastive learning graph contrastive learning module (μ = 0) or without training
mechanism, does not show competitive performance. The network reconstruction module (μ = 1), which demonstrates
reason behind this limitation lies in the use of node-to-global- that the joint optimization of two complementary modules
instance comparisons in contrastive learning, which cannot is helpful to improve the performance of ADVANCE in
capture anomalies within local substructure and is not friendly detecting anomalies, especially the network reconstruction
to heterogeneous graphs. The outstanding performance of module. Furthermore, the importance of different modules
Sub-CR can be attributed to its adept aggregation of local- varies on different datasets, and the optimal tuning parameters
global structural information, an aspect that ADVANCE lacks for BlogCatalog, Flickr, and Cora datasets are 0.8, 0.8, and
in its consideration. Node anomalies in the graph often 0.9, respectively.
4070 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Experimental results for parameter analysis. (a), (b), and (c) show the impact of different tuning parameter, numbers of nearest neighbors, and target
view update mechanism decay rate w.r.t. Precision@50, respectively.

 TABLE V
 E FFECT OF D IFFERENT E DGE ATTRIBUTES W. R . T. P RECISION @K

Fig. 4. Experimental results for ablation study. (a), (b), and (c) show the performance of ADVANCE and its variants w.r.t. Precision@K.

 The number of nearest neighbors k is crucial for construct- network information. Fig. 3(c) shows the performance of
ing the self-enhanced view, which reflects the neighborhood the ADVANCE framework for different target view update
size of each node in the self-enhanced view. Smaller values mechanism decay rates. In the experiment, we set the target
of k may not enable nodes to aggregate neighborhood features view update mechanism interval ε to 0 for all three datasets.
adequately, while larger values of k may add invisible noise to As can be observed, various networks require distinct rates
node attributes aggregation. Fig. 3(b) shows the performance of update for the target view. The optimal decay rate is δ =
of ADVANCE with different numbers of nearest neighbors. 0.9999 for BlogCatalog dataset and Flickr dataset and δ =
Overall, for BlogCatalog, Flickr, and Cora datasets, the best 0.999 for the Cora dataset. Furthermore, the performance of
performances are achieved when the number of nearest neigh- ADVANCE decreases when the decay rate δ = 1, which
bors k are set as 40, 30, and 10, respectively. proves the effectiveness of the target view update mechanism.
 The target view update mechanism decay rate δ plays a Edge attributes represent the edge attributes information
critical role in controlling the update process of the target used when initializing the target view. Section IV-A1 mentions
view. A larger decay rate will cause the target view to be that six similarity indices are considered to calculate the
updated too slowly, while a smaller decay rate may cause similarity of two connected nodes as edge attributes. The
the target view to update too sharply. When the decay rate experimental results are shown in TABLE V, where Mean
δ = 1, the target view is never updated and maintains the of six indices denotes the average of the calculated results
original structure. The selection of the decay rate for the target of six similarity indices as the edge attributes. It can be
view update mechanism is critical in determining whether the seen that different networks have different adaptability to
target view can effectively alleviate the structural anomalies edge attributes. For BlogCatalog and Cora datasets, it is more
and guide the self-enhanced view to learn more valuable advantageous to consider six edge attributes simultaneously,
XU et al.: UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 4071

while for Flickr dataset, using common neighbors to calculate [2] M. Ku. JYV, A. K. Swain, K. Mahapatra, and S. P. Mohanty,
edge attributes is more effective in detecting anomalous nodes. “Fortified-NoC: A robust approach for trojan-resilient network-on-chips
 to fortify multicore-based consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consumer
 Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 57–68, Feb. 2022.
F. Ablation Study (RQ3) [3] Z. Kahleifeh, H. Thapliyal, and S. M. Alam, “Adiabatic/MTJ-based
 physically Unclonable function for consumer electronics security,” IEEE
 We further compare the results of ADVANCE and its Trans. Consumer Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Feb. 2023.
variables, namely ADVANCE w/o CL, ADVANCE w/o ARes [4] V. S. Baghel and S. Prakash, “Generation of secure fingerprint template
 using DFT for consumer electronics devices,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
and ADVANCE w/o SRes. ADVANCE w/o CL, ADVANCE Electron., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 118–127, May 2023.
w/o ARes, and ADVANCE w/o SRes denote the framework [5] X. Zhou et al., “Decentralized P2P federated learning for privacywithout contrastive learning component (i.e., μ is set to 0), preserving and resilient mobile robotic systems,” IEEE Wireless
 Commun., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–89, Apr. 2023.
without attribute reconstruction component (i.e., α is set to [6] M. Kargar, M. Zihayat, and J. Szlichta, “Mining and exploration
0) and without structure reconstruction component (i.e., α is of attributed graphs: Theory and applications,” in Proc. CCASCON,
set to 1) in anomaly detection, respectively. As we can see Markham, ON, Canada, 2019, pp. 397–398.
in Fig. 4, ADVANCE outperforms all the variants consistently [7] Z. Zang, S. Li, D. Wu, J. Guo, Y. Xu, and S. Z. Li, “Deep manifold
 embedding of attributed graphs,” Neurocomputing, vol. 514, pp. 83–93,
on all three datasets, which indicates that all three compo- Dec. 2022.
nents in ADVANCE contribute to the detection of anomalies. [8] S. Zhao, Z. Du, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Tang, and P. S. Yu, “Hierarchical
Especially, ADVANCE outperforms ADVANCE w/o CL by representation learning for attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2641–2656, Mar. 2023.
12%, 13.2%, 11.6% on three datasets w.r.t. Precision@50, [9] T. Qiu, X. Liu, X. Zhou, W. Qu, Z. Ning, and C. L. P. Chen, “An adaptive
respectively, which demonstrates the contrastive-based module social spammer detection model with semi-supervised broad learnis crucially important to ADVANCE. The attribute recon- ing,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4622–4635,
 Oct. 2022.
struction component and structure reconstruction component [10] R. Ghanem and H. Erbay, “Spam detection on social networks using
reconstruct the node attributes and topology structure of the deep contextualized word representation,” Multimedia Tools Appl.,
original graph, respectively, so as to identify the anomalies vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 3697–3712, 2023.
 [11] A. Singh, A. Jain, and S. E. Biable, “Financial fraud detection
in the network from multiple perspectives. According to the approach based on firefly optimization algorithm and support vector
experimental results, the importance of attribute reconstruction machine,” Appl. Comput. Intell. Soft Comput., vol. 2022, Jun. 2022,
and structure reconstruction in detecting anomalies is differ- Art. no. 1468015.
 [12] M. Y. Turaba, M. Hasan, N. I. Khan, and H. A. Rahman, “Fraud
ent for different attributed networks. For BlogCatalog and detection during financial transactions using machine learning and deep
Flickr datasets, the node attributes contribute more to finding learning techniques,” in Proc. CCCI, Dalian, China, 2022, pp. 1–8.
anomalous nodes, while for Cora dataset, paying attention to [13] R. Desai and V. T. Gopalakrishnan, “Network intrusion detection through
 machine learning with efficient feature selection,” in Proc. COMSNETS,
topology structure is more conducive to detecting anomalies Bengaluru, India, 2022, pp. 797–801.
in attributed networks. [14] H. Alavizadeh, H. Alavizadeh, and J. Jang-Jaccard, “Deep Q-learning
 based reinforcement learning approach for network intrusion detection,”
 Comput., vol. 11, no. 3, p. 41, 2022.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [15] X. Zhou, W. Liang, W. Li, K. Yan, S. Shimizu, and K. Wang,
 In this paper, we propose a novel anomaly detection frame- “Hierarchical adversarial attacks against graph-neural-network-based
 IoT network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
work based on graph contrastive learning, namely ADVANCE, no. 12, pp. 9310–9319, Jun. 2022.
which is consisted of two modules: graph contrastive learn- [16] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS: A joint
ing module and network reconstruction module. ADVANCE modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
 Proc. IJCAI, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
innovatively constructs the target view and learnable self- [17] B. Perozzi, L. Akoglu, P. I. Sánchez, and E. Müller, “Focused clustering
enhanced view and takes advantage of the graph contrastive and outlier detection in large attributed graphs,” in Proc. CKDD,
learning method to maximize the consistency between the New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 1346–1355.
 [18] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
target view and learnable view, which captures network neighborhoods,” in Proc. SDM, Miami, Florida, USA, 2016,
information related to anomalies without the guidance of pp. 207–215.
external information (i.e., labels). Next, the node attributes [19] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual Analysis for
 anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, Melbourne,
and topology structure of the original attributed networks VIC, Australia, 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
are reconstructed by the network reconstruction module. [20] E. Lughofer et al., “On-line anomaly detection with advanced indepen-
Finally, two complementary modules are jointly trained to dent component analysis of multi-variate residual signals from causal
 relation networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 537, pp. 425–451, Oct. 2020.
achieve more effective anomaly detection. A series of experi- [21] J. Liang, P. Jacobs, J. Sun, and S. Parthasarathy, “Semi-supervised
ments on three benchmark datasets prove the effectiveness of embedding in attributed networks with outlier,” in Proc. SDM,
ADVANCE. The proposed ADVANCE framework facilitates San Diego, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 153–161.
 [22] W. Chu and K. M. Kitani, “Neural batch sampling with reinforcethe early detection of fraudulent users and illicit financial ment learning for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ECCV,
transaction activities within consumer electronic networks, Glasgow, U.K., 2020, pp. 751–766.
thereby furnishing consumer electronics with a dependable [23] A. Kumagai, T. Iwata, and Y. Fujiwara, “Semi-supervised anomaly
security assurance. detection on attributed graphs,” in Proc. IJCNN, Shenzhen, China, 2021,
 pp. 1–8.
 [24] L. Zhang, X. Xie, K. Xiao, W. Bai, K. Liu, and P. Dong, “MANomaly:
 R EFERENCES Mutual adversarial networks for semi-supervised anomaly detection,”
 Inf. Sci., vol. 611, pp. 65–80, Sep. 2022.
 [1] W. Hamidouche, F. Pescador, T. Biatek, and E. François, “Editorial real- [25] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
 time implementation of VVC standard for consumer electronic devices,” on attributed networks,” in Proc. SDM, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2019,
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 93–95, May 2022. pp. 594–602.
4072 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

[26] P. Kavehzadeh, M. Samadi, and M. A. Haeri, “Unsupervised anomaly [52] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 detection on node attributed networks: A deep learning approach,” in convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICLR, Toulon, France, 2017.
 Proc. ICISS, Edinburgh, U.K., 2021, pp. 35–40. [53] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on
[27] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y. F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE: attributed networks,” in Proc. WSDM, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2019,
 Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. pp. 357–365.
 CIKM, 2021, pp. 3122–3126. [54] D. B. Skillicorn, “Detecting anomalies in graphs,” in Proc. ISI, New
[28] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, Brunswick, NJ, USA, 2007, pp. 209–216.
 “Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self- [55] D. Zhu, Y. Ma, and Y. Liu, “Anomaly detection with deep graph
 supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, autoencoders on attributed networks,” in Proc. ISCC, Rennes, France,
 no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[29] K. Hassani and A. H. K. Ahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representation [56] J. Gan, R. Hu, M. Zhan, Y. Mo, Y. Wan, and X. Zhu, “Multi-view
 learning on graphs,” in Proc. ICML, 2020, pp. 4116–4126. unsupervised graph representation learning,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2022,
[30] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,” pp. 2987–2993.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009. [57] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
[31] T. Pourhabibi, K. L. Ong, B. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detec- R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR, New Orleans, LA,
 tion: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection USA, 2019.
 approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 113303. [58] Z. Peng et al., “Graph representation learning via graphical mutual
[32] N. Li, H. Sun, K. C. Chipman, J. George, and X. Yan, “A probabilistic information maximization,” in Proc. WWW, Taipei, Taiwan, 2020,
 approach to uncovering attributed graph anomalies,” in Proc. SDM, pp. 259–270.
 Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2014, pp. 82–90. Bo Xu (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and Ph.D.
[33] D. Eswaran, C. Faloutsos, S. Guha, and N. Mishra, “SpotLight: degrees from the Dalian University of Technology,
 Detecting anomalies in streaming graphs,” in Proc. KDD, London, U.K., China, in 2007 and 2014, respectively, where she
 2018, pp. 1378–1386. is currently an Associate Professor with the School
[34] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. V. Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN: of Software. Her current research interests include
 Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on social computing, data mining, information retrieval,
 attributed networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 519–541, 2022. and natural language processing.
[35] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
 graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
[36] F. Zhang, H. Fan, R. Wang, Z. Li, and T. Liang, “Deep dual support
 vector data description for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” Jinpeng Wang received the B.Sc. degree in soft-
 Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 1509–1528, 2022. ware engineering from the Dalian University of
[37] R. Fathony, J. Ng, and J. Chen, “Interaction-focused anomaly detection Technology, China, in 2021, where he is currently
 on bipartite node-and-edge-attributed graphs,” in Proc. IJCNN, Gold working the master’s degree with the School of
 Coast, QLD, Australia, 2023, pp. 1–10. Software. His research interests include data science,
[38] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view social computing, and graph learning.
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
 Proc. IJCAI, 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
[39] S. Hu and M. Shao, “Dual perspective contrastive learning based
 subgraph anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. ICANN,
 Bristol, U.K., 2022, pp. 481–493. Zhehuan Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
[40] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple and Ph.D. degrees from the Dalian University of
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Technology, China, in 2010 and 2017, respectively,
 ICML, 2020, pp. 1597–1607. where he is currently an Associate Professor with
[41] Y. Hua, X. Shu, Z. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Uncertainty-guided voxel-level the School of Software. His current research interests
 supervised contrastive learning for semi-supervised medical image seg- include knowledge graph, data mining, and natural
 mentation,” Int. J. Neural Syst., vol. 32, no. 4, 2022, Art. no. 2250016. language processing.
[42] C. Mavromatis and G. Karypis, “Graph InfoClust: Maximizing
 coarse-grain mutual information in graphs,” in Proc. PAKDD, 2021,
 pp. 541–553.
[43] L. Yu et al., “SAIL: Self-augmented graph contrastive learning,” in Proc.
 AAAI, 2022, pp. 8927–8935. Hongfei Lin received the M.S. degree from the
[44] Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, D. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Peng, and S. Pan, “Towards Dalian University of Technology, China, in 1992,
 unsupervised deep graph structure learning,” in Proc. WWW, Lyon, and the Ph.D. degree from Northeastern University,
 France, 2022, pp. 1392–1403. China, in 2000. He is currently a Professor with
[45] H. Zhang et al., “DCML: Deep contrastive mutual learning for COVID- the College of Computer Science and Technology,
 19 recognition,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control., vol. 77, Aug. 2022, Dalian University of Technology. He has published
 Art. no. 103770. over 100 research papers in various journals, con-
[46] X. Liu, C. Song, F. Huang, H. Fu, W. Xiao, and W. Zhang, “GraphCDR: ferences, and books. His research interest includes
 A graph neural network method with contrastive learning for cancer drug text mining for biomedical literatures, biomedical
 response prediction,” Brief. Bioinform., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2022. hypothesis generation, information extraction from
[47] M. Chen, W. Zhang, Z. Yuan, Y. Jia, and H. Chen, “Federated knowledge huge biomedical resources, sentimental analysis, and
 graph completion via embedding-contrastive learning,” Knowl. Based opinion mining.
 Syst., vol. 252, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 109459. Feng Xia (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
[48] X. Zhou et al., “Hierarchical federated learning with social con- B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
 text clustering-based participant selection for Internet of Medical Hangzhou, China. He is a Professor with the School
 Things applications,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 10, no. 4, of Computing Technologies, RMIT University,
 pp. 1742–1751, Aug. 2023. Australia. He has published over 300 scientific
[49] Y. Yang, C. Huang, L. Xia, and C. Li, “Knowledge graph contrastive papers in international journals and conferences
 learning for recommendation,” in Proc. SIGIR, Madrid, Spain, 2022, (such as IEEE TAI, TKDE, TNNLS, TC, TMC,
 pp. 1434–1443. TPDS, TBD, TCSS, TNSE, TETCI, TETC, THMS,
[50] M. Chen, C. Huang, L. Xia, W. Wei, Y. Xu, and R. Luo, “Heterogeneous TVT, TITS, TASE, ACM TKDD, TIST, TWEB,
 graph contrastive learning for recommendation,” in Proc. WSDM, TOMM, WWW, AAAI, SIGIR, WSDM, CIKM,
 Singapore, 2023, pp. 544–552. JCDL, EMNLP, and INFOCOM). His research
[51] Y. Ma et al., “Enhancing recommendations with contrastive learn- interests include data science, artificial intelligence, graph learning, digital
 ing from collaborative knowledge graph,” Neurocomputing, vol. 523, health, and systems engineering. He is a Senior Member of ACM, and an
 pp. 103–115, Feb. 2023. ACM Distinguished Speaker.