IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024 21709

Vehicular Social Dynamic Anomaly Detection With
 Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregator Enabled VAE
 Zehao Hu , Yuwei He , Yuqi Shen , Minho Jo , Senior Member, IEEE, Mario Collotta , Member, IEEE,
 Guojiang Shen , and Xiangjie Kong , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Vehicle driving behavior analysis and detection traffic congestion and accidents have become more prominent,
tasks have become an indispensable part of intelligent transporta- impacting people’s time and safety [4], [5] [6]. Leveraging
tion systems. Accurate pattern recognition of potential anomalies IoT technologies, such as sensor networks with Road-Side
during the movement of entities is crucial for improving transportation efficiency. Current methods typically analyze vehicle Units (RSUs) and On-Board Units (OBUs), researchers aim
trajectories independently without considering potential interac- to extract valuable insights from data to enhance traffic
tions among vehicles. To address this limitation, some studies management systems. Detecting traffic anomalies in a timely
have integrated graph attention mechanisms to capture the manner is essential for efficient traffic management [7], [8]
influence of neighboring vehicles during the aggregation process. [9], [10], considering the impact of drivers’ decisions on
However, Graph Attention Networks (GATs) are constrained
by the univariate nature of attention heads and coefficients,
 traffic dynamics. The challenge for human operators lies in
thus lacking flexibility. In this work, we not only consider the processing vast amounts of data and the lack of a standardized
social dynamics among neighboring vehicles but also delve into approach to anomaly detection.
the limitations of GAT models. We propose a Vehicular Social In our work, the task is to detect anomalous scenarios in
Dynamics Anomaly Detection (VSD-AD) model based on the vehicular social dynamics from data collected by highway
Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregator (MMA) enabled Variational video surveillance in the sensor network. Vehicle trajec-
AutoEncoder (VAE) architecture to maximize the learning of
relational embeddings among neighbors in a highway vehicle net- tory/behavior anomaly detection tasks can be divided into
work. Furthermore, we apply Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ) two major categories based on the data type processed. The
to the encoder output to mitigate the complexity of neighbor first category [11], [12] [13], [14] is devoted to preprocess
relationships. Our model is flexible and customizable for different trajectories extracted from video surveillance systems, then
highway scenarios, suitable for large-scale highway vehicle video using unsupervised or weakly supervised learning to cluster
data. To validate real-world applicability, we further assess its
 them into anomalies like sudden braking, severe collision
performance on both the simulated dataset and real-world traffic
dataset, where our model outperforms other mainstream methods accidents, etc. The second category focuses on spatiotemporal
in terms of detection performance. sequences generated from GPS, IoT devices, and motion
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, variational autoencoder,
 sensors using methods such as reinforcement learning [15]
graph aggregation, intelligent transportation. and deep learning [16], [17] or euclidean space inference [18],
 with each method concentrating on the operational behavior
 of individual vehicles.
 I. I NTRODUCTION While the works above have achieved significant results,
 they have not considered the social dynamics of relationships,
H IGHLY autonomous smart traffic management system,
 as a key component of smart cities, plays a crucial role in addressing urban challenges like traffic flow
 as shown in Figure 1, within vehicles and the transmission
 of messages between drivers. For instance, the brake lights
prediction and accident prevention. With the expansion of of a car ahead, even if at a considerable distance, can signal
urban areas and populations [1], [2] [3], issues such as the following drivers, who may respond by decelerating. The
 double flash signals of overtaking warning and alert can
 Manuscript received 21 May 2024; revised 1 August 2024; accepted prompt the following car to accelerate and prepare to overtake,
2 September 2024. Date of publication 25 September 2024; date of current while the deceleration of the ego-vehicle to give way should
version 27 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer”
and “Leading Goose” Research and Development Program of Zhejiang under not be considered an anomalous behavior. As another example,
Grant 2024C01214 and in part by the National Natural Science Founda- if vehicles within a driver’s forward vision begin to slow
tion of China under Grant 62072409 and Grant 62073295. The Associate down or even stop, the ego-vehicle would naturally decelerate
Editor for this article was F. Xia. (Corresponding authors: Xiangjie Kong;
Minho Jo.)
 and stop until the road condition becomes positive. In this
 Zehao Hu, Yuwei He, Yuqi Shen, Guojiang Shen, and Xiangjie Kong are scenario, the ego-vehicle should not be considered anomalous,
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of but rather the focus should be on the vehicles at the front of the
Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: 211122120078@zjut.edu.cn;
211122120044@zjut.edu.cn; yuqishen51@gmail.com; gjshen1975@zjut.
 queue. Here, we give a definition of vehicular social dynamic
edu.cn; xjkong@ieee.org). anomalies: in a normally functioning vehicular social network
 Minho Jo is with the Department of Computer Convergence Software, Korea system [19], vehicles form an implied interaction with each
University, Sejong City 30019, South Korea (e-mail: minhojo@korea.ac.kr). other, and if the movement of a vehicle or a number of vehicles
 Mario Collotta is with the Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Kore
University of Enna, 94100 Enna, Italy (e-mail: mario.collotta@unikore.it). negatively affects the normal functioning of the whole system,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3457569 these vehicles are social dynamic anomalies vehicles.
 1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
21710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 extract spatiotemporal features of dynamic graphs. It replaces
 the graph attention mechanism with a more flexible graph
 multi-mask aggregator to deeply consider the social influence
 of neighboring vehicles on ego vehicles. To prevent the
 decoder from being confused by complex encodings from the
 encoder, inspired by the VQ-VAE model [21], we propose
 a graph feature quantisation operation to ensure a smooth
 transition of encoder output representations. In terms of the
 time dimension, fine-grained sampling is replaced by coarse
 sampling, enabling the model to detect behavioral anomalies
 over a longer period. Each sampling period undergoes detailed
Fig. 1. Example for graph of vehicular social dynamics. Vehicles serve
as nodes, and edges are formed when certain conditions are met such as sampling, i.e., the snapshot of that moment, followed by
vehicles being too close to each other or engaging in information exchange. constructing graphs of vehicles and their neighboring rela-
Unreasonable lane-changing behavior by vehicles is considered abnormal, and tionships. Furthermore, to facilitate unsupervised learning,
vehicles are flagged as suspected anomalies after completing a lane change.
 we reconstructed the probability distribution of trajectories in
 the decoder part, highlighting anomalous temporal sequences
 Some work has noticed this deficiency. Reference [20] with lower reconstruction probability.
captured the interactions between vehicles through the RGAT Fortunately, the proposed model is capable of detecting
scheme, but the attention mechanism in GAT is not deep anomalies in the social dynamics of highway vehicles over
enough and lacks the flexibility of a user-defined model. extended distances and durations. To validate our model’s
It can only assign attention coefficients to neighboring vehicles effectiveness, our data is sourced from large-scale simulation
through predefined attention heads. Considering the driving trajectory data generated by the microscopic traffic simulator
habit differences among drivers from different countries and from [20] and the real-world HighD dataset [22]. Compared
regions, it is difficult to explore patterns in different data with existing state-of-the-art methods, our model is the only
through these methods alone. However, these works have also one that is customizable and capable of detecting both indiinspired our approach, as traditional single-vehicle methods vidual vehicle anomalies and overall scene anomalies within a
are no longer sufficient to accommodate the increasingly specific period. Moreover, our method performs robustly with
complex vehicular social dynamics. both simulated and real-world data.
 To capture the social nature between vehicles, structur- The major contributions of this study include:
ing them into a network-like formation is highly beneficial • We propose a Vehicular Social Dynamic Anomaly
for vehicle interactions. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) Detection (VSD-AD) model based on the Recurrent
are powerful tools for dealing with complex relational net- Multi-Mask Aggregator (MMA) enabled Variational
work structures, and they encompass various specific models AutoEncoder (VAE) architecture. It captures the social
such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), Graph dynamics between highway vehicle neighbors more
Attention Networks (GATs), and Message Passing Neural Net- deeply and offers a degree of customizability.
works (MPNNs). These networks, combined with RNNs, can • We propose a graph vector quantisation technique
simultaneously process dynamic temporal graphs. However, —Node Feature Quantisaton (NFQ) to ensure that the
in designing the network, we still face challenges such as: node representations of vehicle relationship graphs aggre-
 • Incomplete neighbor relationship. The interaction gated by the encoder are smoothly processed by the
 between drivers and the positional relationships between decoder.
 vehicles often have a significant impact on the driving • We conduct extensive experiments on both simulated and
 patterns of vehicles. Therefore, there is still considerable real-world datasets, demonstrating the superior ability of
 potential for deep exploration of the neighbor relation- our proposed model to detect anomalous driving behavships between vehicles. iors in large-scale highway traffic surveillance systems.
 • Fixed identification patterns. Due to the varied data Observations on a dataset generated by traffic simulation
 distributions across different datasets corresponding to software demonstrate the model’s sensitivity to the social
 traffic regulations and driving habits in various countries dynamics of vehicles.
 and regions, relying solely on fixed patterns to identify
 abnormal driving behavior is often inadequate.
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 • Inaccurate detection targets. Many existing approaches
 have a vague definition of trajectory graphs, leading to A. Trajectory Modeling
 coarse detection targets in models. This can result in Since trajectory data possess spatiotemporal characteristics,
 the loss of some anomalies and ultimately reduce the most research on trajectory modeling primarily focuses on
 detection accuracy of the model. learning the spatial features of past trajectories of vehi-
 Addressing the challenges outlined above, we propose cles, pedestrians, or aerial vehicles and predicting their
a data-driven, customizable method for Vehicular Social future movements. An overview of recent years’ works in
Dynamic Anomaly Detection (VSD-AD), realized through this field can be comprehensively found in [23]. In [24],
recurrent multi-mask autoencoders. This method maintains a grid-based spatial encoder and a relative temporal encoder
the combination of RNN and graph convolution models to are combined to extract trajectory features. These features
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21711

are then fused with static embeddings (representing static attention-based graph convolutional network. Wang et al. [45]
information such as traffic flow and weather) through an proposed a method integrating reinforcement learning with
attention mechanism. Reference [25] employs network rep- spatial knowledge graphs to predict human mobility patterns.
resentation learning to achieve accurate vehicle trajectory Notably, [46] focuses on improving the generalizability of
clustering. Similarly focusing on automobiles, [26] devel- graph anomaly detection models via data augmentation. There
ops three prediction models with distinct architectures: a are also numerous methods targeting subgraphs, such as
Transformer-based model (TS-Transformer), a Generative the Anomalous Subgraph Autoencoder (AS-GAE) proposed
Adversarial Network-based model (TS-GAN), and a Con- by [47] to extract anomalous subgraphs. Reference [48] perditional Variational Autoencoder-based model (TS-CVAE). forms intra-view node-subgraph contrastive learning to enrich
These models demonstrate that traffic state-based models con- the anomaly information. Reference [49] starts from injective
sistently predict future trajectories more accurately than vanilla node augmentation and tries to enrich node representations
models, with the TS-Transformer producing state-of-the-art via multi-scale contrastive training. As the most relevant work,
results. Yan et al. [27] proposes an unsupervised method for [20] differs from our adoption of MMA. Their proposed model
traffic VAD based on future object localization. In the field of utilizes a GAT to extract vehicle neighborhood relationships.
aircraft, the learning model of [28] adopts an encoder-decoder However, due to insufficient depth in capturing spatiotempoarchitecture with a hybrid core of LSTM and GAN. Li et al. ral relationships with the GAT and GRU combination, the
[29] proposes the traffic trajectory prediction algorithm based model lacks expressive power. This is the primary challenge
on the convolutional attention network (TraGCAN) to predict addressed by our proposed method in this study. Additionally,
the trajectories of heterogeneous traffic agents in dense traffic. we introduce node quantization to further fine-tune the model.
They construct the spatial relationship of traffic agents as a Inspired by anomaly detection in graphs, we model each
graph structure and introduce a graph convolutional network snapshot as a graph, where vehicles are nodes and the
to extract spatial interactions. Reference [30] utilizes Graph adjacency relationships between vehicles are edges. Thus,
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to design modules for cap- we transform the problem of detecting anomalies in vehicle
turing sub-trajectory anomalies in both attribute space and trajectories into a graph node anomaly detection problem.
structural space within the generation and contrastive learning
modules. III. M ETHOD
 Our work involves capturing all trajectory points within
 In this section, we introduce the proposed VSD-AD model
a fixed area in a snapshot manner and recording vehicle
 which consists of three parts, namely Encoder module,
information for each point, including position, velocity, and
 Decoder module, and NFQ module. The overview of VSD-AD
acceleration. We have designed an encoder-decoder framework
 can refer to Figure 2.
to learn the spatiotemporal relationships among vehicles in
these snapshots, with the aim of modeling these spatiotemporal
relationships in trajectories. A. Problem Formulation

B. Graph Anomaly Detection The input to the model consists of an observation set
 O = {o1 , o2 , . . . , o|W | } over a time window W on the
 In this paper, we focus on modeling the relationships highway. For each time step t within W, the observation
between vehicles and their neighbors on a highway scene ot = {xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN } is noted, where N = |ot | represents
as a graph structure, with the fundamental task being graph the number of vehicles in the current observation. Here,
anomaly detection. Relevant reviews can be found in [31] xti denotes the features of the vehicle numbered i at time
and [32], both of which are classic works on using deep step t. The vehicle features xti = (xti , yti , lti , vti , ati ) include
learning methods to solve graph anomaly detection problems. the longitudinal position xti , lateral position yti , driving lane
The definition of anomalies varies, but common criteria for ID lti , longitudinal speed vti , and longitudinal acceleration
judgment include extreme traffic events and accidents [33], ati . Furthermore, to reduce feature complexity and training
driving behaviors [34], [35], and autonomous vehicle driving difficulty, we opt not to include vertical vehicle velocity
conditions [36]. Researchers have developed a plethora of and acceleration as features in training. This decision stems
graph-based methods for these detection scenarios. In the arti- from the observation that in highway datasets, the majority
cle [37], Deng proposes a spatiotemporal graph convolutional of vehicles exhibit predominantly horizontal velocities and
adversarial network (STGAN). Other approaches include using accelerations, with minimal values in the vertical direction.
GNN methods for multivariate time-series anomaly detec- Even during turns, the deviations in the vertical direction are
tion [38], [39], and generative and contrastive self-supervised minimal. In the rare event of abrupt maneuvers, such as sharp
learning methods [40]. Tu et al. [41] introduced Deep outdatEd turns, the model can effectively capture and learn from the
fAct detectioN (DEAN), which employs a Relations-to-Nodes significant decreases in horizontal velocity and acceleration
(R2N) graph, a contrastive approach designed to unveil values.
implicit outdated information. CenGCN [42] posits that the Given the vehicle features xti for all t in W, our primary
information transmitted from other nodes to the core node objective is to detect vehicles exhibiting anomalous social
through the propagation mechanism is unequal, a concept behaviors over a certain period W on the highway section.
that bears resemblance to the Graph Attention Network Additionally, we will segment the highway section into shorter
(GAT) [43]. Chen et al. [44] combines sequence and graph- stretches of length δs , referred to as scenes, and perform
structured data, achieving sequence reconstruction through an anomaly detection for all vehicles on stretch S during W.
21712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 2. The overview of VSD-AD model which consists of three modules: Encoder, Decoder, and Node Feature Quantisation. Firstly, within a time window,
the snapshot of road vehicles composing the graph is mined for neighbor relationships using Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregators. Then, the output of the
encoder is quantized by the Node Feature Quantization module. Finally, reconstruction is performed by a decoder with a structure identical to that of the
encoder.

 drivers primarily focus on the few vehicles closest to them, and
 the most significant impact on a current vehicle is undoubtedly
 from its neighboring vehicles.

 C. Encoder
 In this subsection, we introduce how Recurrent Multi-Mask
 Aggregators [50] are used to compress and encode trajectory
 time series data.
 Specifically, we employ the RNN variant GRU [51], known
 for its proficiency with sequential data tasks. Compared to
 the traditional LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory network),
 GRU’s structure is simpler. It merges the forget and input
 gates into a single “update gate” and omits the output gate.
 This simplified structure results in fewer parameters for the
Fig. 3. The Multi-Mask Aggregator within the GRU module will learn GRU, making it more computationally efficient. We replace the
masks for each vehicle node feature using MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) matrix multiplication in the GRU’s update gate z t , reset gate
and aggregate them onto ego vehicle nodes through various aggregators.
 rt , and candidate state H̃t with graph convolution operations,
 denoted as ∗M , to capture the social dynamics among vehicle
The criterion for scene anomaly detection involves identifying
 graphs. This approach effectively leverages the strengths of
anomalous vehicles within each segment, as elaborated in
 GRU in handling temporal dependencies while adapting its
Section III-G.
 architecture to better represent the complex social dynamics
 present in vehicular graphs:
B. Graph Construction
 We first construct a spatiotemporal dynamic graph repre- zt = σ (Wx z ∗M Xt + Whz ∗M Ht−1 + bz ),
senting the vehicular social dynamics, denoted as G(W) = rt = σ (Wxr ∗M Xt + Whr ∗M Ht−1 + br ),
{(V1 , E1 ), (V2 , E2 ), . . . , (VT , ET )} for time t in W = H̃t = tanh(Wxh ∗M Xt + Whh ∗M (rt ⊙ Ht−1 + bh ),
{1, 2, . . . , T }. The node set Vt represents all vehicles observed
on the highway at ot and their features xti = (xti , yti , lti , vti , ati ). Ht = zt ⊙ Ht−1 + (1 − zt ) ⊙ H̃t . (1)
From the formulation, it is evident that for different time steps where Ht ∈ R N ×dh represents the hidden state, while z t ∈
t in W, the number of vehicles N = |Vt | is fixed, but the R N ×dh and rt ∈ R N ×dh correspond to the update gate and
number of vehicles at a single time step |ot | can vary, similar reset gate, respectively, each with a dimension of dh . The
 ij
to the count in a snapshot. For et in Et , we define its existence weights Wx z , Whz , Wxr , Whr , Wxh , Whh and biases bz , br , bh
based on the condition that, centered on the current ego vehicle are learnable parameters. The activation function σ is the
 j
xti , vehicle xt is within δx feet horizontally and less than δl sigmoid function, and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
lanes vertically. This approach is justified as, in real scenarios, The input X t ∈ R N ×d f at time step t to the GRU comes
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21713

from the raw observation ot , where d f is the node feature aggregation. This allows the network to learn to ignore certain
dimension. This dimensionality is derived from the spatial “undesired” nodes when propagating information. The mean
coordinates, speed, and acceleration (xt , yt , vt , at ) ∈ R N ×4 , aggregator, on the other hand, integrates information from
concatenated with lane embeddings h lt ∈ R N ×dl . It is impor- all neighbor vectors, where ◦ denotes the Hadamard product
tant to note that h lt represents the mapping of discrete lane operation.
IDs to their corresponding embedding vectors with dimension c. Message Vector Scaling. Further, enhances expressiveness
dl , making the input feature dimension d f = 4 + dl . by utilizing degree scalers to amplify and attenuate signals
 For the graph convolution operation ∗M , unlike the RGAT based on the nodes’ degrees. The general expression for degree
method based on Graph Attention Network (GAT) [43] used scalers S(·) is:
in [20] to capture dynamic interactions between neighboring
 log (d + 1) ω
  
vehicles, we adopt RMMA [50] based on Multi-mask aggre- S(d, ω) = , d > 0, −1 < ω < 1, (6)
gators. This approach draws similarities with GAT and MPNN ϕ
but offers some theoretical and practical advantages [50]. in this context, ω represents the amplification factor, where d
As illustrated in Figure 3, the graph convolution operation is the node degree, and ϕ is the average degree of the training
∗M X t for the vehicle feature set input X t primarily consists set. In our work, we set ω = {−1, 0, 1}, corresponding to
of four processes: signal attenuation, no change, and amplification, respectively.
 a. Mask Generation. The purpose of this step is to learn d. Assimilation. Finally, it is necessary to integrate the
unique values between node neighbors, forming a mask. The results of all aggregators and scalers. If ⊗ denotes the tensor
Multi-Mask Aggregators (MMA) deploy a Multi-Layer Per- product, then the universal aggregation function ⊕mask for
ceptron (MLP) between each node pair x i , x j and selectively MMA can be expressed as:
extract node features ei j . This operation can be likened to cre-    
ating weights for multiplying aggregated neighboring features, I Masked Max
similar to the messages passed in Message Passing Neural ⊕mask =  S(D, α = 1)  ⊗  Masked Min  . (7)
Networks (MPNN) and the attention coefficients in Graph S(D, α = −1) Masked Mean
Attention Networks (GAT). However, while GAT typically
 At this point, for each time step t, all vehicles xti in
yields a single attention coefficient, the mask in MMA can
 the observation set ot have received information from their
learn a relationship vector for each pair of neighbors. For each
 neighbors. Information that cannot influence the ego vehicle
node pair x i , x j , the learned mask is represented as:
 will be ‘discarded’, while neighbor information that truly
 j j ij j ij
 m t = M L P(||xti , xt , et ) = σ (Wm (||xti , xt , et )) (2) alters driving behavior will be strengthened. In comparison
 j
 to works with predefined edge weights, it is evident that
where m t represents the mask for vehicle j at time step t, MMA exhibits stronger interpretability and possesses more
σ is the activation function and Wm is a learnable matrix. learnable parameters to determine the social dynamics among
The symbol || denotes column-wise concatenation. Since neighbors than GAT. Moreover, the multi-aggregator feature
 j ij
xti , xt , et ∈ Rd f , the result of the concatenation belongs to of MMA provides it with a certain degree of flexibility and
R3×d f , and Wm ∈ R3×α . The dimensionality of the result of customization. For instance, operators can choose or combine
 j ij
multiplying the concatenated xti , xt , et with Wm is in Rd f ×α , multiple min aggregators as needed.
 j
which ultimately determines the dimension of m t . Here, α
represents the hyperparameter for the number of hidden units.
 D. Node Feature Quantisation
 b. Neighbor Aggregation. Unlike most graph convolution
methods that use only one type of aggregator, such as a Inspired by Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoder
mean aggregator, to combine neighbor information, Multi- (VQ-VAE) [21], which has proven effectiveness in vector
Mask Aggregators (MMA) allow users to choose one or quantisation when the posterior and prior distributions are
multiple masked aggregators based on the data distribution categorical, the VQ operation has been shown to improve
and their specific needs. This flexibility enables a focus on the overall network performance by drawing an embedding
the social dynamics of vehicle interactions from multiple table from these distributions and using it as input to the
perspectives. There are three types of aggregators available, Decoder network. In this subsection, we will provide a detailed
namely masked max, min, and mean aggregators: explanation of our proposed Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ)
 j j j
 mechanism.
 maxt = max j∈N ei i (xt ◦ m t ), (3) The input to NFQ is the hidden state of the Encoder’s last
 t
 j j j
 min t = min j∈N ei i (xt ◦ m t ), (4) layer, denoted as HT ∈ R N ×dh . First, we define a discrete
 t latent embedding space e ∈ R K ×dh , where K is the size of
 j 1 X j j
 mean t = xt ◦ m t , (5) the discrete latent space. Thus, there are K embedding vectors
 |N ei ti | ei ∈ Rdh , i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , K , constituting the embedding space
 j∈N ei ti
 known as the code book. Our goal is to map each vector in HT
where Neiit denotes the set of neighbor IDs for vehicle i at to the code book e for quantisation. The initialization methods
time step t. Each aggregator performs a Hadamard product for a code book typically include random initialization and
with the neighbor features and the masks generated in step a). K-means clustering initialization. Here, we initialize each
The difference lies in the operations of min and max, which vector in the code book by sampling each element from a
select the smallest or largest vector from the result vectors for standard normal distribution. We then compute the posterior
21714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

categorical distribution probabilities q(z|ot ), which are defined time T , we decode the sequence backward from time step T .
as one-hot vectors, as follows: Therefore, the initial input for the Decoder-RMMA will be the
 ( node states at time T .
 1 for k = argmin j ∥ z e (ot ) − e j ∥2 ,
 q(z = k|ot ) =
 0 otherwise.
 F. Loss Function
 (8)
 For each ego vehicle at time t, certain features including
the variable z e (ot ), denoted as HT , represents the result of the longitudinal position xti , velocity vti , and acceleration ati
processing the original data ot through the Encoder. The are assumed to follow univariate Gaussian distributions, i.e.,
distribution q(z = k|ot ) is deterministic and is based on xti ∼ N (µx i , σx i ), vti ∼ N (µvi , σvi ), and ati ∼ N (µa i , σa i ).
 t t t t t t
the principle of computing the distances between each input Since lane information is a discrete signal, the longitudinal
vector and the K vectors in the embedding. The distances lane information lti is presumed to be a discrete choice
are calculated using the common Euclidean distance ∥·∥2 . among several lanes L. For the Decoder, the ego vehicle’s
The result of Equation (8), q(z = k|ot ) ∈ R N ×K , indicates lane position is a potential discrete category distribution,
that only the vectors corresponding to z e (ot ) with the closest represented as p1i , . . . , p L i . The Decoder’s output X̂ will
 t t
Euclidean distances to the ei vectors in the code book e will eventually evaluate the above Gaussian and categorical dishave the value 1 in the item at index i of the q(z = k|ot ) tributions, meaning that for each x̂t i ∈ X̂ , there are x̂t i =
vector. all other values are set to 0. The quantized result z q (ot ) [µ̂xti , σ̂ xti , µ̂vti , σ̂ vti , µ̂ati , σ̂ ati , p̂1it , . . . , p̂L it ] to evaluate the
can be expressed as: mean, variance of the longitudinal position, velocity, acceleration, and the probability of the lane position.
 z q (ot ) = q(z = k|ot ) ⊙ e. (9)
 The probability density functions for evaluating position,
the described process can be summarized as representing velocity, and acceleration are denoted as q(xti |µ̂x i , σ̂x i ),
 t t
z e (ot ) through a discrete bottleneck and then mapping it to q(vti |µ̂vi , σ̂vi ), and q(ati |µ̂a i , σ̂a i ) respectively. We aim to
 t t t t
the nearest elements in the embedding e: minimize the negative log-likelihoods as follows:
 z q (ot ) = ek , where k = argmin j ∥ z e (ot ) − e j ∥2 . (10)
   
 Lx i = − log q xti |µ̂x i , σ̂x i , (11)
 t t t
 Due to the fact that messages from multiple neighbors are   
aggregated into node tensors by multiple aggregators through Lvi = − log q vti |µ̂vi , σ̂vi , (12)
 t t t
Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregation (RMMA), and these ten-   
 La i = − log q ati |µ̂a i , σ̂a i . (13)
sors are then passed as hidden states to the next RMMA, the t t t

information content tends to be coarse. We believe this may For lane classification, we aim to minimize the
be detrimental to the subsequent tasks of data reconstruction cross-entropy loss as follows:
and classification by the Encoder. Therefore, by employing the
 L
proposed Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ), we aim to map X  
the output of the Encoder to discretized entries, introducing Ll i = − 1l i log p̂l i , (14)
 t t t
a quantisation operation. This operation is intended to help l=1
alleviate the aforementioned issue. where 1l i is an indicator function that equals 1 if vehicle xit
 t
 is in lane l at time t, and 0 otherwise.
E. Decoder Given the direct gradient estimation from z q (ot ) to z e (ot )
 The Decoder employs the same RMMA structure as the and that the above loss functions do not account for the
Encoder. Furthermore, both the Decoder and Encoder have gradient descent problem for each embedding ei in Node Feaan equal number of spatiotemporal modules in their RMMA ture Quantisation (NFQ), to learn the code book’s embedding
structures, determined by the depth of the input spatiotem- space, we employ an l2 error to approximate the Encoder
poral dynamic graph, i.e., our window size W. To avoid outputs z e (ot ) towards embedding vectors ei . The loss function
the computational burden of repeatedly calculating the edge for learning the code book, L N F Q , is defined to minimize the
set, we use the union of all edges in the Encoder, denoted l2 error as follows:
as E = E1 ∪ E2 ∪ . . . ∪ ET , as the input for the Decoder. L N F Q =∥ sg[z e (ot )] − z q (ot ) ∥22 + ∥ z e (ot ) − sg[z q (ot )] ∥22 ,
According to our graph construction approach, the edge set
only restricts the neighborhood around the nodes. The inter- (15)
action relationships between neighboring nodes and which where | · |2 denotes the Euclidean distance. sg[·] represents the
neighbors have a more significant impact on the central node stop gradient operator, which is defined as the identity function
are dynamically determined by the multi-mask aggregation during forward computation and has zero partial derivatives,
mechanism of RMMA. effectively treating its operand as an un-updated constant.
 The hidden state Ĥ t ∈ R N ×dh of the Decoder is further Thus, the overall loss function can be expressed as a weighted
processed through a fully connected layer to generate the sum of the negative log-likelihood losses and the cross-entropy
output node state reconstruction X̂ t . Details about X̂ t will be loss across all agents and all times, as well as the code book’s
explained in subsection F. Subsequently, the output X̂ t serves l2 error:
as the input for the next recurrent step. Unlike the Encoder,
since the vectors at time T are most relevant to the state at Lit = λx Lx i + λν Lν i + λa La i + λl Ll i , (16)
 t t t t
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21715

 T
 N X
 X Algorithm 1 The Overall Procedure of VSD-AD
 L= Lit + λ N F Q L N F Q . (17) Require: Scenario: sce, Training set: Dtrain , Test set: Dtest ,
 i=1 t=1 Training epochs: epoches, Batch size: batch_si ze, Winwhere λx , λv , λa , λl , and λ N F Q are the weights for each loss dow size: W.
component, serving as hyperparameters. Typically, these can Ensure: Anomaly scores ρ of trajectory test set.
be empirically set as λx = 1, λv = 1, λa = 2, λl = 2 and 1: Construct vehicular social dynamics graph G(W) for
λ N F Q = 2. Dtrain and Dtest , as shown in Section III-B.
 2: Initialize the trainable parameters W and the code book
G. Anomaly Detection of feature quantisation e randomly.
 Based on the granularity of detection, anomaly detection 3: // T raining phase
can be divided into anomaly vehicle detection and anomaly 4: for epoch in {1, 2, . . . , epoches} do
scene detection. 5: for batch (G(W)1 , G(W)2 , . . . , G(W)batch_si ze ) do
 For anomaly vehicle detection, the anomaly score ρW
 i of the
 6: for t in {1, 2, . . . , T } do
vehicle i under time window W is calculated as its average 7: Construct lane embeddings h l .
loss across all time steps: 8: Get node features X t via concating with h l .
 1 X i
 T 9: Get hidden state Ht via Eq. (1).
 ρW
 i
 = Lt , (18) 10: end for
 T
 t=1 11: Compute q(z|ot ) via Eq. (8).
where T is the length of the time window W. Anomaly scene 12: Get the quantized result z q (ot ) via Eq. (9)
detection primarily identifies anomalies in the entire scene, 13: for t in {1, 2, . . . , T } do
aggregating the losses of all vehicles within stretch S during 14: Obtain hidden state Ĥt via Eq. (1).
W to calculate the scene anomaly score ρW S : 15: end for
 S 16: Compute the position Lx , velocity Lv , acceleration
 ρW = max(Lit ), ∀(i, t) that xti ∈ S. (19)
 La and lane loss Ll via Eq. (11) (12) (13) (14).
 The equation indicates that each scene’s anomaly score 17: Compute the NFQ loss via Eq. (15).
is determined by the maximum anomaly score among its 18: Combine all the loss as L via Eq. (16) (17)
vehicles, implying that the presence of any anomalous vehicle 19: Optimize L, update parameters W and code book e.
within a scene renders the entire scene abnormal. Here, 20: end for
we obtain the set of anomaly scores V eSco for vehicles and 21: end for
the set of anomaly scores SceSco for scenes. 22: // T est phase
 After obtaining these anomaly scores, we cannot directly 23: for ot in Dtest do
determine anomalous vehicles and scenarios. However, we can 24: Obtain the loss Lit for cars via Eq. (16).
establish thresholds based on the intuitive distribution of these 25: Obtain the anomaly car score ρW i via Eq. (18).
anomaly scores. To ensure scientific rigor, this study employs 26: Obtain the anomaly scene score ρW S via Eq. (19).
cross-validation by splitting the dataset into training and 27: Obtain the anomaly scores set V eSco and SceSco.
validation sets. Through ROC curve analysis on the validation 28: return anomaly scores V eSco and SceSco.
set, we select the threshold that maximizes the Area Under the 29: end for
Curve (AUC). This method allows for a more precise threshold
selection, suitable for scenarios that require a balance between
prediction accuracy and recall.
 It is worth mentioning that, unlike using the mean for A. Datasets
aggregation, we adopt maximum aggregation to highlight the The detailed information for both datasets is presented as
presence of anomalies, rather than averaging the losses of follows:
normal vehicles. In conclusion, the overall process and pseudo 1) TransModeler Simulation Dataset: This dataset origicode of the VSD-AD model proposed by us can be referenced nates from the virtual simulation data generated by TransModin Algorithm 1. eler, as referenced in [20]. TransModeler, a traffic simulation
 software, accommodates a wide range of granularity and com-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS plexity in simulation needs and generates traffic flow on roads
 In this section, we utilize two types of data sources, namely and intersections, including vehicle acceleration, deceleration,
simulation data and real-world data, to validate the perfor- and lane-changing behaviors. The data for this work were capmance of our proposed VSD-AD model. Initially, simulation tured over a 5-mile stretch of a 4-lane highway at a frequency
data with ground truth labels for anomalies is used for a of 1Hz, encompassing various scenarios and vehicle behaviors.
quantitative performance comparison between our proposed Detailed information can be found in Table I. In Table I, the
model and baseline models. Subsequently, the HighD dataset first column represents the scenario types, and the first row
is employed to verify the effectiveness of our model in indicates the types of vehicles present in each scenario. “CTG”
practical applications. Moreover, to demonstrate the strong is the abbreviation of “constant time gap”, which stands
customization capability of VSD-AD, we modified different for the vehicle that follows the constant time car-following
modules of the VSD-AD model on both datasets to fit actual model where drivers can maintain a consistent desired distance
needs. from the vehicle in front. The “TD” column, representing
21716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I B. Baselines and Metrics
 D ISTRIBUTION OF V EHICLE T YPES IN D IFFERENT S CENARIOS
 1) Baselines: To demonstrate the superiority of our work,
 we compared it with the most advanced trajectory anomaly
 detection algorithms and heuristic algorithms on the same
 trajectory dataset. Our baselines primarily include:
 • Linear Temporal Interpolation (LTI) [52] approximates
 a trajectory by interpolating between trajectory points at
 the first and last time steps.
 • Constant Velocity Model (CVM) [53], which assumes
 TABLE II that an agent’s next step velocity and direction are the
 S IMULATION DATA T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET D ISTRIBUTION same as the previous two sampling points. This approach
 has even surpassed some neural network algorithms due
 to their erroneous assumptions.
 • Robust Tensor Recovery (RTR) [54] introduces a tensor
 decomposition method that helps recover low-rank tensor
 values containing vehicle information and compares them
 with normal patterns to detect sparse anomalies.
 • Sequence to Sequence Learning (seq2seq) [55] employs
 a classic encoder-decoder neural network architecture
 TABLE III
 with LSTM to capture the spatiotemporal relationships of
 H IGH D DATA T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET D ISTRIBUTION
 vehicle trajectories, which is used to recognize patterns.
 • Spatiotemporal Graph Auto-Encoder (STGAE-biv),
 a variant from [52], defines a weighted adjacency matrix
 through a kernel function incorporating the distances
 between agents and uses a bivariate Gaussian reconstruction loss to build the encoder-decoder to obtain the
“Traffic Demand”, displays the specific traffic volume for each
 anomaly score.
scenario in terms of vehicles per lane per hour, simulating
 • DSAB [20], an autoencoder composed of RGAT blocks
various traffic demands including free flow and congested
 that captures the relationships of social dynamics between
conditions. The remaining values in the table indicate the
 vehicles, where the most crucial vehicles for the
distribution of each vehicle type within the respective scenario.
 ego-vehicle are assigned attention coefficients through an
The dataset is divided into six distinct scenarios. Among them,
 attention mechanism.
the Comprehensive scenario consists predominantly of normal
vehicles along with all other types of abnormal vehicles. This Among all the baselines, LTI and CVM are simple
scenario is complex and closely reflects real-world conditions, parameter-free reconstruction methods, while the others
thereby emphasizing the model’s robustness. In the Normal require learning model parameters to capture non-linear patscenario, abnormalities are limited to Speeding and Slow terns. Both can only handle simple non-free-flow scenarios
categories only. Each of the remaining scenarios focuses on a with minor vehicle speed changes. RTR, Seq2seq, CVM, and
single abnormality type, highlighting the common limitation LTI consider only the trajectory of the ego-vehicle itself,
of models in detecting only one or two specific anomalies while STGAE-biv and DSAB demonstrate the social dynamics
rather than a comprehensive range. interactions between vehicles.
 Unlike most studies that focus only on common anomalies 2) Metrics: Similar to the validation metrics used in most
such as speeding, tailgating, and stalled vehicles, we have anomaly detection works in practical experiments, we adhere
also examined slow driving behaviors, which are difficult to the following metrics:
to learn using single-vehicle methods. The specific distribu- • ROC-AUC score, a common indicator in the field of
tion of the simulation dataset in this work is presented in anomaly detection. Firstly, sort real labels and Sco based
Table II. on the descending order of Sco values. Subsequently,
 2) HighD Dataset: The real-world dataset HighD was col- it calculates the AUC using the sorted Sco and correlected by the Technical University of Munich using drones and sponding real labels’ values. The ROC curve is plotted
other tools on local highways, amassing a total of 16.5 hours with False Positive Rate (FPR) on the x-axis and True
of high-definition traffic video data. In this work, we selected Positive Rate (TPR) on the y-axis. The AUC under the
approximately 5.8 hours of highway vehicle trajectory data ROC curve is typically computed using the following
as our training set, which includes scenarios of both clear formula:
 j∈neg 1( pi > q j )
and congested traffic conditions on a three-lane highway, with
 P P
 i∈ pos
corresponding traffic flows ranging from 1200 to 3600 vehicles AU C = , (20)
 | pos| · |neg|
per lane per hour. Subsequently, we used a 15-minute segment
with a traffic flow of approximately 2300 vehicles per lane per where pos and neg are sets of positive and negative
hour as our test set. The detailed distribution is presented in class samples respectively, pi and q j represent the pre-
Table III. dicted probabilities (here denoted as Sco) for the i-th
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21717

 positive sample and j-th negative sample. The symbol TABLE IV
 1(·) denotes the indicator function, which equals 1 if the H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS ON THE VSD-AD
 M ODEL U SING S IMULATION DATASET
 condition inside the parentheses holds true, and 0 otherwise.
 • Precision@k. This setting is merely for purposes such
 as manually validating a fixed number of anomalies,
 where Pr ecision@k measures the relevance among our
 specified k samples. The mathematical expression is:
 P
 i∈top_k_indices lables[i]
 pr ecision@k = , (21)
 k
 where top_k_indices is a collection of indices corresponding to the top k highest predicted values, identified
 using a fast partitioning algorithm. labels refers to the
 array of true labels, and k denotes the number of top
 predicted values that are of interest to us.
 • Average precision, which averages the precision-recall the neighbor distance threshold δx to 0.2, and set the batch size
 data into a single value. First, we need to com- to 128, with other parameters configured the same as in the
 pute the Precision-Recall (PR) curve. The definition of simulation dataset.
 pr ecision@k is shown in Eq. (21). The definition of Given that our proposed VSD-AD model requires a constant
 r ecall@k can then be expressed as: number of vehicles in each time window, many vehicle trajec-
 P tories are not complete, such as those entering or leaving the
 i∈top_k_indices lables[i]
 r ecall@k = . (22) observed road segment. Our approach is as follows: For the
 Total positive examples TransModeler Simulation dataset, owing to its large volume
 Next, we compute the Average Precision (AP). Typically, and controllable data source, we directly discard all incomplete
 the area under the PR curve is approximated by discretiz- vehicle trajectories. For the real-world HighD dataset, due to
 ing the PR curve, which sums instead of integrating to its uncontrollable data source, containing numerous incomapproximate the area under the PR curve. plete segments and shorter sampling intervals, we complete the
 X incomplete vehicle trajectories through linear extrapolation,
 AP ≈ (r ecall@k − r ecall@(k − 1)) · pr ecision@k,
 assuming a constant vehicle speed for the extrapolated parts.
 k
 These are masked during loss computation to prevent them
 (23) from influencing the experimental results.
 where k iterates over all non-decreasing points on the PR
 curve (points where recall does not decrease). Therefore, D. Results and Analysis
 the AP function computes the Average Precision using
 In this section, we conduct a quantitative analysis and
 the aforementioned process, which evaluates the balance
 compare the performance of our model on TransModeler
 between precision and recall when predicting positives.
 Simulation data with baselines across different scenarios.
 We also perform ablation studies and hyperparameter analyses
C. Implementation Details to understand the impact of each model component and the
 The hyperparameter settings for validating our VSD-AD variations in hyperparameters on performance.
model on simulation data are presented in Table IV. The 1) Model Comparison: In this section, we not only compare
parameters are divided into three parts according to the different anomaly vehicle detection methods in comprehensive
process: graph convolution, model, and training parameters. scenarios but also evaluate the performance of anomaly scene
Notably, the parameter δx representing the distance threshold detection against baselines. Subsequently, we compare the
between neighbors differs for detecting anomalous vehicles performance of anomaly vehicle detection in other scenarios.
and anomalous scenarios, being 0.1 miles and 0.15 miles, All baseline methods utilize the formula 18 and 19 to compute
respectively. Based on W and sample_time, the graph depth anomaly scores.
is determined to be 15. In the model parameter settings, the Initially, we conduct benchmark tests on the validation
recommended calculation method for NFQ embedding space is set, where all anomalous social dynamics are manifested on
K = 2dh , and we adopt a slightly larger vector space to better highways. The comparative experimental results for anomaly
aid quantification. The aggr e_list indicates a combination of vehicle detection can be seen in Table V. Apart from DSAB,
masked min and mean aggregators for the MMA aggregator, which captures inter-node correlations through graph attention
the rationale for which is detailed in Section III-C. It’s mechanisms, our method is the only one capable of identifying
worth mentioning that, in the Training section, lr represents specific behaviors, such as anomalous vehicles that deviate
the initial learning rate, which is halved every 50 epochs. from typical social dynamics. Concerning precision across
Gradient clipping is used to prevent gradient explosion, with different k values, most methods do not exceed 0.6 and
a maximum norm of 1. generally fall within the range of 0.1-0.3. This is because
 For the HighD dataset, the window size W is set to 10s, the social relationships between vehicles cannot be identified
leading to a graph depth of 10. Apart from this, we also adjust through simple mathematical methods or neural networks
21718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE V
 A BNORMAL V EHICLE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON THE
 T EST S ET OF C OMPREHENSIVE S CENARIO

 TABLE VI
 A BNORMAL S CENE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON THE
 T EST S ET OF C OMPREHENSIVE S CENARIO

modeling individual vehicles. This microscopic approach to Fig. 4. Influence of different parameters. The model tends to favor the
anomaly vehicle detection highlights this fact. In contrast, our min-mean aggregator for fitting the data. Regarding the size of the code book
method achieves a precision of over 0.7, even approaching embedding space, larger spaces enhance model accuracy but must be carefully
 balanced to avoid weakening quantization capabilities. The model exhibits
0.9 at its peak, where DSAB and our method are roughly insensitivity towards dropout and sampling time, affording us greater freedom
comparable. Moreover, our average precision surpasses that in parameter selection.
of most methods by approximately 0.6%, and similarly, our
ROC-AUC score is approximately 0.18% higher. These experimental results demonstrate that our VSD-AD method can in Table VII. From the metrics of pre@100 and Ave Pre,
delve deeper into the neighbor relationships between vehi- it can be observed that for slow and stalled vehicles, most
cles. While STGAE-biv and DSAB can also identify social methods fail to recognize their patterns. Only by deeply
relationships between vehicles, the former fails to capture modeling the social relationships between vehicles can their
lane-changing behaviors well due to its use of bivariate anomalies be effectively detected. In these two scenarios, our
Gaussian trajectory loss, and the latter does not fully explore method achieves optimal performance, with approximately a
neighbor relationships. Not to mention that baselines like 1% improvement in each metric compared to the second-
Seq2Seq, RTR, CVM, and LTI are unable to identify dynamic highest method.
social relationships at all. It is evident that almost all methods, including the
 Furthermore, we conducted comparative experiments on the non-parametric approach CVM specifically designed for
performance of anomaly scene detection among all methods, speeding and tailgating scenarios, perform well in the speeding
as shown in Table VI. Since anomaly scene detection involves scenario. Although DSAB stands out as the most outstanding,
macroscopically identifying abnormal patterns in entire scene almost unbeatable, reaching an impressive 0.995 at ROC-AUC,
segments, most methods perform well in this aspect. For the performance gap of our model remains within an acceptinstance, sudden deceleration, braking, or unreasonable accel- able range. Given that CVM follows different car-following
eration of anomalous vehicles in specific scenes can be easily dynamics in its initial setup, its performance surpassing all
identified by simple non-parametric methods like LTI and methods in the tailgating scenario is not surprising. However,
CVM. Moreover, when anomalous vehicles are present in it is worth noting that no method outperforms ours on every
a scene, the scene’s anomaly score is significantly higher metric. we consistently outperform others in most scenarios.
compared to normal patterns. 2) Hyper Parameter Analysis: In this section, we explore
 Nevertheless, our method still maintains a leading position the impact of different hyperparameter configurations on
among all methods, with approximately a 2% improvement the model, considering the customization capability of our
in precision and ROC-AUC indicators. This is notewor- proposed model. We employ different GRU-built graph convothy, considering that anomaly scene detection is generally lution modules to validate the model’s sensitivity to them. The
well-addressed by existing methods due to its reliance on RMMA (Recurrent Multi-head Message Aggregator) built-in
macro-level recognition of abnormal patterns in entire scene aggregator combinations used are min, min-mean, and minsegments, unlike the more nuanced anomaly vehicle detection. mean-max.
 Next, we compared the performance between all baselines Firstly, we investigate the sensitivity of the model to the
and VSD-AD in other distinct scenarios, including slow, hidden dimension during the model and social dynamics
speeding, tailgating, and stalled. The results can be referenced relationship graph construction process. From Figure 4a, it can
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21719

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE OF A BNORMAL V EHICLE D ETECTION IN D IFFERENT I NDEPENDENT S CENARIOS

be observed that the model is not sensitive to the hidden
dimension, and there is no discernible pattern. To ensure fewer
model parameters, we choose 5 as the hidden dimension. Next,
by observing Figures 4b, 4c, and 4d, the distance threshold
signifies that vehicles within this threshold are defined as
neighbor nodes during the construction of the spatiotemporal
relationship graph. When the value is 0, the model focuses
only on a single vehicle without considering social dynamics.
From Figure 4b, it is evident that the model’s performance is
optimal when the distance is 0.1.
 Considering the time dimension, we initially set the sampling interval to 1 second and change the window size from
5 seconds to 20 seconds. Then, we fix the window size at
15 seconds and change the sampling interval from 1 second Fig. 5. The ablation study reveals that the MMA module significantly
 enhances the overall performance of the model, whereas the NFQ module,
to 4 seconds. Figures 4c and 4d show that different window while contributing to improvements, functions more akin to fine-tuning the
sizes and sampling frequencies have minimal impact on the model.
overall performance of the model. The model achieves optimal performance when the embedding space for RMMA is Across each scenario, there is an approximate 0.26 drop in
set to 256, and it is sensitive to this parameter according accuracy. Conversely, solely eliminating the NFQ module does
to 4e. not lead to substantial fluctuations in the model’s performance,
 Finally, considering the introduced NFQ module, Figure 4f typically resulting in a 1%-2% difference in accuracy.
compares the impact of its parameter settings. It can be
observed that after reaching an optimal solution, further E. Qualitative Results
growth in the dropout does not contribute to improving the
model. In this section, we qualitatively studied the performance of
 Each line plot in Figure 4 illustrates the impact of different our proposed VSD-AD model on high-definition data captured
RMMA built-in aggregator combinations under various param- by drones in the real world. Unlike simulated data, the
eters. In summary, the min-mean aggregator combination is HighD dataset has relatively fewer trajectories and different
most suitable for fitting the model to the simulated dataset. road condition patterns. However, our model still manages to
It is essential to note that aggregators like min, mean, and capture these patterns and detect anomalies.
max do not indicate the nearest, average, and farthest distances The data in HighD primarily originates from German highin the spatiotemporal vehicular social dynamics graph, but ways, where speed limit policies are relatively lenient, with
rather their impact on ego-vehicles as indicated by the masked some areas even having unrestricted speeds. Figure 6a illusrepresentations learned by the MLP formula. trates the road conditions during normal driving. Calculated
 from the training set, the average speeds from right to left lanes
 3) Ablation Study: In this study, we aim to evaluate the are 56, 69, and 76 mph, respectively. Similar to driving rules
impact of specific modules within the proposed VSD-AD in China, faster vehicles tend to be closer to the left, while
model on the overall model performance by selectively remov- slower ones are inclined to be on the right. Therefore, judging
ing them. We objectively assess the influence of the MMA a vehicle’s abnormality solely based on whether its speed
(Multi-Mask Aggregator) module and the NFQ (Neighbor exceeds the limit is insufficient. It’s also necessary to consider
Fusion Queue) module on the model using the AUC (Area if its speed aligns with other vehicles in the same lane.
Under the Curve) metric on a simulated dataset across four Otherwise, it should be considered abnormal. In this section,
scenarios (Slow, Speeding, Tailgating, Stalled). Notably, the we manually inspected the segments where the vehicles with
MMA module utilizes a min-mean aggregator combination. the highest anomaly scores were found. We discovered that
 As depicted in Figure 5, the removal of the MMA mod- the abnormal vehicles fell into the two categories mentioned
ule, replaced with GCN (Graph Convolutional Network) for earlier: speeding/slowing down, indicating aggressive driving
graph convolution operations to process neighboring vehicle with excessive/insufficient acceleration and speeds not consisinformation, results in a significant performance decrease. tent with the normal range of the lane.
21720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 speed, causing vehicle number 4 to brake urgently. Our model
 accurately labels vehicle number 4 as normal in this scenario.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 In this study, we address the critical task of detecting
 anomalous social dynamics using trajectories obtained from
 a high-speed highway video surveillance system supported by
 the Internet of Things. Our approach focuses on employing
 VSD-AD, an innovative autoencoder supported by recurrent
 multi-mask aggregators, to precisely identify anomalous vehicles. By leveraging this method, we successfully capture the
 complex spatiotemporal dynamics of trajectory patterns, taking
 into account the interactions between neighboring vehicles
 and the inherent randomness in driving behavior. Through
 comprehensive experiments on both simulated and real-world
 datasets, our model demonstrates its scalability, making it
 suitable for large-scale highway monitoring systems with
 thousands of vehicles. Furthermore, our user-customizable
 approach exhibits significant efficacy in detecting various
 anomalous scenarios. Particularly noteworthy is its outstanding performance in identifying anomalies in individual
 vehicles, placing it at the forefront of anomaly detection
 methods. This implies its potential to accurately pinpoint
 specific problematic vehicles within massive traffic flows,
 thereby promoting enhanced traffic management and safety
 protocols.
 Regarding the shortcomings and perspectives of this study,
 it is notable that the MMA modules incur significant computational costs, requiring several hours for training in our
 experimental setup. Despite achieving commendable results
 in both simulation and real-world testing, there remains a
 pressing need to enhance the algorithm’s time complexity in
 the immediate future. Moreover, the VSD-AD model operates
 on a data-driven basis, necessitating extensive data acquisition and preprocessing efforts, particularly challenging in
 obtaining highway data, which demands substantial costs,
 time, and manpower. To address this challenge, we anticipate
 that advancements can swiftly be made through temporal
 data reconstruction techniques or the generation of highway
 imagery via visual direction neural networks and data augmentation solutions [56], thereby augmenting the quantity of
 authentic data and reducing deployment costs for the model.
Fig. 6. Qualitative results. The visualization demonstrates the detection of
the top two instances with the highest anomaly scores by the model. The R EFERENCES
reconstructed scenes appear significantly different from the original scenes,
 [1] W. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Gong, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, and W. Wei,
yet the model successfully discerns abnormal and suspicious vehicles within
 “An attention-based deep learning framework for trip destination predicthem.
 tion of sharing bike,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
 pp. 4601–4610, Jul. 2021.
 We visualize our experimental results in Figure 6, showcas- [2] W. Wang et al., “Realizing the potential of the Internet of Things for
 smart tourism with 5G and AI,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 295–301,
ing the top two scenes with the highest anomaly scores from Nov./Dec. 2020.
four perspectives: speed, acceleration, normalized anomaly [3] Y. Chang, E. Tanin, G. Cong, C. S. Jensen, and J. Qi, “Trajectory similarscores, and normalized anomaly scores reconstructed by the ity measurement: An efficiency perspective,” 2023, arXiv:2311.00960.
model. Each arrowhead dot represents the starting point, while [4] X. Xie, C. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. N. Wu, and S. Zhu, “Congestion-aware
 multi-agent trajectory prediction for collision avoidance,” in Proc. IEEE
the triangle represents the end point. In the acceleration view Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2021, pp. 13693–13700.
that is shown in Figure 6b, arrows pointing in the opposite [5] H. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, and B. Yin, “Fine-grained accident
direction indicate vehicles are decelerating. In Figure 6b, vehi- detection: Database and algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33,
 pp. 1059–1069, 2024.
cle number 1 suddenly decelerates without any interference
 [6] M. N. Azadani and A. Boukerche, “Driving behavior analysis guidelines
from vehicles ahead. In Figure 6c, vehicle number 1 attempts for intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
to accelerate from lane 2 to lane 1, which requires a higher vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6027–6045, Jul. 2022.
HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE 21721

 [7] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly [29] J. Li, H. Shi, Y. Guo, G. Han, R. Yu, and X. Wang, “TraGCAN:
 analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, Trajectory prediction of heterogeneous traffic agents in IoV systems,”
 vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022. IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7100–7113, Apr. 2023.
 [8] H. Ghahremannezhad, H. Shi, and C. Liu, “Object detection in traffic [30] X. Kong, H. Lin, R. Jiang, and G. Shen, “Anomalous sub-trajectory
 videos: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7, detection with graph contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE
 pp. 6780–6799, Jul. 2023. Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9800–9811, Jul. 2024, doi:
 [9] B. Zhao, P. Han, and X. Li, “Vehicle perception from satellite,” IEEE 10.1109/TVT.2024.3382685.
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, [31] W. Ju et al., “A comprehensive survey on deep graph representation
 Apr. 2024. learning,” Neural Netw., vol. 173, May 2024, Art. no. 106207.
[10] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi- [32] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
 attention network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 Intell., Apr. 2020, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1234–1241. pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[11] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “An efficient approach for anomaly detection in [33] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
 traffic videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,”
 Jun. 2021, pp. 4236–4244. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781,
[12] Y. Zhao, W. Wu, Y. He, Y. Li, X. Tan, and S. Chen, “Good practices Oct. 2022.
 and a strong baseline for traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF [34] A. Stocco, M. Weiss, M. Calzana, and P. Tonella, “Misbehaviour pre-
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 3993–4001. diction for autonomous driving systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 42nd Int.
[13] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, P. P. Roy, and A. Mitra, “Vehicular Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computtrajectory classification and traffic anomaly detection in videos using ing Machinery, Oct. 2020, pp. 359–371, doi: 10.1145/3377811.3380353.
 a hybrid CNN-VAE architecture,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., [35] J. Wang et al., “Anomalous trajectory detection and classification based
 vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11891–11902, Aug. 2022. on difference and intersection set distance,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
[14] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 2487–2500, Mar. 2020.
 aided weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveil- [36] A. Aboah, M. Shoman, V. Mandal, S. Davami, Y. Adu-Gyamfi, and
 lance videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, A. Sharma, “A vision-based system for traffic anomaly detection using
 May 26, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3274611. deep learning and decision trees,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
[15] M.-H. Oh and G. Iyengar, “Sequential anomaly detection using inverse Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 4207–4212.
 reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. [37] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
 Disc. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1480–1490. adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
[16] Y. Cheng, B. Wu, L. Song, and C. Shi, “Spatial-temporal recurrent neural Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
 network for anomalous trajectories detection,” in Advanced Data Mining [38] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning for
 and Applications, J. Li, S. Wang, S. Qin, X. Li, and S. Wang, Eds., multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 565–578. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024.
[17] Y. Ding, W. Zhang, X. Zhou, Q. Liao, Q. Luo, and L. M. Ni, “FraudTrip: [39] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 Taxi fraudulent trip detection from corresponding trajectories,” IEEE attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12505–12517, Aug. 2021. Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[18] D. Zhang, Z. Chang, S. Wu, Y. Yuan, K.-L. Tan, and G. Chen, “Con- [40] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
 tinuous trajectory similarity search for online outlier detection,” IEEE and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4690–4704, Oct. 2022. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
[19] A. M. Vegni and V. Loscri, “A survey on vehicular social networks,” Dec. 2023.
 IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2397–2419, 4th [41] H. Tu, S. Yu, V. Saikrishna, F. Xia, and K. Verspoor, “Deep outdated fact
 Quart., 2015. detection in knowledge graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining
[20] Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and D. Work, “Detecting socially abnormal Workshops (ICDMW), Shanghai, China, Dec. 2023, pp. 1443–1452.
 highway driving behaviors via recurrent graph attention networks,” in [42] F. Xia et al., “CenGCN: Centralized convolutional networks with vertex
 Proc. ACM Web Conf. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing imbalance for scale-free graphs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
 Machinery, Apr. 2023, pp. 3086–3097, doi: 10.1145/3543507.3583452. no. 5, pp. 4555–4569, May 2023.
[21] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural dis- [43] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
 crete representation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2018, arXiv:1710.10903.
 Syst., vol. 30, I. Guyon et al., Eds., Curran Associates, 2017, [44] J. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Hu, W. Wang, H. Zhang, and X. Hu,
 pp. 1–10. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ “Traffic flow matrix-based graph neural network with attention
 files/paper/2017/file/7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-Paper.pdf mechanism for traffic flow prediction,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 104,
[22] R. Krajewski, J. Bock, L. Kloeker, and L. Eckstein, “The highD dataset: Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102146. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 A drone dataset of naturalistic vehicle trajectories on German highways sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253523004621
 for validation of highly automated driving systems,” in Proc. 21st Int. [45] P. Wang, K. Liu, L. Jiang, X. Li, and Y. Fu, “Incremental mobile
 Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Nov. 2018, pp. 2118–2125. user profiling: Reinforcement learning with spatial knowledge graph
[23] X. Kong, J. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. He, X. Zhao, and G. Shen, “Mobile for modeling event streams,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 trajectory anomaly detection: Taxonomy, methodology, challenges, and Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. New York, NY, USA: Assodirections,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19210–19231, ciation for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2020, pp. 853–861, doi:
 Jun. 2024. 10.1145/3394486.3403128.
[24] X. Liu et al., “Traffic anomaly prediction based on joint static-dynamic [46] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang,
 spatio-temporal evolutionary learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., “Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 5356–5370, May 2023. data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
[25] W. Wang et al., “Vehicle trajectory clustering based on dynamic pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023.
 representation learning of Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [47] Z. Zhang and L. Zhao, “Unsupervised deep subgraph anomaly detec-
 Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3567–3576, Jun. 2021. tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
[26] C. Vishnu, V. Abhinav, D. Roy, C. K. Mohan, and C. S. Babu, pp. 753–762.
 “Improving multi-agent trajectory prediction using traffic states on [48] J. Hu et al., “SAMCL: Subgraph-aligned multiview contrastive learning
 interactive driving scenarios,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 8, no. 5, for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 pp. 2708–2715, May 2023. early access, Nov. 7, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3323274.
[27] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in [49] H. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. Fu, X. Wang, G. Chen, and C. Zhou, “Multi-scale
 driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, self-supervised graph contrastive learning with injective node augmenpp. 444–459, Jan. 2023. tation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 261–274,
[28] Q. Hu, G. Huang, H. Shi, Y. Lin, and D. Guo, “A short-term aircraft Jan. 2024.
 trajectory prediction framework using conditional generative adversarial [50] A. Sarígün and A. S. Rifaioglu, “Multi-mask aggregators for graph
 network,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Civil Aviation Saf. Inf. Technol. neural networks,” in Proc. 1st Learn. Graphs Conf., 2022, pp. 1–10.
 (ICCASIT), Oct. 2022, pp. 433–439. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=hZ3b8CskgC
21722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[51] R. Dey and F. M. Salem, “Gate-variants of gated recurrent unit (GRU) Minho Jo (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. B.A. degree from the Department of Industrial Engi-
 (MWSCAS), Aug. 2017, pp. 1597–1600. neering, Chosun University, Gwangju, South Korea,
[52] J. Wiederer, A. Bouazizi, M. Troina, U. Kressel, and V. Belagiannis, in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree from the Depart-
 “Anomaly detection in multi-agent trajectories for automated driving,” ment of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh
 in Proc. 5th Conf. Robot Learn., vol. 164, A. Faust, D. Hsu, and University, Bethlehem, PA, USA, in 1994. He is
 G. Neumann, Eds., Nov. 2022, pp. 1223–1233. [Online]. Available: currently a Full Professor with the Department of
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/wiederer22a.html Computer Convergence Software, Korea University,
[53] C. Schöller, V. Aravantinos, F. Lay, and A. Knoll, “What the constant Sejong, South Korea, where he is also the Direcvelocity model can teach us about pedestrian motion prediction,” IEEE tor of the IoT & AI Laboratory. His research
 Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1696–1703, Apr. 2020. interests include IoT, blockchain, LLM/ChatGPT,
[54] Y. Hu and D. B. Work, “Robust tensor recovery with fiber outliers artificial intelligence and optimization theory, big data, network secufor traffic events,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 15, no. 1, rity, cloud/edge computing, wireless energy harvesting, and autonomous
 pp. 1–27, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3417337. vehicles. Average number of citations per publication authored by him
[55] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning (from 2012 to 2022) is 41.7 and Average Field-Weighted Citation Impact
 with neural networks,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. (FWCI) of him (from 2012 to 2022) is 4.42 (based on SCOPUS SciVal).
 Syst. (NIPS), Montreal, QC, Canada, vol. 2. Cambridge, MA, USA: He was a recipient of the 2018 IET Best Paper Premium Award by the
 MIT Press, 2014, pp. 3104–3112. United Kingdom’s Royal Institute of Engineering and Technology. He was
[56] Z. Wang et al., “A comprehensive survey on data augmentation,” 2024, awarded with the 2011 Headong Outstanding Scholar Prize. He is one of
 arXiv:2405.09591. the founders of the Samsung Electronics LCD Division. He is the Founder
 and the Editor-in-Chief of KSII Transactions on Internet and Information
 Systems (SCIE/JCR and SCOPUS indexed). He was the South Korea’s
 Presidential Commission on Policy Planning. He was an Associate Editor
 of IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, IEEE ACCESS, and IEEE I NTERNET OF
 T HINGS J OURNAL; and an Editor of IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATION
 and Network.

 Zehao Hu received the B.Sc. degree in net- Mario Collotta (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 work engineering from Wenzhou University, China, degree in computer science engineering and telecomin 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree munications from Catania University, Italy, in 2011.
 with the College of Software and the College of He received the confirmation by the National Advi-
 Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Uni- sory Commission in order to became a Full Professor
 versity of Technology, China. His research interests in July 2018. He was the Chair of the B.D. Course in
 include federated learning and telematics systems. Computer Science Engineering and the M.D. Course
 in Telematics Engineering, Kore University of Enna,
 Italy. He is scientific responsible of the Computer
 Engineering and Networks Laboratory (CENs Lab),
 where he coordinates several research projects. He is
 currently an Associate Professor of computer engineering with the Department
 of Engineering and Architecture, Kore University of Enna. His research
 interests include the study of innovative solutions and approaches in expert
 systems and networks, focused on real-time and secure application and the
 interaction design of related App. He has published more than 100 refereed
 Yuwei He received the B.Sc. degree from China articles in these areas. In the following some relevant metrics overview (last
 Jiliang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2022. She is update April 2024): Scopus H-index is 25 with 2229 Citations.
 currently pursuing the master’s degree with Zhejiang
 University of Technology, Hangzhou. Her research Guojiang Shen received the B.Sc. degree in control
 interests include urban computing and data mining. theory and control engineering and the Ph.D. degree
 in control science and engineering from Zhejiang
 University, Hangzhou, China, in 1999 and 2004,
 respectively. He is currently a Professor with the
 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology. His current research
 interests include artificial intelligence theory, big
 data analytics, and intelligent transportation systems.

 Xiangjie Kong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
 Yuqi Shen received the B.Sc. degree in computer Hangzhou, China. He is currently a Full Professor
 science and technology from Zhejiang University with the College of Computer Science and Technol-
 City College, China, in 2022. She is currently pur- ogy, Zhejiang University of Technology. Previously,
 suing the M.S. degree with the College of Software he was an Associate Professor with the School of
 and the College of Computer Science and Tech- Software, Dalian University of Technology, China.
 nology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China. He has published over 170 scientific papers in
 Her research interests include federated learning and international journals and conferences (with over
 recommendation systems. 140 indexed by ISI SCIE). His research interests
 include network science, mobile computing, and
 urban computing. He is a Senior Member of CCF and a member of ACM.