IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024 2745

 WAKE: A Weakly Supervised Business Process
 Anomaly Detection Framework via
 a Pre-Trained Autoencoder
 Wei Guan , Jian Cao , Senior Member, IEEE, Haiyan Zhao , Yang Gu , and Shiyou Qian , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The ability to detect anomalies in business processes practitioners and decision-makers in analyzing and managing
is crucial for achieving success in business operations. While unsu- businesses more effectively, and preventing severe consequences
pervised anomaly detection approaches have gained popularity in resulting from anomalies.
recent years due to their label-free nature, in some cases, a limited
number of labelled anomalies can be provided and using them can Many anomaly detection methods for business processes have
improve the performance of anomaly detection. To address this been proposed, including conformance checking-based [1], [2],
issue, we propose a novel framework for anomaly detection that information theory-based [3], [4], probabilistic [5], [6], [7] and
uses a pre-trained autoencoder to extract feature representations distance-based [8], [9]. They are either based on assumptions
of traces. An anomaly score generator based on a multi-layer
 about the data distribution or require extensive prior knowledge
perceptron is utilized to evaluate the extracted features. The entire
framework is trained using a joint loss that ensures the generated of the process, which is not always available in real life.
anomaly scores satisfy a specific distribution without compromising In recent years, deep learning [10] has achieved remarkable
the autoencoder’s ability to reconstruct normal traces. The feature feats in revealing complex relationships in high-dimensional
encoder is fine-tuned to provide insights into the cause of anomalies. data. Not surprisingly, it has become the mainstream ap-
Additionally, we design a novel technique for calculating anomaly
 proach for business process anomaly detection [11], [12],
scores to mitigate the effects of varying numbers of potential attribute values. We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic [13], [14], [15]. In these models, anomalies are detected in
and real-life logs, and our results demonstrate that our proposed terms of reconstruction errors directly and there is no need
method, WAKE, outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised deep to spend time annotating the data. However, without incorpobusiness process anomaly detection methods by a significant mar- rating prior knowledge about anomalies, the performance of
gin. Additionally, it outperforms other weakly supervised anomaly
 these approaches and the reliability of their results can not be
detection methods as well.
 guaranteed.
 Index Terms—Process mining, weakly supervised anomaly Providing supervision information to train a model can not
detection, deep learning, recurrent neural networks, autoencoder. only improve its performance but also enhance its trustworthiness. Unfortunately, fully-supervised anomaly detection approaches are often impractical as they require labelled training
 I. INTRODUCTION
 data containing both normal and anomalous samples [16]. How-
 NSURING smooth and organized business processes is
E crucial to maintaining a successful enterprise. This makes
it an important task for both IT departments and business adever, detecting anomalies using a limited number of labelled
 anomalies can be challenging. First, the insufficient supervised
 information provided by the limited number of labelled anomaministrators. Despite efforts to maintain the correct executions lies poses a significant challenge to generalize the detection
of these processes, anomalies are inevitable and can arise from of both known anomalies, whose behaviors resemble those of
various causes such as system malfunctions and human errors. labelled anomalies, and unknown anomalies, whose behaviors
Detecting anomalies in event traces of business processes can aid differ from those of labelled anomalies. Additionally, in the
 unlabelled samples, the large number of normal samples can
 Manuscript received 1 June 2023; revised 13 September 2023; accepted 3 potentially overwhelm the model’s ability to distinguish between
October 2023. Date of publication 13 October 2023; date of current version 19 normal and anomalous behavior.
April 2024. This work was supported in part by the China National Science Thankfully, researchers have proposed several approaches to
Foundation under Grant 62072301, and in part by the Program of Technology
Innovation of the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Munici- address these challenges. For instance, there has been research
pality under Grant 21DZ1205000. Recommended for acceptance by R.C.-W. into anomaly detection with incomplete supervision, which
Wong. (Corresponding author: Jian Cao.) involves labeling only a portion of the input data. The major
 Wei Guan, Jian Cao, Yang Gu, and Shiyou Qian are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, methods [17], [18], [19] focus on learning feature represen-
Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: guan-wei@sjtu.edu.cn; cao-jian@sjtu.edu.cn; tations while other approaches [20], [21], [22] directly learn
gu_yang@sjtu.edu.cn; qshiyou@sjtu.edu.cn). anomaly scores within an end-to-end learning framework. Ap-
 Haiyan Zhao is with the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology,
Shanghai 200093, China (e-mail: zhaohaiyan1992@foxmail.com). proximate labels can also be generated to detect anomalies by
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3322411 directly addressing the insufficiency of labels [23], [24], [25].

 1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2746 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

 r We provide a formal definition for the problem of detecting and interpreting the cause of anomalies in business
 processes using weak supervision.
 r We design the WAKE framework, which can detect and
 interpret the cause of anomalies by utilizing incomplete
 and inexact labelled anomalies.
 r We propose a new method for extracting feature representations of traces by utilizing a pre-trained autoencoder.
 r To interpret the causes of anomalies, we propose a novel
 calculation method for anomaly scores that mitigates the
Fig. 1. Illustration of our proposed framework. influence of varying numbers of potential attribute values.
 We conduct comprehensive experiments on synthetic and
 real-life datasets, which demonstrate that WAKE achieves su-
Moreover, the multiple-instance learning (MIL) framework is perior performance. Additionally, we carry out ablation studies
applied in [26], [27], [28] to detect anomalies with inexact to evaluate the impact of each individual component in our
labels. approach.
 Despite these advances, these weakly supervised anomaly The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
detection methods for other applications are not directly appli- introduces the related work. Section III gives the definition of
cable to business processes. First, they do not have the ability the problem. Then proposed framework WAKE is elaborated in
to learn the temporal relationships between events in traces Section IV. Section V reports the experiment results on both
of business processes. Second, these methods require identical synthetic and real-life logs. Finally, we conclude our work and
features as inputs, while traces have different lengths. Third, discuss future work in Section VI.
none of these methods simultaneously consider incomplete and
inexact supervision. II. RELATED WORK
 Recently, Elaziz et al. [29] introduced a novel weakly super-
 To align with the focus of our research, we provide a concise
vised anomaly detection method tailored for business processes.
 review of existing work in three areas: i) traditional business
However, a notable limitation of their approach is the absence of
 process anomaly detection approaches, ii) deep business process
explanations for the detected anomalies, which holds significant
 anomaly detection approaches, and iii) the utilization of weakly
practical importance. Identifying which attribute of an event
 supervised learning in anomaly detection. To serve as a point of
contributes to the detection of an anomaly using trace-level
 reference, we present an overview of these works in Table I.
(inexact) labels can be challenging due to ambiguous label
information.
 A. Traditional Business Process Anomaly Detection
 To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we design a
Weakly-supervised business process Anomaly detection frame- Approaches
worK via a prE-trained autoencoder, named WAKE, which is Traditional business process anomaly detection approaches
illustrated in Fig. 1. WAKE, which effectively exploits a few can be broadly divided into four categories.
labelled anomalies in logs, is optimized through a three-stage The conformance checking-based approaches [1], [30] are
training procedure to detect and interpret anomalies. WAKE the first category, which utilize conformance checking techleverages a pre-trained autoencoder capable of reconstructing niques to examine the synchronisation between the recorded
normal traces as a feature encoder. The feature representa- log and the corresponding process model. The process model
tion extracted from the feature encoder somehow reveals prior can either be given or discovered from the log using process
knowledge about the normal traces. Specifically, the feature mining techniques. In some studies [2], [31], the integration of
representation of the trace is composed of three factors (i.e., conformance checking techniques and association rule learning
latent representation, reconstruction error vector and maximum has been shown to improve the accuracy of anomaly detection.
reconstruction error vector) and characterizes whether the trace The second category is information theory-based apdeviates from the normal pattern. Latent representation is the proaches [3], [4], [32], [33], which applies statistical leverage
low-dimensional vector representation of the trace, while re- to detect trace-level anomalies in business processes while acconstruction error vector and maximum reconstruction error counting for varying trace lengths.
vector are the reconstruction errors of the trace. Following The third category is probabilistic approaches, which utilizes
feature extraction, the feature representations are fed into an probabilistic graphical models such as likelihood graph [34],
anomaly score generator to detect anomalies. The feature en- Bayesian networks [35], hidden Markov model (HMM) [5],
coder and the anomaly score generator are jointly optimized [6] and variable order Markov models (VOMMs) [7] to create
using both unlabelled traces and a limited number of labelled normal process behavior probabilistic models based on event
anomalies. The feature encoder can also be applied to interpret logs for detecting anomalies.
the cause of anomalies after fine-tuning to provide an insight into The fourth category involves distance-based approaches that
anomalies. consider the distance between traces for anomaly detection. For
 The main contributions of our work are as follows: example, Sureka [8] calculate the normalized longest common
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2747

 TABLE I
 BRIEF SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS

sub-sequence (NLCS) between traces and apply k nearest neigh- are time series, the authors in [12], [13], [15], [43] embed
bor (KNN) to detect anomalies. Kang et al. [36] use the LOF LSTM or GRU in the autoencoder to improve the reconstruction
algorithm based on k nearest neighbor imputation (KNNI) to capability of the model. GAE [14] and GAMA [44] convert
detect abnormal termination. In other studies [37], outlier-aware traces into graphs and utilize graph neural networks (GNN) to
clustering algorithms are used, while Hsu et al. [9] utilize the obtain graph encoding. Anomalies are detected based on the
duration of events to compute the distance between traces for reconstruction error of the graphs or traces.
detecting temporal anomalies. These approaches may be biased by the presence of anoma-
 The traditional approaches are either based on data distribu- lies, as they treat normals and anomalous data equally.
tion assumptions or require prior knowledge, and none of them Weakly Supervised: Krajsic et al. [45] propose a bidireccan take advantage of labelled anomalies. tional LSTM variational autoencoder with self-attention. This
 approach requires a clean log for training purposes. In the
 study by Elaziz et al. [29], reinforcement learning is employed
B. Deep Business Process Anomaly Detection Approaches to enhance information extraction from a limited number of
 Recently, deep business process anomaly detection have labelled anomalies.
gained significant attention due to their ability to extract complex Nevertheless, current approaches fall short in their ability to
underlying relationships from unlabelled data. These techniques interpret the fundamental causes underlying anomalies.
can be categorized into two main groups: unsupervised and
weakly supervised approaches.
 C. Weakly Supervised Learning for Anomaly Detection
 Unsupervised: Due to the user-friendly nature of unsupervised methods, they have garnered extensive research attention. Given the current limited research on applying weakly
Studies by Tavares et al. [38] and Junior et al. [39] encode supervised learning to business process anomaly detectraces as vectors using the word2vec [63] encoding method, tion, we conduct a thorough review of weakly supertaking into account semantic information about the process. vised learning approaches applied in anomaly detection
After encoding, the random forest algorithm [38] or one-class within various other domains. These studies leverage la-
SVM [39] can be applied to detect anomalous traces. Krajsic belled data to improve the anomaly detection performance,
and Franczyk [40] use an autoencoder to reconstruct traces and even though the supervision may be incomplete, inexact, or
detect anomalies based on reconstruction error. To overcome the inaccurate.
overfitting problem, Nolle et al. [11], [41] utilize a denoising Incomplete supervision refers to the situation where only part
autoencoder that introduces additive Gaussian noise over the of the input data is labelled. Some studies [17], [18], [19],
input vector. Nguyen et al. [12], [42] employ a variational [46], [47], [48] have utilized deep neural networks to extract
autoencoder (VAE), which is an autoencoder with additional anomaly-oriented representations from input data. While feature
constraints on the hidden representation. Considering that traces representation learning can enhance downstream detection, it
2748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

only provides indirect learning for anomaly scores. End-to- Please note that activity is a unique attribute in the attribute
end anomaly score learning frameworks such as DevNet [20], set A that reflects the control flow. Let te,a denote the value of
PReNet [21], and FEAWAD [22] can directly acquire anomaly attribute a of event e in trace t.
scores from trained models. In addition to using existing labels, Example 1: Given an attribute set A = {Activity, Country}.
active learning strategies are applied in [23], [24], [25] to gather t = [CRP, ES], [AIC, CN], [LEU, US], [AN, CN], [RA, FR]
more supervision. represents a trace containing five simple events taking place
 Anomaly detection with inexact supervision occurs when in chronological order. The value of the first attribute (i.e.,
labels are not as precise as required, i.e., only coarse-grained Activity) in the second event (i.e., [AIC, CN]) in trace t can
labels are available due to the high cost of labeling. In [26], be obtained with t2,1 = AIC.
[27], [28], [49], authors detect anomalies with inexact supervi- Next, we define the weakly supervised (i.e., with incomplete
sion via the multiple-instance learning (MIL) framework, where supervision) business process anomaly detection as follows:
video segments are considered as instances, while normal and Definition III.2 (Weakly Supervised Business Process
abnormal videos are classified as positive and negative bags, Anomaly Detection): Given a log L = t1 , t2 , . . . , tu ,
respectively. A self-reasoning framework proposed in [50] trains tu+1 , tu+2 , . . . , tu+g  containing u + g traces, where
neural networks by generating pseudo labels through binary U = t1 , t2 , . . . , tu  is a set of unlabelled traces and
clustering of video features. WETAS [51] uses dynamic time G = tu+1 , tu+2 , . . . , tu+g  with g  u is a very small set
wrapping (DTW) alignment to enhance detection performance. of labelled anomalies that provide some prior knowledge of
 Anomaly detection with inaccurate supervision occurs when anomalies, the goal is to detect some anomalous traces that
labels are not entirely accurate and may contain errors. Zhang differ significantly from the majority of traces in U .
et al. and Zhao et al. [52], [53] propose to learn a joint model However, it is not sufficient to only detect these anomalies, we
from multiple sets of noisy labels using ensemble learning. Gao also need to interpret the cause of anomalies (i.e., with inexact
et al. [54] propose a denoising network based on GAN for supervision), which are defined as follows:
anomaly detection in dynamic graphs that employs self-training Definition III:3 (Interpretation of the Cause of Anomalies).
to progressively refine inaccurate node labels. Given a set of labelled anomalies G and a set of detected
 Our proposed approach is superior to these methods, as it can anomalous traces D, which is a subset of unlabelled trace set,
detect anomalies with both incomplete and inexact supervision  determine which attribute a of which event e in
 the goal is to
in business processes. trace t ∈ G D is anomalous.

 IV. METHODOLOGY
D. Masked Autoencoding Techniques
 In this section, we introduce our proposed anomaly detection
 Masked autoencoders (MAE) have recently gained signififramework, WAKE, which employs a novel feature encoding
cant traction as a scalable self-supervised learning method. The
 strategy to overcome the limitations of inadequately labelled
seminal paper by He et al. [55] introduces masked autoencoders
 anomalies. Fig. 2 shows the architecture of WAKE, which
for self-supervised learning of image representations. This funcomprises an autoencoder-like feature encoder and an anomaly
damental contribution has paved the way for their exploration
 score generator that collaborate with each another within the
in various domains. For example, in [56], [57], MAEs are efmodel. The feature encoder converts the trace into a more meanfectively employed for learning graph representations. Notably,
 ingful feature representation, i.e., three factors that characterize
Huang et al. [58] extend the application of MAEs to the realm
 whether the trace deviates from the normal pattern, while the
of audio data.
 anomaly score generator generates an anomaly score based on
 Notably, MAEs have found utility in anomaly detection. The
 the feature representation from the feature encoder. The anomaly
authors in [59], [60] have harnessed MAEs to identify image
 score is a scalar between 0 and 1 indicating the probability
anomalies. Furthermore, the capabilities of MAEs extend to
 that the trace is an anomaly. WAKE is optimized through a
video anomaly detection [61], and even to the detection of
 three-stage training procedure to detect and interpret the cause of
anomalies in road networks [62].
 anomalies in the log. The following subsections provide details
 about the proposed framework.
 III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
 To set the foundation for the following sections, we will A. Feature Encoder
provide definitions for key terms including attribute, event, The objective of the feature encoder is to transform the input
trace, and log. trace into a meaningful feature representation that improves
 Definition III: 1 (Event, Trace, Log). Let A = anomaly detection. To accomplish this, we utilize an autoen-
{a1 , a2 , . . . , aA } denote a set of attributes, where A = |A| coder (AE) with recurrent layers to generate the feature reprerepresents the total number of attributes. For each attribute sentation. Particularly, three factors, namely the latent represena ∈ A, Va is the set of possible values. An event is a tuple tation, reconstruction error vector, and maximum reconstruction
e = [Va1 , Va2 , . . . , VaA ], where Va ∈ Va is a potential value for error vector, characterize whether the trace deviates from the
attribute a. A trace t is a sequence of events, and an event log normal pattern. In addition, we employ teacher forcing methods
L is a set of traces. We denote the number of events in a trace t to improve the convergence speed and reconstruction capability
by |t|, and the number of traces in an event log L by |L|. of the feature encoder.
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2749

Fig. 2. Architecture of WAKE where E = maxt∈L |t| is the maximum length of traces in log L and A is the total number of attributes.

 In order to make the model work properly, we pad the traces where Wsa is a learnable matrix and LeakyRELU(x) =
that are shorter than E with padding events to make their length max(0.1x, x) is a non-linear activation function. The first factor
equal to E, where E = maxt∈L |t| is the maximum length of of our feature representation is the concatenation of sa0 for all
traces in log L. As different attributes have distinct anomaly attributes a ∈ A:
patterns, we assign different embedding layers, bidirectional
gated recurrent units (BGRU) encoders, attention layers, gated s = a∈A sa0 (2)
recurrent units (GRU) [64] decoders, linear layers, and softmax, where  indicates concatenation.
to different attributes. We will now explain the process of reconstructing the value
 Due to the mathematical nature of neural networks, embed- of attribute a of event e. To capture the inherent relationships
ding layers are used to convert each attribute value te,a into among attributes, all the outputs of the BGRU encoders, H =
vector representation fea . GRUs typically learn information from {h11 , h12 , . . . , hA A
 E−1 , hE }, must be fed into the attention layer:
previous states. However, in cases where the current attribute
 a a T a a
value is influenced by both the attribute value preceding it ege,i = (Vα ) tanh(Wα [se−1 hi ]) (3)
and the one following it, the conventional learning behavior of a
 exp(ege,i )
 a
GRUs proves to be insufficient for accurately reconstructing the αe,i = a
 (4)
attribute value. Therefore, the embedding vectors fea are fed m exp(ege,m )
into the BGRU, which is an extension of GRU. The BGRU 
 cae = a
 αe,i hi (5)
consists of two GRUs: a forward GRU that accepts forward i
inputs and a backward GRU that accepts backward inputs. For
each attribute a of event e, the forward GRU generates forward where hi ∈ H, ·T represents transposition, Wα a
 is a learnable
 →
 − a a
 matrix, Vα is a learnable vector and se−1 is the hidden state of
hidden states hae , and the backward GRU generates backward
 ←− −−−− the GRU decoder for attribute a at the previous event e − 1.
hidden states haE+1−e . These hidden states are concatenated to
 → ←−−−−−
 − To improve the feature encoder’s reconstruction capability,
produce the BGRU output hae = [hae haE+1−e ]. To generate the we utilize the teacher forcing method, which is a widely used
latent representation sa0 based on the autoencoder for attribute technique in natural language processing. For the first attribute
 −→
a, the final hidden states of the forward GRU haE and the (Activity), we use the previous ground truth attribute value (i.e.,
 ←−
backward GRU haE are concatenated and fed into linear layers. activity name) te−1,1 to guide the reconstruction of the activity
The activation function used in the linear layer is the Leaky name for the current event e.
ReLU.
 s1e = GRU1 (s1e−1 , [c1e tf 1e−1 ])) (6)

 −→ ←− where s1e−1 is the hidden state of the first GRU decoder for the
 sa0 = LeakyRELU(Wsa [haE haE ]) (1) first attribute at previous event e − 1, tf 1e−1 is the embedding
2750 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

vector of te−1,1 and c1e is the output of the attention layer for the Algorithm 1: Training Procedure.
first attribute at event e. The initial hidden state of the first GRU
 Stage 1: Pre-training
decoder for the first attribute is s10 . The probability distribution
 Input: Unlabelled trace set U
p1e , which is the probability distribution over all possible values
 Output: Feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e )
of the first attribute (Activity) of event e, can be calculated by
 1: Randomly initialize Θf e
 p1e = Softmax(Wp1 [s1e c1e tf 1e−1 ]) (7) 2: for i = 1 to n_epochs1 do
 3: for j = 1 to n_batches1 do
which represents the linear layer and the softmax layer. 4: B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from U
 We assume that the value of the other attribute a is primarily 5: loss ← Calculate Lpre (B) from (13)
affected by the current activity name. Thus, we use the ground 6: Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the parameters
truth activity name te,1 of the current event e to predict the in Θf e
probability distribution over all possible values of attribute a of 7: end for
event e. The probability distribution pae can be computed by 8: end for
 sae = GRUa (sae−1 , [cae tf 1e ]) (8) 9: return ψ(·; Θf e )
 Stage 2: End-to-end optimization
 pae = Softmax(Wpa [sae cae tf 1e ]) (9) Input: Unlabelled trace set U , labelled anomaly set G
 Output: Feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e ), anomaly score
where tf 1e is the embedding vector of te,1 . generator ϕ(·; Θasg )
 Specifically, pae is a vector of dimension |Va |. Let pa = 10: Randomly initialize Θasg and load Θf e from the
 a
[p1 [t1,a ], . . . , pa|t| [t|t|,a ], 1, . . . , 1], where |t| is the original pre-trained feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e ) returned in stage
length of trace t and pae [te,a ] denotes the probability that the 1
value of attribute a of event e in trace t is te,a . The probability 11: for i = 1 to n_epochs2 do
vector can be represented as 12: for j = 1 to n_batches2 do
 13: B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from G
 p = a∈A pa (10)
 and U with probability β and 1 − β, respectively
 a loss ← Calculate Lete (B) from (16)
Take the negative logarithm of each element in p , we can ob- 14:
tain ra = [− log pa1 [t1,a ], . . . , − log pa|t| [t|t|,a ], 0, . . . , 0]. Then, 15: Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the
the second factor of the feature representation, i.e., the recon- parameters in Θf e and Θasg
struction error vector can be represented as 16: end for
 17: end for
 r = a∈A ra (11) 18: return ψ(·; Θf e ), ϕ(·; Θasg )
 Finally, the third factor of the feature representation, Stage 3: Fine-tuning 
i.e., the maximum reconstruction error vector is m = Input: Entire log L = U G
[max(r1 ), . . . , max(rA )] where max(ra ) represents the max- Output: Another feature encoder ψ (·; Θf e ) for
imum value in the vector ra . interpreting the cause of anomalies
 In summary, the input trace is characterized by the three 19: Θf e ← Load Θf e from the feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e )
factors (i.e., latent representation s, reconstruction error vector returned in stage 2
r and maximum reconstruction error vector m) and anoma- 20: for i = 1 to n_epochs3 do
lies in any one of these factors will be detected by WAKE. 21: for j = 1 to n_batches3 do
Each of these three factors has its own specific meaning. s is 22: B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from L
the low-dimensional vector representation of the trace, while 23: loss ← Calculate Lf t (B) from (17)
r and m are the reconstruction errors of the trace, which 24: Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the
have been shown to reflect anomalies in previous studies [11], parameters in Θf e
[12], [40]. 25: end for
 26: end for
B. Anomaly Score Generator 27: return ψ (·; Θf e )

 The anomaly score generator produces a scalar, i.e., an
anomaly score, between 0 and 1 based on the feature representation from the feature encoder. The anomaly score indicates
the probability that a trace is anomalous.
 The concatenation of three factors is processed by a multi- where zk and zk−1 are the activations at the k-th layer and k − 1-
layer perceptron (MLP) to map the input into an anomaly score. th layer, respectively. Wzk and bk are the weight and bias for the
Specifically, for each layer of the MLP, we have k-th layer. For the first layer of MLP, z0 = [srm]. For the
 last layer, we use the sigmoid activation function to map z k to
 zk = LeakyRELU(Wzk zk−1 + bk ) (12) a scalar between 0 and 1, producing the anomaly score z.
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2751

C. Training Procedure In Lasg , we employ different loss functions depending on the
 trace’s label. For an unlabelled trace, the loss increases linearly
 The training procedure of WAKE consists of three stages:
i) Pre-training: The feature encoder is trained to reconstruct as its anomaly score increases. However, for a labelled anomalous trace, we utilize a logarithmic function and square to achieve
normal traces. ii) End-to-end optimization: The feature encoder
 an exponential increase in loss as its abnormal score decreases.
and the anomaly score generator are jointly trained based on
the pre-trained feature encoder. iii) Fine-tuning: The end-to-end The square operation is applied to introduce a varying degree
 of monotonicity to vary the monotonicity of the logarithmic
optimized feature encoder is fine tuned to enable it to interpret
 function between 0 and 1. The primary objective of this equation
the cause of anomalies. The architecture parameters are trained
using mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and opti- is to assign a significantly higher loss to traces that have been
 confidently labelled as anomalous. By incorporating the logamized with Adam [65]. We use ψ(·; Θf e ) to denote an feature
encoder and ϕ(·; Θasg ) to denote an anomaly score generator, rithmic function, we effectively amplify the loss for these traces,
where Θf e and Θasg represent the model parameters for the magnifying their impact on the overall loss computation. This
 approach underscores the importance of accurately identifying
feature encoder and the anomaly score generator, respectively.
The training procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1. and penalizing labelled anomalies, as they are deemed to be
 It is worth noting that our anomaly detection framework more critical and necessitate greater attention during the training
 procedure.
is weakly supervised, meaning that only a limited number of
labelled anomalies are available. The set of unlabelled traces The second part of the loss function is to minimize the reconmay contain both normal and anomalous traces. However, as struction errors for normal traces, and minimize the minimum
 probabilities of attribute values in anomalous traces, which is
anomalies are rare in real-world and the majority of unlabelled
traces are normal, a straightforward strategy is employed: con- based on the idea that at least one attribute value in the anomalous
 trace is anomalous.
sidering all unlabelled traces as normal. This approach has been  
demonstrated to be effective in previous studies [20], [22]. Our  
experiments confirm that this simple strategy yields satisfactory Lre (B) = (1 − yt ) ri + yt min {pi } (15)
 pi ∈pt
performance. t∈B ri ∈rt

 1) Pre-Training: We first employ a pre-training stage to where rt represents the second factor of the feature representatrain the feature encoder to be able to reconstruct normal traces, tion of trace t. pt represents the probability vector of trace t.
providing a basic reference for the subsequent end-to-end Based on (14) and (15), our joint loss function can be formally
optimization. The pre-training stage is depicted in lines 1-9 of calculated as
Algorithm 1. The feature encoder is pre-trained with all
unlabelled traces by minimizing the reconstruction errors (i.e., Lete (B) = Lasg (B) + λLre (B) (16)
cross-entropy loss). Our objective is to reconstruct the value of where λ is a hyper-parameter to balance the contributions of two
each attribute a of each event e in each trace t ∈ B, where B is parts to the joint loss function.
a batch of traces: 3) Fine-Tuning: Finally, we fine-tune the feature encoder
 
 Lpre (B) = ri (13) obtained in stage 2 to obtain a new feature encoder so that
 t∈B ri ∈rt it can interpret the cause of anomalies. The fine-tuning stage
where rt represents the second factor of the feature is depictedin lines 19-27 of Algorithm 1. We use the entire
representation of trace t (i.e., the reconstruction error vector). log L = U G, which contains both labelled anomalous traces
 2) End-to-End Optimization: In stage 2, to ensure that and unlabelled traces without oversampling anomalies. The loss
WAKE was able to effectively detect anomalies, a mini-batch function in stage 3 is the same as that in (15).
is constructed by random sampling, i.e., we sample batch_size Lf t (B) = Lre (B) (17)
traces from labelled anomaly set G and unlabelled trace set U
with user-chosen probability β and 1 − β, respectively, to form
 D. Interpretation of the Cause of Anomalies
a mini-batch. In other words, the anomalies are oversampled
to address the sample imbalance. The end-to-end optimization The output of stage 3 (i.e., feature encoder) can be applied
stage is depicted in lines 10-18 of Algorithm 1. to interpret the cause of anomalies. With the input trace t, we
 Our objective is to make the anomaly scores generated by the consider the probability distribution pae over all possible values
anomaly score generator satisfy a specific distribution (i.e., the of attribute a of event e generated by the feature encoder.
anomaly scores of normal traces converge to 0 and the anomaly Intuitively, compared to a normal attribute value, the probascores of anomaly traces converge to 1.) without destroying bility of an anomalous one is lower. However, since the number
the ability of the feature encoder to reconstruct normal traces. of possible values for each attribute varies (i.e., |Va1 | = |Va2 |
Therefore, the first part of the loss function is: where a1 , a2 ∈ A), it would be unfair to rely solely on a lin-
  ear transformation of the probability of attribute values when
 Lasg (B) = [(1 − yt )zt + yt (log zt )2 ] (14) calculating the anomaly score for each attribute of each event.
 t∈B To mitigate this phenomenon, we design a novel anomaly score
where yt ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the current trace t is anoma- that is comparable across attributes. We consider the logarithm
lous (yt = 1) and zt represents the anomaly score of trace t. of the probability of the value of attribute a in event e to be a
2752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

random variable, then the difference
  between the expectation of Among these methods, GAE, DAE, VAE, LAE and BINet are
this random variable (i.e., pi ∈pae pi log pi ) and the logarithm deep unsupervised anomaly detection methods specifically for
of the probability of the actual attribute value (i.e., log pae [te,a ]) business processes. They apply different types of autoencoders
is defined as the anomaly score, which is similar to information to reconstruct traces and detect anomalies based on recongain in decision tree [66]. The introduction of the logarithm struction errors. DeepSAD and REPEN are weakly supervised
increases the anomaly score for low-probability attribute values, anomaly detection methods by extracting an anomaly-oriented
while this expectation compensates for the effect of the differ- representation. DevNet, PReNet and FEAWAD are also weakly
ence in the number of possible attribute values. The anomaly supervised anomaly detection methods by directly learning
score zea for attribute a of event e can be calculated by: anomaly scores. DAE, VAE, LAE and BINet are adapted to
 ⎛ ⎞ perform the interpretation of the cause of anomalies. However,
  the other methods are not proposed for business processes and
 zea = Sigmoid ⎝ pi log pi − log pae [te,a ]⎠ (18) they cannot interpret the cause of the anomalies.
 pi ∈pa
 e

 B. Parameter Settings and Metrics
where pi is the i-th element of vector pae . If the actual attribute
value has a low probability compared to the probability distri- WAKE is implemented based on PyTorch. In our experiment,
bution, then the anomaly score will be high. we apply two-layer BGRUs for encoding and two-layer GRUs
 for decoding in feature encoder. Dropout is applied after each
 layer of both BGRUs and GRUs in the feature encoder and
E. Complexity Analysis after each layer of the anomaly score generator to counteract
 Regarding the feature encoder, the computational complexity overfitting. We initialize weights using the initialization introof the embedding layer is O(EAxh), where h represents the duced in [67], and train the proposed model for 14 epochs
hidden layer size and x = max{|Va |}a∈A is the maximum of the in stage 1, 10 epochs in stage 2 and 4 epochs in stage 3
cardinalities of sets Va for all a in A. The computational com- (i.e., n_epochs1 = 14, n_epochs2 = 10, n_epochs3 = 4) with
plexity of the BGRU layer is O(EAh2 ). The linear layer used Adam optimizer [65]. In the absence of special statements, the
to obtain s0 has a computational complexity of O(Ah2 ). The hidden layer size of the BGRUs and GRUs is 64, the learning
attention mechanism introduces a complexity of O(E 2 A2 h2 ). rate is 0.0002, the batch size is 64, β used to handle the sample
The computational complexity of the GRU layer is O(EAh2 ), imbalance in stage 2 is 0.3 and λ in the joint loss is 10. To ensure
and the linear layer before the Softmax has a complexity of a fair comparison, the parameters for all the compared methods
O(EAxh). Note that x is usually smaller than EAh, the overall are set according to the values given in the original article. For
time complexity is O(E 2 A2 h2 ). the weakly supervised anomaly detection methods, we take ten
 Moving on to the anomaly score generator, the input dimen- percent of all anomalous traces as labelled anomalies and the
sion is the sum of the dimensions of vectors s, p and m. The other traces are unlabelled.
dimensions of vectors s, p and m are Ah, AE, and A respec- We employ the commonly used metric F −score which is the
tively. Note that, the dimension of the hidden layer size is always harmonic mean of P recision and Recall to evaluate the effecsmaller than the input dimension, the computational complexity tiveness of these methods. P recision and Recall are defined
of the anomaly score generator is O(A(E + h)2 ) = O(AE 2 ) or as P recision = T PT+F P TP
 P , Recall = T P +F N , and F −score =
O(Ah2 ) based on the relative order of magnitude of E and h. 2∗P recision∗Recall
 P recision+Recall , respectively, where T P , F N and F P denote
 Overall, when considering an event log comprising T traces, true positives, false negatives and false positives. The F −score
whether it pertains to the optimization process of the feature for each method is calculated based on the optimal threshold
encoder in stages 1 and 3, or the joint training of both the feature value, which is determined by using a grid search method.
encoder and the anomaly score generator in stage 2, the time The method has excellent anomaly detection performance when
complexity of each epoch is O(T E 2 A2 h2 ). F −score is close to 1. We conduct each experiment five times
 and report the mean F −score.
 V. EXPERIMENTS
 C. Artificial Anomalies
 In this section, we empirically evaluate the effectiveness
of WAKE on both synthetic and real-life datasets. WAKE is Similar to previous studies [3], [11], [13], [30], [34], we
implemented in Python, and the source code is accessible at create artificial anomalies in logs to evaluate the effectiveness
https://github.com/guanwei49/WAKE. of WAKE. We manually inject six types of anomalies into
 the logs, which are commonly observed in real-life business
 processes [13]. Fig. 3 illustrates the different anomalous traces
A. Compared Methods generated by applying the six types of anomalies to a normal
 To verify the superiority of the proposed method, we com- trace. The definitions of these anomaly types are as follows:
pare WAKE with ten state-of-the-art anomaly detection meth- r Skip: A sequence of events has been skipped.
ods: DAE [11], VAE [12], LAE [12], BINet [13], GAE [14], r Insert: A sequence of random events has been inserted.
DeepSAD [17], REPEN [18], DevNet [20], PReNet [21] and r Rework: A sequence of events has been executed a second
FEAWAD [22]. time.
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2753

 TABLE II
 STATISTICS OF THE LOGS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS

 cases from a hospital. iv) Request: This log contains events
 related to Requests for Payment. v) Prepaid: This log contains
 events related to prepaid travel costs. vi) Loan: This log contains events related to the loan application process of a Dutch
 financial institute. vii) Approval: This log contains information
 for loan and overdraft approvals processes from submission to
 eventual resolution (approval, cancellation, or rejection). viii)
 Declaration: This log contains events related to domestic travel
 declarations.
 The summary of statistics for each event log used in the
 experiments is presented in Table II. To evaluate the efficacy
 of our approach, we deliberately introduce ten percent artificial
Fig. 3. Different anomaly types applied to a normal trace.
 anomalies into both synthetic and real-life logs. This means that
 ten percent of the traces will be anomalous.
 r Early: A sequence of events has been executed too early,
 and hence is skipped later. E. Experiments on Synthetic Logs
 r Late: A sequence of events has been executed too late, and
 1) Performance Evaluation: Table III reports the perforhence is skipped earlier.
 r Attribute: Some attribute value has been replaced by an mance of weakly supervised business process anomaly detection
 and interpretation of the cause of anomalies of various methods
 incorrect value in some events.
 over eight synthetic logs. The best results are indicated using
 bold typeface. We have the following observations.
D. Dataset
 The proposed WAKE framework achieves the best perfor-
 We evaluate our method using both synthetic and real-life mance on all the synthetic logs in terms of weakly superlogs. To generate synthetic logs, we utilize simulation tech- vised business process anomaly detection and interpretation
nology and adopt eight different business process models [13]. of the cause of anomalies. In terms of anomaly detection, the
Among these models, two (Paper and P2P) are handmade, while F −scores of WAKE are on average 18.63% better than the
the remaining six (Small, Medium, Large, Huge, Gigantic, and best weakly supervised anomaly detection method (DevNet),
Wide) are randomly generated using the PLG2 tool [68]. The and the F −scores of WAKE are on average 27.48% better than
randomly generated process models have different numbers of the best deep unsupervised anomaly detection method (DAE).
activities and varying size ranges. We also use a likelihood This demonstrates that a few labelled anomalies are well levergraph [34] to generate causally dependent event attributes. Each aged by WAKE to improve the detection performance. While
synthetic log contains 2 to 5 attributes, and we generate a total existing weakly supervised anomaly detection methods are able
of 4 ∗ 8 = 32 synthetic logs that are free of anomalies. to exploit a few labelled anomalies, they do not take into account
 For real-life logs, there are eight commonly used logs, which the impact of the temporal nature of the events and the varying
include the following: i) Billing: This log contains events that length of traces in business processes. WAKE utilises BGRUs to
pertain to the billing of medical services provided by a hospital. capture the temporal information of events and employs a mask
ii) Receipt: This log contains records of the receiving phase mechanism to deal with varying trace lengths. More importantly,
of the building permit application process in an anonymous the reconstruction errors of traces, which is widely used in unmunicipality. iii) Sepsis: This log contains events of sepsis supervised anomaly detection, is also incorporated into WAKE
2754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

 TABLE III
 F −scoreS OVER SYNTHETIC LOGS WHERE “AD” REPRESENTS WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION AND “IA” REPRESENTS
 INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES. THE BEST RESULTS ARE INDICATED USING BOLD TYPEFACE

 increases and approaches 1. However, other methods require a
 higher γ to achieve a relatively good performance (e.g., at least
 40% labelled anomalies are required to achieve a F −score of
 0.9 for DevNet). This demonstrates that our approach requires
 fewer labelled anomalies and saves on human annotation costs.
 REPEN hardly varies with γ, whose performance is the worst.
 Even 50% labelled anomalies are not enough to surpass the
 best unsupervised method, which may be because the distance
 between the traces does not reflect the nature of the anomaly.
Fig. 4. F −scores under different ratios of labelled anomalies over synthetic In terms of interpretation of the cause of anomalies, from
logs. Fig. 4(b), we can see that the F −score of WAKE increases with
 the γ and is always higher than the best unsupervised method.
 This illustrates that coarse-grained labels are helpful to obtain
to improve detection performance. In terms of interpretation more accurate fine-grained labels and the proposed calculation
of the cause of anomalies, the F −scores of WAKE are on of anomaly scores for each attribute value does indeed mitigate
average 16.16% better than the best deep unsupervised anomaly the effect of the difference in the number of possible values of
detection method (BINet). This suggests that the feature encoder different attributes.
which is used to extract feature representations of traces to reflect
anomalies can be fine-tuned and well adapted to interpret the
cause of the anomalies. F. Experiments on Real-Life Logs
 2) Impact of Degree of Supervision: Next, we evaluate the 1) Performance Evaluation: To validate the applicability of
impact of degree of supervision i.e., different ratios of labelled our method, we conduct experiments on eight real-life logs.
anomalies γ. F −score is averaged over all synthetic logs. The results are shown in Table IV. For the datasets Billing and
 Fig. 4(a) shows the F −scores under different ratios of la- Declaration, the hidden layer size of WAKE is set to 16.
belled anomalies γ (i.e., γ percent of all anomalous traces are As can be seen, the proposed WAKE framework is also
labelled as labelled anomalies) in terms of weakly supervised superior over all the real-life logs in terms of weakly superanomaly detection. The best unsupervised anomaly detection vised business process anomaly detection and interpretation
results are shown as dark yellow dashed lines. We can see of the cause of anomalies. In terms of anomaly detection, the
that all weakly supervised anomaly detection methods behave F −scores of WAKE are on average 16.17% better than the
similarly with their F −scores increasing with γ. As expected, best weakly supervised anomaly detection method (DevNet),
more labelled anomalies can provide more supervised infor- and the F −scores of WAKE are on average 22.21% better than
mation. None of the weakly supervised methods outperform the best deep unsupervised anomaly detection method (DAE).
the unsupervised method with only 1% labelled anomalies. As At the same time, for most logs (e.g., Request and Declaration),
expected, the unsupervised approaches only consider the essen- there are some weakly supervised anomaly detection methods
tial features of the process, while the existing semi-supervised that perform better than deep unsupervised business process
approaches treat all unlabelled anomalies as normal samples, anomaly detection methods. This also indicates that if a limited
and the learned detector can be biased by this large number of number of anomalies can be used wisely, it can help a lot
unlabelled anomalies (99% of anomalies). Our proposed WAKE in improving the detection results. In terms of interpretation
and FEAWAD outperform the best unsupervised method with of the cause of anomalies, the F −scores of WAKE are on
only 5% labelled anomalies, confirming the advantage of WAKE average 15.49% better than the best deep unsupervised anomaly
in leveraging a few labelled anomalies more efficiently. When detection method (BINet), showing that a limited number of
γ is between 1% and 10%, the F −score of WAKE increases labelled anomalies are equally helpful in interpreting the cause
rapidly, while when γ > 10%, the F −score of WAKE barely of anomalies.
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2755

 TABLE IV
 F −scoreS OVER REAL-LIFE LOGS WHERE “AD” REPRESENTS WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION AND “IA” REPRESENTS
 INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES. THE BEST RESULTS ARE INDICATED USING BOLD TYPEFACE

 TABLE V
 ABLATION STUDY - F −scoreS FOR WAKE AND ITS ABLATED VERSIONS IN TERMS OF ANOMALY DETECTION

 TABLE VI
 EFFECT OF PRE-TRAINING STAGE IN TERMS OF ANOMALY DETECTION

 G. Ablation Study
 We investigate the relative importance of each factor of feature
 representation in terms of anomaly detection for each log. The
 results are shown in Table V .
 As can be seen, when only one factor is used for anomaly
 detection, the reconstruction error vector r performs best, with
 the exception of the log Billing. This demonstrates that the
 effectiveness of using the reconstruction error, which is a com-
Fig. 5. F −scores under different ratios of labelled anomalies over real-life
 monly used indicator for unsupervised anomaly detection, as
logs. a component of the feature representation of a trace. It also
 illustrates the ability of our pre-trained autoencoder to reflect the
 anomalies. However, using only the maximum reconstruction
 2) Impact of Degree of Supervision: Next, we evaluate the error vector m results in relatively poor performance, suggestimpact of degree of supervision. F −score is obtained over all ing that relying solely on the maximum reconstruction error
real-life logs. The results are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b) in terms for each attribute may not be sufficient to reflect anomalies,
of weakly supervised anomaly detection and the interpretation and detection results may be biased by special events. Simof the cause of anomalies, respectively. ilarly, using only the latent representation s also results in
 Similar to that in Section V-E2, our proposed framework relatively poor performance, indicating that with few labelled
WAKE achieves a good anomaly detection performance with anomalies, the model may easily overfit without the aid of
only 10% labelled anomalies, which proves that WAKE is also a reconstruction error that is representative of the distance
applicable in real life. However, the F −score of each method from the normal pattern. The proposed WAKE framework (i.e.,
remains scarcely close to 1 even when 50% of the anomalies all three factors were used simultaneously to detect anomaare labelled. This is possibly due to some natural anomalies that lies) has the best performance, suggesting that the combinaare detected but not labelled in the datasets. From Fig. 5(b), tion of the three factors is a more effective strategy, as any
we can see that WAKE is able to better interpret the cause of significant deviation in any of the three factors can be detected
anomalies, whose F −score exceeds 0.6 even with only 1% by WAKE.
labelled anomalies.
2756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

 TABLE VII
 EFFECT OF PRE-TRAINING STAGE IN TERMS OF INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES

 TABLE VIII
 COMPUTATIONAL COST

 some labelled anomalies may be given a very low anomaly score
 by the trained model. When β is greater than 0.5, the F −scores
 of WAKE decrease sharply on all logs, indicating that the model
 is biased by too many labelled anomalies in a mini-batch. At
 the same time, since the number of labelled anomalies is few,
 they are oversampled. To traverse all unlabelled traces in a
 single epoch, the number of batches (i.e., n_batches2 ) has to
 be increased, which increases the training time. All in all, a β
Fig. 6. Parameter analysis in terms of weakly supervised anomaly detection. between 0.2 and 0.5 seems to be a good choice.
 2) Impact of λ: Note that λ is a hyper-parameter to balance
 the contributions of two parts in the joint loss (i.e., (16)). When
H. Effect of Pre-Training Stage
 λ = 0, the anomaly scores generated by the anomaly score
 We evaluate the effectiveness of the pre-training stage adopted generator only have to satisfy a specific distribution (i.e., without
in our proposed model. We compare WAKE with a model that minimizing reconstruction errors). In this section, we investigate
does not include the pre-training stage (the first stage described the impact of λ for weakly supervised anomaly detection by
in Algorithm 1) in the training procedure. varying the value of λ.
 The results in terms of anomaly detection and interpretation of From Fig. 6(b), we can see that the changing pattern of
the cause of anomalies are shown in Tables VI and VII, respec- F −scores on logs Small, Medium, Gigantic and Request is
tively. In terms of anomaly detection, compared with the model basically the same. Their F −scores increase sharply and then
without a pre-training stage, WAKE achieves a significant im- decrease as λ increases which suggests that focusing on the
provement by 5.81% (average) and 7.75% (average) on synthetic reconstruction errors of traces in the feature encoder can imlogs and real-life logs, respectively. In terms of interpretation prove the anomaly detection performance of WAKE when the
of the cause of anomalies, compared with the model without a limited number of labelled anomalies is not sufficient to cover
pre-training stage, WAKE achieves a significant improvement all anomaly patterns, but paying too much attention to the
by 4.13% (average) and 10.45% (average) on synthetic logs and reconstruction errors can lead to a poor anomaly detection
real-life logs, respectively. These results show that pre-training performance. For the log Declaration, λ has less of an effect
is a necessary stage to avoid some bad local minima so that our on it. When additional analyses are performed to examine the
model can better detect anomalies and interpret their causes. characteristics of the log, it can be observed that the limited
 number of labelled anomalies in the log Declaration can cover
I. Parameter Analysis most anomalous patterns and WAKE performs well even when
 not concerned with reconstruction errors, but it performs slightly
 1) Impact of β: Note that the parameter β controls the proworse when overly concerned with reconstruction errors.
portion of labelled anomalies and unlabelled traces in minibatches in training stage 2, aiming to address sample imbalance.
In this section, we investigate the impact of β for weakly supervised business process anomaly detection by varying the value
of β. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the performance of WAKE on Small, J. Computational Cost
Medium, Gigantic (synthetic logs), Request and Declaration The time consumption of each method is presented in
(real-life logs) under different magnitudes of β in terms of Table VIII. These results have been averaged across all the
weakly supervised anomaly detection. The labelled anomalies datasets.
are not oversampled when β = 0. While our proposed method, WAKE, demonstrates superior
 As can be seen, the changing pattern of F −scores is basically performance, it also incurs the highest computational cost. In
the same on all logs. Their F −scores increase and then decrease contrast to other approaches, WAKE necessitates three stages of
as β increases. When β is small, the model may be biased by training. Moreover, the incorporation of GRU further intensifies
a large number of negative samples, i.e., in order to reduce the computational cost. Similarly, GAE employs graph neural
anomaly scores for a large number of unlabelled traces, even networks, which contribute to a higher computational cost.
GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER 2757

 VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK [12] H. T. C. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ko, and M. Comuzzi, “Autoencoders
 for improving quality of process event logs,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 131,
 In this paper, we propose WAKE, a weakly supervised pp. 132–147, 2019.
business process anomaly detection framework via a pre- [13] T. Nolle, S. Luettgen, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “BINet: Multiperspective business process anomaly classification,” Inf. Syst., vol. 103,
trained autoencoder. Our approach takes advantage of a few 2022, Art. no. 101458.
labelled anomalies, which are always available in real life, [14] S. Huo, H. Völzer, P. Reddy, P. Agarwal, V. Isahagian, and V. Muthusamy,
to detect anomalies in unlabelled traces. We propose a novel “Graph autoencoders for business process anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 19th Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., Springer, 2021, pp. 417–433.
feature encoder that transforms traces into more meaningful [15] W. Guan, J. Cao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “GRASPED: A GRU-AE
feature representations. The feature encoder is pre-trained to network based multi-perspective business process anomaly detection
be able to reconstruct normal traces. The feature representations model,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., early access, Mar. 30, 2023,
 doi: 10.1109/TSC.2023.3262405.
are fed into an anomaly score generator to detect anomalies. [16] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning for
To overcome the limitation of data insufficiency for labelled anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 38:1–
anomalies, the feature encoder and the anomaly score generator 38:38, 2022.
 [17] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv:
are jointly optimized through the training process with a spe- 1906.02694.
cially designed joint loss. The feature encoder is fine-tuned to [18] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of
interpret the cause of the anomalies. We propose a novel method ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,”
 in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018,
for interpreting the cause of anomalies by computing anomaly pp. 2041–2050.
scores that can be compared across attributes, addressing the [19] B. Tian, Q. Su, and J. Yin, “Anomaly detection by leveraging incomproblem of unfairness caused by differences in the number of plete anomalous knowledge with anomaly-aware bidirectional GANs,”
 2022, arXiv:2204.13335.
possible values for different attributes. Extensive experiments [20] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with
demonstrate that the proposed approach can effectively exploit deviation networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
limited-but-valuable information from a few labelled anomalies. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 353–362.
 [21] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep weakly-supervised
The proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art approaches anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv: 1910.13601.
with superior performance. [22] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature encoding
 Event logs now contain multimedia data such as videos and with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, Jun. 2022.
images, which capture the scenes upon completion of an event. [23] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward supervised
These diverse sources of information can easily lead to anoma- anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262, 2013.
lies. In the future, we plan to investigate the fusion of these [24] S. Das, W.-K. Wong, T. Dietterich, A. Fern, and A. Emmott, “Incorporating
 expert feedback into active anomaly discovery,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int.
heterogeneous data types to implement cross-media anomaly Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 853–858.
detection in business processes. [25] T. Huang, P. Chen, and R. Li, “A semi-supervised VAE based active
 anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series for online systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1797–1806.
 [26] Y. Gong, C. Wang, X. Dai, S. Yu, L. Xiang, and J. Wu, “Multiscale continuity-aware refinement network for weakly supervised video
 REFERENCES anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo, 2022,
 pp. 1–6.
 [1] M. Ebrahim and S. A. H. Golpayegani, “Anomaly detection in business
 [27] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in
 processes logs using social network analysis,” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking
 surveillance video,” 2021, arXiv:2108.03825.
 Techn., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 127–139, 2022.
 [28] B. Wan, Y. Fang, X. Xia, and J. Mei, “Weakly supervised video anomaly
 [2] R. Sarno, F. Sinaga, and K. R. Sungkono, “Anomaly detection in business
 detection via center-guided discriminative learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 processes using process mining and fuzzy association rule learning,” J.
 Conf. Multimedia Expo, 2020, pp. 1–6.
 Big Data, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 5.
 [29] E. A. Elaziz, R. Fathalla, and M. Shaheen, “Deep reinforcement learning
 [3] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Detecting anomalies in business process event
 for data-efficient weakly supervised business process anomaly detection,”
 logs using statistical leverage,” Inf. Sci., vol. 549, pp. 53–67, 2021.
 J. Big Data, vol. 10, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 33.
 [4] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Keeping our rivers clean: Information-theoretic
 [30] F. de Lima Bezerra and J. Wainer, “Algorithms for anomaly detection of
 online anomaly detection for streaming business process events,” Inf. Syst.,
 traces in logs of process aware information systems,” Inf. Syst., vol. 38,
 vol. 104, 2022, Art. no. 101894.
 no. 1, pp. 33–44, 2013.
 [5] D. Rahmawati, R. Sarno, C. Fatichah, and D. Sunaryono, “Fraud detection
 [31] R. Sarno, R. D. Dewandono, T. Ahmad, M. F. Naufal, and F. Sinaga,
 on event log of bank financial credit business process using hidden Markov
 “Hybrid association rule learning and process mining for fraud detection,”
 model algorithm,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Sci. Inf. Technol., 2017, pp. 35–40.
 IAENG Int. J. Comput. Sci., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 59–72, 2015.
 [6] C. Linn and D. Werth, “Sequential anomaly detection techniques in
 [32] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Online anomaly detection using statistical leverbusiness processes,” in Proc. Int. Workshops Bus. Inf. Syst. Workshops,
 age for streaming business process events,” in Proc. Int. Workshops Process
 Springer, 2017, pp. 196–208.
 Mining Workshops, S. J. J. Leemans and H. Leopold, Eds., Springer, 2020,
 [7] M. G. Armentano and A. A. Amandi, “Detection of sequences with
 pp. 193–205.
 anomalous behavior in a workflow process,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf.
 [33] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Business process event log anomaly detection
 Database Expert Syst. Appl., Q. Chen, A. Hameurlain, F. Toumani, R.
 based on statistical leverage,” in Proc. 1st Italian Forum Bus. Process
 R. Wagner, and H. Decker, Eds., Springer, 2015, pp. 111–118.
 Manage. Co-Located 19th Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., 2021, pp. 7–
 [8] A. Sureka, “Kernel based sequential data anomaly detection in business
 12.
 process event logs,” 2015, arXiv:1507.01168.
 [34] K. Böhmer and S. Rinderle-Ma, “Multi-perspective anomaly detection in
 [9] P. Hsu, Y. Chuang, Y. Lo, and S. He, “Using contextualized activity-level
 business process execution events,” in Proc. OTM Confederated Int. Conf.
 duration to discover irregular process instances in business operations,”
 “On Move to Meaningful Internet Syst.”, C. Debruyne, H. Panetto, R.
 Inf. Sci., vol. 391, pp. 80–98, 2017.
 Meersman, T. S. Dillon, E. Kühn, D. O’Sullivan, and C. A. Ardagna, Eds.,
[10] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. E. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
 2016, pp. 80–98.
 no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
 [35] A. Rogge-Solti and G. Kasneci, “Temporal anomaly detection in business
[11] T. Nolle, S. Luettgen, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “Analyzing busiprocesses,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., Springer, 2014,
 ness process anomalies using autoencoders,” Mach. Learn., vol. 107,
 pp. 234–249.
 no. 11, pp. 1875–1893, 2018.
2758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

[36] B. Kang, D. Kim, and S. Kang, “Real-time business process monitoring [61] N.-C. Ristea, F.-A. Croitoru, R. T. Ionescu, M. Popescu, F. S. Khan, and
 method for prediction of abnormal termination using KNNI-based LOF M. Shah, “Self-distilled masked auto-encoders are efficient video anomaly
 prediction,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 6061–6068, 2012. detectors,” 2023, arXiv:2306.12041.
[37] F. Folino, G. Greco, A. Guzzo, and L. Pontieri, “Mining usage scenarios [62] W. Yu, M. Huang, S. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Ensembled masked graph
 in business processes: Outlier-aware discovery and run-time prediction,” autoencoders for link anomaly detection in a road network considering
 Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 1005–1029, 2011. spatiotemporal features,” Inf. Sci., vol. 622, pp. 456–475, 2023.
[38] G. M. Tavares and S. Barbon Jr, “Analysis of language inspired trace [63] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
 representation for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Pract. word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781.
 Digit. Libraries, Springer, 2020, pp. 296–308. [64] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
[39] S. B. Junior, P. Ceravolo, E. Damiani, N. J. Omori, and G. M. Tavares, decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Meth-
 “Anomaly detection on event logs with a scarcity of labels,” in Proc. 2nd ods Natural Lang. Process., A. Moschitti, B. Pang, and W. Daelemans,
 Int. Conf. Process Mining, 2020, pp. 161–168. Eds., 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
[40] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Lambda architecture for anomaly detection [65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 in online process mining using autoencoders,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Adv. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 Comput. Collective Intell., M. Hernes, K. Wojtkiewicz, and E. Szczerbicki, [66] J. R. Quinlan, “Induction of decision trees,” Mach. Learn., vol. 1, no. 1,
 Eds., Springer, 2020, pp. 579–589. pp. 81–106, 1986.
[41] T. Nolle, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “Unsupervised anomaly detec- [67] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
 tion in noisy business process event logs using denoising autoencoders,” feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
 in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Discov. Sci., T. Calders, M. Ceci, and D. Malerba, Y. W. Teh and D. M. Titterington, Eds., 2010, pp. 249–256.
 Eds., 2016, pp. 442–456. [68] A. Burattin, “PLG2: Multiperspective processes randomization and simu-
[42] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Variational autoencoder for anomaly detection lation for online and offline settings,” 2015, arXiv:1506.08415.
 in event data in online process mining,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Enterprise
 Inf. Syst., 2021, pp. 567–574.
[43] T. Nolle, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “BINet: Multivariate business Wei Guan is currently working toward the PhD
 process anomaly detection using deep learning,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. degree with the Department of Computer Science
 Bus. Process Manage., M. Weske, M. Montali, I. Weber, and J. vom and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
 Brocke, Eds., Springer, 2018, pp. 271–287. His research interests include predictive monitoring,
[44] W. Guan, J. Cao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “GAMA: A multi-graph-based anomaly detection, and machine learning.
 anomaly detection framework for business processes via graph neural
 networks,” 2023, 10.36227/techrxiv.23627850.v1.
[45] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Semi-supervised anomaly detection in business process event data using self-attention based classification,” Procedia
 Comput. Sci., vol. 192, pp. 39–48, 2021.
[46] C. Huang, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and Q. Tian, “ESAD: End-to-end Jian Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a
 deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2020, arXiv: 2012.04905. tenured professor with the Department of Computer
[47] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN: An Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong Uniefficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few identified versity. He is also the director of research institute
 anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 107:1– of network computing and service computing. His
 107:30, 2022. research interests include intelligent data analytics,
[48] Z. Feng, J. Tang, Y. Dou, and G. Wu, “Learning discriminative features service computing. He has published more than 300
 for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. research papers in prestigious journals and confer-
 Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 2935–2939. ences. Currently, he is the distinguished member of
[49] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in CCF.
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 2018, pp. 6479–6488. Haiyan Zhao received the PhD degree from the
[50] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, H. Shin, and S. Lee, “A self-reasoning Nanjing University of Science and Technology, in
 framework for anomaly detection using video-level labels,” 2020, arXiv: 2002. She is an associate professor affiliated with the
 2008.11887. University of Shanghai for Science and Technology.
[51] D. Lee, S. Yu, H. Ju, and H. Yu, “Weakly supervised temporal anomaly She has authored more than 80 papers in journals
 segmentation with dynamic time warping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. and conferences, and her research interests include
 Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 7355–7364. data analytics, recommender systems, and business
[52] C. Zhang et al., “Fraud detection under multi-sourced extremely noisy process management.
 annotations,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021,
 pp. 2497–2506.
[53] Y. Zhao, G. Zheng, S. Mukherjee, R. McCann, and A. H. Awadallah,
 Yang Gu is currently working toward the PhD degree
 “ADMoE: Anomaly detection with mixture-of-experts from noisy labels,” with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
 2022, arXiv:2208.11290.
 neering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research
[54] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Alleviating
 interests include service computing and data mining.
 structural distribution shift in graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th
 ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023, pp. 357–365.
[55] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16 000–16 009.
[56] Y. Ye, L. Xia, and C. Huang, “Graph masked autoencoder for sequential
 recommendation,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
 Retrieval, 2023, pp. 321–330. Shiyou Qian (Member, IEEE) received the PhD de-
[57] Q. Tan, N. Liu, X. Huang, R. Chen, S.-H. Choi, and X. Hu, gree in computer science from Shanghai Jiao Tong
 “MGAE: Masked autoencoders for self-supervised learning on graphs,” University, China, in 2015. He is currently an asso-
 2022, arXiv:2201.02534. ciate researcher with the Department of Computer
[58] P.-Y. Huang et al., “Masked autoencoders that listen,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 28 708–28 720. versity, China. His research interests include event
[59] H. Yao, X. Wang, and W. Yu, “Siamese transition masked autoencoders as matching for content-based publish/subscribe sysuniform unsupervised visual anomaly detector,” 2022, arXiv:2211.00349. tems, resource scheduling for hybrid-cloud, and driv-
[60] M.-I. Georgescu, “Masked autoencoders for unsupervised anomaly detec- ing recommendation with vehicular networks.
 tion in medical images,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07534.