30 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 WF-Transformer: Learning Temporal Features for
 Accurate Anonymous Traffic Identification by
 Using Transformer Networks
 Qiang Zhou , Liangmin Wang , Member, IEEE, Huijuan Zhu , Member, IEEE, Tong Lu,
 and Victor S. Sheng , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Website Fingerprinting (WF) is a network traffic security. Last decades, several anonymous communication sysmining technique for anonymous traffic identification, which tems have been designed and developed for the users‘ privacy
enables a local adversary to identify the target website that an protection [1]. Tor (or The Onion Router) is a popular low
anonymous network user is browsing. WF attacks based on
deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) get the state-of-the-art latency anonymous network, and has more than three million
anonymous traffic classification performance. However, due to the daily users [2]. Latest studies have shown traffic mining
locality restriction of CNN architecture for feature extraction on algorithm called Website Fingerprinting (WF) technique can
sequence data, these methods ignore the temporal feature extrac- destroy the anonymity of the Tor [3]. Since the different add-in
tion in the anonymous traffic analysis. In this paper, we present and content of different websites, there is a specific pattern
Website Fingerprinting Transformer (WF-Transformer), a novel
anonymous network traffic analysis method that leverages Trans- of traffic encrypted through an anonymous network system,
former networks for temporal feature extraction of traffic traces which can be used for determining the destination of the target
and improves the classification performance of Tor encrypted website based on the collected traces [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9].
traffic. The architecture of WF-Transformer is specially designed Network attackers eavesdrop and collect the network traffic
for traffic trace processing and can classify anonymous trafpassively when a user visits the target website. WF attackers
fic effectively. Furthermore, we evaluate the performance of
WF-Transformer in both closed-world and open-world scenarios. use the features that are calculated from the network traffic
In the closed-world scenario, WF-Transformer attains 99.1% traces, such as packet rates [10], directions of packets [7] and
accuracy on Tor traffic without defenses, better than state- inter-arrive time [11], and then a classifier is trained for the
or-the-art attacks, and archives 92.1% accuracy on the traces classification of anonymous traces.
defended by WTF-PAD method. In the open-world scenario, WF-
 The pioneering WF attacks are mainly focusing on the hand-
Transformer has better precision and recall on both defended
and non-defended traces. Furthermore, WF-Transformer with a crafting feature extraction of the anonymous traces and the
short input length (2000 cells) outperforms the DF method with selection of classifiers [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Wang et al.
a long input length (5000 cells). utilize several traffic features, such as packet direction, packet
 Index Terms— Website fingerprinting, traffic analysis, size, and burst number, and then a k-NN classifier is trained for
encrypted communication, transformer networks. the prediction of target traces [11]. Panchenko et al. propose
 a WF attack method named CUMUL [13], which calculates a
 I. I NTRODUCTION novel feature set with a cumulative behavioral representation
 of the collected traffic traces and utilizes Support Vector
W ITH the development of Internet, privacy disclosure
 of network users is an urgent problem for network Machine (SVM) as the classifier. Hayes et al. propose a
 k-FP method for WF attack [14], which utilizes a random
 Manuscript received 17 December 2022; revised 23 June forest to rank the importance of different traffic features
2023 and 1 September 2023; accepted 11 September 2023. Date of publication and then uses k-NN classifier to predict the labels of target
25 September 2023; date of current version 16 November 2023. This work
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
 traffic traces. These three WF attack methods achieve about
under Grant 62372105 and Grant 62272204, in part by the Leading-Edge 91% classification accuracy for Tor anonymous traffic trace
Technology Program of the Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation under Grant classification in the closed-world setting.
BK20202001, and in part by the Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu
Higher Education Institutions of China under Grant 23KJB520004. The
 With the development of WF attack methods, several
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving defense methods have been proposed [15], [16], [17], [18],
it for publication was Dr. Grigorios Loukides. (Corresponding authors: [19], [20]. Dyer et al. propose a WF defense method named
Qiang Zhou; Liangmin Wang.)
 Qiang Zhou, Huijuan Zhu, and Tong Lu are with the School of Com- BuFLO [15], which pads a large number of dummy packets
puter Science and Communication Technology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang into normal traffic traces to protect users’ privacy. Cai et al.
212013, China (e-mail: zhouqiang@ujs.edu.cn; huijuanzhu@ujs.edu.cn; improve the BuFLO defense method and propose TAMARAW
lutong@stmail.ujs.edu.cn).
 Liangmin Wang is with the School of Cyber Space and Secu- [16]. TAMARAW sets a hyperparameter to restrict the number
rity Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (e-mail: of the padded dummy packets during the transmission process,
liangmin@seu.edu.cn). but the bandwidth overhead and the latency are still too high
 Victor S. Sheng is with the Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, TX 79409 USA (e-mail: victor.sheng@ttu.edu). to be implemented in a real network scenario. Juarez et al.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3318966 propose a lightweight defense method named WTF-PAD
 1556-6021 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 31

[17], and the strategy of the WTF-PAD is that it only pads
dummy packets into the gaps between the real packets, which
decreases the bandwidth overhead efficiently, and has no delay.
 However, with the development of deep learning techniques
[21], [22], [23], [24], [25], traffic data mining methods that
based on CNN network architecture and its variants are used
for traffic analysis [26], [27]. WF attacks based on deep
convolutional neural networks have been proposed [7], [28], Fig. 1. Demo of website fingerprinting attack.
and existing defenses that padding dummy packets into normal
trace based on the statistical information of traces fail to
counter deep WF attacks [7], [29], [30]. Rimmer et al. test 2) We propose a more sophisticated design of Transformer
multiple deep frameworks to classify the anonymous traffic network for traffic analysis and corresponding optiand get better performance than existing non-deep WF attack mization function. WF-Transformer shows two main
methods [29]. Sirinam et al. utilize a more sophisticated advantages. One is its shorter input than CNN-based
convolutional neural network to construct a deep WF model methods, which allows an adversary to save time in
called DF, and DF only uses the direction of the packets as traffic collection. The other is its fast convergence, which
the input of the model. Both of the deep WF attack methods helps to get a robust model.
achieve more than 96% classification accuracy [7]. 3) We evaluate the effectiveness of WF-Transformer on
 Although the latest deep WF attack methods based on CNN the public Tor dataset for both closed-world and openarchitecture have obtained a lot of progress in anonymous world settings, and we also show the performance
traffic classification [7], [30], the design of existing deep WF of WF-Transformer on non-defended and defended
attacks based on CNN fails to extract the temporal feature of traces. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, WFthe traces, which can be seen as the long-term dependence Transformer outperforms existing methods in terms of
among the cells of traffic traces. For example, one request is classification accuracy in closed-world setting, TPR,
sent to the server by the client, the response of the current FPR, Precision and Recall for open-world setting.
request may not be send back to the client immediately due 4) We conduct experiments to show the information leakto the response of the former request is transmitting, and the age of features extracted by WF-Transformer and
current request has been delayed, so the local features extract CNN-based model, respectively, and reveal the impact
by CNN fail to represent the patterns of the traces. CNN only of the Transformer architecture on feature extraction.
focuses on the local features of the traffic and fails to capture The study indicates that WF-Transformer can utilize
the long-term dependence among the packets in a traffic trace, shorter traces to learn more information from traces than
which can make the discriminative patterns of the traffic traces CNN-based models with the help of extracted temporal
be ignored, and reduce the performance of the deep model on features, demonstrating the superiority and effectiveness
the classification of anonymous traffic. of Transformer architecture used for traffic analysis.
 To tackle this problem, we present a novel anonymous The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The threat
trace classification model called Website Fingerprinting Trans- model about WF attacks is introduced in Section II. Related
former (WF-Transformer). Unlike the existing deep WF attack works are shown in Section III. Preliminary knowledge
models, WF-Transformer utilizes Transformer network [24] to about Transformer network is introduced in Section IV. The
extract the temporal feature of the traffic traces. Furthermore, proposed method is shown in Section V. The evaluation
we propose a more sophisticated design on the network setting and experiment results are shown in Section VI and
architecture of Transformer and the corresponding optimiza- Section VII, respectively. In Section VIII, we show differtion function, and make the proposed WF-Transformer more ent information leakage for different models. In Section IX,
suitable for processing traffic trace data. To demonstrate the we give some discussion about our proposed method, and we
effectiveness and superiority of WF-Transformer, we conduct conclude our work in Section X.
extensive experiments on a public dataset and evaluate the performance of our method in both closed-world and open-world II. T HREAT M ODEL
scenarios. Considering the existing WF defense methods, Tor network is a popular low-latency anonymous system,
we also conduct experiments to show the effectiveness of our and encrypted packets are transmitted in Tor with multiple
method against WF defenses. To sum up, the contributions of proxies to protect the users’ privacy. Figure 1 shows the WF
this paper can be summarized as follows: attack scenario, and we can find that attackers are located
 between the client and the entry node of Tor, and record the
 1) We present WF-Transformer, a novel WF attack based traffic traces passively during the user is browsing the target
 on Transformer network. To the best of our knowledge, websites with Tor. Generally, the sequence of the packets
 WF-Transformer is the first WF attack that utilizes and time stamps of the trace can be collected, and several
 Transformer network to extract the temporal feature of handcrafting trace features can be calculated and the classifier
 the traffic traces for traffic classification, and yields a can be trained for the identification of the anonymous trace.
 better performance than state-of-the-art CNN-based WF We formalize the WF attack scenario in this part. Generally,
 attacks. WF attackers are located between the client and the entry node
32 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

of the Tor, and they can only record the transmitted packets LSTM. With the help of deep learning techniques, AWF
passively, which means that attackers can not drop, modify, achieves 96% classification accuracy on Tor traffic in closeddecrypt or delay the packets. Furthermore, the transmitted world setting. Sirinam et al.propose Deep Fingerprinting (DF)
packets are encrypted with different secret keys in different to classify the anonymous traffic [7]. DF utilizes a CNN
proxy nodes of Tor. The plaintext information and IP of the network with a sophisticated design. DF only uses the direction
packets are invisible to attackers without packet decryption. of packets as inputs, and an end-to-end training manner is
For the attacker, we assume that the identity of the client is used for the training of the model. In closed-world setting,
known by the attacker, and the goal of the attacker is to identify DF can obtain 98% classification accuracy on non-defended
the target websites that the user visits. Tor traffic. As for the Tor traffic defended by WTF-PAD
 Closed-World and Open-World Scenario: To evalu- method, DF can still achieve over 90% classification accuracy.
ate the performance of WF attack, there are two settings, Bhat et al. propose Var-CNN method [30], which utilizes
the closed-world setting and the open-world setting. For the deep techniques for large amounts of traffic classification.
closed-world setting, the network users is assumed that they Unlike prior deep WF attacks, VarCNN utilizes time stamp
can only access a finite set of websites, and the attacker and packet direction as network inputs, and obtains over
monitors these websites, and the classification of the anony- 98% classification accuracy on Tor traffic [30]. Wang et al.
mous trace is a supervised learning problem. However, this ensemble multiple CNN-based networks for the classification
assumption is considered unrealistic, because of the large of anonymous traffic [34], and get better performance in opennumber of websites in the real-world that can be visited by world scenario.
network users. Furthermore, the traffic traces collected by
attackers are limited under this setting. For the open-world
 B. WF Defenses
setting, which is more practical, Tor users can visit a large
number of websites while the attacker can only record a With the development of WF attacks, several WF defenses
limited of website traces. For a collected trace, attackers need have been proposed [15], [17], [35], [36]. The prior defense
to identify whether the traffic is under monitored. If it is methods pad dummy packets into normal traces based on
monitored, similar to the closed-world setting, a classification statistical information of the Tor traffic to disturb the WF
model is trained to identify the target website. The open-world attack classifiers. However, existing defenses, BuFLO [15] and
setting is a more complex problem compared with closed- TAMARAW [16], pad too many dummy packets into normal
world setting, the number of unmonitored websites is assumed traces and cause high bandwidth overhead, and this makes
much greater than that of the monitored websites in closed- them impractical.
world setting. Several lightweight defenses have been proposed [17], [35],
 [37]. Juarez et al. propose Website Traffic Fingerprinting Pro-
 III. R ELATED W ORKS tection with Adaptive Defense (WTF-PAD), and WTF-PAD
 builds a histogram of packet time from the collected Tor traces.
 In this section, we give some surveys on the latest process By sampling packet time from the histogram, WTF-PAD only
of WF attack. Considering the influence of WF defenses, the pads dummy packets into the gaps of the normal trace, which
related works are introduced in two parts, WF attacks and WF reduces the bandwidth overhead. However, WF attacks based
defenses. on deep learning techniques, such as DF method, still can
 classify the traffic traces defended by WTF-PAD. Gong et al.
A. WF Attacks propose a lightweight defense called FRONT [35]. FRONT
 With the wide application of anonymous network, lots only pads the front portion of Tor traces, which is a feature-rich
of WF attack methods have been proposed [7], [11], [13], part of a traffic trace. With similar bandwidth overhead,
[14], [30], [31], [32], [33]. The pioneering attacks are mainly FRONT gets better performance than WTF-PAD.
non-deep WF attack methods, which extract the handcrafting Deep classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial examples
features from the collected traffic traces based on human [38], [39], and several WF defense methods based on adverknowledge. Packet direction, packet rates and inter-arrive time sarial training manners are proposed for against deep WF
of packets are commonly used handcrafting features, and a attacks. Rahman et al. propose Mockingbird method for WF
classifier is trained on these features to identify the target defense, which generates traces by moving the traffic traces
websites of the traffic traces. Existing non-deep WF attack randomly and not following more predictable gradients [40].
methods aim at trace feature extraction and classifier selection, Abusnaina et al. propose a Deep Fingerprinting Defender
and KNN and SVM are commonly used classifiers [11], [13], (DFD) against deep WF attacks. DFD injects dummy packets
[14], and these WF attack methods achieve 91% classification within every burst of Tor traces to generate adversarial traffic
accuracy in the closed-world setting. traces [41].
 Deep WF attacks aim at utilizing deep neural networks
for anonymous trace extraction automatically. Rimmer et al. IV. P RELIMINARY
propose automated website fingerprinting (AWF) which uti- Our proposed WF-Transformer utilizes a Transformer netlizes deep neural networks to identify Tor traffic automatically work for the traffic temporal feature extraction, rather than
rather than manually engineering [29]. AWF has tried a lot commonly used CNN network, which fails to catch the temof state-of-the-art deep networks, such as SDAE, CNN, and poral features and the long-range dependence of the traffic
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 33

trace. In this section, we give some introduction about the According the attention mechanism, we can get the attention
Transformer network. weight as follows.
 Transformer network is designed with a self-attention mech-
 QK T
anism, which is first applied to the field of natural language Attention(Q, K , V ) = so f tmax( √ )V (7)
processing (NLP) [24], [42], [43]. Recently, Transformer net- dk
work has been applied for computer vision tasks, which is where dk is used for scaling.
dominant by CNN network previously [25]. Generally, Transformer network contains two parts, an encoder and a decoder. V. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
Transformer with encoder-decoder architecture is suitable for In this section, we first introduce the inputs of our proposed
machine translation tasks in NLP. For sequence classification WF-Transformer. Subsequently, we present the architecture of
tasks, we only need the encoder part of Transformer, and the the model and the optimization procedure of our method.
decoder part can be replaced with a classifier.
 The input sequence can be set X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ). The A. The Inputs of WF-Transformer
embedding of the Transformer network is used to extract the
features from the original traffic traces, and obtain the vector Generally, Transformer networks are used for NLP, and the
matrix representation Z of the features. Z can be calculated input of the Transformer is a sequence, which is processed
as follows: from the original sentences. As for the traffic traces, the
 traffic traces collected by network attackers mainly contain
 Z = WE X (1) the the time stamp of the packets, packet number and packet
 size and packet directions. Prior study in WF attacks shows
where W E is the embedding matrix, and different W E repre- that features extracted from the lengths of traces in each
sents different embedding manners. direction are important for the success of WF attack. However,
 Behind each block of the Transformer network, there is a Sirinam et al. prove that using packet length as a feature does
layer normalization operation, which is used for the output not provide significant attack accuracy improvement [7]. Their
of the corresponding block, and the outputs are converted proposed DF attack method abandons the packet size and the
to a mean value of 1, and a variance of 0 by the layer time stamps, and only utilizes the packet direction as the input
normalization. of the deep neural network.
 In the NLP field, the position of different element in a Similar to other deep WF attack methods, we only utilize
sequence is important for the meaning of a sentence. How- the packet directions as the inputs of the WF-Transformer. The
ever, due to the parallelization processing of the Transformer, directions of the packets can be extracted from the collected
position embedding is conducted to preserve the position infor- traces easily, and we use +1 to represent the outgoing packet,
mation of a sequence. For a sequence, the position embedding while −1 is used to represent the incoming packet, and then
can be calculated as follows: the input sequence can be donated as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ],
 pos where xi ∈ {−1, +1}, and i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, n is the number
 P E( pos, 2i) = sin( 2i
 ) (2)
 10000 dmodel of packets in a trace sequence. The length of the sequence is
 pos important for the speed and classification accuracy of the Tor
 P E( pos, 2i + 1) = cos( 2i
 ) (3)
 traces, and the sequence length of other deep WF methods
 10000 dmodel
 [7], [30] are generally set to 5000. In fact, with the help of
where pos is the position of the corresponding element in the Transformer network in temporal feature extraction, WFa sequence, dmodel is the word embedding length, and i ∈ Transformer can achieve comparable performance with shorter
[1, 2, . . . , dmodel − 1]. When i is an odd number, position trace compared with the state-of-the-art deep WF attacks, and
embedding is calculated with equation 2, otherwise using the superiority of our proposed method will be shown in the
equation 3. With the word embedding and position embedding, following part.
the composition is obtained by adding the word embedding
and position embedding element by element.
 B. The Architecture of WF-Transformer
 The multi-head attention mechanism is an important part
of Transformer network, which focuses on key information of Since the CNN focuses on the local property of the sequence
the sequence, like a human intuitively. Transformer network and ignores the long-term dependence among the elements in a
utilizes a multi-head attention mechanism to weigh the impor- sequence, CNN has drawbacks in processing time series data,
tant features of the sequence. For the embedded features Z , while the Tor trace is a typical time series sequence. In this
we can get Q, K , and V by linear transform as follows. paper, our proposed WF-Transformer utilizes Transformer
 network to extract the temporal features of the Tor traces.
 Q = Wq Z (4) To make the proposed model suitable for the traffic traces,
 K = Wk Z (5) we conduct sophisticated design on the Transformer network,
 V = Wv Z (6) and we will introduce the design of our model in the following
 part.
where Q, K , V are query, key and value respectively. Wq , In Figure 2, the architecture of the proposed
Wk , Wv are initialized randomly and updated in the training WF-Transformer network is shown in detail. After the
procedure. embedding of the inputs, a layer norm operation is conducted,
34 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 2. The architecture of the proposed WF-Transformer.

and then is the multi-head attention module, a one-dimension can be calculated as follows:
convolutional network layer with Gaussian Error Linear Unit |X | C |X | C
 1 − s XX s XX
 yic log( ŷic ) −
 
(GELU) activation function is used for the processing of the loss = − log ŷic
embedded features, and the Q, K , V are calculated with |X | |X |
 i=1 c=1 i=1 c=1
corresponding equations (4)(5)(6). (10)
 Absolute position embedding is introduced as above, which where yic and ŷic denote the ground-truth label c and probutilizes a sine or cosine function to generate the position code, ability of the sample xi classified to category c, respectively.
and this position embedding fails to distinguish the relation- The smooth coefficient is determined by varying s in the range
ship among multiple elements. In the multi-head attention of {0, 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.5} in the experiments, and we set
part of our proposed WF-Transformer, we utilize the relative s = 0.005 for the proposed model by a grid search manner.
position embedding manner to show the relative position
relationship among different packets in a trace. The multi-head VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
attention with relative position embedding can be calculated In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to
as follows: demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed
 method. As far as we know, our proposed WF-Transformer is
 Q(K T + A K )
 Attention(Q, K , V ) = so f tmax( √ )(V + A V ) the first work that utilizes Transformer network for temporal
 dk feature extraction of anonymous traffic traces, and we compare
 (8)
 WF-Transformer with the state-of-the-art WF attacks on public
For ai,∗ j ∈ A∗ , ∗ represents K or V , ai,∗ j = Wcli
 ∗ Tor traffic datasets on both closed-world and open-world
 p( j−i,k) , and
cli p(x, k) = max(−k, min(k, x)), k = j − i. ai, j and ai,V j can
 K setting.
represent the relative position information of element i and A. Dataset
element j, and this information only related with the position
i and j. We utilize the open-source dataset which is collected by
 Furthermore, we utilize short-cut connection [23] among Sirinam et al. [7] to evaluate our method. The dataset condifferent layers and dropout function after the GELU activation tains two parts, Closed-world dataset and Open-world dataset,
function to avoid overfitting. In the forward layers, we utilize which is collected with a tor-browser-crawler tool on Tor
four convolutional layers, and each with GELU activation. Browser Bundle version 7.0.6. DF dataset is the latest public
As for the classifier, we utilize a fully-connected layer to dataset for the evaluation of deep WF attacks, which contains
classify the Tor trace for our WF-Transformer model. 95000 traces while Wang‘s dataset only contains 9000 traces
 In this section, we describe the optimization of the proposed in the closed-world setting, so DF dataset is more suitable for
WF-Transformer. We use W F T to represent the Transformer the training and evaluation of deep WF attack models.
feature extractor, and Cls to represent the classifier. Given 1) Closed-World Dataset: This part of dataset collects Tor
the input X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xm } and ground-truth labels for traffic traces by visiting the homepage of each top Alexa
corresponding samples Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , ym } for training 100 websites 1250 times. This dataset is generated in a campus
set, where m is the number of the samples. C denotes the environment by using ten low-end machines. These machines
number of the trace categories. Then we can get the predicted visit target websites with sequential and ordered methodology
probability ŷi for the input xi as follows: in a round-robin manner. The dataset is preprocessed after the
 crawler finishes by only recording the websites that have over
 ŷi = so f tmax(Cls(W F T (xi ))) (9) 1000 visits. The closed-world dataset contains 95 websites
 with 1000 visits for the closed-world evaluations. For closed-
We choose multi-classification cross-entropy loss function world evaluation, the training set contains 76000 traces, while
with a smooth coefficient s for our model, and the loss function the testing set contains 9500 traces.
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 35

 TABLE I
 H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION FOR WF-T RANSFORMER

 TABLE II
 T HE D ETAILS OF DF DATASET

 2) Open-World Dataset: This part of the dataset collects to 16, and we utilize the dropout layer after each activation
the Alexa top 5000 websites excluding the first 100 websites layer and set the rate as 0.5, and the training epochs are set
used in closed-world dataset. The collection procedure is the to 40 for all the attacks. The input of the WF-Transformer is
same as the closed-world collection procedure. For open-world the direction of each packet in the traffic trace. Furthermore,
dataset collection, each homepage of the websites is only we give hyper-parameter search ranges and the selected values
visited once, and the corrupted visits which have been col- in Table I.
lected in closed-world dataset are discarded. The webpages
that are blank pages, access denied pages, CAPTCHA pages
 C. Experiment Setup
and timeout error pages are removed, and the final open-world
dataset contains 40,716 traffic traces. For open-world evalua- To evaluate the performance of our proposed WFtion, the training set contains 96000 traces, while the testing Transformer, we compare it with several state-of-the-art WF
set contains 29500 traces. More details can refer to Table II. attacks. We choose three attacks, CUMUL [13], AWF [29]
 and DF [7] as benchmarks to show the performance of our
 proposed attacks. CUMUL is a non-deep WF attack, AWF
B. Experiment Details and DF are deep WF attacks with different designs of CNN
 Our proposed WF-Transformer method is used for website networks, and they are two kinds of representative existing
fingerprinting attacks with a novel deep network architecture. WF methods. Specifically, we follow the network setting of
Compared with existing deep website fingerprinting attack AWF [29], AWF is an LSTM/CNN hybrid architecture in our
methods which utilize CNN as the feature extractor, the pro- experiment evaluations, which is built by five convolutional
posed WF-Transformer utilizes Transformer which contains layers, one LSTM layer and a fully-connected layer.
lots of improvements for traffic trace feature extraction. To evaluate the performance of our proposed WF-
 Our implementation of WF-Transformer model uses Pytorch Transformer comprehensively, we choose four defenses,
framework [44], and we utilize RTX 3090 to accelerate the TAMARAW [16], WTF-PAD [17], FRONT [35] and Mockingmodel training. We utilize AdamW [45] as an optimizer to bird [40] as competitors to our proposed attacks. TAMARAW
train the WF-Transformer networks, the learning rate is set is a heavyweight regularization defense with high latency and
as 3e−4 at the beginning with a dynamic change mechanism. data overhead, while WTF-PAD is a lightweight obfuscation
The learning rate is 3e−4 in the first 30 epochs, and then set defense, which is developed by Tor project. FRONT is a
as 3e−5 for the following 10 epochs. The batch size is set new lightweight defense which pads dummy packets into
36 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

the front part of the traces. Mockingbird generates adver- length of inputs in prior deep WF attacks is set to 5000, such
sarial traces to confuse the classifiers. In our experiments, as AWF and DF attacks. However, the longer the inputs, the
we follow the original settings that provided in the papers higher the model computation cost is, and the practicality of
and perform parameter tuning on the candidate parameters and the model can be reduced, since attackers need to collect more
find the optimal parameters. Specifically, Mockingbird utilizes traffic traces, which needs more time. The length of the inputs
the trace burst as the input, so we transform the burst of the is set in the range of [1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000] for each
generated adversarial trace to the direction of each packet for attack.
the evaluation of WF attacks. According to Table III, WF-Transformer attains 99.1%
 We conduct the experiments on both closed-world and classification with the input length 5000, which is significantly
open-world settings. In closed-world setting, the classification better than the other attacks with different input lengths,
accuracy is used for the evaluation of the attack methods. significantly. Furthermore, we can find that the classification
In open-world setting, we calculate the corresponding TPR, accuracy is improved with the length of the inputs increased.
FPR and precision-recall curves to show the performance of Compared with CUMUL, which is a non-deep WF attack
different methods. method, our WF-Transformer outperforms CUMUL in all
 input length settings, significantly.
D. Evaluation Metrics Compared with deep WF attacks, such as AWF and DF
 methods, WF-Transformer can still obtain better performance
 We use the prediction probability output by the classifier
 than them, especially for the short input length setting. In our
to classify target traces. If a monitored trace has a prediction
 experiment, AWF utilizes the CNN/LSTM hybrid architecture
probability greater than a certain threshold, we will record
 for the model building, which is the same as the corresponding
it as True Positive (TP), or False Negative (FN) otherwise.
 hyperparameter setting for the AWF. We can observe that
Similarly, if an unmonitored trace is correctly classified, it will
 the classification accuracy of AWF is lower than that of
be considered True Negative (TN), or False Positive (FP)
 our WF-Transformer, even when the input length is set to
otherwise.
 5000, and the classification accuracy of AWF (95.5%) is
 For closed-world scenario, classification accuracy is used
 poorer than the performance of WF-Transformer with input
for the evaluation of WF attacks. For open-world scenario,
 length 1000. Though AWF model contains LSTM network
True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR)
 to extract temporal features of the traces, the performance
are used. Furthermore, Precision-Recall curves are used for
 of AWF is still inferior to our proposed WF-Transformer,
further study of the WF attacks for open-world setting. As for
 which demonstrates the superiority of the WF-Transformer
closed-world setting, the classification accuracy is calculated
 in trace temporal feature extraction. DF has a more complex
by N ACC /N AL L , where N AL L is the number of the all traffic
 network architecture than AWF, and gets better performance
traces, and N ACC denotes the number that correct classifithan AWF, but the performance of DF is still inferior to WFcations. TPR is calculated by T P/(T P + F N ) and FPR
 Transformer. When the input length of the WF-Transformer
equals to F P/F P + T N . Precision and recall are defined as
 is set as 2000, WF-Transformer gets better classification
T P/(T P + F P) and T P/T P + F N , respectively.
 than DF with input length 5000 (98.7% vs 98.3%), which
 demonstrates the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed
 VII. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
 WF-Transformer for anonymous trace classification in closed-
 In this section, we show the experiment results of our world scenario. Furthermore, based on the given average
WF-Transformer for both closed-world setting and open-world classification accuracy and standard deviation, a t-test [46]
setting. can be conducted to each anonymous trace classification result,
 there is high confidence that our WF-Transformer significantly
A. Closed-World Evaluation on Non-Defended Traces outperforms DF for corresponding input trace length. For the
 We evaluate the performance of the WF-Transformer in case that WF-Transformer with input length 5000 and DF
the closed-world scenario on the non-defended traces, which with input length, the classification accuracy of our proposed
only utilizes website traces from the closed-world dataset WF-Transformer is significantly higher than that of DF.
with no WF defenses. For baseline methods, we compare WF-Transformer with CUMUL, AWF and DF attacks.
As mentioned ahead, WF-Transformer is designed for the tem- B. Closed-World Evaluation on Defended Traces
poral feature extraction of the traffic traces. In the evaluation In this section, we test the performance of the proposed
phase, unlike the setting in the prior attacks, we vary the length WF-Transformer on the defended traces. As mentioned in
of the input trace and show the superiority of the proposed section III, WF defenses pad dummy packets into the nor-
WF-Transformer. mal traces to change the pattern of the anonymous traces,
 Table III shows the classification accuracy results of dif- so that the performance of WF attack model in classifying
ferent WF attacks, and we repeat each anonymous trace defended traces is reduced. In this part, we select TAMARAW
classification task five times. Both average classification accu- [16], WTF-PAD [17], FRONT [35] and Mockingbird [40] to
racy and standard deviation are reported for each anonymous evaluate the performance of WF attack under the defended
trace classification task. In table III, we show the results of traces. TAMARAW is a heavyweight defense that pads dummy
different lengths of inputs for each WF attack. Generally, the packets into traces at fixed speed and length, which causes
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 37

 TABLE III
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) ON N ON -D EFENDED T RACES FOR S TATE - OF - THE -A RT ATTACKS IN THE C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

high bandwidth overhead and delay. WTF-PAD and FRONT experiment, the bandwidth overhead of WTF-PAD is 67%,
are lightweight defenses. According to the experiment in and there is no delay for WTF-PAD defense due to the dummy
the closed-world setting, WF-Transformer can utilize short packets being padded into the gaps between normal packets.
inputs to get better classification accuracy than other methods, In Table IV, we can observe that FRONT defense can reduce
so evaluating performance on the traces defended by FRONT the classification accuracy of all the WF attacks, and the
is necessary for our proposed WF-Transformer. Mockingbird accuracy of CUMUL is reduced from 95.5% to 44.2%. For
is a new defense that based on adversarial examples, we test AWF and DF defenses, FRONT still gets good performance
the performance of our proposed WF-Transformer on the in confusing deep classification models, and the classification
traces defended by Mockingbird. accuracy is lower than 72% on the defended traces. According
 We follow the setting of TAMARAW in the original paper, to the FRONT paper [35], the trace pattern information is
and padding dummy packets into the traces with fixed IAT. For gathered in the head part of the traces, padding dummy packets
WTF-PAD defense, we use an open-source defended dataset. into the front part of the traces rather than the whole trace
For FRONT defense, since there is no time stamp in our can reduce the bandwidth overhead and confuse traffic pattern
dataset, and we follow the setting of the original paper [35] information efficiently. Since the feature-rich part is confused,
and calculate the percentage of packets in the traces, and we the attack performance is reduced. For Mockingbird defense,
only pad dummy packets into first 50% of the traces to get WF-Transformer gets 56.2% classification accuracy on the
the traces defended by FRONT. traces defended by Mockingbird, which is higher than other
 Since the classification accuracy of WF-Transformer with WF attacks. The experiments on defended traces show that
input length 2000 on non-defended traces has reached 98.5%, our WF-Transformer can get better performance on defended
which is higher than other WF attacks, the following eval- traces than state-of-the-art methods.
uation of WF-Transformer on defended traces is based on Our proposed WF-Transformer gets better attack perforthe input length 2000, and for other WF attacks, the input mance than AWF and DF attacks, though only using 2000 cells
length is set to 5000 as the original paper. In our experiment in a trace. WF-Transformer can extract the temporal feature of
settings, the defended traces are also used for the training of the traces, and the classification accuracy of WF-Transformer
the attack models, and we evaluate the classification accuracy is reduced from 98.5% on non-defended traces to 82.4% on
on test traces. For Mockingbird [40], we utilize AWF network traces defended by FRONT, which gets the smallest drop
as the detector, and the experiment set follows the case I in compared with other WF attacks.
the original paper [40], which is more realistic. Furthermore, we show the training process of the
 We show the defense performance in Table IV, and both WF-Transformer in undefended traces in a closed-world
the classification accuracy on defended traces and bandwidth setting. Since DF is a state-of-the-art deep WF attack,
overhead are listed in the table. TAMARAW is a heavyweight we compare our method with DF to show the convergence
defense, and the bandwidth overhead is 403% in our exper- performance. As shown in Figure 3, we show the DF method
iments, and holds up well with less than 15% classification with 5000 input length and our proposed WF-Transformer
accuracy among all the WF attacks. Though TAMARAW with two kinds of input length, 2000 and 5000, respectively.
gets good performance in defending the WF attacks, it is Figure 3(a) shows changes in the training and test loss
not practical in real anonymous networks due to the high during training epochs. WF-Transformer method has lower
bandwidth overhead and delay. training and test loss value than DF method, and we can
 For WTF-PAD defense, the classification accuracy of find that the test loss value of our proposed WF-Transformer
CUMUL and AWF is reduced from over 90% to less than is almost unchanged after 5 epochs, while the loss of DF
65%, which shows significant defense performance. How- remains unchanged after 10 epochs, which means that our
ever, DF can still realize over 90% classification accuracy proposed WF-Transformer converges faster than DF methods.
on WTF-PAD defended traces (98.3% for non-defended Furthermore, WF-Transformer with input length 5000 has a
traces), and the experiment result demonstrates that WTF-PAD lower loss than WF-Transformer with length 2000 for the
fails to resist the DF attack. Furthermore, the proposed training and test procedure.
WF-Transformer obtains 92.1% classification accuracy on In Figure 3(b), we show the classification accuracy of DF
defended traces, which shows that WTF-APD defended and WF-Transformer during training epochs. Our proposed
traces fail to confuse the WF-Transformer classifier. In our WF-Transformer obtains over 90% classification accuracy,
38 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE IV
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) ON D EFENDED T RACES IN THE C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

Fig. 3. The loss value and classification accuracy change for DF and WF-Transformer in closed-world setting. (WFT denotes WF-Transformer, the number
represents the input length.)

while DF gets about 76% classification accuracy in the first add an extra category to the classifier for the classification of
epoch, and the classification accuracy of WF-Transformer the unmonitored website traces. Generally, if the prediction
is higher than that of DF for each training epoch, consis- probability of a monitored trace is greater than a threshold,
tently. The classification accuracy of WF-Transformer has little the trace is considered a true positive. The different thresholds
change after 5 epochs, while the accuracy for DF remains are used for different WF attacks, which are selected to realize
stable after 15 epochs, which shows that WF-Transformer has high TPR and low FPR.
better convergence than DF. Furthermore, since we update the For the evaluation in the standard model, we investigate
learning rate dynamically in the training, the loss and accuracy the impact of more training data on the performance of the
curves of WF-Transformer are smoother than that of DF. classifiers in the open-world scenario by varying the number
 of unmonitored traces, and we compare the performance
 of our proposed WF-Transformer with other state-of-the-art
C. Open-World Evaluation WF attacks on non-defended traces. In our standard model,
 WF attacks used in the open-world scenario are more the training set contains all the monitored traces(900 traces
realistic, in which attackers not only classify the anonymous for each 95 monitored websites). In the test phase, all the
traces based on the limited monitored sites, but also need to monitored traces and 20000 unmonitored traces are included
distinguish whether the trace comes from a monitored site or in the test set, and the unmonitored traces are randomly
an unmonitored one. For the evaluation of the WF attacks in selected from the unmonitored traces set that is not used for
the open-world setting, we chose the true positive rate (TPR) training.
and false positive rate (FPR), and we also show Precision- As shown in Figure 4, we show the influence of the unmon-
Recall (PR) curves, which is commonly used in prior works itored traces used for the training on the WF attacks in open-
[7], [44]. world setting. For the evaluation of WF-Transformer, we show
 In our open-world evaluation, the output of the model is the results on two settings, the input length is 2000 and
the prediction probability of each category. Previous studies 5000, respectively, and the amounts of the unmonitored
have provided a Standard Model for the evaluation of WF traces vary in the range {1000, 5000, 10000, 15000, 20000},
in the open-world setting [7], in which the attackers can utilize Figure 4 (a) and (c) show the TPR and FPR of the baseline
the unmonitored traces to train the classifier, and this can methods and the proposed WF-Transformer with input length
help the WF attack model classify monitored and unmonitored 2000, and Figure 4 (b) and (d) show the TPR and FPR of
traces correctly. The evaluation of the standard model is similar the baseline methods and the proposed WF-Transformer with
to that in the closed-world setting, the difference is that we input length 5000.
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 39

Fig. 4. The impact of the amount of unmonitored training data on TPR and FPR (Non-defended dataset) in open-world setting. (WF-T represents“WF-Transformer”. 2000 and 5000 represent the input length for WF-Transformer, respectively.)

Fig. 5. Precision-Recall curves in the open-world setting. (Up: the input length of the traces for WF-Transformer is set to 2000. Down: the input length of
the traces for WF-Transformer is set to 5000.)

 Compared with the baseline methods, WF-Transformer gets the size of the unmonitored trace increasing in the training,
the best performance in both TPR and FPR metrics. For and the FPR is lowest when the size is set to 20000. In the
the input length in 2000, WF-Transformer gets consistently evaluation of the defended traces, we set the number of
best performance on both TPR and FPR, and the TPR is the unmonitored trace to 20000 and provide Precision-Recall
0.965, while FPR is 0.007 for 20000 unmonitored traces. curves of different WF attacks to show the diagnostic ability
For the input length in 5000, WF-Transformer still gets best when the discrimination threshold varies. In the experiment
performance than the other baseline methods, and the TPR setting, the training set contains all the monitored traces and
is 0.969 and the FPR is 0.007 for 20000 unmonitored traces. 20000 unmonitored traces, while the test set contains the mon-
According to our experiments, AWF gets the lowest TPR and itored set and 20000 unmonitored traces (each unmonitored
highest FPR, which is a bad performance on unmonitored website has one trace).
traces, and this be attributed to the architecture of the net- We conduct extensive experiments in an open-world setworks, which has fewer layers than DF. WF-Transformer and ting to show the precision-recall curves in the non-defended,
other baseline methods have the same FPR trend with the train- defended by WTF-PAD and defended by FRONT traces. The
ing size increasing, while our proposed WF-Transformer has precision-recall curve shows the trade-off between precision
higher TPR than other baseline methods over all the training and recall for different thresholds. A high area under the curve
sizes, which demonstrates the effectiveness and superiority of represents both high recall and high precision, where high
the proposed WF-Transformer. precision relates to a low false positive rate, and high recall
 For the evaluation of the unmonitored traces in the open- relates to a low false negative rate. Since the dataset we used is
world scenario, we conduct experiments on the traces defended an imbalanced dataset [7], PR curves can be used to show the
by WTF-PAD and FRONT methods. Furthermore, we also performance of the classifier. As shown in Figure 5, we show
conduct experiments on the non-defended traces for compar- the PR curves in the open-world settings under different input
ison. According to Figure 4 (c) and (d), the FPR drops with length settings for WF-Transformer, in which the input length
40 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

for CUMUL, AWF, and DF is set to 5000 as their original can learn the temporal features of the traces, which is ignored
paper, while the input length for WF-Transformer is set to by the CNN-based deep WF attacks. There are several studies
2000 and 5000, respectively. about the information leakage measurement for website finger-
 The up row in Figure 5 shows the PR curves of the printing [47], [48], and the information leakage measurement
CUMUL, AWF, DF and WF-Transformer with input length can be used to estimate how much information leaks from
2000 on the defended traces, and we can observe that systems.
WF-Transformer still outperforms other WF attacks in all the We utilize WeFDE (Website Fingerprint Density
defense settings. For non-defended traces, the PR curves of Estimation) [48] to measure the information leakage of
DF and WF-Transformer are in the top right-hand corner, the features extracted by DF and our proposed WFwhich means that both DF and WF-Transformer are effective Transformer. According to WeFDE, the information leakage
for different thresholds, and the performance of DF and can be calculated as I (F; W ) = H (W ) − H (W |F), where F
WF-Transformer are close to each other in the non-defended is the trace fingerprinting, and W is the website information,
traces. The precision for CUMUL and AWF is high, while the and I (F; W ) is the amount of the information that an
recall covers a wide range, which means that these attacks attacker can learn form F about W , and H (⋆) is entropy
miss many monitored traces. For the traces defended by function. Since WeFDE is specially designed for quantifying
WTF-PAD, the performance of all the attacks is reduced. the information leakage from WF defenses [48], we measure
According to the Figure 5(b), CUMUL and AWF get bad information leakage of the features extracted from the traces
performance for the traces defended by WTF-PAD, while our defended by WTF-PAD.
proposed WF-Transformer outperforms all other WF attacks, We utilize the features which are before the classifier of
including DF attacks. For traces defended by FRONT, our WF-Transformer and DF as inputs of WeFDE, and implement
proposed WF-Transformer still gets the best performance than the source code1 to calculate the information leakage.
other attacks, and for high precision, WF-Transformer gets a According to our experiment, the information leakage of
precision of 0.968 and recall of 0.711. For high recall, WF- features extracted by DF (input length 5000) is 7.2 bits,
Transformer gets 0.720 precision and 0.956 recall. With the while the information leakage of features extracted by
input length set to 2000, WF-Transformer gets best perfor- WF-Transformer is 7.7 bits (input length 2000) and 7.9 bits
mance than other WF attacks, which set the input length of (input length 5000). The higher of the information leakage, the
the trace to 5000. more information is extracted from the traces. The experiment
 In Figure 5 (d) and (h), we show the performance of result demonstrates that our proposed WF-Transformer can
WF-Transformer on traces defended by Mockingbird method. learn more information from the anonymous traces than the
Mockingbird is a new defense that generates adversarial CNN-based model, which validates the superiority of our
traces to mislead the classifiers to a selected wrong target proposed method.
category [40], and makes the performance of WF attack
decrease. For traces defended by Mockingbird, our proposed IX. D ISCUSSION
WF-Transformer gets the best performance than other attacks,
 To the best of our knowledge, WF-Transformer is the first
and for high precision, WF-Transformer gets a precision of
 work that uses Transformer network for WF attack tasks.
0.562 and a recall of 0.391. For high recall, WF-Transformer
 According to the experiment results above, our proposed
gets 0.425 precision and 0.911 recall. The area under the PR
 WF-Transformer obtains the best performance than several
curve of WF-Transformer is larger than other WF attacks,
 state-of-the-art WF attacks on both closed-world and openwhich means that WF-Transformer has better anonymous trace
 world settings. Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments
classification performance. In Figure 5 (d), WF-Transformer
 to show the model robust on the defended anonymous traces,
with the input length set to 2000 still gets the best performance
 and the experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness and
than other WF attacks which the input length of the trace is
 superiority of our proposed method.
set to 5000.
 As we have claimed that our proposed WF-Transformer
 The down row in Figure 5 shows the PR curves of the
 can extract the temporal feature of the traces with the help
CUMUL, AWF, DF and WF-Transformer with input length
 of the Transformer network, WF-Transformer can learn the
5000 on the defended traces. With more information delivered
 long-term dependence among the trace cells, while the CNN
to WF-Transformer model, our proposed method gets better
 network focuses on the local features with a slide window
performance than other WF attacks and WF-Transformer with
 and ignores the dependence between the front cells and the
input length 2000. WF-Transformer can utilize short trace
 latter cells in the traces, and Transformer architecture has
(2000) to train the model and get better performance than other
 advantages in analyzing trace data. Though the proposed
deep attacks trained on long traces (5000) in both closed-world
 WF-Transformer obtains convincing results in WF attack,
and open-world settings.
 we give some consideration to the limitation of our proposed
 method, and the discussion mainly focuses on the training
 VIII. M EASURING I NFORMATION L EAKAGE FOR
 costs.
 E XTRACTED F EATURES
 We test the processing time for the WF attacks with different
 In this section, we give more evidence to show the supe- deep networks. For simplicity, we compare the processing time
riority of our proposed WF-Transformer in extracting trace
features. As we claimed that our proposed WF-Transformer 1 https://github.com/s0irrlor7m/InfoLeakWebsiteFingerprint
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 41

 TABLE V the traces, and WF-Transformer with input length 5000 obtain
 T HE C OMPUTING T IME FOR D IFFERENT D EEP WF 99.1% classification accuracy for undefended trace, which
 ATTACKS . (S ECOND /T RACE )
 is a new state-of-the-art WF result. With the input length
 set to 2000 for WF-Transformer, in closed-world evaluation,
 WF-Transformer obtains 98.7% classification accuracy for
 undefended traces, and reaches 92.1% and 82.4% classification
 accuracy for traces defended by WTF-PAD and FRONT
 respectively, which is higher than that of DF significantly.
 For open-world evaluation, WF-Transformer with 2000 input
of our proposed WF-Transformer with DF attack, which is a length obtains a 0.99 precision and a 0.95 recall for undestate-of-the-art attack based on CNN architecture. Based on fended traces, and it attains precision of 0.97, 0.95 and recall
the DF original code, we reproduce the DF with Pytorch of 0.71, 0.70 for traces defended by WTF-PAD and FRONT,
framework, and WF-Transformer is realized with Pytorch, respectively. For the defense method based on adversarial
equally. Both of them use GPU acceleration with NVIDIA examples, WF-Transformer still gets the best classification
GTX 3090 with 24 GB of GPU memory. For the input performance than existing WF attacks. Furthermore, WFlength of 2000, DF requires 0.0026 seconds for each trace, Transformer has better convergence performance than DF, and
while WF-Transformer requires 0.0070 seconds for each trace. these experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superior-
For the input length of 5000, the processing time for each ity of our proposed WF-Transformer. In the future, we plan
trace has small increase, and requires 0.0027 seconds, while to conduct further research on the design of Transformer
WF-Transformer requires 0.019 seconds. According to the network for processing traffic traces, and get a more efficient
comparison, the time consumption for WF-Transformer is Transformer-based WF model.
higher than DF method, which is based on CNN architecture. The comparison of computing time is shown in the R EFERENCES
table V.
 [1] C. Fachkha and M. Debbabi, “Darknet as a source of cyber intelligence:
 The performance of WF-Transformer with a 2000 input Survey, taxonomy, and characterization,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
length is better than DF with an input length of 5000, the vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1197–1227, 2nd Quart., 2016.
processing time of WF-Transformer for each trace is about [2] Users-Tor Metrics. Accessed: Jun. 10, 2022. [Online]. Available:
7 times that of DF. Considering the whole attack procedure, https://metrics.torproject.org/userstats-relay-country.html
 [3] I. Karunanayake, N. Ahmed, R. Malaney, R. Islam, and S. K. Jha,
collecting only 2000 cells is easier and time-saving than “De-anonymisation attacks on Tor: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
collecting 5000 cells for a website, so the increased time Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2324–2350, 4th Quart., 2021.
consumption in classification can be tolerated. According to [4] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website finconvergence analysis in Figure 3, WF-Transformer converges gerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc.
 10th Annu. ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Chicago, IL, USA,
faster than DF, which can decrease the training time and Oct. 2011, pp. 103–114.
improve deployment efficiency in real networks. Further- [5] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a dismore, Transformer architecture has been extensively studied tance: Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM Conf.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Raleigh, NC, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 605–616.
in multiple fields, such as NLP [24]and CV [25]. Lots of
 [6] A. Kwon, M. AlSabah, D. Lazar, M. Dacier, and S. Devadas, “Circuit
optimization on Transformer architecture has been proposed, fingerprinting attacks: Passive deanonymization of Tor hidden services,”
such as Swin-Transformer [25], so it is promising to improve in Proc. 24th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security). Washington,
the efficiency of WF-Transformer to decrease the time cost DC, USA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2015, pp. 287–302.
 [7] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprintin processing traces, and make our proposed method more ing: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,”
efficient. in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2018,
 pp. 1928–1943.
 X. C ONCLUSION [8] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Bovenzi, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 “A dive into the dark web: Hierarchical traffic classification of anonymity
 In this paper, we present a novel deep WF attack, called tools,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1043–1054,
Website Fingerprinting Transformer (WF-Transformer), which Jul. 2020.
 [9] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webutilizes Transformer network to extract the temporal feature of page fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted
the anonymous traffic traces, and trains the model in an end-to- traffic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059,
end manner. Unlike existing deep WF attacks based on CNN 2021.
architecture that only focus on the local dependence of the [10] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
 Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinotraces, WF-Transformer can learn the long-term dependence mial Naïve–Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput.
among the trace cells. We conduct extensive experiments to Secur., R. Sion and D. Song, Eds., Chicago, IL, USA, Nov. 2009,
validate the effectiveness of our proposed method in both pp. 31–42.
 [11] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
closed-world and open-world settings. According to our exper- attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd
iments, WF-Transformer outperforms other Bstate-of-the-art USENIX Secur. Symp. San Diego, CA, USA: USENIX Association,
WF attacks in both closed-world and open-world setting, Aug. 2014, pp. 143–157.
and the performance of WF-Transformer with input length [12] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Díaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
 evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
2000 outperforms that of DF with input length 5000 due to Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Nov. 2014,
Transformer network can capture the temporal feature from pp. 263–274.
42 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[13] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc. [34] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “SnWF: Website
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. San Diego, CA, USA: The Internet fingerprinting attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE
 Society, Feb. 2016, pp. 1–15. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, 2022.
[14] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable web- [35] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
 site fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp. fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security).
 (USENIX Security). Austin, TX, USA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2016, Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2020, pp. 717–734.
 pp. 1187–1203. [36] W. De la Cadena et al., “TrafficSliver: Fighting website fingerprinting
[15] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a- attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 boo, I still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” Commun. Secur., USA, Oct. 2020, pp. 1971–1985.
 in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy. San Francisco, CA, USA: IEEE [37] A. Ilyas, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, L. Engstrom, B. Tran, and
 Computer Society, May 2012, pp. 332–346. A. Madry, “Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features,”
[16] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A sys- in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Annu. Conf. Neural Inf.
 tematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 32, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2019,
 defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., pp. 125–136.
 Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Nov. 2014, pp. 227–238. [38] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
[17] M. Juárez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, and M. Wright, “Toward adversarial examples,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
 an efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Computer Security— San Diego, CA, USA, May 2015, pp. 1–11.
 ESORICS 2016 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 9878. [39] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” in Proc.
 Heraklion, Greece: Springer, Sep. 2016, pp. 27–46. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Banff, AB, Canada, Apr. 2014,
[18] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie-talkie: An efficient defense against pp. 1–10.
 passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. [40] M. S. Rahman, M. Imani, N. Mathews, and M. Wright, “Mockingbird:
 Symp. (USENIX Security). Vancouver, BC, Canada: USENIX Associa- Defending against deep-learning-based website fingerprinting attacks
 tion, Aug. 2017, pp. 1375–1390. with adversarial traces,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
[19] D. Lu, S. Bhat, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “DynaFlow: An efficient pp. 1594–1609, 2021.
 website fingerprinting defense based on dynamically-adjusting flows,” in [41] A. Abusnaina, R. Jang, A. Khormali, D. Nyang, and D. Mohaisen,
 Proc. Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Toronto, ON, Canada, Jan. 2018, “DFD: Adversarial learning-based approach to defend against website
 pp. 109–113. fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (IEEE INFO-
[20] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and COM), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2020, pp. 2459–2468.
 A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings,” in [42] J. Ainslie et al., “ETC: Encoding long and structured inputs in trans-
 Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroSP), Saarbrücken, Germany, formers,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.
 Mar. 2016, pp. 372–387. (EMNLP). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Lin-
[21] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, guistics, 2020, pp. 268–284.
 no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015. [43] Z. Dai, G. Lai, Y. Yang, and Q. Le, “Funnel-transformer: Filtering
[22] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification out sequential redundancy for efficient language processing,” in Proc.
 with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
 Process. Syst., 26th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 25, (NeurIPS), vol. 33, Dec. 2020, pp. 4271–4282.
 Lake Tahoe, NV, USA, Dec. 2012, pp. 1106–1114. [44] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
[23] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32. Curran,
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
 (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE Computer Society, Jun. 2016, [45] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” in
 pp. 770–778. Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), New Orleans, LA, USA,
[24] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural May 2019, pp. 1–19.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 26th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, [46] W. S. Gosset, “The probable error of a mean,” Biometrika, vol. 6, no. 1,
 Long Beach, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 5998–6008. pp. 1–25, Mar. 1908.
[25] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using [47] T. Chothia, Y. Kawamoto, and C. Novakovic, “A tool for estimating
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), information leakage,” in Computer Aided Verification—25th Interna-
 Montreal, QC, Canada, Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002. tional Conference, CAV 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia, July 13–19,
[26] W. Zeng, C. Lin, K. Liu, J. Lin, and A. K. H. Tung, “Modeling spatial 2013. Proceedings, vol. 8044. Springer, 2013, pp. 690–695.
 nonstationarity via deformable convolutions for deep traffic flow predic- [48] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2796–2808, website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
 Mar. 2023. Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Toronto, ON, Canada, Oct. 2018,
[27] J. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Sun, and D. Qi, “Flow prediction pp. 1977–1992.
 in spatio-temporal networks based on multitask deep learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 468–478,
 Mar. 2020.
[28] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on Tor anonymity using deep
 learning,” in Proc. Asia–Pacific Adv. Netw., vol. 42, 2016, pp. 15–20.
[29] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juárez, T. V. Goethem, and W. Joosen,
 “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. San Diego, CA, USA: The Internet
 Society, Feb. 2018, pp. 1–15.
[30] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A dataefficient website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,”
 Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310,
 Oct. 2019.
[31] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet Qiang Zhou received the B.Sc. degree in mathematfingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with ics and applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree
 N-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., in computer science from the Beijing University of
 London, U.K., Nov. 2019, pp. 1131–1148. Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in
[32] M. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Xu, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting 2012 and 2021, respectively. Since 2021, he has been
 attack,” Comput. Netw., vol. 198, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 108298. a Lecturer with the School of Computer Science
[33] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu Univertralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using sity. His research interests include encrypted traffic
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, analysis, network security, and machine learning.
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
ZHOU et al.: WF-TRANSFORMER: LEARNING TEMPORAL FEATURES 43

 Liangmin Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. Tong Lu received the B.Sc. degree in the Internet of
 degree in computational mathematics from Jilin Uni- Things engineering from Jiangsu University, Zhenversity, Changchun, China, in 1999, and the Ph.D. jiang, China, in 2021, where he is currently pursuing
 degree in cryptology from Xidian University, Xi’an, the master’s degree in software engineering. His cur-
 China, in 2007. He is currently a Full Profes- rent research interests include website fingerprinting
 sor with the School of Cyber Space and Security defense and machine learning.
 Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
 He has published over 60 technical papers at premium international journals and conferences, such as
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS -
 PORTATION S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, the IEEE Global Communications Conference,
and the IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference. His
research interests include data security and privacy. He has served as a TPC
Member for many IEEE conferences, such as IEEE ICC, IEEE HPCC, and
IEEE TrustCOM. He is a member of ACM. He is a Senior Member of the
Chinese Computer Federation. He has been honored as a “Wan-Jiang Scholar”
of Anhui Province since November 2013. He is an Associate Editor of Security
and Communication Networks. Victor S. Sheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the master’s degree in computer science from the
 University of New Brunswick, Canada, in 2003, and
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Western University, Ontario, Canada, in 2007. He was
 Huijuan Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the mas- an Associate Research Scientist and a NSERC
 ter’s degree from the School of Computer Science Post-Doctoral Fellow in information systems with
 and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu Univer- the Stern Business School, New York University,
 sity, Zhenjiang, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree after he obtained the Ph.D. degree. He is currently an
 from the School of Computer and Control Engineer- Associate Professor of computer science with Texas
 ing, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tech University and the Founding Director of the
 Beijing, China, in 2017. Since 2018, she has been Data Analytics Laboratory (DAL). His research interests include data mining,
 an Associate Professor with the School of Computer machine learning, and related applications. He is a Lifetime Member of the
 Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu ACM. He received the Test-of-Time Award for research from KDD 2020, the
 University. Her research interests include malware Best Paper Award Runner-Up from KDD 2008, and the Best Paper Award
 detection, data mining, deep learning, and pattern from ICDM 2011. He is an area chair and a SPC/PC member of a number of
 recognition. international conferences. He is a reviewer of several international journals.