3856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Zero-Day Guardian: A Dual Model Enabled
 Federated Learning Framework for Handling
 Zero-Day Attacks in 5G Enabled IIoT
 Priyanka Verma , Senior Member, IEEE, Nitesh Bharot , Senior Member, IEEE,
 John G. Breslin, Senior Member, IEEE, Donna O’Shea, Senior Member, IEEE,
 Ankit Vidyarthi , and Deepak Gupta , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—5G emerges as the bedrock for the Industrial interconnection of billions of entities, from everyday consumer
Internet of Things (IIoT), it facilitates the seamless, low-latency electronics to large-scale industrial apparatus, facilitated by the
fusion of artificial intelligence and cloud computing, thereby forti- ability to generate, process, and disseminate colossal volumes
fying the entire industrial procedure within a framework of smart
and intelligent IIoT ecosystems. Concurrently, the continuously of data [2].
changing landscape of cybersecurity threats in the realm of the In essence, IoT refers to the network of physical enti-
Internet of Things (IoT) is giving rise to unparalleled security ties, or “things”, integrated with a variety of technologies
complexities. These challenges are particularly pronounced in the such as sensors, software, and connectivity modules, which
context of zero-day attacks, and integration of 5G technology enable these entities to coordinate and share data over the
further exacerbates the intricacy of the situation. Thus this paper
introduces a cutting-edge 5G-enabled framework for cyberthreat Internet. These entities encompass a broad spectrum of devices
detection leveraging Federated Learning (FL) without the need from smart household appliances, such as thermostats and
for data sharing. It employs a dual Autoencoder (AE) based refrigerators, to health-oriented devices like wearable fitness
model. Distinctly, our model utilizes two synchronized AEs for trackers [3].
each client, integral to FL mechanism. While one AE evaluates On the other hand, IIoT, an offshoot of IoT, is focused
the IIoT environment based on normal network patterns, another
focuses on attack scenarios. For decisive threat assessment, the primarily on the industrial utilization of these technologies.
system uses the capabilities of a one-class SVM classifier with The IIoT framework incorporates elements of machine-to-
AEs. Furthermore, our method ensures a synergistic blend of self- machine communication, automation techniques, Machine
learning and collaborative learning by implementing a polling Learning (ML), and real-time data analytics. These elements
mechanism between overarching AE classifier and those tailored collectively aim to amplify efficiency, productivity, and safety
to individual client data and counters zero-day threats and out
performs traditional AI/ML techniques. across multiple sectors, including manufacturing, logistics,
 energy, and transportation [4].
 Index Terms—5G, IIoT, cyberthreat, federated learning, Wireless connections continue to play a crucial role in the
autoencoders, zero-day attack.
 growth of IoT and IIoT, ensuring extensive and robust links
 between devices, machinery, systems, individuals, and entities.
 5G is set to drive the evolution of automated manufactur-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ing, particularly in localized and public 5G solutions. This
 HE RAPID proliferation of the Internet of Things (IoT) represents a pivotal opportunity to advance future wireless
T and its industrial counterpart, the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT), signifies a remarkable evolution in the
 communication [5].
 IIoT systems, in particular, are prime targets for cyberglobal technological landscape [1]. This evolution involves the attacks due to the expanded attack surface and each connected
 device represents a potential weak spot. The data held within
 Manuscript received 18 August 2023; revised 19 October 2023; accepted these systems is often a treasure trove of intellectual property
19 November 2023. Date of publication 28 November 2023; date of current and sensitive corporate information, making them attractive
version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the Science Foundation of
Ireland (SFI) under Grant 16/RC/3918, through EU’s MSCA under Agreement targets for cybercriminals [6].
847577 and Agreement SFI 12/RC/2289-P2 (Insight). (Corresponding author: Furthermore, IIoT systems frequently suffer from insuf-
Priyanka Verma.) ficient security protocols, either from oversight or inherent
 Priyanka Verma, Nitesh Bharot, and John G. Breslin are with the
Data Science Institute, University of Galway, Galway, H91 TK33 Ireland device limitations, rendering them comparatively easy tar-
(e-mail: priyanka.verma@universityofgalway.ie). gets [7]. Moreover, the introduction of 5G in the IIoT
 Donna O’Shea is with the Department of Computer Science, Munster expands the potential for cyber attacks. The increased
Technological University, Cork, T12 P928 Ireland.
 Ankit Vidyarthi is with the Department of Computer Science Engineering speed and connectivity of 5G networks create more
and Information Technology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, entry points for hackers to exploit vulnerabilities in
Noida 201301, India. connected devices and systems, posing greater risks
 Deepak Gupta is with the CSE Department, Maharaja Agrasen Institute of
Technology, New Delhi 110086, India. to critical infrastructure, data integrity, and operational
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3335385 continuity.
 
 c 2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK 3857

 Security strategies that are adequately mature for conven- This advancement enhances system efficiency compared to
tional Information Technology (IT) systems may not translate earlier iterations where immediate connectivity was restricted
seamlessly to the 5G-enabled IIoT context [8]. to private networks with high-speed links. Consequently, the
 To circumvent these limitations, a growing body of recent newly devised system is well-suited for real-time applications.
research is pivoting towards ML and Deep Learning (DL) Aiming to tackle the problem of zero-day attack detection, the
methodologies [9]. main contributions of the proposed framework are:
 However, their practical application is often restricted due • Proposed a dual-model classification system within a
to apprehensions about privacy, security risks associated with federated framework, designed to identify unfamiliar
data transfer between industrial environments and servers, and examples by contrasting them with distinct normal and
the time-demanding nature of the training phase on a singular attack profiles.
machine [10]. • This work provides valuable insights and a robust solution
 Therefore, the integration of edge computing with DL to counter zero-day attacks effectively. It proposes a novel
can help bring intelligence directly to the source of data and effective framework that achieves high accuracy,
creation, thus tackling challenges such as data privacy, high detection rate, and F1-score, outperforming traditional
communication costs, the need for vast memory space, short- models and hybrid approaches.
ened training periods, and high latency [11]. Local DL and • The proposed framework provides the ability to effecdistributed DL techniques have been developed to foster this tively handle imbalanced data sets by using two individual
edge intelligence, and they function without the need for data models for attack and normal traces.
aggregation [12] thus reducing issues with singular machines. The rest of the paper is organized as: Section II describes
 However, these techniques frequently fail to accurately the existing solutions to the zero-day attack. These include
identify zero-day attack instances, in which cybercriminals centralized and decentralized ML/DL-based techniques. Next,
commandeer a network of compromised computing devices Section III aims to address the proposed approach, explaining
to take advantage of previously unknown weaknesses in IoT the know-how of the proposed approach. It consists of the
systems. A lack of existing training samples within individual workflow of the proposed technique along with the algorithms
IoT-edge devices hampers the effectiveness of the above and the diagrammatic representations. The proposed approach
methods in such situations. The detection of zero-day threats is is then validated by experimentation and the results obtained
inherently difficult, primarily because of the lack of previous are analyzed in Section IV. It aims to compare the results of
information regarding such incidents [13], [14]. various existing solutions with the proposed approach. Lastly,
 One potential remedy to this issue is Federated Learning the conclusion of the paper along with some scope for future
(FL) [15]. In the FL paradigm, each data proprietor (referred research is mentioned in Section V.
to as a client) constructs a model using their proprietary data
and transmits the model weights to a centralized server. The
server’s function is to amalgamate these parameters to create II. R ELATED W ORK
a comprehensive model, which can then be deployed across This section introduces the present techniques available
all client environments [16]. for cyber threat detection. AI-based IDS have been exten-
 Thus based on the aforementioned discussion, this paper sively utilized in device-level detection, marking notable
elucidates an FL-based framework for zero-day cyber-threat successes [18], [19]. The majority of existing research, such
detection within 5G-enabled IIoT ecosystems. This advanced as studies [20], [21] on intrusion detection operate under a
cyberthreat detection paradigm involves training two indepen- closed-set assumption, meaning they only anticipate encoundent AE models on each client’s data, one model learning from tering attack classes that were present in the training data set
normal traffic and another learning from attack traffic, with during testing.
the models’ parameters being shared with a server using a 5G In a 2017 study focusing on water treatment systems,
network, thereby eliminating the need to share raw data. Inoue et al. [22] introduced an anomaly detection model
 These parameters are then used by the server to build two utilizing Deep Neural Networks (DNN). By employing Long
global components to learn normal and attack profiles. Using Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks within their
these global models, each client maps its personal data into a investigation, they were able to reveal that the DNN model,
latent space and trains two classifiers for the received global having been trained on normal data, exhibited performance
AE models. Further client trains two more one-class classifiers that surpassed that of the one-class Support Vector Machine
on their local normal and attack data. Then shares the output (SVM) model. The training process for the one-class SVM
of four classifiers with their own polling unit (ϑ) for final model was more rapid compared to the DNN method they
prediction. Every client has the ability to assess its condition proposed.
using the shared learning models for representation and the In 2020, there were numerous studies conducted on cyberrepository of classifiers. Moreover, the system is equipped threat detection. Audibert et al. [23] put forth an anomaly
with 5G capabilities, enabling it to achieve remarkable data detection approach in an unsupervised way and leveraging
throughput and minimal communication delay. This empowers AEs for multivariate time series. Their method exhibited rapid
sensors and devices to seamlessly exchange data in real- training time, robustness to parameter selection, and stability.
time between clients and servers, especially when deployed Their result evaluation shows that their method stands up well
within a data-intensive 5G framework as exemplified in [17]. against other methods in the field.
3858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Abdelaty et al. [24] introduced a modular deep learning- framework leverages image-based representations of packetoriented anomaly detection model for IIoT systems. They level data, extracting both spatial and temporal patterns from
evaluated their proposed model on two IIoT datasets and the network traffic. Furthermore, we incorporate stacking and
found it to have superior performance, especially regarding sub-clustering techniques, which facilitate the identification of
the F1-score metric, compared to several existing methods. previously unknown attacks by effectively capturing the intri-
Whereas, Moon et al. [25] proposed a combined use of one- cate and varied characteristics of legitimate network behavior.
class SVM and LSTM networks for anomaly detection within Wu et al. [30], in their study, devised an intrusion detection
IIoT systems. Their evaluation revealed that the LSTM-based method based on dynamic ensemble incremental learning.
technique was more effective than the one that utilized one- While this approach is capable of adapting to newly discovered
class SVM. local attack variants, it struggles to incorporate knowledge
 Moreover, Nagarajan et al. [26] offered an anomaly of new attacks that manifest in other IDSs. Given that IDS
detection method aimed at maintaining privacy within IIoT devices dispersed across various geographical locations might
networks. They compared their approach to two datasets with face different attack variants, collaborative model learning
traditional ML techniques. The results demonstrated that their can substantially enhance the defense capabilities of smart
method had a higher detection rate than the others. community systems against unfamiliar attacks.
 However, these closed-set AI-based Intrusion Detection While the aforementioned methods yield exceptional results,
Systems (IDS) come with inherent limitations. These systems there’s a significant hurdle that precludes their widespread
often fall short when faced with unknown or novel attack adoption in the industrial sector. They are centralized techvectors, and they tend to generate high false positive rates, niques in nature, requiring whole data to be housed on one
potentially leading to alert fatigue. Moreover, maintaining system for training purposes. It makes the training process
closed-set IDS involves labor(intensive), and frequent updates both time-consuming and hardware-intensive. Additionally, the
to incorporate new threat intelligence, making it challenging need to transfer and store all data samples from industrial
to keep up with the rapidly evolving threat landscape. These operations on one server raises concerns about security and
systems struggle to adapt to changes in network configurations privacy. Various industrialists become hesitant to share their
and are ill-suited to handling class imbalances or scaling data with other entities to train ML models. In response to
effectively in dynamic network environments. Attackers can these challenges, several studies have devised the use of nonexploit the weaknesses of closed-set IDS through evasion centralized techniques, such as FL, to train models. These
techniques, emphasizing the need for more adaptive and methods circumvent the need for data sharing, addressing
proactive security measures. many of the concerns associated with centralized systems.
 To address these limitations, the cybersecurity community Detection methodologies based on FL, as referenced in [10],
has recognized the importance of open-set intrusion detection allow for the sharing of locally learnt parameters instead
methods. Open-set IDS distinguishes between known and of actual data. This approach is proved superior in accelunknown threats, primarily relying on anomaly detection and erating training, protecting privacy, and reducing latency.
more advanced machine learning techniques. These methods Popoola et al. [31] employed this strategy by federatoffer a forward-looking approach by continuously learning ing IoT edge devices along with DNN to detect zero-day
from new data and adapting to evolving threats, reducing false botnet attacks. Reference [32] introduced an innovative
positives, and offering better scalability and adaptability. They system combining blockchain technology with federated intruare designed to be more resilient against evasion techniques sion detection to handle untrustworthy updates. Meanwhile,
and can provide a more robust defense against an ever- Ruzafa-Alcázar et al. [33] devised an intrusion detection
changing threat landscape, making open-set intrusion detection method leveraging semi-supervised federated methodology.
an essential component of modern cybersecurity strategies. In this arrangement, unlabelled samples were utilized for
 Only a handful of studies have explored open-set intrusion boosting performance of classification system.
detection. For instance, Ibrahim Hairab et al. [27] suggested a In 2022, [34] introduced the FL technique designed to
method based on CNN for anomaly detection in IoT networks detect attacks on solar farms. Tests in diverse scenarios and
to counteract zero-day attacks. Despite this, their proposed comparisons with traditional ML strategies were noted. The
method falls short of providing a detailed classification of experiment demonstrated that their proposed FL-based model’s
known attacks. performance closely mirrored its centralized counterpart but
 Ping and Ye [28] proposed open-set IDS, that addresses with the advantage of reduced computational and data transfer
the problem of seen and unseen behaviors/traffic through costs.
three modules named MinMax autoencoder, the classifier, and Rey et al. [35] suggested both supervised and unsupervised
pseudo extreme value machine. They conducted experiments FL-based methods for detecting malware, which they evalon USTC-TFC2016 & CSE_IDS2018+ datasets to establish uated under various conditions. They compared this model
the efficacy of their proposed approach achieving accuracy of with two other methods, revealing that the FL-based approach
72% and 89.4% respectively. was superior to employing multiple local models, one per
 Farrukh et al. [29] present a novel framework specifi- client.
cally designed to address the open set recognition challenge Even though the above FL-based methods tackle the priwithin the domain of Network Intrusion Detection Systems, vacy concerns related to centralized ML methods, they fall
with a particular focus on IoT environments. The proposed somewhere short in detecting unknown attacks on IIoT. These
VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK 3859

Fig. 1. The proposed zero-day guardian framework with 5G network.

methods generally focus on the creation of general classifier P(client_tb ). Every client has its individual local model say
models and thus perform low when encountering zero-day M and it is trained with loss function as:
attacks. Moreover, the above methods do not give preference to
 L(client_tc , w)
self-learning and completely rely on the global model, which 
 1
allows a single attack client to influence the overall global = Lc (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc , w) (1)
model. Hence, above mentioned strategies do not handle the |client_tc |
 
zero-day scenarios well, thus creating a need for an efficient where varies for (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc ) ∈ client_tc
model. and Lc (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc , w) is a specific function to
 be minimized. So our goal is to finally aggregate the Ml to
 III. P ROPOSED Z ERO -DAY G UARDIAN F RAMEWORK obtain global model Mg for each client by maintaining the data
 privacy:
 The conventional approach to ML, where the model is
 1
trained and tested on the same set of data, restricts individual C
 1
client’s growth for detecting new attack traces. Collaborative min{Mc }C
 c=1 C |client_tk |
learning, on the other hand, offers a better way to enhance c=1
individual client progress. However, collaborative learning c
 client_t

often involves sharing data, which poses security risks. To ∗ L(Ml(c) (client_t_Xc ), client_t_yc ) (2)
address this, FL emerged as a decentralized system that not i=1
only ensures client security but also eliminates the need In both conventional ML assessment techniques and federfor data sharing among clients. Additionally, FL enables ated approaches, the model is conditioned and evaluated using
individual clients to participate in a global scenario, promoting identical categories of data. During the training phase, the
better learning outcomes. model assimilates the underlying patterns from each category
 FL is a privacy-preserving decentralized method, developed of data. Subsequently, these learned patterns are employed
by Google, that reduces the client-side computation and to recognize samples from the corresponding classes in the
parallelly allows each client to gain global knowledge without testing phase. However, these approaches assume that the
globally sharing data with each other or without bringing data training dataset includes all the attack classes that the model
to a central location. Let there be C clients c ∈ C, and the will encounter after deployment, which limits the system’s
number of communication rounds is R and client training data ability to detect attacks outside its dataset. This lack of
as client_t1 , client_t2 , client_t3 , . . . , client_tc , . . . , client_tC . robustness raises concerns about the system’s security, as
Each client_tc = {client_t_Xc , client_t_yc }C c=1 and testing it may allow attack traffic to bypass its defenses. So, we
dataset as client_tt_X, client_tt_y for all clients. Each training propose a dual AE model-enabled FL framework for handling
data has a distinct distribution such that P(client_ta ) = zero-day attacks in 5G-enabled IIoT systems. The proposed
3860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1 Zero-Day Guardian Framework Workflow
Prerequisites: Clients k with local data D, 2 local classifiers 7: Use classifiers to predict the probabilities
0b & 0m , 2 global classifiers b & m , a data differentiator  y_predg = p .score_samples(Td1 )
and 2 AEs lb & lm for normal and attack data respectively, y_predg
 y_predg = e y_predgj
and a voting unit ϑ. j=1 e

A cloud server with 2 global AEs gb & gm , a weight y_predl = 0l .score_samples(Td2 )
 y_predl
distributor ω, a data storage, an aggregator. y_predl = e y_pred lj
 j=1 e
Working: where, j = {1,2,3,4}, g = {1,3}, l= {2,4}
 1: Use  to divide the D into the normal and attack dataset  = len(y_predg or l )
 Dn & Da respectively. 8: Combine the results of the local and global classifiers
 (Db , Dm ) =  (D) individually
 2: Use Db & Dm to participate in federated scenario to obtain 9: y_pred_self_model = list()
 gb &  gm 10: for i in range(len(y_predlb )):
 gb = AEFedaratedb (Db , lb ) 11: if y_predlb [i] ≥ y_predlm [i]:
 gm = AEFedaratedm (Dm , lm ) 12: y_pred_self_model.append (0)
 3: Train the 0b & 0m 13: else:
 0b = 0b .fit(Db ) 14: y_pred_self_model.append(1)
 0m = 0m .fit(Dm ) 15: y_pred_global_model = list()
 4: Train b & m 16: for i in range(len(y_predgb )):
 b = b .fit(gb .predict(Db )) 17: if y_predgb [i] ≥y_predgm [i]:
 m = m .fit(gm .predict(Dm )) 18: y_pred_global_model.append (0)
 Testing Phase 19: else:
 5: Replicate the test data Td to generate 4 test spaces 20: y_pred_global_model.append(1)
 Td1 = Td.copy() 21: Predict the outcomes
 Td2 = Td.copy() 22: y_pred = list()
 Td3 = Td.copy() 23: for i in range(len(y_pred_self_model)):
 Td4 = Td.copy() 24: if y_pred_self_model[i] == y_pred_global_model[i]:
 6: Pass Tdb & Tdm through gb & gm obtained by federated 25: y_pred.append(y_pred_global_model[i])
 process. 26: else:
 Td1 = gb .predict(Td1 ) 27: y_pred.append(y_pred_self_model[i])
 Td3 = gm .predict(Td3 ) 28: y_pred is desired output

framework aims to tackle the zero-day attack by separately growth of interconnected, intelligent systems. It enables realtraining classifiers to identify normal and attack traffic. This time remote monitoring and maintenance, enhances mobility
in turn helps to train the classifiers more precisely to handle for robots and autonomous vehicles, and ensures scalabilonly one kind of data empowering it with a higher detection ity and energy efficiency in manufacturing environments.
rate. The usage of separate models for normal and attack data Furthermore, 5G’s potential to offer global, high-speed
also handles the issues caused by the dominant class if the connectivity promises to reshape the way industries operdataset is imbalanced. ate, making them more efficient, responsive, and globally
 The scenario considered within the proposed framework connected.
involves clients functioning as edge nodes, symbolizing indi- The major components of the proposed framework are; at
vidual industrial units. Each unit integrates a variety of the client end it consists of two global AEs and their associated
intelligent sensors, actuators, cameras, robots, machines, IC two classifiers, data storage, two more classifiers built on local
controllers, and IoT-based chips to gather vital data. This normal and attack data, a data distinguisher, and a polling
data is then stored in a database to facilitate the training mechanism. At the server, we have an aggregator, weights
of a local model. Subsequently, these clients collaborate distributor, data storage, and two global AEs.
by sharing gradients from their respective local models, Algorithm 1 describes the workflow of the proposed framewhich are aggregated on a cloud server. This FL pro- work with Table I describing the parameters involved. The
cess is facilitated through the utilization of the Internet major steps of the proposed framework are:
and the efficiency of 5G infrastructure, with its ultra-low • At each client it initially begins by initializing the data
latency, high bandwidth, network slicing capabilities, and distinguisher process where the normal traffic data is
advanced security features, 5G facilitates real-time control, separated from the attack one.
machine-to-machine communication, and seamless connec- • These separated datasets Db for normal & Dm for attack
tivity for an array of devices and sensors, fostering the are used to separately train the local AE lb for normal
VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK 3861

Fig. 2. Testing with the proposed framework at individual client.

 TABLE I
 D ESCRIPTION OF S YMBOLS U SED IN P ROPOSED A PPROACH output set with the same fs-number of features. It entails the
 usage of an encoder and decoder which works collaboratively
 to first reduce the feature set to a specified feature set say
 fs’ (through encoder) and then reconstruct the feature set fs
 through its decoder set. AE employed in our system mainly
 uses the same functionality and then uses Mean Squared Error
 (MSE) as its loss function.

 1
 n
 MSE = (ytrue − ypred )2
 n
 i=1

 where n is the total number of predictions
 Once the local training of l is completed, every client
 traffic and AE lm for attack traffic and shared with the shares its AE weights with the global server for the federated
 server. process. Once the parameters of the client’s local components
 • At the server, the process of aggregation takes place to
 are shared with the server, it employs the federated averaging
 get the global AEs gb and gm for normal and attack method, as described in [15], to amalgamate the components
 traffic respectively, and shared back to clients. into two global elements, as represented by Eq. (3) and Eq. (4).
 • Further on global AEs gb and gm , each client trains two
 The resultant global components are depicted in Eq. (5). These
 separate global one class classifiers such as b & m . consolidated global components are subsequently distributed
 • Then on local data Db & Dm the clients local classifiers
 to the clients, allowing them to refine the components using
 0b & 0m , named as self-model classifiers are trained. their individual local data. After this refinement, the param-
 • In the case of testing, the testing data is first passed
 eters are shared back with the server using a 5G network
 through the gb & gm respectively and then classified between the client and server. This iterative model weights
 using the global classifiers b & m respectively. the training cycle, conveying them to the server, and their
 • The testing data is also passed through the self-model
 subsequent aggregation constitutes the FL process.
 classifiers to generate two more outcomes from 0b & 0m
 1 k
 K
 respectively. Wi = wi (3)
 • As a final prediction step, these predictions are combined K
 k=1
 to generate the desired classification within the polling
 mechanism. where Wi is the aggregated weights of components i (normal
 As mentioned, each client has two local AE lb for normal or attack) and wki are the weights of components i for
traffic and AE lm for attack traffic. This AE is a specially client k.
designed network that has the power to transform data through
 1 k
 K
the use of neural structures. It takes the input data, says D Bi = bi (4)
with fs features, processes them, and converts them to another K
 k=1
3862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II
Algorithm 2 AEFederated PARAMETERS U SED IN THE Z ERO -DAY G UARDIAN M ODEL
Input: K clients with their local data & a server
 for comms_round do
 for client k do
 Train the normal AE 1 present with client
 ζ (Dkn , rnk (fnk (Dkn )));
 Train the attack AE 3 present with client
 ζ (Dka , rak (fak (Dka )));
 Share the AE parameters gi with server for
 both AE‘s
 ωi = {ωik |i ∈ {normal, attack}}
 βi = {βik |i ∈ {normal, attack}}
 end
 Server aggregate the parameters & make the a hypersphere with the center of c and radius of ϒ by
 global components gi minimizing the ϒ 2 .
 
 Wi = K1 K i=1 wi
 k
 
  K 2
 n
 Bi = K i=1 bi
 1 k
 minϒ k ,ck ϒik + C μj (6)
 ηi = gi (D) = σ (wi D + bi ); i i
 j=1
 Server shared global components with clients subjected to:
 end 2
 ||gi (Xik ) − cki ||2 ≤ ϒik + μj
 μj ≥ 0
where Bi is the accumulated biases of normal or attack where ϒik and cki are the parameters of the one-class SVM
counterparts of i and bki are the biases of component i for 0ki which is trained for component i of client k, μj are slack
client k. variables, C is the penalty parameters gi (·) is the global AE
 (Eq. (5)) for component i and Xik are the local samples of
 ηi = gi (X) = σ (wi X + Bi ) (5) client k belongs to component i.

 IV. R ESULTS E VALUATION
 In this context, gi signifies the global AE function for
component i, ηi compares the new samples with the normal In this section, we outline the experimental setup, dataset
and attack data. description, zero-day scenario simulation, and subsequent
 Once the global models are shared with clients, they train comparative result analysis. Our approach revolves around
four one-class SVM classifiers, two using the new represen- a dual AE model-enabled 2-way FL framework designed
tations ηb and ηm from the global AEs and two on local to counter zero-day attacks. The chosen dataset X-IIoTID
clients’ data for normal and attack traffic. One-class SVM represents real cybersecurity incidents to ensure practicality.
is a type of SVM algorithm used specifically for anomaly We meticulously simulate zero-day scenarios to evaluate the
detection rather than classic classification tasks. This technique efficacy of our zero-day guardian framework. Result analyis particularly useful when the data consists mainly of one sis encompasses performance metrics, model accuracy, and
class (the “normal” class) and the goal is to detect outliers comparison against traditional methods. This comprehensive
or anomalies, which form a second class that is typically evaluation demonstrates the efficacy of our approach in detectunderrepresented in the dataset. As in our proposed approach, ing and mitigating zero-day threats, laying the foundation for
we are separately training the classifiers of normal and attack more robust and proactive cybersecurity measures.
profiles, thus one-class SVM fulfills this purpose.
 One-class SVM operates by defining a decision boundary A. Experimental Setup and Parameters
around the normal/attack data in a way that positions this data The proposed mechanism was developed and analyzed using
in a small region while outliers fall outside this region. It Python 3.10,1 on a MacBook Pro equipped with an Apple
achieves this by learning a decision function that is positive M1 Pro processor. The MacBook Pro configuration includes
for the region of normal/attack data and negative for the region a 10-core CPU, a 16-core GPU, 16 GB of RAM, and a 1TB
where outliers lie. SSD. Table II gives the parametric description of the proposed
 However, it’s important to note that one-class SVM’s framework with Table III describing the performance metrics
performance can be sensitive to the choice of the kernel and the used for the evaluation.
kernel’s parameters, as well as the value of the hyperparameter
that controls the trade-off between maximizing the distance B. Dataset Description
of the hyperplane from the origin and minimizing the number To evaluate the proposed framework we utilized X-IIoTID
of instances that fall on the side of the hyperplane with the dataset [36]. This dataset is specifically designed for IIoT
outliers. Equation (6) shows the training objective of the oneclass SVM model. The goal of one-class SVM is to obtain 1 https://docs.python.org/3/library/
VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK 3863

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT AE S ON X-IIOTID DATASET

applications and captures system activity generated by a range
of IIoT devices. With a total of 820,834 traces, the dataset
comprises 68 features and encompasses 0-9 different labels.
These labels represent various attack types, along with a
separate label for normal requests. The whole training dataset
was divided among 10 clients for the FL approach. This
divided dataset for each client was further bifurcated into
normal and attack traffic using the data distinguisher and used
to train the individual AEs in a federated way respectively.

C. Building a Zero-Day Scenario
 A zero-day attack is characterized by its novelty and the fact
that it represents an unfamiliar type of threat that has not been
previously encountered or described to the model during its
training phase. In order to effectively simulate zero-day attacks
in our experiments, a commonly adopted practice involves
partitioning the dataset into two distinct groups: one consisting
of known network traffic and another comprised of ‘unknown’
network traffic. In the context of our specific experiments, we
implemented this approach by filtering out instances associated
with attack labels named ‘Lateral Movement’ (comprising
31,596 traces) and ‘Weapon’ (comprising 67,260 traces) from
the training dataset. This selective exclusion of attack labels
aimed to create a scenario in which the model encounters
attacks it has never been exposed to during training. However,
it is important to note that these excluded attack labels, namely
‘Lateral Movement’ and ‘Weapon’, were reintroduced in the Fig. 3. Comparison of one-class SVM in proposed framework with other
testing dataset, thus ensuring a comprehensive evaluation of one-class classifiers.
the model’s performance in the presence of these zero-day
attack types.
 single-layered AE, sparse AE, and variational AE, where
 increasing the number of communication rounds results in a
D. Result Analysis decrease in AE loss. However, the AE loss values are higher
 Here we analyze and compare the performance of the for all the other AEs in comparison to the multilayered AE.
various AEs with the proposed approach, comparison with Thus it can be concluded from the results that the
other federated attack detection DL models, and comparison Multilayered AE demonstrates the lowest AE loss values
with other one-class classifiers, traditional ML classifiers, and among all the AEs considered in this comparison for both
DL classifiers for individual clients. attack and normal traffic. Therefore, we used multilayered AEs
 1) Comparison With Other AEs: Firstly, we compared the in the proposed approach.
performance of various AE models. Results obtained from the 2) Comparison of One-Class SVM Used in Proposed
comparison of different AEs on the X-IIOTID dataset with Framework With Other One Class Classifiers Models: This
the proposed approach are described in Table IV. The table section compares the performance of the opted classifier
provides insights into the communication rounds required for (one-class SVM) for the proposed approach with other onetraining the AEs and the corresponding AE loss for both attack class classifiers. The other one-class classifiers considered are;
and normal traffic. Isolation Forest (IF), Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), Local
 For the multilayered AE, it can be observed that for the Outlier Factor (LOF), and Elliptic Envelope (EE).
number of communication rounds from 2 to 10, the AE loss The results of the classification performance for different
decreases gradually for both attack and normal data. The classifiers are presented in the given Figure 3 depicting the
lowest AE loss values achieved for attack and normal data accuracy, detection rate, and F1-score for each classifier.
are 0.000370 and 0.000305, respectively, at 10 communication The proposed classifier achieves an accuracy of 99.328%,
rounds. Similar trends can be observed in the case of the a detection rate of 99.668%, and an F1-score of 99.844%
3864 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON M ODELS PARAMETERS C OMPARISON OF P ROPOSED W ITH DL-BASED FL M ODELS

 Fig. 4. Comparison of the proposed framework with other one-class
indicating that the one-class SVM used in the proposed frame- classifiers.
work performs exceptionally well in accurately classifying the
data, detecting known and unknown (zero-day) traffic, with
high F1-score.
 The IF classifier performs poorly, while the GMM, LOF,
and EE classifiers achieve varying degrees of effectiveness in
identifying zero-day attacks in the dataset. However, the oneclass SVM classifier exhibits the highest accuracy, detection
rate, and F1-score, indicating its superior performance in zeroday attack detection compared to the other classifiers. Hence,
the one-class SVM is chosen for the proposed approach.
 3) Comparison of the Proposed Framework With DL-Based
FL Models: Table VI presents the performance comparison
of different DL models, including MLP, CNN, GRU, CNN Fig. 5. Comparison of the proposed framework with traditional ML
+ GRU hybrid model, and the proposed model with Table V classifiers.
describing their respective parameters. The results demonstrate
that CNN, while effective in capturing spatial patterns, falls suggest that the proposed approach has successfully addressed
short when dealing with sequential information, as evident the challenge of zero-day attack detection and demonstrates
through the superior performance of the CNN + GRU hybrid remarkable capabilities in accurately classifying it.
system. On the other hand, the GRU model’s limitations 4) Comparison of the Proposed Approach With One
in handling spatial patterns are compensated by the CNN Class Classifiers in Centralized Settings: Here the proposed
component of the hybrid model. Zero-day attacks are typically approach is compared with one-class classifiers such as SVM,
designed to exploit vulnerabilities that are not known to IF, LOF, EE when applied to the centralized settings where
security experts or database systems. Since these models all data is located in one place. As shown in Figure 4
learn from historical data and have not encountered zero- The proposed framework demonstrates the highest accuracy,
day attack patterns, they lack the ability to detect zero-day detection rate, and F1-score among all evaluated classifiers,
attacks effectively. This concept of learning provides them indicating its superior performance in detecting known and
the ability to easily handle and learn the known attack unknown attacks. Moreover, all the other one-class classifier,
patterns but falls short in case of unknown attacks. Moreover, evaluated on centralized data lags behind the proposed model.
the proposed approach aims to understand the attack and However, in centralized settings data privacy is always a
normal patterns separately therefore they are rendered more concern which is also addressed in the proposed approach
power to understand the difference between normal and attack while utilizing the FL-based framework.
patterns. Table VI demonstrates that the proposed approach 5) Comparison With ML Models at Individual Client: This
significantly outperforms all individual models, including the section analyzes the effectiveness of the proposed approach in
hybrid CNN + GRU model, across all evaluation metrics. It comparison to traditional ML-based techniques for zero-day
attains an outstanding accuracy of 99.32%, a detection rate of attack detection. Figure 5 represents the significant difference
99.69%, and an F1-score of 99.84%. These exceptional results between the proposed framework and the other ML models
VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK 3865

 TABLE VII
 S ERVER S IDE S CALABILITY A NALYSIS IN T ERMS OF M EMORY C ONSUMPTION AND T IME

 937.809 MB to 1814.565 MB for normal scenarios and
 1089.352 MB to 1936.666 MB for attack scenarios. Overall
 memory consumption for the FL process ranges from 3622.273
 MB to 24121.373 MB for the normal scenario and 9683.329
 MB to 37538.783 MB for the attack scenario. Moreover, the
 overall time taken for the complete FL process ranges from
 163.579 seconds to 250.181 seconds for the normal scenario
 and 166.6853 seconds to 249.272 seconds for the attack
 scenario. The time taken per epoch per client ranges from 1
 to 7 seconds for the normal scenario and 1 to 9 for the attack
 scenario. These numbers provide a comprehensive overview
Fig. 6. Comparison of the proposed model with DL classifiers.
 of how server-side performance metrics change with varying
 client numbers in the FL process for different scenarios.
 Thus, from the above results it is observed that even with an
in terms of accuracy, showing that the proposed framework increased number of clients (more connected IoT devices), the
outperforms other traditional models with the given dataset. proposed approach is able to deal with them without adding
Similar to accuracy, the proposed approach demonstrates the much complexity and resource consumption to the system.
highest detection rate. The high detection rate of the proposed
approach indicates its ability to effectively identify zero- V. C ONCLUSION
day attack instances, making it a promising choice for the In conclusion, our research introduces an innovative
application at hand in comparison to traditional ML solutions. approach to enhance cybersecurity defenses against zero-day
 6) Comparison With DL Models at Individual Client: attacks and address data imbalance within the context of a
Comparison the performance of the proposed approach 5G network. The proposed framework, which leverages a dual
with other DL models at individual client level as shown Autoencoder (AE) model-enabled Federated Learning (FL)
in Figure 6. The proposed model achieves exceptional system, has yielded remarkable results. It achieved an excepperformance with an accuracy of 99.32%, detection rate of tional accuracy rate of 99.32%, a detection rate of 99.69%,
99.69%, and F1-score of 99.84%, showcasing its superior abil- and an F1-score of 99.84%. These results clearly surpass
ity to accurately classify instances and detect anomalies. The the performance of traditional models and hybrid architec-
MLP, GRU, and CNN models also perform well, achieving tures, underscoring the framework’s effectiveness in accurately
accuracies of 87.66%, 87.87%, and 87.72%, respectively. In identifying and classifying zero-day attacks. Moreover, the
conclusion, the proposed model outperforms all other models, incorporation of separate AEs during training significantly
exhibiting the highest performance across all metrics, while the improved the handling of data imbalance, particularly benefit-
MLP, GRU, and CNN models also achieve high performance ing underrepresented classes.
in the classification task. Furthermore, our adoption of the dual model FL frame-
 7) Scalability Analysis: This section outlays the concept of work facilitated efficient collaboration and knowledge sharing
scalability with our proposed framework. It displays various among distributed nodes, leading to enhanced model generalresults of the proposed framework, analyzing it with multiple ization and scalability. These outcomes collectively establish
clients. Moreover, it provides insights into the time taken and our approach as a robust and promising solution to bolster
memory consumption with varying numbers of clients. cybersecurity defenses in the face of dynamic and evolving
 Table VII shows results for five different scenarios, by threats in real-world scenarios. Nevertheless, it is important to
varying the number of clients as 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 to show acknowledge that this approach does introduce increased comthe effect of scalability on the proposed approach. The metrics plexity and computation costs. In our forthcoming research
include average memory consumption per client ranging from efforts, we intend to focus on optimizing the FL process
3866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

and explore its applicability in various domains, continuing [15] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
to push the boundaries of advanced threat detection and “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
data handling techniques. Concurrently, we will explore the [16] L. Li, Y. Fan, M. Tse, and K.-Y. Lin, “A review of applications in federpractical viability and implementation of integrating edge ated learning,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 149, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 106854.
computing with deep learning to harness edge intelligence [17] M. Anisetti, F. Berto, and M. Banzi, “Orchestration of data-intensive
 pipeline in 5G-enabled edge continuum,” in Proc. IEEE World Congr.
within intrusion detection systems, addressing the need for Services (SERVICES), 2022, pp. 2–10.
real-world applicability and optimization. [18] P. Verma, S. Tapaswi, and W. W. Godfrey, “A request aware module
 using CS-IDR to reduce VM level collateral damages caused by
 DDoS attack in cloud environment,” Clust. Comput., vol. 24, pp. 1–17,
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT Sep. 2021.
 The research presented emanated from the European [19] P. Verma, S. Tapaswi, and W. W. Godfrey, “An impact analysis and
 detection of HTTP flooding attack in cloud using bio-inspired clustering
Union’s Horizon 2020 program for research and innova- approach,” Int. J. Swarm Intell. Res. (IJSIR), vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 29–49,
tion, which provided funding under Grant Number 847577 2021.
(SMART 4.0 Marie Skłodowska–Curie Actions COFUND), [20] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framework using blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart
and also by a grant from Science Foundation Ireland under cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341,
Grant Number SFI/12/RC/3918 and SFI 12/RC/2289-P2 Jul.-Sep. 2021.
(Insight). In order to promote open access, the author has [21] Y. Guo, T. Ji, Q. Wang, L. Yu, G. Min, and P. Li, “Unsupervised anomaly
 detection in IoT systems for smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
chosen to apply a CC BY public copyright license to any vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2231–2242, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
version of the Author Accepted Manuscript that results from [22] J. Inoue, Y. Yamagata, Y. Chen, C. M. Poskitt, and J. Sun, “Anomaly
this submission. detection for a water treatment system using unsupervised machine
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. Workshops (ICDMW),
 2017, pp. 1058–1065.
 [23] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 R EFERENCES “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 [1] C. F. Strnadl, “End-to-end architectures for data monetization in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2020,
 the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) concepts and implementa- pp. 3395–3404.
 tions,” in Monetization of Technical Data: Innovations from Industry [24] M. Abdelaty, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, “DAICS: A
 and Research. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2023, pp. 149–183. deep learning solution for anomaly detection in industrial control
 [2] S. Muthunagai and R. Anitha, “CTS-IIoT: Computation of time series systems,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 2,
 data during index based de-duplication of Industrial IoT (IIoT) data pp. 1117–1129, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
 in cloud environment,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 129, no. 1, [25] J.-H. Moon, J.-H. Yu, and K.-A. Sohn, “An ensemble approach to
 pp. 433–453, Mar. 2023. anomaly detection using high- and low-variance principal compo-
 [3] S. Ding, A. Tukker, and H. Ward, “Opportunities and risks of Internet nents,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 99, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 107773.
 of Things (IoT) technologies for circular business models: A literature [26] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Deverajan, A. K. Bashir, R. P. Mahapatra,
 review,” J. Environ. Manag., vol. 336, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 117662. and M. S. Al-Numay, “IADF-CPS: Intelligent anomaly detection frame-
 [4] P. Verma and N. Bharot, “A review on security trends and solutions work towards cyber physical systems,” Comput. Commun., vol. 188,
 against cyber threats in industry 4,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Secure Cyber pp. 81–89, Apr. 2022.
 Comput. Commun. (ICSCCC), 2023, pp. 397–402. [27] B. Ibrahim Hairab, H. K. Aslan, M. S. Elsayed, A. D. Jurcut, and
 [5] A. Mahmood et al., “Industrial IoT in 5G-and-beyond networks: Vision, M. A. Azer, “Anomaly detection of zero-day attacks based on CNN
 architecture, and design trends,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, and regularization techniques,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 573,
 no. 6, pp. 4122–4137, Jun. 2022. Jan. 2023.
 [6] R. Pareriya, P. Verma, and P. Suhana, “An ensemble Xgboost approach [28] G. Ping and X. Ye, “Open-set intrusion detection with MinMax autoenfor the detection of cyber-attacks in the Industrial IoT domain,” in Big coder and pseudo extreme value machine,” in Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Neural
 Data Analytics Fog-Enabled IoT Networks: Towards a Privacy Security Netw. (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8.
 Perspective. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2023, p. 125.
 [7] P. Verma, J. G. Breslin, and D. O’Shea, “FLDID: Federated learning [29] Y. A. Farrukh, S. Wali, I. Khan, and N. D. Bastian, “Detecting unknown
 enabled deep intrusion detection in smart manufacturing indus- attacks in IoT environments: An open set classifier for enhanced network
 tries,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 22, p. 8974, Nov. 2022. intrusion detection,” 2023, arXiv:2309.07461.
 [8] S. S. Mathew, K. Hayawi, N. A. Dawit, I. Taleb, and Z. Trabelsi, [30] Z. Wu, P. Gao, L. Cui, and J. Chen, “An incremental learning method
 “Integration of blockchain and collaborative intrusion detection for based on dynamic ensemble RVM for intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans.
 secure data transactions in industrial IoT: A survey,” Clust. Comput., Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 671–685, Mar. 2021.
 vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 4129–4149, 2022. [31] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
 [9] M. Nuaimi, L. C. Fourati, and B. B. Hamed, “Intelligent approaches O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
 toward intrusion detection systems for Industrial Internet of Things: A detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 systematic comprehensive review,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 215, pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
 Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103637. [32] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam,
[10] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of Things and O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based
 intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?” IEEE smart transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
 Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020. no. 3, pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
[11] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen, [33] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy-
 “Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive preserving federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 869–904, Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023.
 2nd Quart., 2020. [34] L. Zhao, J. Li, Q. Li, and F. Li, “A federated learning framework for
[12] N. Bharot, P. Verma, S. Sharma, and V. Suraparaju, “Distributed denial- detecting false data injection attacks in solar farms,” IEEE Trans. Power
 of-service attack detection and mitigation using feature selection and Electron., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 2496–2501, Mar. 2022.
 intensive care request processing unit,” Arab. J. Sci. Eng., vol. 43, [35] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated
 pp. 959–967, Feb. 2018. learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204,
[13] T. Zoppi, A. Ceccarelli, and A. Bondavalli, “Unsupervised algorithms to Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693.
 detect zero-day attacks: Strategy and application,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 pp. 90603–90615, 2021. [36] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID:
[14] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detec- A connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for
 tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198, Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 Jan. 2023, pp. 175–185. pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022.