IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024 12399

 Zero-X: A Blockchain-Enabled Open-Set Federated
 Learning Framework for Zero-Day
 Attack Detection in IoV
 Abdelaziz Amara Korba , Member, IEEE, Abdelwahab Boualouache , Member, IEEE,
 and Yacine Ghamri-Doudane , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The Internet ofVehicles (IoV) is a crucial technology prevalence of Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) in our
for Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) that integrates ve- modern world. Internet of Vehicles (IoV) technology provides
hicles with the Internet and other entities. The emergence of 5G a crucial communication framework for CAVs, facilitating reliand the forthcoming 6G networks presents an enormous potential
to transform the IoV by enabling ultra-reliable, low-latency, and able communication between CAVs and other IoV entities, such
high-bandwidth communications. Nevertheless, as connectivity ex- as infrastructure, pedestrians, and smart devices. The fifth generpands, cybersecurity threats have become a significant concern. ation (5G) and the forthcoming sixth generation (6G) networks
The issue has been further exacerbated by the rising number of promise to revolutionize the IoV by enabling ultra-reliability
zero-day (0-day) attacks, which can exploit unknown vulnerabiliwith ultra-low latency and high bandwidth communications.
ties and bypass existing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs). In this
paper, we propose Zero-X, an innovative security framework that With the growing level of connectivity and complexity in the
effectively detects both 0-day and N-day attacks. The framework IoV, cybersecurity risks have become a major concern. Among
achieves this by combining deep neural networks with Open-Set these risks, Zero-day cyberattacks stand out as a significant
Recognition (OSR). Our approach introduces a novel scheme that threat. A zero-day attack refers to a new type of cyber attack
uses blockchain technology to facilitate trusted and decentralized that is unknown to both the general public and the cybersefederated learning (FL) of the Zero-X framework. This scheme
also prioritizes privacy preservation, enabling both CAVs and curity experts [1]. This kind of attack exploits unknown vul-
Security Operation Centers (SOCs) to contribute their unique nerabilities or uses innovative methods to evade detection by
knowledge while protecting the privacy of their sensitive data. To security mechanisms. Upstream [2], a cybersecurity and data
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to leverage OSR management platform for CAVs has analyzed over 900 publicly
in combination with privacy-preserving FL to identify both 0-day reported cyberattacks on cars in the last decade. Examples of
and N-day attacks in the realm of IoV. The in-depth experiments
on two recent network traffic datasets show that the proposed real-world cyberattacks can be found in [2], including instances
framework achieved a high detection rate while minimizing the where hackers could disable the brakes and kill a car’s engine
false positive rate. Comparison with related work showed that the traveling at 65 mph using a laptop and custom-written software
Zero-X framework outperforms existing solutions. plugged into the OBD II port. In another case, hackers remotely
 Index Terms—5G, 6G, blockchain, connected and automated controlled a Jeep’s engine while driving on a highway. These
vehicles, differential privacy, federated learning, IoV, zero-day incidents highlight the significant cybersecurity risks associated
attacks, open-set recognition, security. with IoV and the urgent need for robust cybersecurity measures
 to ensure the safety of vehicle occupants and other road users.
 I. INTRODUCTION To mitigate cyberattacks in the context of the IoV, Artificial
 ITH the rapid development of computing and com- Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a crucial tool for cybersecu-
W munication technologies, we are witnessing a growing rity. Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) based
 IDSs have been proposed to protect vehicular networks from
 Manuscript received 24 August 2023; revised 3 February 2024; accepted 3 cyber-attacks [3]. In ML, classification involves assigning data
April 2024. Date of publication 11 April 2024; date of current version 19 September 2024. This work was supported in part by 5G-INSIGHT bilateral project to predefined categories based on their features, using a trained
(ID: 14891397) under Grant ANR-20-CE25-0015-16, in part by Luxembourg model. This model, developed with a labeled dataset, learns
National Research Fund, in part by French National Research Agency, and in part to recognize patterns indicative of each class for predicting
by FEDER MISMAR, Région Nouvelle-Aquitaine B4IoT. The review of this
article was coordinated by Prof. Xu Chen. (Corresponding author: Abdelaziz unlabeled data. In a real IoV environment, zero-day attacks will
Amara Korba.) inevitably occur frequently. However, existing IDSs [4], [5],
 Abdelaziz Amara Korba is with the L3I, University of La Rochelle, 17000 [6] are typically designed for static and closed-set scenarios.
La Rochelle, France, and also with the LRS, Badji Mokhtar Annaba University,
Annaba 23000, Algeria (e-mail: abdelaziz.amara_korba@univ-lr.fr). Assuming that all possible attack types an intrusion can belong
 Abdelwahab Boualouache is with the FSTM, University of Luxembourg, 4365 to are known and predefined during the training phase of the
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg (e-mail: abdelwahab.boualouache@uni.lu). IDS. However, this assumption is unrealistic as new types of
 Yacine Ghamri-Doudane is with the L3I, University of La Rochelle, 17000
La Rochelle, France (e-mail: yacine.ghamri@univ-lr.fr). attacks are constantly emerging. The majority of current IDSs
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3385916 rely on Supervised Learning (SL), a method that can prove to

 0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
12400 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

be inefficient in effectively identifying unknown attacks charac- the expected communication pattern of CAVs and detect
terized by patterns substantially divergent from those observed any deviations from this pattern as malicious activity. This
during the training phase. approach is highly effective in detecting various types
 To enable the detection of zero-day attacks, anomaly and nov- of attacks, as opposed to existing methods that require
elty detection techniques have been used [7], [8], [9]. Although separate training for each new attack.
the solutions based on these techniques yield promising results r The Zero-X framework leverages open-set federated learnin detecting unseen/ zero-day attacks, they can unfortunately not ing to train the attack classifier (AC) model, a deep multirecognize the type of detected attacks. This poses a substantial class data descriptor that aims to identify a spherical dechallenge in the development of a security mechanism capa- cision boundary for each type of attack. This boundary
ble of identifying known (N-day) attacks while also detecting determines whether a network flow belongs to a given
emerging zero-day (0-day) attacks. attack type, making it effective in detecting unseen attacks
 Open-Set Recognition (OSR) [10] offers a realistic approach while accurately identifying known attacks. To the best of
in a dynamic field like intrusion detection. This method equips our knowledge, this is the first work to leverage OSR in
models to manage both known and unexpected attack types, combination with FL for intrusion detection in the context
considering the limitations of incomplete training data and the of the IoV.
possibility of encountering new attack types after training. OSR r We propose a new training scheme utilizing blockchain
emphasizes the need for classifiers to be both accurate and technology to empower the federated learning, enhancing
flexible, adapting to scenarios where test samples may include the security and decentralization of the Zero-X framepreviously unseen attack types. This adaptability is crucial for work’s training process. Our contribution lies in the introeffectively responding to the continuously evolving nature of duction of an innovative Byzantine Fault Tolerance consuch fields. In recent years, combining deep neural networks sensus mechanism named Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA). This
with open-set recognition has led to significant advances in mechanism plays a pivotal role in guaranteeing the secure
detecting unknown classes in computer vision [11], [12], [13]. dissemination and aggregation of FL model updates.
However, this approach has yet to be fully utilized in intrusion r The framework’s effectiveness is thoroughly assessed by
detection. While some studies have explored the application of extensive evaluations on two recent datasets. The first
open-set recognition in this context [14], [15], to the best of dataset, 5G-NIDD [19], comprises 5G network traffic
our knowledge, OSR has never been leveraged to detect 0-day traces of attacks that target the infrastructure (MEC). The
attacks in IoV. second dataset, VDoS [20], contains network traffic orig-
 Recent IDSs [6], [16], [17], [18] leveraged the potential of inating from inter-vehiclar attacks. To create a realistic
Federated Leaning (FL) paradigm to train the detection model test scenario, we designate one type of attack as the 0-day
in a distributed and privacy-preserving manner. FL enables attack, while the remaining attack types are considered as
collaborative training of the model without requiring the trans- N-day attacks.This process is repeated with different 0-day
mission of raw data, which enhances participants’ data privacy. attacks, resulting in K test scenarios per dataset, where K
Due to centralized model aggregation, however, standard FL is represents the number of attack types in the dataset.
susceptible to server failures and external attacks, which can The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows. Section II
result in inaccurate detection model updates or training failures. provides an overview of the related work. Section III introduces
 To address the limitations mentioned in existing IDSs within the system design of the framework. In Section IV, we present
the IoV environment, this paper introduces the Zero-X frame- in detail the development and operation of the framework.
work. This security framework effectively identifies both 0-day The performance evaluation results are depicted in Section V.
and N-day attacks by integrating deep neural networks with Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
Open-Set Recognition (OSR). Our approach introduces a pioneering scheme that utilizes blockchain technology to facilitate
secure and decentralized federated training of the Zero-X frame- II. RELATED WORK
work. The framework not only guarantees high accuracy but also The development of IDS for IoV has gained significant attenensures fast detection, which is a critical factor in mitigating tion in recent years due to its criticality in ensuring the security
the impact of attacks. The Zero-X framework is designed to and privacy of these connected systems. A security framedetect and classify attacks solely based on network traffic. Its work [5] is proposed for efficient cyber-attack detection in the
device-agnostic nature makes it suitable for deployment on both intravehicle networks (IVN) and External Vehicular Networks
CAVs and Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) infrastructure. (EVNs). To differentiate cyberattack patterns more easily, An-
Its purpose is to secure CAVs against inter-vehicular attacks balagan et al.’s [21] IDS framework transforms vehicle network
while protecting the MEC infrastructure from possible attacks, data into images, enhancing attack identification. However, both
including Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, that approaches rely on centralized learning, which raises privacy
may originate from compromised CAVs. In summary, the main concerns within the broader context of the IoV, as data collection
contributions of this paper are: could potentially infringe on user privacy.
 r Our proposed framework uses unsupervised privacy- Uprety et al. [16] introduced a FL-based collaborative IDS,
 preserving FL to train an attack detection (AD) model. enabling CAVs to train Deep Learning (DL) models on locally
 Specifically, we use a Deep Auto-Encoder (DAE) to model labeled datasets and share model parameters with a central FL
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12401

server for global model aggregation. Similarly, Hbaieb et al. [18] and external networks. This approach, however, necessitates
proposed an IDS for CAVs combining Software-Defined Net- a considerable number of observations for high detection acworking (SDN) and FL, where SDN controllers train local curacy, and its detection rate for certain attack types is lower
models using data from CAVs, and global model aggregation compared to other methods. Other recent studies [8], [24], [25]
is performed on a central cloud server. Both approaches [16], have focused on detecting zero-day attacks in Intra-Vehicular
[18] rely on a central server, presenting risks as potential attack Networks. Jeong et al. [8] utilized autoencoders to process live
targets and single points of failure. There is also the risk of streams in CAN (Controller Area Network) message payloads.
attackers intercepting and observing model updates during net- However, X-CANIDS [8] might face limitations in effectively
work transmission. Differently, Boualouache et al. [6] proposed detecting suspension attacks, which are typically identified by
an FL-based privacy-preserving IDS using multiple FL servers time-interval or sequence-based IDSs. In their respective works,
for global model aggregation. However, this solution, along with Agrawal et al. [24] and Yang et al. [25] employed unsupervised
the previous ones [16], [18], do not consider the risk of a learning and anomaly-based IDS for CAN message analysis.
compromised FL client poisoning the model during training. While the approaches [8], [23], [24] enable zero-day attack de-
To address these challenges, Zero-X employs differential pri- tection, they fall short in identifying the types of N-day attacks.
vacy and blockchain technology, facilitating decentralized and Their effectiveness is further constrained by the lack of shared
privacy-enhanced federated training of the framework. Addi- CAN databases among carmakers. Moreover, their dependence
tionally, it incorporates a Byzantine Fault Tolerance consensus on centralized learning poses privacy concerns, where data
mechanism, named Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA), to ensure secure collection could infringe on user privacy. In contrast, Zero-X,
dissemination and aggregation of FL model updates. with its OSR detection model, enables the detection of zero-day
 Liu et al. [17] introduced an FL-based IDS that incorporates a attacks and the identification of N-day attacks. Additionally, it
blockchain-based incentive mechanism to mitigate adversarial respects user privacy through federated learning, eliminating the
attacks. In this system, CAVs function as FL clients, building need for data collection.
models from their locally labeled datasets, with Roadside Units
(RSUs) aggregating the global models. However, this approach’s III. SYSTEM DESIGN
reliance on a simple MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) network
 This section introduces the system model, seamlessly putting
for the classification task in intrusion detection may not be
 in collaboration different CAVs with SOCs. It illustrates the synsufficiently effective in detecting new attack patterns. To classify
 ergy operation between them through the Blockchain-enabled
various attack types, Abdel-Basset et al. [4] presented FED-IDS,
 collaborative training of the Zero-X Framework. Furthermore,
a Blockchain-enabled FL IDS utilizing a transformer network,
 an exploration of the system’s addressed threat model will also
capable of understanding the spatial and temporal patterns of
 be presented.
traffic flows in vehicles. However, the authors acknowledge
practical challenges with their consensus mechanism, such as
divergence, limited efficiency, and high computational demands. A. System Model
Lai et al. [22] introduced a FL and Edge Cloud communication Our framework enables privacy-preserving collaboration
architecture (FL-EC) and a Feature Select Transformer (FS- among multiple CAVs and Security Operation Centers (SOC)
Former) model for robust intrusion detection in the IoV. Yet, that may be owned by different stakeholders within the ITS
they recognize that this model comes with the drawback of high ecosystem, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To participate in the federated
computational costs. training process, the SOCs deploy MEC servers on strategically
 The aforementioned FL-based IDSs operate under the as- placed Base Stations (BSs). The system model is composed of
sumption that CAVs possess labeled datasets for FL rounds, an three main elements with different roles which can be summaassumption that might be unrealistic due to the general absence rized as follows:
of pre-labeled malicious traffic data. Additionally, these systems 1) CAVs: are tasked with training the Attack detector (AD)
often assume an IID (Independent and Identically Distributed) model using their own local dataset, which exclusively
configuration for classifier training, which may not reflect the consists of benign traffic, as CAVs typically lack traffic
significant imbalances in real-world training data, a known labeling functions. When a CAV drives near a BS, it can
factor adversely affecting collaborative detection performance. download and read the last block of the blockchain to
Moreover, their dependence on closed-set and supervised learn- get the latest global AD model. Acting as FL workers,
ing methods limits the detection of unseen and zero-day attacks. each CAV conducts the learning process using its own
In contrast, our framework employs a more realistic configura- On Board Unit. The CAV trains the global model on its
tion, recognizing that CAVs typically do not have traffic labeling local data and adds a specific amount of Gaussian noise
functions and considering the case of non-IID training data. to the trained parameters before sending them back to the
Additionally, Zero-X enhances attack detection, including zero- BS. This technique, known as differential privacy, protects
day attacks, by integrating deep neural networks with Open-Set the privacy of CAV’s native data from honest-but-curious
Recognition (OSR) capabilities. MEC nodes.
 To detect zero-day attacks in the IoV, Khan et al. [23] intro- 2) MECs: play a crucial role in validating and aggregating
duced an IDS using state-based Bloom filters and a bidirectional AD model updates that are received from CAVs. During
LSTM classifier for detecting cyber-attacks in both In-Vehicle the training of the Attack Classifier (AC) model, each
12402 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. System design for the Zero-X framework.

 MEC is assigned one of three roles: worker, validator, or As a crucial component of the IoV ecosystem its security
 miner. As a worker, the MEC trains the AC model using its is essential for ensuring the overall security of the IoV.
 local dataset, which includes labeled malicious network Hackers could potentially create an IoV botnet [5] by
 flows. Given that SOCs are equipped with cyber threat compromising a group of CAVs and using them to launch
 intelligence tools, it is reasonable to assume that they DDoS attacks on the MEC infrastructure. Such attacks are
 possess labeled samples of malicious network traffic. As similar to DDoS attacks based on IoT bots.
 a validator, the MEC ensures the accuracy of transactions r Attacks against the detection framework: one potential
 and validates blocks that are proposed by miners. Finally, threat against the security framework is attacks on the
 as a miner, the MEC is responsible for creating new blocks framework’s detection capabilities. This could happen durduring the consensus process. ing the training phase, where malicious CAVs or compro-
 3) Blockchain: to ensure secure and transparent FL model mised MECs may be selected as FL workers. If this occurs,
 updates, the framework uses blockchain technology for the attackers could attempt to undermine the collaborative
 AD and AC model updates sharing and aggregation (see learning process by injecting malicious updates during the
 Fig. 1). By establishing a consortium blockchain, SOCs global model aggregation, which is known as a poisoning
 can create a trusted and immutable ledger to store and attack [27]. Additionally, attackers may also try to infer
 securely distribute the AD and AC model updates. The de- sensitive information from the model parameters through
 centralized nature of the blockchain ensures that no single an inference attack [28]. Both types of attacks can signif-
 SOC controls the entire network, thereby minimizing the icantly compromise the accuracy and effectiveness of the
 risk of a single point of failure or data tampering. security framework.

 IV. PROPOSED ZERO-X FRAMEWORK
B. Threat Model
 This section details the Zero-X framework. It begins with
 We consider three categories of potential cybersecurity attacks
 a presentation of the framework overview. Following this, the
that could target the IoV ecosystem. These include inter-vehicle
 flow extraction and feature engineering processes are described.
attacks, attacks against the MEC infrastructure, and attacks
 Then, the attack detection process and subsequent attack classifiagainst the intrusion detection mechanism itself.
 r Inter-vehicular attacks: our threat model considers sce- cation phase are explained. Finally, we will present the proposed
 blockchain-enabled FL scheme to ensure secure sharing and
 narios where one or colluding internal/external malicious
 aggregation of model updates.
 CAVs launch DoS/DDoS attacks affecting the availability
 of the CAV and the network. For example, a colluding ma-
 A. Zero-X Overview
 licious CAVs can perform flooding attacks against a target
 CAV, aiming to overwhelming its capacity and preventing During the development phase, the AD and AC models are
 legitimate traffic from being processed. For comprehensive trained independently on the network flows using a decentralized
 information on examples of attack scenarios please refer FL approach, as illustrated in Fig. 2. First, network flows are
 to [3]. extracted from collected raw network traffic, and then a set of
 r Attacks against the MEC infrastructure: MEC handles sen- features is calculated for each flow. The AD model is designed as
 sitive and valuable data, making it a target for various net- a deep auto-encoder (DAE) trained exclusively on benign traffic
 work attacks from both internal and external sources [26]. data. On the other hand, the AC model is a deep multi-class
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12403

Fig. 2. Zero-X framework workflow.

data descriptor [29] trained on the MEC’s local dataset, which and then converts back to m (m < d) number of neurons
includes labeled malicious network flows. During the deploy- reconstructed input vectors using a set of generative weights.
ment phase,as illustrated in Fig. 2, the flow collector monitors An AE architecture has two major parts: the encoder and the
incoming and outgoing packets. The preprocessing module ex- decoder. The encoder reduces the dimension of the input vectors
tracts network flows from the raw traffic data, according to a (xi ∈ Rd ) to numbers of neurons that form the hidden layer. The
specific Time Window (TW), and generates a vector of features. activation of the neuron i in the hidden layer is given by:
This features vector is then sent to the AD module, which ⎛ ⎞
evaluates the flow as benign or malicious. The framework’s  n

attack classifier module further examines any malicious flows hi = f θ (x) = s ⎝ Wijinput xj + binput
 i
 ⎠ (1)
 j=1
detected by the AD to determine if they correspond to a new
(0-day) or existing (N-day) attack. where x is the input vector, θ is the parameters W input , binput ,
 W is an encoder weight matrix of dimension m × d, while b is
B. Flow Extraction & Features Engineering a bias vector of dimension m. Thus, the input vector is encoded
 First, we use a combination of five properties from the packet to a vector with fewer dimensions. The decoder maps the lowheader, including the network and transport layer headers of the dimensional hidden representation hi to the original input space
TCP/IP protocol stack, to identify a traffic flow. These include Rd by the same transformation as the encoder. The function of
the source IP address, the destination IP address, the source port mapping is as follows:
number, and the destination port number, as well as the protocol. ⎛ ⎞
 n
For each flow extracted, a set of features are calculated according xi = gθ (h) = s ⎝ Wijhidden hj + bhidden
 i
 ⎠ (2)
to a given time window (ex. 10 seconds). Flow features include j=1
mainly packet header characteristics and statistics computed
based on header information of network and transport layers. The set of decoder parameters is θ (W hidden hj + bhidden ).
This set of features is then used as a features vector. The objective of an autoencoder is to minimize the reconstruction error relative to θ and θ :
C. Attack Detector
 1
 n
 

 As a CAV runs a set of well-known applications such as θ∗ , θ ∗ = argθ,θ min ε(xi , xi ) (3)
 n i=1
those related to safety, convenience, and commercial use, its
 1
 n
communication pattern should exhibit a high degree of regularity
as long as it is not under attack or experiencing any faults. = argθ,θ min ε(xi , gθ (fθ (xi ))) (4)
 n i=1
Conversely, any attack on the CAV’s system would inevitably
alter its communication pattern. Hence, we use a Deep Auto- The reconstruction error is utilized as the anomaly score. Net-
Encoder (DAE) to model the expected communication pattern work flows with significant reconstruction errors are regarded as
of the CAV and detect any attacks as anomalous occurrences. malicious flows (anomalies). Only benign flows are used to train
The DAE model [30] is an unsupervised model that compresses the DAE model. After training, the DAE model will reconstruct
input vectors as code vectors using a set of recognition weights benign flows exceptionally well, but not malicious flows that
12404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 Algorithm 1: Attack Detection. class-conditional probabilities are calculated. This reflects the
 likelihood that an input sample is drawn from each distribution,
 and this probability can serve as a good confidence measure [29].
 Based on the K-th class conditional distribution, the distance
 function D can be defined in (5):
 f (x; W ) − μk 2
 Dk (x) ≈ + log σkd (5)
 2σk2
 The Deep MCDD loss is defined as a Maximum A Posteriori
 (MAP) loss estimation of the generative classifier as defined in
 (6):

 1 
 N
 exp(−Dyi (xi ) + byi )
 Loss = log k (6)
 k=1 exp(−Dk (xi ) + bk )
 N i=1
 The objective can be defined as follow:
 
 1 
 N
 1 exp(−Dyi (xi )+byi )
 min Dyi (xi )− log k
 k=1 exp(−Dk (xi ) + bk )
 W,μ,σ,b N ν
 i=1
 (7)
 The training can be seen as minimizing the intra-class deviation in the embedded space. The four trainable parameters
 used in the objective, that is, DNN weights (W ), class means
 (μclassx ), standard deviations (σclassx ), and biases (bclassx ), can
it has never seen. Algorithm 1 shows the anomaly detection be optimized simultaneously and effectively using minibatch
process using the reconstruction errors of the DAE model. The SGD and gradient back-propagation. The confidence score S(x)
threshold, α, is the mean squared error (MSE) median, and the represents the distance between a test sample and the closest
sample’s C times the MSE Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) class-conditional distribution in the latent space. The CS repreover the validation set. MAD uses the deviation from the median, sents the minimum value of the confidence score calculated on
which is less likely to be skewed by outlier values. the training set. If the confidence score S(x) of a network flow
 In Algorithm 1, the DAE training complexity is O(n × m) x is less than CS , then it is considered an unseen/ 0-day attack.
(lines [1–2]), where n is the number of samples and m the count Otherwise, we predict the class label of an input sample to the
of weighted connections. RE computations for datasets (lines class with the highest posterior probability ŷ(x). The procedure
[3–4]) and median determination using a specialized algorithm of training and testing the attack classifier is described in detail
(lines [5–6]) have a linear complexity of O(N ). The testing in Algorithm 2.
phase functions g0 and fφ (lines [7–9]) also operate in O(N ), The computational complexity of the training phase in Algoindependent of the dataset size, with N being the test sample rithm 2 (lines [1 - 7]) for a dataset with N samples, k classes,
size. and a latent space dimensionality of d is O(N × k × d). This
 includes squared difference and variance normalization opera-
D. Attack Classifier tions per sample and class, as well as the cost of propagating
 samples through a neural network with m total connections,
 To identify the type of the detected attack (N-day), or eventuadding an extra complexity of O(N × m). Therefore, the comally determine if it is an unseen or 0-day attack, we leverage the
 bined complexity for the dataset stands at O(N × (m + k × d)),
potential of OSR through FL. In this paper, we use deep multiprior to considering any potential optimizations from parallel
class data description method, called Deep-MCDD [29], as it
 processing and GPU acceleration that can be available in MEC
can accurately classify in-distribution (ID) samples into known
 infrastructure, since this model is trained by MECs. In the testing
classes and detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples as well.
 phase (lines [9–15]), each test sample is evaluated with a com-
This method seeks to identify, for each class, a spherical decision
 plexity of O(k × d) due to distance computations for k classes
boundary that determines whether a test sample belongs to the
 in a d-dimensional feature space. The subsequent classification
class or not. Deep-MCDD integrates K hypersphere-modeled
 involves an arg max operation across classes with a complexity
one-class classifiers into a single network. The objective of
 of O(k). The total complexity for testing N samples, therefore,
learning a single hypersphere is to assess whether or not a test
 is O(N × k × d).
sample belongs to the target class; hence, training it for each class
is useful for recognizing OOD samples that do not belong to any
given class. Each sample from a K-th class-conditional distribu- E. Blockchain-Enabled Federated Training
tion can be considered as an isotropic Gaussian distribution with To ensure the secure and decentralized federated training of
class mean μk and standard deviation σk within the latent space, both AD and AC models, we use blockchain technology. In
denoted by N (μk , σk2 I). Using the resulting distributions, the our framework, updates of both models are recorded on the
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12405

 Algorithm 2: Attack Classification. thereby minimizing the likelihood of a compromised MEC being
 repeatedly assigned to a validator or a miner role.
 1) Federated Training: In our framework, updates of both
 models are recorded on the same blockchain. However, it is
 worth noting that sharing AD model updates from CAVs to MEC
 is done off-chain to enhance the scalability of the system. This
 approach allows faster and more efficient communication without overburdening the main blockchain with every AD update.
 We assume that a reference dataset BT est containing only benign
 network flows has been provided to all participating MECs. Each
 CAV extracts the AD model from the blockchain, then trains it on
 its local dataset. After local training, each CAV sends the model
 updates to the adjacent MEC node. Since an adversary may
 attempt to infer the data at the i-CAV from its uploaded updates,
 we use differential privacy to enforce privacy-preserving of local
 updates. After completing the local training, a CAVi will add
 a specific quantity of Gaussian noise to the trained parameters
 wit . As outlined in Algorithm 3, after clipping the gradient wt :
 t+1
 wt+1 ← wt+1 / max(1, ||wC || ), where C denotes the gradient
 norm bound, an additive noise nti is added to wt . Then, the noised
 updates wit are sent to the adjacent MEC node. To avoid model
 poising, the MEC node will first check the AD model updates
 ADU p on BT est . The model is considered to be valid when the
 gap between l(wt ) and l(wt−1 ) locates within a certain range δ.
same blockchain, while their training is performed indepen- When a MEC node is designated as a worker, it leverages
dently. Integrating blockchain with FL requires careful selec- its local dataset to train the AC model retrieved from the
tion of the blockchain type and consensus protocol, as they blockchain. Upon completing the training, the worker generates
significantly impact scalability, latency, complexity, and cost. two transactions: TAD , which includes the AD model update
Public blockchains face issues like scalability limitations and (computed based on the aggregated updates received from the
high latency. Private blockchains improve scalability and la- CAVs), and TAC , which contains the AC model’s local updates.
tency but may reduce decentralization and privacy. Consortium Both transactions are signed with the worker’s private key and
blockchains, which Zero-X employs, strike a balance, making transmitted to the validator nodes. The procedure of federated
them well-suited for our system. Zero-X utilizes a consortium training of the AD and AC models is described in detail in
blockchain featuring a novel Byzantine Fault Tolerance con- Algorithm 3.
sensus mechanism known as Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA). This 2) Proof-of-Accuracy Consensus Mechanism: In our promechanism ensures secure sharing and aggregation of model up- posed blockchain framework, collaboration among MECs is
dates. Our approach strategically prioritizes scalability, latency, achieved through a consensus process where model updates
and security, with a slight compromise in decentralization. We are shared, packaged into blocks, and validated by a group
consider two types of nodes within the blockchain network: of validators. To ensure the consensus process is efficient and
 r Passive node: refers to CAVs that solely download and secure, we introduce a lightweight consensus mechanism called
 read blocks without actively participating in the consensus Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA), which is inspired by the Delegated
 process. Byzantine Fault Tolerance (dBFT) algorithm [31]. The PoA
 r Active node: refers to MECs actively participating in the mechanism involves selecting a set of validator nodes (delegates)
 consensus process. In each round, every MEC is assigned based on their contributions to improving the model’s accuracy.
 to one of the following roles: worker, validator, and miner. We assume a total of 3f + 1 validators, where f is the maximum
 A worker participates in the FL of the AC model and aggre- number of validators that can be faulty. Among these validators,
 gates local AD model updates received from CAVs before one is designated as the miner. The detailed design of the PoA
 relaying them. A validator node checks the correctness mechanism is explained in the following three steps.
 of transactions, and validates miner-proposed blocks. The a) Collecting and verifying transaction: When a validator
 miner is responsible for creating a new block during the receives a transaction, it first verifies its signature. Then, it
 consensus round. creates a test model MT est with the update, which it evaluates
 The node’s identifier (ID) is its public key. This key is used to on its local dataset (for AC transactions) or on the reference
verify the signatures of transactions or blocks created by the de- dataset BT est (for AD transactions). Next, it calculates the
vice. The following outlines the process of selecting miners and accuracy gain ACC_gain of a transaction using the (8), with
validators in each round. The role-switching policy guarantees the Gj−1 representing the global model constructed in round
that miners and validators are re-selected for each new round, Rj−1 . Validators exchange ACC_gain values for all transactions
12406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 Algorithm 3: Federated Training. with its private key as an endorsement. The endorsed candidate block is then sent to the miner. Once 2/3 validators have
 signed the candidate block, the miner broadcasts the block along
 with the collected signatures to the other validators. Upon receiving the block from the miner, a validator verifies the signatures
 and checks if the block has enough signatures from validators to
 meet the required consensus threshold (2/3 validators). If the
 threshold is met, the block is considered final and is added
 to the blockchain. However, if the threshold is not met, the
 block is discarded, and the consensus process starts anew with
 a new round and a new miner. Once the block is successfully
 added to the blockchain, the validators propagate the block to
 other nodes in the network, and the nodes update their local
 copy of the blockchain to reflect the new block. Adding a new
 block triggers a new round of federated training of the two
 models (AD and AC). Model training stops when the average
 value of the model’s ACC_gain (calculated from the last block)
 approaches 0. The top 3f+1 worker nodes with the highest
 ACC_gain in the current round will be selected as validators for
 the next round. On the other hand, nodes that have accumulated
 a negative ACC_gain over a specified number of rounds will
 be considered unreliable and excluded from participating in
 subsequent training and consensus rounds. This measure helps
 eliminate poor updates that could hinder the convergence of the
 global models. Importantly, it also protect the training process
 against potential model poisoning attacks that may arise from a
 compromised MEC.
 3) Incentive/ Reward Mechanisms: The SOCs participating
 in the federated training are intrinsically motivated by the advantage of having an updated IDS, which obviates the need for
 supplementary incentives or reward mechanisms. However, to
 promote the active engagement of CAVs in the learning process,
 it is vital to establish an incentive mechanism. In this regard, we
 have adopted the Stackelberg game theoretic-based incentive
 mechanism proposed in our previous research [6].

 V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
 In this section, we will assess the effectiveness of the Zero-X
 framework by conducting a thorough evaluation on two recent
 datasets. The first dataset, 5G-NIDD [19], consists of 5G netwith each other. The final score of ACC_gain value for a given
 work traffic traces of attacks that target the MEC infrastructure.
transaction is the sum of the ACC_gain values calculated by all
 The second dataset, VDoS [20], contains network traffic origivalidators. At the end of the validation process, all validators will
 nating from inter-vehicle attacks. After briefly introducing the
have the same list of transactions with their respective ACC_gain
 datasets and the experimental setting, we analyze the detection
values.
 performance in detail. We also test various time-window (TW)
 ACC_gain = ACC(MTest ) − ACC(Gj−1 ) (8) sizes as it directly impacts the detection delay. Further, we
 will comprehensively analyze the identification performance of
 b) Generating Blocks: The MEC assigned with the
 N-day and 0-day attacks. We then evaluate the performance of
miner’s role is responsible for creating a new block. Once
 the blockchain system, and present the incentive mechanism’s
the FL process has expired, the miner collects TAD and TAC
 performance. Next, we present a security analysis of the Zero-X
transactions, including their corresponding ACC_gain, from the
 framework. Finally, we compare our approach with existing
transaction pool. These transactions are then combined to form
 solutions in the literature.
a candidate block. The miner signs the block with its private key,
before broadcasting it to the other validators in the network.
 A. Datasets
 c) Consensus process: Each validator examines the content of the candidate block, comparing the transactions and The 5G Network-Intrusion Detection and Defense (5G-
ACC_gain values with their own calculated values. If they match, NIDD) dataset [19] comprises data collected from a 5G testbed
the candidate block is accepted, and the validator signs the block connected to the 5G Test Network at the University of Oulu
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12407

 TABLE I The training set excludes samples from the 0-day attack, and
 DATASET SAMPLES DISTRIBUTION
 the AC is trained on N-day attacks for classifying inputs into
 K − 1 attack types. The test set comprises all samples from the
 0-day attack and N-day attack samples reserved for testing. This
 process is repeated with different 0-day attacks, resulting in K
 scenarios per dataset.
 We implemented a DAE with five hidden layers. The local
 models’ weights were computed using the Stochastic Gradient
 Descent (SGD) algorithm. The Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss
 function was used, with a learning rate of 0.012. After each
 round, the weights of the global model were calculated using
 the Federated Averaging algorithm [33]. We trained and tested
 the model in the Google Colab cloud environment. We used the
 Pytorch package to implement the local and federated learning
 models.
 TABLE II
 DATASET SPLITTING C. Attack Detection Performance
 Firstly, we evaluate the accuracy of the global model AD on
 the two datasets, considering the IID and Non-IID configurations. Next, we conduct a thorough analysis of the model’s performance using various metrics. Finally, we test multiple levels
 of differential privacy to determine the optimal balance between
 privacy and model performance. To obtain a comprehensive
in Finland. The testbed consists of two base stations, each and insightful evaluation of attack detection performance, we
equipped with an attacker node and multiple benign 5G users. consider the following metrics:
The attacker nodes simulate various attack scenarios against r Precision: the ratio of classified malicious flows that are
the server deployed in the 5GTN Mobile Edge Computing truly malicious:
(MEC) environment. The dataset includes examples of Denial
 TP
of Service (DoS) attacks, such as ICMP Flood, UDP Flood, P recision = (9)
SYN Flood, HTTP Flood, and Slowrate DoS, as well as port TP + FP
scans, including SYN Scan, TCP Connect Scan, and UDP Scan. r Accuracy: the ratio of correctly predicted malicious sam-
The VDoS dataset [20], is a publicly available dataset that ples to the total samples:
contains both benign and malicious network traffic data. The
 TP + TN
dataset was generated using a realistic testbed comprising two Accuracy = (10)
 TP + FN + FP + TN
vehicles, physical and virtual machines, access points, and Cisco
antennas. Three different scenarios, urban, rural, and highway,
 r TPR: measures the proportion of benign flows that are
were used to collect the network traffic data. The dataset contains incorrectly classified as malicious by the model:
the network traces of three types of DoS attacks: UDP Flood, TP
SYN Flood, and Slowloris. The sample distribution of network TPR = (11)
 TP + FN
traffic per attack for both datasets is presented in Table I.
 r FPR: measures the effectiveness of the model in incorrectly
 recognizing normal flow as an anomaly:
B. Experimental Setting
 FP
 To extract flows and calculate features from raw traffic (PCAP FPR = (12)
files), we developed some scripts using CICFlowMeter [32], FP + TN
a popular flow traffic exporters. For a more comprehensive r F1-Score: is the harmonic average of the precision and
understanding of the list of features and their corresponding recall:
descriptions, kindly refer to [7]. We perform data preprocessing, 2 ∗ (T P R ∗ P recision)
which includes data cleaning, data normalization, and feature F 1_Score = (13)
 (T P R + P recision)
engineering. To ensure accurate results, we follow a specific
protocol for splitting the datasets. Legitimate traffic is divided r AUCROC: measures how effective the model is in distininto three parts: 60% for training the AD, 20% for AD validation, guishing between normal and malicious flows:
and 20% for testing. Similarly, malicious traffic is split into 60% 1 TP TN
for training the AC, 20% for AC validation, and 20% for testing. AU CROC = + (14)
 2 TP + FN TN + FP
The dataset splitting is illustrated in Table II. To create a realistic
test scenario, we designate one type of attack as the 0-day attack, TP, TN, FP, and FN denote true positive, true negative, false
while the remaining attack types are classified as N-day attacks. positive, and false negative, respectively.
12408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. Learning performance of AD models. (a) VDoS - AD Loss. (b) 5G-NIDD - AD Loss.

Fig. 4. AD performance versus the number of CAVs: Accuracy and F1-score analysis. (a) Accuracy. (b) F1-Score.

 TABLE III This indicates that the model effectively distinguished between
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE
 benign and malicious network traffic in both configurations
 (IID and Non-IID). Table IV further demonstrates the impact of
 differential privacy level on the performance of the AD model.
 The differential privacy level is varied by changing the epsilon
 () value, which controls the amount of noise added to the model
 updates. As the differential privacy level increases (i.e., epsilon
 decreases), the precision, accuracy, TPR, F1-score, and ROC all
 Fig. 3 illustrates the AD loss function over the number of tend to decrease. This is expected because increasing the amount
federated learning rounds, which typically exhibits a decreasing of noise added to the model update will make it more difficult for
trend as the model is trained with more data. Although slight the model to detect malicious traffic accurately. By setting the
fluctuations may be observed, the function stabilizes for both value of  to 1, DP only slightly impacts system performance.
datasets and with both IID and Non-IID configurations. After For the IID configuration, we observe a degradation of 0.24%
the 10th round, we observe minor improvements in the model’s in AUROC, while for the Non-IID configuration, we observe
accuracy. The results as shown in Table III are quite promising. a degradation of 0.07%. It is worth noting that even with the
They suggest that the model exhibits strong and consistent most challenging configuration - Non-IID with a high noise level
performance across both datasets and data distribution scenarios. (epsilon=0.01) - the model still achieves an accuracy higher than
The minor differences observed between the IID and Non-IID 92% and a precision of 97%. The fact that DP has a relatively
conditions indicate that the model is resilient and maintains its small effect on the model’s performance can be attributed to the
robustness, even when faced with different data distributions. fact that detection also depends on the threshold α. Even if the
 We tested different configurations by varying the number of addition of noise increases the loss of the model, the threshold
CAVs per FL round. Fig. 4 illustrates that an increasing number will still be calculated based on the new loss and remain slightly
of CAVs tends to slightly decrease the accuracy and F1-score, affected.
particularly for the Non-IID distribution. This could be due to the
data becoming more diverse as more CAVs are involved, making D. Detection Delay
it more challenging for the model to find a global optimum. The time-window (TW) size is a critical parameter that has a
As expected, the results consistently demonstrate that the IID direct impact on detection delay. While a smaller TW can reduce
distribution outperforms the Non-IID distribution in terms of detection delay, it may not capture certain traffic properties that
accuracy and F1-score, regardless of the number of CAVs. require a longer time interval to become detectable. Therefore,
 According to the results presented in Table IV, the AD model we conducted experimental tests using multiple TW sizes to
exhibited a high detection rate and a low false positive rate. determine the optimal one.
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12409

 TABLE IV
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE WITH DP

 TABLE V
 N-DAY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION

 E. Attack Identification Performance
 The framework’s attack classifier module further examines
 any malicious flows detected by the AD to determine if they
 correspond to a new (0-day) or existing (N-day) attack. We
 evaluate the accuracy of the global AC model on the two datasets,
 considering both IID and non-IID configurations. Additionally,
 we conduct a comprehensive analysis of the model’s performance in detecting both N-day and 0-day attacks.
 1) N-Day Attack Identification Performances: Overall, the
 AC model successfully detects various types of attacks, even
 when confronted with different data distributions, as illustrated
Fig. 5. Impact of TW size on the detection accuracy.
 in Table V. For the 5G-NIDD dataset, the AC model achieved
 high performance, with precision and TPR scores of 100%
 in most cases. The FPR was also low, indicating that the
 The results presented in Fig. 5 reveal a correlation between model did not classify benign traffic as malicious. However,
the TW and the accuracy and F1-score of the AD model. for SlowrateDoS and TCPConnectScan attacks with Non-IID
Specifically, as the TW decreases, both performance metrics data distribution, the F1-score was slightly lower compared to
deteriorate. The default window size, which corresponds to other cases. The slow nature of traffic makes it challenging
the flow lifetime, yields the highest accuracy and F1-score. to detect the Slowrate DoS attack, which differs from other
However, if a smaller window size is desired, the 10-second DoS attacks in terms of speed and packet volume sent. In a
window remains the best option as it still maintains a high level TCPConnectScan attack, the three-way handshake process is
of accuracy and F1-score. The 1-second window, on the other successfully established, mimicking a legitimate connection and
hand, performs the poorest among the tested windows, with an making the attack challenging to detect. However, it is worth
accuracy of 83.16% and an F1-score of 88.15%. Nevertheless, noting that the detection rate for this type of attacks remains
it still provides satisfactory detection capabilities. Ultimately, very high, with a detection rate of over 95%. For the VDoS
the choice of TW will depend on the desired level of security dataset, the AC model achieved a perfect score in all cases with
when deploying the framework, including considerations such both IID and Non-IID data distributions.
as the tolerance for false negatives and the acceptable detection 2) 0-Day Attack Identification Performances: As previously
delay. mentioned, to create a realistic testing scenario, we designate
12410 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 TABLE VI
 0-DAY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION

one type of attack as the ‘0-day’ attack, while classifying the the case of SYNFlood and UDPScan attacks. Overall, the AC
remaining attack types as ’N-day’ attacks. For each dataset, we model demonstrates promising performance in both Non-IID
repeat this process with different 0-day attacks, resulting in K and IID settings. The Non-IID configuration is more challengscenarios per dataset. To evaluate our model’s performance, we ing but, simultaneously, more representative of the real-world
use standard metrics such as accuracy and AUROC. Addition- scenario where participating MECs (SOCs) may not have the
ally, we use the true negative rate (TNR) at 85% true positive same distribution of attack samples.
rate (TPR), denoted as TNR85, a performance metric commonly
used for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [29].
 Overall, the model’s performance is quite satisfactory. The F. Blockchain System’s Performance
results in Table VI indicate that the effectiveness of the AC This section evaluates the performance of the blockchain sysmodel can vary depending on the type of attack. However, it can tem proposed for sharing model updates. In this experiment, we
identify most attacks with a high level of accuracy. Specifically, consider implementing this framework in Luxembourg as a case
in the 5G-NIDD dataset, the model accurately detected 7 out study. To comprehensively assess the system’s performance, we
of 8 attacks with an accuracy exceeding 85%. Moreover, in the plan to deploy a certain number of MEC servers, ranging from 40
VDoS dataset, the model accurately detected 2 out of 3 attacks to 160, at key base stations across each of Luxembourg’s 12 adwith an accuracy exceeding 93%. It can be observed that the ministrative cantons. Considering the nature of our consortium
model has superior performance against scan-type attacks. blockchain, which is comprised of MEC nodes, the experiment
 The model’s limited accuracy in identifying Slowrate DoS includes varying the number of these nodes to examine scalaattacks can be attributed to its resemblance to HTTP flood at- bility. We have configured the number of validators to be 10%
tack, which makes distinguishing between the two challenging. of the MEC nodes, while ensuring compliance with the PoA
It is crucial to note that closed-set supervised methods have requirement of having 3f + 1 validators, where f signifies the
also yielded similar misclassifications between HTTP flood maximum number of potentially faulty MECs.
and Slowrate DoS attack flows [19]. Despite the differences This evaluation was conducted on a machine equipped with a
between the two attacks regarding speed and packet volume, CPU (Intel i9 2.6 GHz) and 32 GB of RAM. The performance of
they exhibit some similarities. In HTTP Flood attacks, a mas- the blockchain system is illustrated in Fig. 6, which displays metsive influx of HTTP requests overwhelms the server, whereas rics such as the message overhead, the number of transactions
in Slowloris (first scenario of slowrate DoS [19]) attack, the per block, and the consensus time. As anticipated, an increase
attacker maintains multiple connections for extended periods, in the number of MEC nodes leads to a corresponding rise in
leading to resource depletion on the server. message overhead, the number of transactions per block, and
 The results of our experiment indicate that, on average, the consensus time, as observed in Fig. 6. It is important to note,
detection rate for 60% of attacks is 4.09% better in the IID however, that despite these increases, both the consensus time
setting than in the Non-IID setting. In addition, the accuracy and message overhead (shown in Fig. 6(a) and (c), respectively)
and AUROC are 3.5% and 6.94% better, respectively, in the continue to remain within reasonable limits. The architecture
IID setting. However, the TNR for ICMP flood and TCPCon- of the system demonstrates its ability to scale, as shown by the
nectScan attacks are similar in both IID and Non-IID settings. moderate increase in consensus time, even when the number of
Interestingly, the Non-IID setting outperforms the IID setting in nodes quadruples. From Fig. 6(c), we can see that deploying
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12411

Fig. 6. Performance of the blockchain system. (a) Messages Overhead. (b) Nb. Transactions per block. (c) Consensus Time (s).

Fig. 7. Impact analysis of model poisoning attack on Zero-X Accuracy. (a) 0% malicious workers (MW). (b) 30% MW & PoA disabled. (c) 30% MW & PoA
enabled. (d) 50% MW & PoA enabled.

 TABLE VII configured such that workers accumulating a negative ACC_gain
 DETAILED RESULTS OF THE BLOCKCHAIN SYSTEM EVALUATION
 over two consecutive rounds are deemed unreliable and thus
 excluded from further training and consensus participation, the
 resilience of the system is evident. Fig. 7(c) depicts the accuracy
 after enabling PoA, which confirms that our system effectively
 filtered out malicious nodes while maintaining performance
 nearly identical to that in a scenario free from such workers.
 Even with an increased presence of malicious workers to 50%,
 Fig. 7(d) shows the model still converges with comparable
10 MEC nodes in each canton keeps the consensus time below accuracy. We can, therefore, conclude that the solution is both
2 seconds, with transaction counts steady at 26, and message effective and robust, even when faced with a model poisoning
overhead stable at 180. Table VII presents a detailed overview attack involving multiple nodes.
of blockchain performance.
 Since CAVs operate as passive nodes, their increasing num-
 G. Security Analysis
bers do not influence the transaction volume per block due
to the MEC nodes’ role in aggregating AD model updates This section provides a comprehensive security analysis of
from the CAVs. Consequently, the addition of CAVs also does our proposed framework, addressing the mitigation of three critnot impact consensus time, as they are not participants in the ical threat vectors (discussed in Section III-B): Inter-vehicular
consensus mechanism. Given that each MEC is capable of attacks, attacks targeting MEC infrastructure, and adversarial
serving an average of 500 participating CAVs, our system is attacks against the Zero-X framework.
projected to sustain its performance levels even with a network r Inter-Vehicular and MEC Infrastructure attacks: Single or
comprising approximately 120 MECs and 60,000 CAVs. The multiple colluding malicious CAVs can launch flooding atsystem’s design ensures that the expansion in node count does tacks on a target CAV, a scenario known as Inter-Vehicular
not detract from blockchain performance, which affirms the Attacks. These attacks impair the target CAV’s ability to
system’s scalability. process legitimate traffic. For a greater impact, these mali-
 The robustness tests on the PoA mechanism under compro- cious CAVs, including compromised CAVs part of an IoV
mised MEC nodes reveal its effectiveness against poisoning botnet, may also target the MEC infrastructure. In this case,
attacks on the AC model. Fig. 7(a) and (b) compare model the CAVs begin their attack by scanning the MEC server,
accuracy without and with 30% compromised workers, demon- followed by executing flood-type DDoS attacks through
strating a convergence failure without PoA. Upon enabling PoA, open ports. For both these attack vectors, Zero-X’s ’Attack
12412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 8. Comparative Performance Analysis of Zero-X with Related Works. (a) CIC-IDS-2017. (b) 5G-NIDD DoS Attacks. (c) 5G-NIDD Scan Attacks. (d) VDoS
Attacks.

 t+1
 Detector’ plays a pivotal role. It employs reconstruction wt+1 ← wt+1 / max(1, ||wC || ), where C is the gradient
 error as an anomaly score to identify malicious traffic norm bound. Subsequently, additive noise nti is incorpoflows, whether in inter-CAV communications or targeting rated into wt . The resulting noised updates wit are then
 the MEC system. Our study conducted tests on three types transmitted to the adjacent MEC node.
 of DoS attacks in inter-vehicular scenarios and five types
 in the context of MEC infrastructure, in both N-day and
 0-day scenarios. The effectiveness of Zero-X is consis- H. Discussion and Comparison
 tently demonstrated in these tests, as shown in Tables V In the current state-of-the-art, only a few studies [7], [23],
 and VI. These results substantiate our hypothesis that both [24], [25] have addressed the detection of zero-day attacks in
 inter-vehicular and MEC-targeted attacks by compromised the IoV. Agrawal et al. [24] primarily focused on intra-vehicular
 CAVs can be detected through distinct traffic pattern dis- networks, whereas Khan et al. [23], [25] extended their research
 ruptions. Once identified, packets from malicious CAVs are to both intra and inter-vehicular networks. Only Yang et al. [25]
 systematically rejected, ensuring the integrity and security conducted experiments specifically focused on zero-day scenarof the IoV network. ios. We conducted a comparative analysis with their work using
 r Poisoning attack: To secure the training of the AD the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [36]. As demonstrated in Fig. 8(a),
 and AC global models against poisoning by malicious the performance difference between MTH-IDS and Zero-X in
 CAVs or MECs uploading substandard model parameters detecting N-Day attacks is relatively small, with MTH-IDS
 (see [27]), our framework incorporates a model validation achieving a 99.8% detection rate, compared to 93.39% for Zeromechanism that focuses on model accuracy gain. The X. In the context of 0-Day attacks, however, Zero-X significantly
 process starts with the MEC node examining the AD outperforms MTH-IDS, achieving a 98.36% detection rate vermodel updates (ADU p ) against the test batch BT est . A sus 75.943% for MTH-IDS. Notably, MTH-IDS employs cenmodel update is deemed valid only if the difference in loss tralized learning, which raises privacy concerns in the IoV due to
 function values between l(wt ) and l(wt−1 ) remains within the necessity of data centralization. We further compared Zero-X
 a predefined threshold δ (detailed in Section IV-E2). with three recent studies that utilized the same datasets [19],
 Updates failing to satisfy this criterion are discarded. For [20] as those used in our experimentation. Fig. 8(b) shows
 the AC model’s integrity, the framework employs a PoA Zero-X outperforming Schan et al.’s method [19] in DDoS
 consensus mechanism. It systematically excludes MEC attack detection, except for SlowrateDoS. As demonstrated in
 nodes demonstrating a consistent negative ACC_gain Fig. 8(c), Zero-X also excels in detecting Scan-type attacks.
 over several rounds from future training and consensus Fig. 8(d) reveals Zero-X’s superiority over Rahal et al. [20]
 activities. This proactive approach effectively prevents and [7] in inter-vehicular attack detection. Zero-X addresses the
 model poisoning that could stem from a compromised limitations of [20]’s inability to detect zero-day attacks and [7]’s
 MEC node. Additionally, the PoA’s role-switching policy inability to recognize N-day attacks.
 ensures periodic re-selection of validators for each training The practicality and real-world potential of the Zero-X frameround, significantly reducing the risk of a compromised work are demonstrated through evaluations conducted on both a
 MEC node being repeatedly chosen as a validator. realistic vehicular traffic testbed [20] and real traffic attacks on
 r Inference attack: An adversary might attempt to infer MEC infrastructure [19]. Both datasets contain diverse attacks
 raw data from a i-CAV using its uploaded weight and mainly categorized as DoS and Scan. Their similar characgradient information [28]. To preserve privacy, Zero-X teristics lead to resembling network behaviors, complicating
 implements differential privacy in local updates. Upon the detection of zero-day attacks. These new patterns may
 completing local training, CAVi adds Gaussian noise to mimic known attacks, challenging the classification model’s
 the trained parameters wit . The gradient wt is then clipped: ability to differentiate them. Table VIII compares the features
AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV 12413

 TABLE VIII
 COMPARISON BETWEEN ZERO-X AND OTHER RELATED WORKS

of the Zero-X framework with other recent studies in various [5] R. Rahal, A. Amara Korba, N. Ghoualmi-Zine, Y. Challal, and M. Y.
key aspects. Notably, Zero-X stands out by effectively detect- Ghamri-Doudane, “AntibotV: A multilevel behaviour-based framework
 for botnets detection in vehicular networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage.,
ing 0-day and recognizing N-day attacks, a capability shared vol. 30, pp. 1–40, 2022.
with MTH-IDS [25]. However, it goes further by prioritizing [6] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “Federated learning-based inter-slice attack
data privacy through federated learning. Additionally, Zero-X detection for 5G-V2X sliced networks,” in Proc. IEEE 96th Veh. Technol.
 Conf., 2022, pp. 1–6.
leverages blockchain technology to decentralize and distribute [7] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, B. Brik, R. Rahal, Y. Ghamri-Doudane,
the coordination of federated training. This not only enhances and S. M. Senouci, “Federated learning for zero-day attack detection in
robustness against adversarial attacks but also minimizes the 5G and Beyond V2X networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023,
 pp. 1137–1142.
risks associated with single points of failure and potential data [8] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware
tampering. explainable intrusion detection system for controller area network-based
 in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technol., vol. 73, no. 3,
 pp. 3230–3246, Mar. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2023.3327275.
 VI. CONCLUSION [9] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A.
 Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture
 This paper proposed Zero-X, a novel security framework for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation sysdesigned to detect both 0-day and N-day attacks in the realm tems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518,
of the IoV. The framework uses a blockchain-enabled federated Jul. 2021.
 [10] C. Geng, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Recent advances in open set recogtraining approach to build detection and identification models nition: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10,
that enable secure collaboration and trust between CAV and pp. 3614–3631, Oct. 2021.
MEC nodes. We empirically evaluate the proposed framework [11] S. Kong and D. Ramanan, “OpenGAN: Open-set recognition via open
 data generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
and compare its performance with existing IDS using recent pp. 813–822.
publicly available datasets. The results show that the Zero-X [12] L. Neal, M. Olson, X. Fern, W.-K. Wong, and F. Li, “Open set learning
framework outperforms existing IDS, demonstrating its superi- with counterfactual images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018,
 pp. 613–628.
ority in detecting a wide range of cyberattacks. For our future [13] P. Oza and V. M. Patel, “C2AE: Class conditioned auto-encoder for openwork, we plan to develop a security framework with the ability set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
to detect zero-day attacks, as well as evolve its detection capabil- 2019, pp. 2302–2311.
 [14] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Niu, and D. Guo, “Unknown network attack
ities. This system will incrementally update the detection model detection based on open-set recognition and active learning in drone
to convert newly discovered “unknown” attacks into “known” network,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 33, no. 10, 2022,
attacks. Another direction to extend this work is to integrate Art. no. e4212.
 [15] S. Xu, L. Li, H. Yang, and J. Tang, “KCC method: Unknown intrusion
an intrusion response mechanism where multiple reinforcement detection based on open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Int. Conf.
learning agents are running on a set of vehicular edge nodes and Tools Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1343–1347.
learn to mitigate newly discovered attacks. [16] A. Uprety, D. B. Rawat, and J. Li, “Privacy preserving misbehavior
 detection in IoV using federated machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
 Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
 REFERENCES [17] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intrusion
 detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
 [1] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detec- no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
 tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198, [18] A. Hbaieb, S. Ayed, and L. Chaari, “Federated learning based IDS appp. 175–185, 2023. proach for the IoV,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur., 2022,
 [2] N. Turgeman, “Infographic: Top real-world threats facing connected cars pp. 1–6.
 and fleets,” Apr. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://upstream.auto/blog/ [19] S. Samarakoon et al., “5G-NIDD: A comprehensive network intrusion
 infographic-top-real-world-threats-facing-connected-cars-fleets/ detection dataset generated over 5G wireless network,” IEEE Dataport,
 [3] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “A survey on machine learning-based Dec. 2022, doi: 10.21227/xtep-hv36.
 misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond vehicular networks,” [20] R. Rahal, A. Amara Korba, and N. Ghoualmi-Zine, “Towards the devel-
 IEEE Commun. Surveys Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1128–1172, 2023, opment of realistic DoS dataset for intelligent transportation systems,”
 doi: 10.1109/COMST.2023.3236448. Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 1415–1444, 2020.
 [4] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, and [21] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
 O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based smart “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
 transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
 pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022. pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
12414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

[22] Q. Lai et al., “Improved transformer-based privacy-preserving architecture Abdelaziz Amara Korba (Member, IEEE) received
 for intrusion detection in secure V2X communications,” IEEE Trans. the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Univer-
 Consum. Electron., 2023, early access, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3324081. sity of Annaba, Annaba, Algeria, in 2016, in a collab-
[23] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An orative program with the University of La Rochelle,
 enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious La Rochelle, France. He is currently an Associate Proactivities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., fessor of computer science. His research interests invol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022. clude network security, machine learning (ML) appli-
[24] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane, cations in cybersecurity, intrusion detection systems,
 “NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intra-vehicular net- decentralized ML techniques, and the development of
 works,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22596–22606, blockchain-based security solutions for the Internet of
 Nov. 2022. Things (IoT) and connected vehicles.
[25] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
 J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[26] H. Sedjelmaci and N. Ansari, “On cooperative federated defense to secure
 multi-access edge computing,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., 2022, early
 access, doi: 10.1109/MCE.2022.3167527.
[27] H. Chen, S. A. Asif, J. Park, C.-C. Shen, and M. Bennis, “Robust Abdelwahab Boualouache (Member, IEEE) reblockchained federated learning with model validation and proof-of-stake ceived the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
 inspired consensus,” 2021, arXiv:2101.03300. the University of Science and Technology Houari
[28] P. Zhao, Z. Cao, J. Jiang, and F. Gao, “Practical private aggregation in Boumediene, Algiers, Algeria, in 2016. He is curfederated learning against inference attack,” IEEE Internet Things J., rently a Research Associate with the Faculty of
 vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 318–329, Jan. 2023. Science, Technology, and Medicine, University of
[29] D. Lee, S. Yu, and H. Yu, “Multi-class data description for out-of- Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg. His
 distribution detection,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. research interests include security and privacy in
 Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1362–1370. connected vehicles, privacy-preserving collaborative
[30] G. E. Hinton and R. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description length learning solutions for 5G, and blockchain-based soand Helmholtz free energy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. lutions for decentralized systems.
 Syst., 1993, vol. 6, pp. 3–10.
[31] Q. Wang et al., “Security analysis on DBFT protocol of NEO,” in Proc.
 24th Int. Conf. Financial Cryptogr. Data Secur., 2020, pp. 20–31.
[32] “Cicflowmeter,” 2018. Accessed: Apr. 26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
 //github.com/CanadianInstituteForCybersecurity/CICFlowMeter
[33] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized Yacine Ghamri-Doudane (Senior Member, IEEE) is
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. currently a Full Professor with the University of La
[34] A. Boualouache, B. Brik, S.-M. Senouci, and T. Engel, “On-demand Rochelle, La Rochelle, France, where he is also the
 security framework for 5GB vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things Director of Laboratory of Informatics, Image and In-
 Mag., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 26–31, Jun. 2023. teraction (L3i). His research interests include the area
[35] A. Selamnia, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and S. Hos- of wireless networking and mobile computing with a
 sain, “Edge computing-enabled intrusion detection for C-V2X networks current emphasis on topics related to the Internet of
 using federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022, Things (IoT), Vehicular Networks, and Digital Trust.
 pp. 2080–2085.
[36] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
 new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, vol. 1, pp. 108–116.