2426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 A Cascaded Broad Learning Network Embedded
 Image Features for Malware Traffic Classification
 Junzhi Xu, Yibin Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Kaijie Zhou, Qin Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Minyu Hua, Lin Shan , Senior Member, IEEE, Yun Lin , Senior Member, IEEE, and Guan Gui , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Malware traffic classification (MTC) is a critical malicious traffic for relevant network management departtechnology in network security, Internet of Things (IoT) devices, ments and device providers. With the development of the 6th
and big data traffic, and has been mainly used for encrypted mali- generation mobile networks [5], [6] technology and Internet of
cious traffic detection and various network traffic classification.
The traditional MTC technology mainly relies on payload-based Things (IoT) [7], [8], [9], [10] technology, data transmission
deep packet inspection methods and port-based identification speed is getting faster and the amount of data is getting
detection techniques. Meanwhile, In recent years, many studies larger. Network attacks [11] are also increasing and becoming
have begun to explore the application of machine learning (ML) more covert. The development of IoT technology has enabled
and deep learning (DL) in MTC tasks. However, ML methods traditional electronic devices to be connected to the network,
require extracting excellent feature information, which can be
challenging for traffic detection tasks. DL methods require excel- bringing great convenience to public lives. For example, smart
lent computing power equipment, such as GPUs, but also have homes, smart cities, autonomous driving, etc. However, while
the drawbacks of long training time and poor interpretability. bringing convenience, these devices are more susceptible to
Consequently, this paper proposes an image feature embedding malicious traffic attacks. Illegal traffic can steal important
cascaded broad learning network (IFCBLN) to address the short- confidential information from users and businesses. In these
comings of ML and DL in MTC tasks. The proposed IFCBLN
method utilizes multiple cascaded broad learning networks (BLN) situations, malicious traffic detection technology has also
combined with image feature extractors to improve the original developed and achieved significant results. Traditional traffic
BLN. Meanwhile, it achieves good performance in MTC tasks. detection techniques include deep packet inspection (DPI) [12]
In the datasets of USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016, the methods based on payloads (TCP, UDP, IP, etc.), as well as
proposed IFCBLN achieves better performance than ML and DL
 identification and detection techniques based on ports (HTTP,
methods. The best results of the algorithm achieve an accuracy of
99.543% and 90.93%, respectively. The proposed method reduces FTP, SNMP, etc.), which can effectively detect illegal network
computational overhead by 98% compared to the DL method. traffic. However, they are powerless against encrypted mali-
 Index Terms—Malware traffic classification, image feature cious traffic and the complex network environment. Therefore,
embedding cascaded broad learning, feature extraction, network finding more effective and robust methods to detect encrypted
security. malicious traffic is necessary.
 To solve this problem, some researchers have applied
 machine learning (ML) methods to malicious traffic detec-
 I. I NTRODUCTION tion [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] techniques. Traditional machine
 learning methods include support vector machine (SVM) [18],
 ALWARE traffic classification (MTC) [1], [2], [3], [4]
M technology is an excellent way to detect encrypted
 naive Bayes, and random forest algorithms. ML has significant
 advantages in training time, but it requires extracting sufficient
 and effective feature information. Therefore, researchers need
 Received 19 June 2024; revised 31 October 2024; accepted 16 December
2024. Date of publication 23 December 2024; date of current version to expend a lot of energy in the feature extraction process. With
8 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science the development of computing power in computer devices,
Foundation of China under Grant 62471247, and in part by the Key Project of
the Natural Science Foundation of the Higher Education Institutions of Jiangsu
 deep learning (DL) [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] has also
Province under Grant 22KJA510002. The associate editor coordinating the emerged. DL has also been applied in traffic detection tasks.
review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Zhang. Common DL networks include convolutional neural network
(Corresponding author: Guan Gui.)
 Junzhi Xu, Yibin Zhang, Qin Wang, Minyu Hua, and Guan Gui are
 (CNN), gated recurrent unit (GRU), and long short-term
with the College of Telecommunications and Information Engineering, memory (LSTM). Zhao et al. [24] proposed a CNN-based
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, CL-ETC malicious traffic detection method. Yao et al. [21]
China (e-mail: 1023010410@njupt.edu.cn; 2021010208@njupt.edu.cn;
wangqin@njupt.edu.cn; 1022010410@njupt.edu.cn; guiguan@njupt.edu.cn). proposed a HAN traffic classification method based on LSTM.
 Kaijie Zhou is with the School of Physical and Electrical Engineering, Wang et al. [25] proposed deep learning-based methods for
Huaiyin Normal University, Huaian 223300, China (e-mail: zhoukaijie@ real-valued convolution neural networks (RVCNN) and realhytc.edu.cn).
 Lin Shan is with the Center for Information Infrastructure, Shinshu valued convolution neural networks (CVCNN). DL technology
University, Nagano 390-8621, Japan (e-mail: shanlin@shinshu-u.ac.jp). can automatically extract potential feature information without
 Yun Lin is with the College of Information and Communication the need for manual feature extraction. However, deep learning
Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150000, China (e-mail:
linyun@hrbeu.edu.cn). requires powerful computing devices, such as GPU, which can
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3522143 provide acceleration. Although GPU can be used, the inference
 2332-7731 
 c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2427

time is still extremely long. Therefore, this article proposes a features from network traffic through image processing
MTC method based on broad learning networks (BLNs). techniques. It is embedded into the proposed algorithms.
 BLN [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33] is a neural Additionally, we implement three different cascades for
network structure with only one layer, consisting of a for- the feature mapping nodes and enhancement nodes of
ward propagation network without a feedback mechanism to basic BLN. The improved algorithms demonstrate excelautomatically adjust weights. Although there is only one layer lent performance in MTC tasks.
of a network, the network width can be infinitely expanded. • The proposed IFCBLN method was experimented
The weight coefficient is randomly generated in BLN. For with in the public datasets of USTC-TFC2016 and
newly added nodes, only the pseudo inverse of the newly ISCXVPN2016. Compared with two ML algorithms
added node needs to be calculated. The training time is greatly and three DL algorithms, the proposed algorithm can
reduced. However, the feedback mechanism and convolution effectively learn robust features and achieve better
calculation of DL networks greatly increase time overhead. performance. At the same time, it ensures that time
Consequently, widening the network width does not signifi- consumption is much less than that of DL algorithms.
cantly increase the training time of the network compared to The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
DL networks. Due to its unique results, it has a fast training Section II, we introduce the recent research progress in the
speed and can achieve good experimental performance. BLN field of MTC. In Section III, we introduce the system model
has demonstrated excellent performance in multiple applica- and the mathematical model for MTC problems. In Section IV,
tion fields. Firstly, it has achieved good performances in the We introduce the technical details of the proposed IFCBLN
field of specific emitter identification (SEI), and the signal method, including the basic network, improved network archifeature embedded broad learning network (SFEBLN) method tecture, and algorithm flow chart. The experimental results and
proposed by Zhang et al. [34] has been applied to the SEI analysis are given in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes
field. This method not only has fast training speed but also the research work of this paper.
recognition accuracy comparable to deep learning algorithms.
Secondly, it also excels in the field of industrial manufacturing. II. R ELATED W ORKS
The ABTCI method proposed by Liu et al. [35] is applied in A. Traditional ML-Based MTC Methods
industrial production environments, and BLN can effectively
monitor the operation of machine rotors and large equipment As encryption technologies advance and new applications
in industrial workshops. It provides a good method for the emerge, traditional methods based on port numbers and
automation and unmanned operation of factory workshops. In Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) have become inadequate for
addition, it has also achieved success in tasks such as computer handling the complexities of modern network environments.
vision (CV) [36], as it can process large-scale image data Yamansavascilar et al. [40] extract 111 features from the
and extract important features. It is also widely applied in UNB ISCX dataset and achieved 93.94% classification accuautomatic modulation classification [38], [39]. Overall, BLN racy using a KNN classifier on 14 applications. Similarly,
has shown excellent application potential in processing large- Koroniotis et al. [41] extract 46 features from captured traffic
scale, high-dimensional data, especially in SEI, industrial and stored them in CSV format, achieving nearly 99% accumanufacturing, and CV fields. racy with an SVM classifier. Chebrolu et al. [42] employ two
 Given the excellent algorithm performance of BLNs, we feature selection methods–Bayesian Networks and Regression
propose an image feature embedding cascaded broad learning Trees–to identify key traffic features. However, traditional ML
network (IFCBLN) method. In this paper, we introduce classic approaches, which rely heavily on manually designed features,
image processing methods into malicious traffic detection, face challenges when dealing with large and complex network
effectively avoiding the complex detection methods of tradi- traffic, often leading to difficulties in feature design and limited
tional malicious traffic techniques. Converting text data into generalization capabilities.
image format data, and extracting feature [37] information
from the image using image processing methods. Next, we B. DL-Based MTC Methods
cascade the BLN in different ways and evaluate the algorithm With the rising complexity of modern cyberattacks [43],
performance of different cascaded networks. Then, based [44], [45], [46], [47], MTC has become a critical focus in
on the above situation, a new network traffic classifier is cybersecurity. DL techniques have gained prominence due
applied to the network traffic classification task. The main to their ability to extract meaningful features from raw
contributions of this paper can be briefly summarized as network data. However, various challenges persist, including
follows: limited datasets, computational constraints, and the need for
 • We propose an image feature embedding cascaded models that can efficiently adapt to new threats. This secbroad learning network (IFCBLN) method. The proposed tion consolidates the contributions and outcomes of recent
 method uses image processing methods to process trans- DL-based MTC research [48], [49], [50], [51], [52], [53],
 formed data and cascaded BLN for malicious traffic presenting how each approach tackles key challenges in the
 detection. The IFCBLN method is trained on the central field. Zhang et al. [48] propose a few-shot malware traffic
 processing unit (CPU). classification (FS-MTC) framework that addresses the data
 • In contrast to traditional MTC methods, we innova- scarcity problem in MTC. Their method combines knowledge
 tively design image feature nodes, which extract image transfer and neural architecture search (NAS) to develop an
2428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

adaptive model that performs well with minimal training sam- providing clearer insights into the learned features and deciples and limited computational resources. The experimental sion processes, which is particularly useful in cybersecurity.
results demonstrate the effectiveness of this method, with the Additionally, their lightweight architecture allows them to
USTC-TFC2016 dataset achieving 86.91% accuracy in 1-shot achieve competitive performance. Lin et al. [54] tackle the
scenarios, outperforming traditional approaches that struggle challenge of imbalanced network traffic classification by
with data scarcity. Ge et al. [50] propose MetaCluster, an introducing MC-OCBLS (Maximum Correntropy-based Oneinterpretable classification framework that enhances the trans- Class Broad Learning System). Their method enhances the
parency and reliability of DL-based MTC models. MetaCluster robustness of the model by using the maximum correntropy
uses semantic prototypes to generate meaningful feature rep- criterion (MCC) to handle noise and outliers effectively. To
resentations at multiple granularities. This method ensures improve performance further, they propose SMC-OCBLS, an
robust classification while reducing model overfitting and ensemble boosting model that increases diversity by disrupting
computational overhead. Compared to other DL models, feature columns during training, forming multiple feature
MetaCluster reduces parameter consumption by 79.52% to spaces. This strategy enables the ensemble to train hybrid clas-
91.78%, improves operational speed by 71.37%, and maintains sifiers across varied feature spaces, improving accuracy and
stable or slightly improved F1 scores. generalization. Experimental results show that MC-OCBLS
 Additionally, it offers interpretability by visually represent- and SMC-OCBLS outperform existing advanced methods,
ing the importance of image, text, and statistical features, particularly in handling noisy and imbalanced network traffic
bridging the gap between the complexity of DL and practical datasets. Zhang et al. [1] focus on lightweight MTC for
cybersecurity needs. Sheng et al. [51] introduce Scanner- IoT environments, aiming to address the limitations of tra-
Hunter, a novel system for identifying malicious scanning ditional ML and DL techniques. Quickly train models by
groups targeting industrial control systems (ICS) by leverag- adding feature layers horizontally rather than increasing model
ing honeynet data. Scanner-Hunter employs a self-expanding depth. Minimize computational overhead without sacrificing
multi-class classification (SEMCC) model and IP prefix judg- accuracy. The model showcases a significant reduction in
ment to accurately identify sophisticated scanning patterns. computational cost, making it highly suitable for deployment
The model effectively analyzes six years of honeynet data, in IoT environments.
uncovering previously unknown scanning groups, some with
advanced persistent threat (APT) characteristics. The ability
 III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
of a system to identify suspicious attackers enhances proactive threat defense by providing actionable intelligence on A. System Model
potential cyberattack campaigns. Given the resource limita- Network traffic is transmitted in the data link and routing
tions of IoT devices, He et al. [53] propose a lightweight ports, which are added to hardware collection devices to
intrusion detection method based on feature grouping and collect network traffic data. Refining the data using software
protocol parsing. This approach focuses on reducing computa- analysis tools and converting it into message-format data.
tional overhead without compromising detection accuracy. The This paper uses the IFCBLN to complete the task of network
method achieves 99.5% classification accuracy across three traffic classification. The model is shown in Fig. 1. The four
IoT datasets, significantly outperforming traditional methods parts of the traffic recognition system include 1) Network
in terms of computational efficiency. Its lightweight design Traffic Collection, 2) Visualization, 3) IFCBLN, and 4) Traffic
makes it ideal for deployment in resource-constrained envi- Classification. Firstly, it is necessary to convert the collected
ronments, ensuring robust IoT security. message format data into image-type data. Then, the converted
 The reviewed studies demonstrate diverse applications of data is placed into the IFCBLN model, which includes feature
DL techniques in MTC, addressing various challenges such mapping nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing
as data scarcity, model interpretability, catastrophic forgetting, nodes. Finally, IFCBLN is capable of identifying various types
and computational constraints. These advancements illustrate of network traffic and encrypted malicious traffic. The details
the growing role of DL in addressing the evolving landscape of the model architecture will be explained in detail in the
of cyber threats. Future research can benefit from integrating following texts. The proposed model can effectively solve the
these approaches to develop more adaptive, interpretable, and MTC problem in this paper.
efficient MTC systems.
 B. Problem Formulation
C. BL-Based MTC Methods This paper finds a fast and effective method to solve the
 MTC problem. We use encrypted malicious traffic and normal
 In recent years, some researchers have introduced Broad
 traffic as the overall input. And convert the input data format.
Learning (BL) into the field of malware traffic detection and
 It can be expressed as follows:
achieved promising results. BLN offers several advantages,
making them well-suited for tasks like malware traffic clas-  
 xj (t) = T xj (t) (1)
sification. One key benefit is their ability to rapidly learn
features without requiring extensive training time, unlike DL where xj (t) is the data after format conversion, T means data
models that often demand large datasets and high compu- format transformation, xj (t) is network traffic header format
tational resources. BLN models are also more interpretable, data.
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2429

Fig. 1. System model of the proposed IFCBLN method.

 Essentially, the proposed MTC method solves the problem
of matching traffic packets with network traffic types in real
life. Encrypting malicious traffic is similar to it. As long as the
type of malicious traffic can be identified, specific measures
can be taken against illegal network traffic. Therefore, traffic
packets and network traffic types can be summarized as
datasets D{ xj , yj }Nj =1 , where yj are the real network traffic
labels. It is the label corresponding to the real network traffic
type. The MTC task of this article can be summarized as
follows: Fig. 2. Illustration of basic BLN structure.
  
 yj = fMTC xj (t), W (2)
 IV. T HE P ROPOSED MTC M ETHOD U SING IFCBLN
where fMTC stands for the mapping function used to identify
various network traffic data and yj are the network traffic In this section, the proposed IFCBLN algorithm for MTC
labels of prediction. W is the weight coefficient after iteration. problems is introduced, which includes features mapping
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed MTC model. nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes, as
We will compare the predicted network traffic type labels with well as three cascading methods of features mapping nodes
the actual network traffic type labels. The probability of this and enhancement nodes. Before that, we will first introduce the
series of data can be defined as accuracy as follows: preliminaries of the classic BLN and then provide a detailed
 ⎧ ⎫ introduction to the proposed IFCBLN method. Finally, the
 ⎨M  ⎬ flowchart and summary of the algorithm are introduced in this
 Acc = yj = yj /M (3) section.
 ⎩ ⎭
 j =1

and the corresponding error rate is Error = 1 − Acc. At the A. Theoretical Foundations
same time, we also need to optimize the function during the The basic BLN structure can be described as Fig. 2. The
training process to improve the accuracy of the model and model structure only has a single layer of network, which has a
reduce its error rate, which can be summarized as follows: forward propagation network and has no feedback mechanism.
     The feedback mechanism has been removed, allowing the
 W = arg min  yj = fMTC xj , W , yj (4) network to train at a fast speed. At the same time, with
 W
 its unique network structure, it not only has fast speed but
where  stands for the difference between real labels yj and also excellent performance. Next, we will introduce the main
predicted labels yj , which is the error rate Error and W is the components of basic BLN. Three parts are as follows:
weight coefficients that cause the predicted labels to deviate 1) Features Mapping Nodes: The features mapping nodes
from the true labels. H are obtained by linear transformation of input data X. In
2430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

the BLN, there can be multiple feature mapping nodes, which
can be represented as follows:
 H = [H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn ] (5)
where Hn is the part of the feature mapping node, and the
linear transformation of the input data is as follows:
  
 Hj = ζ X̃ex WHj + β Hj , (6)
where ζ represents the linear transformation of the BLN, and
X̃ex is the preprocessed data, which is processed differently
in different application fields. WHj is a random coefficient
matrix generated by the system and follows a Gaussian
distribution. β Hj is a sparse representation of the matrix
after linear transformation. The overall processing flow of the
above formula is as follows: first, preprocessing the input data
and then multiplying the input coefficient matrix with the Fig. 3. Architecture of the IFCBLN method for MTC problems.
random coefficient matrix to complete random convolution.
Next, the obtained coefficient matrix needs to normalize the
coefficients of the entire matrix through the maximum and calculation. Finally, non-linear activation functions are used to
minimum values. Finally, sparse representation is performed perform non-linear operations on the coefficient matrix. In this
to reduce the correlation between feature mapping nodes. way, the enhanced node processing is completed, and adding a
Avoid generating weights with a correlation that is too high, nonlinear activation function can increase the nonlinear factors
reduce waste, and improve the utilization of weights. From this of the network.
process, it can be seen that this network structure is strongly 3) Nonlinear Activation Functions: This summary prorandom. vides a concise description of nonlinear functions. In neural
 2) Enhancement Nodes: The enhancement nodes Z gener- networks, adding nonlinear functions is to enhance their nonated through linear transformation cannot fully complete the linear characteristics and apply them to nonlinear problems. In
training task of the network structure. The features obtained reality, the vast majority of problems are nonlinear problems.
from linear transformation are extremely limited. Therefore, it The common nonlinear activation functions are as follows:
is necessary to supplement other feature information through 2
other means. Nonlinear transformations, which are opposite tan sig(b) = −1 (9)
 1 + e −2b
to linear transformations, can effectively compensate for this 1
deficiency. The enhancement nodes in this summary are sigmoid(b) = (10)
 1 + e −b
obtained by non-linear transformation of the coefficient matrix
 e b − e −b
obtained from the feature mapping node section. Enhancement tanh(b) = b . (11)
node processing can be described as follows: e + e −b
   These activation functions are often used for both DL and
 Z = Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zm (7)
 BLN.
where Z is composed of m enhancement nodes windows, and
Zm is one of the enhancement node windows. The specific B. Our Proposed IFCBLN Method
nonlinear transformation is as follows:
   The MTC problem is often solved by DL and its improved
 Zi = ξ HWzi + β zi algorithms, so this paper adopts a broad learning network to
   address MTC task. In this paper, we propose an IFCBLN
 = ξ [H1 , H2 , . . . Hn ]Wzi + β zi method for the MTC problem. The detailed model architecture
     
 = ξ . . . ζ X̃ex WHl + β Hl , . . . Wzi + β zi , (8) of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3. This mainly
 includes three cascade methods of features mapping nodes
where H represents the number of windows for the features and Enhancement Nodes for BLN: a cascade of features
mapping nodes, ξ is a nonlinear transformation function for mapping nodes (CF), a cascade of enhancement nodes (CE),
the feature mapping node, and Wzi and β zi are randomly and a cascade of features mapping nodes and enhancement
generated weight matrices and biases corresponding to the nodes (CFE), as well as adding new incremental nodes: image
enhancement nodes, which also follow a Gaussian distribution. processing nodes. The IFCBLN method mainly extracts the
The enhancement nodes processing process is as follows: features of malicious traffic data through network cascade and
firstly, all coefficient matrices H of the feature mapping nodes the idea of extracting image features from network traffic data.
are placed into the enhancement node network as input data. The main components of IFCBLN are as follows:
Secondly, the input matrix H is multiplied by the randomly 1) Image Processing Nodes: Ordinary malicious traffic
generated matrix Wzi for the purpose of random convolution data is transformed into image format data through format
and bias terms. Normalizing the coefficients in the matrix after transformation. Extracting features from network traffic data
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2431

in header format is too cumbersome and difficult. Therefore,
converting the data format is necessary. There are relatively
few methods for feature extraction from traffic data, and
the research in this area remains incomplete. On the other
hand, image processing is more mature, with many established
methods available for feature extraction. Therefore, traffic data
is converted into image data to leverage these advanced techniques. Extracting malicious traffic data feature information in
image format through image processing methods. At present,
researchers have conducted comprehensive research in the field
of CV, and there are many methods for image processing
to extract feature information. This conclusion adopts classical image processing, due to its fast processing speed and
good processing results. Extract gradient changes in image
format data through image processing. Significant gradient
location can be helpful for network traffic classification tasks.
The processing process of image processing nodes can be
expressed as:

 Xin = pin (X, Ψ) (12)

where Xin is the coefficient matrix obtained by processing the
input data through image processing nodes. X and Ψ are the
input data and the parameters that the transformation function
may require. Among them, the classic image processing
methods are as follows:
 1
 Xin [j , k ] = √ f [n]Φj ,k [n] (13)
 M k

where f [n] is the input data, Φj ,k [n] is the wavelet basis Fig. 4. The cascaded broad learning network of features mapping nodes and
function, and in discrete cases, it is a matrix. The formula enhancement nodes.
is discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Common wavelet bases
include Haar, Daubechies, etc. After transformation, the grawe need to create the first feature mapping nodes. The input
dient transformation feature information of the image can be
 data is placed in them, represented as follows:
extracted. However, its output cannot be directly input into the  
network, and we still need to perform nonlinear transformation H1 = φ XWh1 + β h1 , (16)
on it. We define image processing nodes as follows:
 where Wh1 and β h1 are randomly generated weight matrices
  
 P = P1 , P2 , . . . , Pp (14) and parameters used, respectively, and φ is the linear transformation. Then, the output of the first node is placed into the
where Pk is the k-th image processing nodes window, which second feature mapping node, expressed as follows:
can be obtained through the following processing steps, as  
follows: H2 = φ H1 W h 2 + β h 2
  
   = φ φ(XWh1 + β h1 )Wh2 + β h2 , (17)
 Pk = γ Xin WPk + βPk (15)
 where H2 is the output of the second feature map node
where γ is the non-linear transformation activation function obtained through a linear transformation from the first node.
of the enhancement nodes. WPk and βPk are the randomly And Wh2 and β h2 , like the above parameters, are randomly
generated weights for image processing nodes and the param- generated weight matrices and parameters used.
eters that may be required for nonlinear transformations, The subsequent feature mapping nodes follow a similar
respectively. In these nodes, we perform image processing processing. Therefore, the cascading connection method of
on the converted format data. After the image processing feature mapping nodes can be summarized as follows:
transformation, we matrix the image format data to easily put it  
into the BLN. Finally, a non-linear transformation of the input Hk = φ Hk −1 Whk + β hk (18)
data is performed to extract non-linear features. So, image where Whk and β hk are both randomly generated.
processing nodes can be represented by P. Next, the feature mapping nodes are connected to the
 2) Cascade of Features Mapping Nodes: We introduce the enhancement nodes as follows:
cascaded feature mapping nodes, as shown in Fig. 4(a). We  
make a cascading connection for feature mapping nodes. Next, Zj = ξ Hn Wzj + β zj , (19)
2432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

where Zj is the output of enhancement nodes obtained by enhancement nodes are two parameters, not the same. If it
non-linear transformation of features mapping nodes. ξ is is the same parameter, the following situations will occur.
the nonlinear transformation, and Wzj and β zj are randomly When the variables are small, although the running speed
generated parameters for enhancement nodes. Hn represents is fast, the number of enhancement nodes is too small, and
the entire output of the feature mapping node. their nonlinear transformation cannot extract enough nonlinear
 Therefore, we have obtained all the outputs of the feature features. When the variables are large, although there are
mapping nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing enough enhancement nodes, the number of cascaded connecnodes. Next, we need to use the outputs of these three parts tion layers of enhancement nodes is too many, which will
to obtain the final output of the BLN. The above process can seriously consume training time. Therefore, we optimize the
be described as follows: structure by setting the number of enhancement nodes in a
 single group to a larger value, which ensures that the nonlinear
 Y = [Φ(X; Wh , βh )|Ξ(Hn ; Wz , βz )|Γ(Xin ; WP , βP )]Wnm
   transformation can extract sufficient nonlinear features. Taking
 = H1 , . . . , Hn |Z1 , . . . , Zm |P1 , . . . , Pp Wnm a smaller value for the number of groups of enhancement
 = [Hn |Zm |Pp ]Wnm , (20) nodes can ensure fast training time and excellent network
 performance.
where Y is the final output of the BLN, which is the
 4) Cascade of Features Mapping Nodes and Enhancement
predicted network traffic type label, Wnm is the weight
 Nodes: In this section, we introduce the cascading of features
matrix obtained from the outputs of features mapping nodes,
 mapping nodes and enhancement nodes. Firstly, the feature
enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes. Overall, this
 mapping nodes are cascaded and connected, and then the
improved cascaded network can learn more effective features
 connected feature nodes are linearly transformed and put
and process them quickly. In MTC problems, it has good
 into the enhancement nodes section. The enhancement nodes
performance.
 section also needs to be cascaded. When the features nodes
 3) Cascade of Enhancement Nodes: Similar to the cascade
 output obtains the first group of enhancement nodes through
method of feature mapping nodes, the cascade connection of
 nonlinear transformation, The output of the first group of
enhancement nodes is achieved through the same connection
 enhancement nodes is transformed into the next group of
approach as the feature nodes mentioned earlier. However,
 enhancement nodes through their nonlinear transformation. By
with slight differences, enhancement nodes require the output
 connecting in this way, the final group of enhancement nodes
of feature nodes as input. Therefore, feature nodes Hi can be
 is obtained.
described as follows:
   Next, we will introduce the cascaded connection between
 Hi = φ XWhi + β hi . (21) feature nodes and enhancement nodes. Firstly, the feature
 nodes are described as follows:
 Next, the output of the feature nodes is subjected to  
nonlinear transformation processing to obtain the first group Hk = φk X; {Whi , β hi }ki=1 (25)
of enhanced nodes, which includes numerous individual
enhanced nodes. The nonlinear transformation of feature nodes where Whi and β hi are randomly generated.
is as follows: Next, the l groups of the enhancement nodes are generated
 by features mapping nodes, as follows:
 Z1 = ξ(Hn Wz1 + βz1 ) (22)  
 Zl = ξ l Hn ; {Wzi , β zi }li=1 (26)
where Z1 represents the nonlinear transformation of the
features nodes Hn , and Hn represents the entire output of the where Wzi and β zi are random weights obtained through
features mapping nodes. Wz1 and βz1 are randomly gener- Gaussian distribution sampling.
ated weight matrices and coefficients used in transformations After obtaining the output of the feature and enhancement
for enhancing nodes. Then, connecting the output of the nodes, we can obtain the final input of the broad learning
first enhancement nodes to the next enhancement nodes, as network. The final input is as follows:
described below:
 Afinal = [Hn |Zm |Ip ] (27)
 Z2 = ξ(Z1 Wz2 + βz2 )
 The entire improved BLN can be described as follows:
 = ξ(ξ(Hn Wz1 + βz1 )Wz2 + βz2 ), (23)
where Z2 is the result obtained by non-linear transformation Y = [Hn |Zm |Ip ]Wnm = Afinal Wnm . (28)
of the first enhancement nodes output. ξ is the nonlinear transformation function, and Wz2 and βz2 are randomly generated C. Summary and Workflow
parameters for the nonlinear transformation function. In this paper, we propose an improved algorithm IFCBLN
 The next enhancement nodes cascade connection method is based on BLN. This algorithm inherits the simple network
similar to the above, which can be described as: architecture of BLN. It has few network layers and less
   weight coefficients than DL networks. This also determines
 Zu = ξ u Hn ; {Wzi , β zi }ui=1 (24)
 that the proposed algorithm has a fast processing speed.
 However, it should be noted that the number of groups At the same time, three network parts can extract feature
for enhancement nodes and the number of single group information from network traffic data: features mapping nodes,
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2433

 Algorithm 1: Workflow of the Proposed IFCBLN Method V. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
 for MTC This section mainly presents our proposed IFCBLN method
 Input: Malware traffic data for train and test X̂train , and the algorithms for comparison. At the same time, it
 X̂test ; also introduces the dataset used, data preprocessing, related
 Real traffic type labels for train Ytrain ; parameter settings, and experimental equipment used. When
 Training hyperparameters Θinit , Θtrain . comparing with other algorithms, we compare them from
 Output: Predicted labels results Ypre ; various aspects such as computer overhead, test accuracy,
 1 [Stage of train]: precision, recall, and F1 scores.
 2 Load X̂train ∈ R
 a×n , Ŷ a×m ;
 train ∈ R
 3 Converting leader type data X̂train into image type data A. Datasets, Data Preprocessing and Experiment Settings
 X̂out ; 1) Datasets: To test the performance of the model
   
 4 Randomly generate Wh ∈ Rn ×l , Wz ∈ R(ll)×p  and β , β ;
 h z proposed in this article, we conduct experiments on two public
 5 if features mapping nodes then
 network traffic datasets, including encrypted malicious traffic
 6 if cascaded features mapping nodes then and normal traffic. Both datasets consist of 80% training
 
 7 Compute nodes H ∈ Ra×(ll) by (16) ∼ (18); dataset and 20% testing dataset. Next, we will introduce the
 8 else dataset used in the experiment as follows:
 
 9 Compute nodes H ∈ Ra×(ll) by (5) and (6); • USTC-TFC2016 dataset [58] consists of real-world
10 end network traffic, including ten types of normal network
11 Linear transformation φ(Wh , H, β h ); traffic and ten types of malicious network traffic. This
12 end dataset is divided into 10 categories of normal traffic, 10
13 if enhancement nodes then categories of malicious traffic, and 20 mixed categories of
14 if cascaded enhancement nodes then normal and malicious traffic. Correspondingly, there are
15 Compute nodes Z ∈ Ra×(qq) by (22) ∼ (24); 134563 samples, 138145 samples, and 272708 samples,
16 else respectively.
17 Compute nodes Z ∈ Ra×(qq) by (7) and (8); • ISCXVPN2016 dataset [55] is a dataset used for private
18 end networks to detect encrypted malicious traffic. The entire
19 Non-linear transformation tansig(Wz , β z , Z); dataset is divided into network traffic under VPN and
20 end
 network traffic under non-VPN. This includes 12 types of
21 if image processing nodes then
 encrypted network traffic. There are a total of 39446 sam-
22 Computer Xin ∈ Ra×M by (12); ples in the entire dataset.
  2) Data Preprocessing: To establish an effective training
23 Process Xin through Xin = √1 f [n]Φ[n];
 M task interface, we first use the network packet analysis tool
24 Randomly generate Wik ∈ RM ×p and β ik ; USTC-TK2016 [58] to convert the data into grayscale images,
25 Compute nodes I ∈ Ra×(pp) by (14) and (15); and extract and analyze network traffic features from the
26 Non-linear transformation tansig(Wi , β i , I); perspective of computer vision. The entire data preprocessing
27 end process can be divided into the following steps: firstly, we
28 Concatenate all nodes as input A = [H|Z|I]; split the original traffic data into discrete data streams, and
  −1
29 Equation Ytrain = AWtrain , A† = AT A AT ; then anonymize the data packets by replacing MAC addresses,
30 Obtain equation solution Wtrain =A Ytrain ;
 † IP addresses, and port numbers. Secondly, to ensure a more
31 [Stage of test]: reliable training process, duplicate or empty content must be
32 Load X̂test , Wh , β h , Wz , β z , Wi , β i , Ytrain ;
 removed. Trim all stream files to standardized 784 bytes to
33 Compute features mapping nodes Htest , enhancement
 ensure consistency. Thirdly, converting to a grayscale image
 nodes Ztest and image processing nodes Itest through means proportionally transforming its numerical values into
 φ(Wh , Htest , β h ), tansig((Wi , β i , Itest ), (Wz , β z , Ztest )); grayscale values ranging from 0 to 255 based on the maximum
34 Concatenate all nodes Atest = [Htest |Ztest |Itest ];
 value. In this step, we convert the data stream file into a
35 Get the classification labels by Ypre = Atest Wtrain ;
 grayscale image for visualization. Each 784 bytes data stream
 is converted into a 28 × 28 pixel grayscale image. Finally,
 to speed up computer data retrieval, we save these images in
 IDX format as input data for the neural network. Through the
 above process, we successfully transform the original network
enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes. These three traffic data into image format data, providing appropriate input
nodes extract the features of network traffic data through for subsequent training tasks.
linear transformation, nonlinear transformation, and image 3) Experiment Settings: The experiments were conducted
processing transformation methods, respectively. Therefore, it using PyTorch 2.0.1 and Python 3.8. In the proposed IFCBLN
can be ensured that the proposed algorithm not only has fast method, we need to manually set some parameters. After a
training speed but also excellent performance. The workflow series of tests, we found the optimal parameters that would
of IFCBLN can be found in Algorithm 1. make the model perform well. However, these parameters are
2434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 5. The confusion matrix of the three cascaded methods on USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

Fig. 6. The T-SNE of the three cascaded methods on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

 TABLE I
 PARAMETERS S ETTING OF P ROPOSED IFCBLN M ETHOD 99.383% and 99.543% for benign traffic in 10 categories,
 respectively. They achieve accuracies of 98.295%, 98.813%
 and 98.531% for malicious traffic in 10 categories. Among
 the 20 mixed categories of traffic, their accuracies are
 97.912%, 98.513% and 98.321%. In the ISCXVPN2016
 dataset, IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieve the
 accuracy of 90.93%, 90.887% and 90.824% in traffic of
 12 types of VPN and Non-VPN. The above results are
 all shown in the Fig. 11. Due to the encrypted network
 traffic of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, identification is difficult.
 Therefore, the classification results may be slightly worse than
not applicable to all scenarios, and in different scenarios, it
 those of the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. This is a good result, far
is necessary to find another set of optimal parameters. The
 less than the computational overhead of deep learning.
parameters of the proposed IFCBLN method are presented in
 In addition, to further demonstrate the classification
Table I.
 performance of IFCBLN, we use the confusion matrix
 and T-SNE visualization tool to demonstrate the classifica-
B. Classification Performance of IFCBLN tion performance of the proposed method on two datasets.
 The proposed IFCBLN method was experimentally ana- In Fig. 5, this is the confusion matrix for 20 mixed
lyzed on two public datasets, evaluating the IFCBLN method benign and malicious traffic in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
based on three evaluation metrics: computational overhead, Fig. 5(a), Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) are the confusion matrices
test accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores. The experimen- of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN and IFCFEBLN for 20 categories. In
tal results indicate that our proposed method performs well. Fig. 6, the T-SNE of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN
We propose three image feature embedding cascaded broad show the classification results of visualization for 20 mixed
learning networks: a cascade of features nodes (IFCFBLN), benign and malicious traffic in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
a cascade of enhancement nodes (IFCEBLN), and a cascade The confusion matrix of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset is shown
of features nodes and enhancement nodes (IFCFEBLN), and in Fig. 7. Meanwhile, in Fig. 8, the T-SNE of IFCFBLN,
analyze them. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, IFCFBLN, IFCFEBLN, and IFCFEBLN show the classification results
IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieve accuracies of 99.16%, of visualization in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset. In the T-SNE
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2435

Fig. 7. The confusion matrix of the three cascaded methods on ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

Fig. 8. The T-SNE of the three cascaded methods on the ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

 TP + TN
analysis, there is partial overlap between Category 14 and Accurac = (29b)
Category 18 in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, indicating that the TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP
traffic data of these two categories are quite similar. Similarly, Precision = (29c)
in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, multiple overlaps occur between TP + FP
 TP
Category 0 and Category 1, as well as between Category 2 Recall = (29d)
and Category 5. This suggests a high similarity among these TP + FN
categories, making it challenging for the model to accurately 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 − score = (29e)
classify and distinguish them. Precision + Recall
 where TP, FP, TN and FN represent true positive, false
 positive, true negative and false negative, respectively. The
C. Comparison With Other Methods proposed IFCBLN method was experimentally conducted on
 To comprehensively evaluate our proposed method, we the CPU platform. SVM and Naive Bayes algorithms were
compared IFCBLN with traditional ML algorithms and the also tested on CPU platforms. Due to its deep network struclatest DL algorithms. As follows: ture and feedback mechanism, deep learning algorithms have
 • SVM and Naive Bayes algorithms are ML-based algo- excellent classification performance. But the disadvantage is
 rithms that use statistical features for network traffic that the training time is long. In Table II, the training time
 classification. of all algorithms is shown. The training time of the CL-ETC
 • CL-ETC [24], RVCNN [25] and CVCNN [25]are DL algorithm is significantly longer than that of the algorithm
 based algorithms that are all based on CNN [56], [57] proposed in this paper, and its classification accuracy is not as
 and improved upon. They have strong feature extraction high as the proposed algorithm on both datasets. The RVCNN
 capabilities in both CV and national language processing and CVCNN algorithms consist of 8 convolutional layers
 (NLP) fields. and 9 convolutional layers, respectively. This means that its
 We use accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores to compare training time is greatly increased, and the fact is the same.
with the comparison algorithms. These indicators can be Their training time is much longer than that of IFCBLN. The
represented as follows: algorithms proposed in this article are IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN,
 and IFCFEBLN. They only account for 0.26%, 0.55%, and
 TP + TN 0.48% of the training time of CVCNN, respectively, in the
 Accuracy = (29a) 20 classification tasks of the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. Among
 TP + TN + FP + FN
2436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE II
 C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD OF IFCBLN AND C OMPARED M ETHODS

the 10 benign traffic classification tasks, they only account
for 0.28%, 0.61%, and 0.5% of the training time of CVCNN.
Among the 10 malicious traffic classification tasks, they
only account for 0.23%, 0.48%, and 0.41% of the training
time of CVCNN. In the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, IFCFBLN,
IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN account for 0.41%, 0.6%, and
1.54% of the training time of CVCNN. In the USTC-
TFC2016 dataset, parameter configurations for IFCFEBLN
and IFCEBLN models are largely consistent. Specifically, the
cascade of feature mapping nodes, which involves minimal
parameters, has negligible impact on runtime. However, the
enhancement nodes contain more parameters, contributing
significantly to computational time. Variations in CPU usage
during experiments caused fluctuations of 10-30 seconds in
training time between trials, affecting consistency between
the two models. To address this, additional experiments were Fig. 9. Train time of all algorithms in USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016
conducted under stable CPU conditions, revealing that the datasets.
training times for IFCFEBLN and IFCEBLN were effectively identical, as expected, given their similar parameter
configurations. Moreover, the cascading of feature mapping
nodes preserves the weights from preceding nodes, reducing
computational overhead.
 To intuitively demonstrate the time advantage of the
proposed algorithms, we use horizontal bar charts to describe
the training and testing time in the USTC-TFC2016 and
ISCXVPN2016 datasets. We use a logarithmic scale, which
can better reflect the data. Among them, the training time is
shown in Fig. 9, and the testing time is shown in Fig. 10.
From them, it can be seen that compared to deep learning
algorithms, the proposed broad learning algorithms have significant advantages.
 The accuracy results of IFCBLN and comparison algorithms
on the USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016 datasets are
shown in Fig. 11. The accuracy of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and Fig. 10. Test time of all algorithms in USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016
IFCFEBLN is significantly higher than SVM and Naive Bayes. datasets.
Although Naive Bayes has low computational overhead, its
classification accuracy is significantly poor. Compared with
RVCNN and CVCNN, our method has an accuracy difference we also evaluate the proposed IFCBLN using three metrics:
of within 1% in the 10 benign traffic classification tasks in precision (PC), recall (RC) and f1 score (F1). The PR,
the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. In the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, RC, and F1 of the proposed algorithm and the comparison
IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieved accuracies algorithms are presented in Table IV on the USTC-TFC2016
of 90.93%, 90.887%, and 90.824%, respectively. Better than dataset. The PR, RC and F1 of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset
the 89.21% accuracy of CVCNN. Slightly inferior to the are shown in Table III. Especially in the ISCXVPN2016
92.89% accuracy of RVCNN. In addition to testing accuracy, dataset, our proposed IFCBLN algorithm outperforms all five
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2437

 TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN IFCBLN ON ISCXVPN2016

 Fig. 12. Results of mask testing in USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

Fig. 11. Performance of IFCBLN and compared methods.

algorithms in terms of three metrics. However, the IFCFEBLN
method, with its more complex parameters, risks overfitting
by capturing noise and specific patterns in the training data.
This leads to solid performance on the training set but
reduced generalization on the test set, weakening the ability
of the model to identify certain class samples and lowering Fig. 13. Results of mask testing in ISCXVPN2016 dataset.
recall. Additionally, complex models are prone to finding local
optima in high-dimensional spaces, which can increase class
confusion, causing samples from smaller classes to be misclassified as larger ones, thereby raising false negatives and further
reducing recall. For example, in tasks involving malicious D. Mask Testing
traffic or radiation source detection, similar patterns across Due to the actual network environment and various encrypcertain categories may lead to misclassification. Furthermore, tion methods, the network data used is not complete. This is a
class imbalance is more pronounced in complex models, where challenge for proposed algorithm models. Therefore, based on
the model may prioritize majority classes to improve accuracy the above actual situation, we use mask testing to simulate the
while neglecting minority classes, further diminishing recall actual network environment. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset,
for underrepresented categories. Meanwhile, we compare the we masked 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 30% of the test
computational complexity and parameters of the DL model data to complete the masking test. Due to the inclusion of
with the proposed methods. mask testing, this poses a challenge to the generalization
 The computational complexity and parameter count of the ability of the algorithm model. The generalization ability of
proposed algorithm and deep learning model are presented in ML is far inferior to DL, so the proposed method is only
Table V. The testing time for our algorithm is slower than compared with three DL algorithms: CL-ETC, RVCNN, and
other models because deep learning models typically run on CVCNN. The results show in Fig. 12 that the accuracy of
GPUs, while ours runs on CPUs. Although training on CPUs IFCFBLN and IFCEBLN is all due to the comparison of the
offers some advantages, our approach faces drawbacks during three algorithms under different scale masks. The accuracy
testing due to the GPU-optimized operations of PyTorch and of IFCFEBLN is inferior to that of CVCNN at 15%, and
the speed of GPU-based matrix computations. We have now it is also better than the three algorithms compared in other
deployed testing on GPUs using the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, cases. In addition, in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, we masked
reducing the testing time to about 1 second. However, since 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 30% of the test data. Proposed
some modules remain on CPUs, further optimization is still algorithms also performed well, and the results are shown in
possible. Fig. 13.
2438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN IFCBLN ON USTC-TFC2016

 TABLE V
 C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY AND PARAMETERS OF DL AND THE [5] G. Gui, M. Liu, F. Tang, N. Kato, and F. Adachi, “6G: Opening new
 P ROPOSED M ETHODS horizons for integration of comfort, security, and intelligence,” IEEE
 Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 126–132, Oct. 2020.
 [6] C. Lee, H. Nam, D. Kim, S. Kim, and D. Lee, “A D-band variable
 gain low noise amplifier in a 28-nm CMOS process for 6G wireless
 communications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 71,
 no. 1, pp. 131–135, Jan. 2024.
 [7] H. Qi, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Wang, and T. Qiu, “A blockchain-driven IIoT
 traffic classification service for edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things
 J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2124–2134, Feb. 2021.
 [8] B. Kang, D. Kim, and H. Choo, “Internet of Everything: A large-scale
 autonomic IoT gateway,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. 3,
 no. 3, pp. 206–214, Jul. 2017.
 [9] J. Li, W. Liang, W. Xu, Z. Xu, Y. Li, and X. Jia, “Service home identification of multiple-source IoT applications in edge computing,” IEEE
 Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1417–1430, Mar./Apr. 2023.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [10] S. Pokhrel, H. Vu, and A. Cricenti, “Adaptive admission control for
 This paper proposed the IFCBLN method for MTC prob- IoT applications in home Wi-Fi networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput.,
 vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2731–2742, Dec. 2020.
lems, which can be quickly trained on CPU platforms. The
 [11] Z. Li, T. Sen, H. Shen, and M. Chuah, “A study on the impact of memory
proposed method, based on the basic BLN, solved the problem DoS attacks on cloud applications and exploring real-time detection
of identifying encrypted malicious traffic by cascading feature schemes,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1644–1658,
mapping nodes and enhancement nodes in multiple ways, Aug. 2022.
 [12] M. Al-Hisnawi and M. Ahmadi, “Deep packet inspection using quotient
as well as adding image processing nodes. The proposed filter,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 2217–2220, Nov. 2016.
methods achieved good results. This algorithm was compared [13] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
with classical ML algorithms and advanced DL, and com- autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024.
pared through multiple metrics. This further demonstrated
 [14] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
the excellent performance of IFCBLN. It also eliminated the robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
limitations of GPU, making it more convenient to deploy on no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
MTC devices. The experimental results show that our proposed [15] S. Zhu, X. Xu, J. Zhao, and F. Xiao, “LKD-STNN: A lightweight malicious traffic detection method for Internet of Things based on knowledge
method performed well. In the subsequent process, we would distillation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 6438–6453,
further improve the connection method of the network model Feb. 2024.
to accelerate the model’s training time. We would also search [16] Z. Xu, X. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Towards persistent detection of DDoS
 attacks in NDN: A sketch-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
for stronger feature extraction methods as better incremental Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3449–3465, Jul./Aug. 2023.
nodes. [17] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A
 channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
 2023.
 R EFERENCES
 [18] Y. Shi, X. Zhang, Z. He, and J. Yang, “A novel malware traffic clas-
 [1] Y. Zhang, G. Gui, and S. Mao, “A lightweight malware traffic classi- sification method based on differentiable architecture search,” in Proc.
 fication method based on a broad learning architecture,” IEEE Internet IEEE 96th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), London, U.K., Sep. 2022,
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 23, pp. 21131–21132, Dec. 2023. pp. 1–5.
 [2] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths: [19] A. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traffic:
 Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans. Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network traf-
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022. fic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
 [3] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C. Xu, “A novel multimodal pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM [20] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Sustaining the high performance of AI-based
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023. network traffic classification models,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 [4] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN: no. 2, pp. 816–827, Apr. 2023.
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” [21] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538, of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
 Sep./Oct. 2022. memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC 2439

[22] Y. Lin, M. Wang, X. Zhou, G. Ding, and S. Mao “Dynamic spectrum [41] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
 interaction of UAV flight formation communication with priority: A deep the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things
 reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput.
 vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 892–903, Sep. 2020. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019.
[23] Y. Lin, Y. Tu, Z. Dou, L. Chen, and S. Mao, “Contour stella image and [42] S. Chebrolu, A. Abraham, and J. P. Thomas, “Feature deduction and
 deep learning for signal recognition in the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. ensemble design of intrusion detection systems,” Comput. Security,
 Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 34–46, Mar. 2021. vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 295–307, 2005.
[24] Z. Zhao, Y. Guo, J. Wang, H. Wang, C. Zhang, and C. An, “CL-ETC: A [43] S. Datta, A. Kotha, U. Venkanna, and K. M. Rao, “XNetIoT: An extreme
 contrastive learning method for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. quantized neural network architecture for IoT environment using
 IFIP Netw. Conf., Catania, Italy, 2022, pp. 1–9. P4,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 5756–5767,
[25] Y. Wang, G. Gui, H. Gacanin, T. Ohtsuki, O. Dobre, and H. Poor, Oct. 2024.
 “An efficient specific emitter identification method based on complex- [44] S. Jorgensen, J. Holodnak, J. Dempsey, K. Souza, A. Raghunath, and
 valued neural networks and network compression,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas V. Rivet, “Extensible machine learning for encrypted network traffic
 Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2305–2317, Aug. 2021. application labeling via uncertainty quantification,” IEEE Trans. Artif.
[26] C. Chen and Z. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective and efficient Intell., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 420–433, Jan. 2024.
 incremental learning system without the need for deep architecture,” [45] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 10–24, Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
 Jan. 2018. network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Services Manag., vol. 21,
[27] C. Chen, Z. Liu, and S. Feng, “Universal approximation capability of no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
 broad learning system and its structural variations,” IEEE Trans. Neural [46] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classi-
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1191–1204, Apr. 2019. fication: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
[28] S. Feng and C. Chen, “Fuzzy broad learning system: A novel neuro- Serv. Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
 fuzzy model for regression and classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., [47] K. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
 vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 414–424, Feb. 2020. “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification based on
[29] X. Gong, T. Zhang, C. Chen, and Z. Liu, “Research review for broad masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
 learning system: Algorithms, theory, and applications,” IEEE Trans. pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
 Cybern., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 8922–8950, Sep. 2022. [48] X. Zhang, Q. Wang, M. Qin, Y. Wang, T. Ohtsuki, and B. Adebisi,
[30] H. Zhao, J. Zheng, W. Deng, and Y. Song, “Semi-supervised broad “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via integrating knowllearning system based on manifold regularization and broad network,” edge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Pap., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 983–994, Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
 Mar. 2020. [49] X. Xu et al., “Advancing malware detection in network traffic with
[31] X. Yuan, J. Chen, N. Zhang, X. Fang, and D. Liu, “A federated self-paced class incremental learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 bidirectional connection broad learning scheme for secure data sharing no. 12, pp. 21816–21826, Jun. 2024.
 in Internet of Vehicles,” China Commun., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 117–133, [50] W. Ge, Z. Cui, J. Wang, B. Tang, and X. Li, “MetaCluster:
 Jul. 2021. A universal interpretable classification framework for cybersecu-
[32] X. Wang, Y. Zhu, S. Han, L. Yang, H. Gu, and F. Wang, “Fast and rity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 3829–3843,
 progressive misbehavior detection in Internet of Vehicles based on broad 2024.
 learning and incremental learning systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., [51] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, L. Zhao, P. Zeng, and J. Zhao, “Scanner-hunter: An
 vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4788–4798, Mar. 2022. effective ICS scanning group identification system,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
[33] S. Han, K. Zhu, M. Zhou, and X. Liu, “Evolutionary weighted broad Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 3077–3092, 2024.
 learning and its application to fault diagnosis in self-organizing cel- [52] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
 lular networks,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3035–3047, “An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for
 May 2023. secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
[34] Y. Zhang, Y. Peng, J. Sun, G. Gui, Y. Lin, and S. Mao, “GPU- pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024.
 free specific emitter identification using signal feature embedded broad [53] M. He, Y. Huang, X. Wang, P. Wei, and X. Wang, “A lightweight
 learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 13028–13039, and efficient IoT intrusion detection method based on feature
 Jul. 2023. grouping,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2935–2949,
[35] G. Liu, W. Shen, L. Gao, and A. Kusiak, “Active broad-transfer learning Jan. 2024.
 algorithm for class-imbalanced fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. [54] M. Lin, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. Chen, “Hybrid ensemble
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–16, Jan. 2023. broad learning system for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
[36] P. Li, B. Sheng, and C. Chen, “Face sketch synthesis using regularized Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5622–5633, Apr. 2024.
 broad learning system,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, [55] G. Draper-Gil, A. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani,
 no. 10, pp. 5346–5360, Oct. 2022. “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
[37] Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Luo, and Y. Chen, “A cognitive feature features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2016,
 extracting method for space target,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote pp. 407–414.
 Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), Beijing, China, 2016, pp. 3148–3151. [56] Y. Tu, Y. Lin, C. Hou, and S. Mao, “Complex-valued networks for
[38] Y. Lin, Y. Tu, and Z. Dou, “An improved neural network pruning automatic modulation classification,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69,
 technology for automatic modulation classification in edge devices,” no. 9, pp. 10085–10089, Sep. 2020.
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5703–5706, May 2020. [57] Y. Lin, H. Zhao, X. Ma, Y. Tu, and M. Wang, “Adversarial attacks
[39] Y. Tu, Y. Lin, J. Wang, and J. U. Kim, “Semi-supervised learning with in modulation recognition with convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
 generative adversarial networks on digital signal modulation classifica- Trans. Rel., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 389–401, Jan. 2020.
 tion,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 243–254, Feb. 2018. [58] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
[40] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz, and M. E. Karsligil, classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 “Application identification via network traffic classification,” in Proc. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan. 2017, pp. 843–848. 2017, pp. 712–717.