2768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 A Cloud Collaborative-Based Intrusion Detection
 and Prevention System for IVN
 Sifan Li , Yue Cao , Senior Member, IEEE, Yu’ang Zhang, Tongxin Liao ,
 Fei Yan , and Hai Lin , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With the increasing intelligence and convenience of
modern vehicles, Internet-of-Vehicle (IoV) technology plays a pivotal role in driving these advancements. While IoV enhances user
services, it also introduces security threats, particularly intrusions
into the In-Vehicle Network (IVN). Attackers can exploit onboard
external network interfaces, posing risks to vehicle safety and
operation. Besides, deploying an Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) on vehicles with limited computational resources exacerbates the computational burden. To address these challenges, this
paper proposes a Cloud Collaborative-based Intrusion Detection
and Prevention System (CC-IDPS). Firstly, this study analyzes
existing in-vehicle intrusion detection datasets and, combined
with real in-vehicle/simulation data, constructs the In-vehicle
Attack Dataset (IVAD). Secondly, the CC-IDPS employs a
sliding window approach for feature extraction from multiple Fig. 1. Illustration of Typical Vehicle Attacks.
Controller Area Network (CAN) IDs, and leverages Bidirectional
Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT) models for
in-vehicle traffic classification. Based on classification results, the networks provide numerous connectivity interfaces to meet
CC-IDPS applies treatments to in-vehicle traffic. Subsequently, diverse application and service requirements [3]. Coupled
the proposed Encode2ID algorithm encodes and stores malicious with inherent vulnerabilities in IVNs, intelligent vehicles are
traffic in the database of cloud, facilitating subsequent model
training. Experimental results demonstrate that, when applied to susceptible to various potential network security loopholes [4].
the IVAD dataset, the model exhibits lower detection accuracy These security vulnerabilities provide opportunities for cyber
and F1-score compared to other datasets. Notably, the CC-IDPS attackers. As shown in Fig. 1, external attackers exploit
outperforms other machine learning and deep learning models remote service vulnerabilities provided by Original Equipment
in detecting performance on the IVAD dataset. Manufacturers (OEMs) to launch remote attacks on vehicles.
 Index Terms—IVN, CAN, IDPS, BERT, cloud. Internal attackers can directly target the IVN by physically
 connecting through the On-Board Diagnostics-II (OBD-II)
 port. Their goal is to breach IVNs by exploiting potential
 I. I NTRODUCTION entry points, aiming to gain control of the vehicle or steal
 ITH the development of intelligent networking personal information from the owner, resulting in diverse
W and autonomous driving technologies, vehicles have
evolved from simple transportation tools into mobile intelinformation security concerns. These security threats not
 only jeopardize passenger safety but also encompass risks of
ligent systems [1]. Modern vehicles not only offer a privacy breaches [5].
more intelligent driving experience, but also feature highly In recent years, security incidents within the realm of
interconnected In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs) [2]. These IVNs have garnered significant attention. In 2022, German
 technology security expert David Colombo highlighted on
 Received 23 May 2024; revised 3 September 2024 and 6 November 2024; Twitter a software vulnerability he discovered within Tesla’s
accepted 3 December 2024. Date of publication 11 December 2024; date of systems. This vulnerability enabled remote access to 25 Tesla
current version 8 August 2025. This work is supported in part by National
Key Research and Development Program of China (2024YFB3108400), Hubei vehicles across 13 countries, allowing for a series of actions
Province Major Science and Technology Innovation Program (2024BAA011), including remotely opening doors and windows, starting the
and Wuhan AI Innovation Program (2023010402040020). The associate editor vehicle, and disabling the security systems [6]. In 2017,
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
J. Xu. (Corresponding author: Yue Cao.) researchers Daan Keuper and Thijs Alkemade from the Dutch
 Sifan Li, Yue Cao, Yu’ang Zhang, Fei Yan, and Hai Lin are cybersecurity firm Computest conducted an investigation on
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, various models of Volkswagen and Audi vehicles, uncover-
Wuhan 430000, China (e-mail: sifan.li@whu.edu.cn; yue.cao@whu.edu.cn;
yuang.zhang@whu.edu.cn; yanfei@whu.edu.cn; lin.hai@whu.edu.cn). ing remote exploitation vulnerabilities within their in-vehicle
 Tongxin Liao is with the Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet infotainment systems [7]. Attackers gained access to the
Technology, School of Electronic Information and Communication, Huazhong infotainment system via the in-vehicle Wi-Fi device, and
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
liaotongxin@hust.edu.cn). exploited vulnerabilities within the infotainment system to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3516052 send Controller Area Network (CAN) messages to the CAN
 2332-7731 
 c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2769

bus, ultimately gaining control over devices such as the central model to vehicles for detection. The detection model
screen, speakers, and microphone. of this system primarily employs Bidirectional Encoder
 Security issues concerning IVNs require solutions to safe- Representation from Transformers (BERT) for classifyguard vehicle systems from potential network threats [8]. As ing the traffic under inspection. Subsequently, based on
one of the most effective solutions at present, although tra- the classification results, vehicles undertake appropriate
ditional machine learning-based Intrusion Detection Systems actions to defend against the malicious traffic.
(IDSs) (like [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]) perform well in detect- • This study enhances the BERT model for IVN intrusion
ing known Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks, their performance detection by adapting it to process serialized IVN data,
is unsatisfactory when faced with complex attacks such as effectively transforming features like message IDs and
fuzzy and spoof attacks [14]. These IDSs are constrained payload contents into a suitable input format. By leverby the limited computational resources within vehicles, thus aging the Masked Language Model (MLM), the model
exhibiting certain limitations. For example, these IDSs are captures contextual relationships between adjacent CAN
difficult to adapt to dynamically changing network threats and traffic, aiding in the classification of traffic as malicious or
may fail to detect sophisticated attack behaviors. As a result, benign. Additionally, the activation function of the output
there is an urgent call for a more comprehensive and innovative layer is adjusted to a sigmoid function, ensuring compatsecurity framework to enhance IVN security. ibility with the binary classification objective aimed at
 Simultaneously, training models for in-vehicle IDSs rely on detecting malicious traffic.
datasets. However, due to privacy and confidentiality concerns • Finally, due to the evolving nature of network attacks,
in vehicle data, the majority of vehicle manufacturers do the CC-IDPS requires periodic database updates to train
not publicly disclose in-vehicle intrusion datasets [14]. This new detection models. However, during the process of
limitation results in a scarcity of publicly available datasets, feeding malicious traffic back to the cloud server, there
with Hacking and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL) might be instances of redundant storage. To address this
datasets being the primary source. Although the HCRL has issue, the CC-IDPS involves an Encode2ID algorithm to
amassed a considerable volume of data from real in-vehicle encode malicious traffic, generating a unique ID for each.
environments, each individual dataset is limited in its coverage As a result of the Encode2ID algorithm, the generated
of attack types and quantity. This limitation makes current strings occupy less space compared to before, thereby
datasets insufficient to comprehensively cover the diverse saving storage space and reducing non-repetitive comparsecurity threats and attack scenarios of IVNs. ison time. Furthermore, the proposed StoreEventID and
 To address these issues, this paper aims to construct a VehicleDetection algorithms not only update the database
new dataset by leveraging both public datasets and data to counter novel attacks, but also drop malicious traffic
collected from real/simulated environments. Additionally, this for defensive measures.
paper seeks to explore and design a Cloud Collaborative-based The remaining structure of this paper is as follows:
Intrusion Detection and Prevention System (CC-IDPS). By Section VII enumerates related works on in-vehicle IDSs.
fully harnessing the resources of cloud computing platforms Section II introduces the in-vehicle CAN bus and its associated
and employing collaborative defense mechanisms, this study attacks. The specific construction process of the IVAD dataset
aims to develop a novel IDPS to counter the increasingly is outlined in Section III. The proposed CC-IDPS framework
complex and diverse network threats faced by IVNs. The and experimental evaluations are presented in Sections IV
primary innovations of this paper are as follows: and V, respectively. Section VIII provides a conclusion for
 • To address the limited variety and quantity of attacks this paper.
 in existing datasets, this paper consolidates HCRL’s
 Car Hacking Dataset (CHD) [15], the Survival Analysis
 II. BACKGROUND
 Dataset (SAD) [16], and data collected from real invehicle/simulation environments. This integration results A. In-Vehicle CAN Bus
 in the development of an In-Vehicle Attack Dataset The CAN is a crucial network architecture used for com-
 (IVAD).1 Due to the broad sources of IVAD and its munication and data transmission among various Electronic
 relatively unfruitful features, it presents considerable Control Units (ECUs) within the internal control area of intellichallenges for subsequent deep learning model detection. gent vehicle [17]. The CAN bus plays a pivotal role in modern
 To tackle this issue, the paper employs a sliding window vehicles, facilitating real-time data exchange and collaboration
 mechanism to extract the CAN ID field of each traf- among different internal vehicle systems. Furthermore, the
 fic within the corresponding window size, subsequently layout design of the CAN bus holds critical significance in
 incorporating these CAN IDs as features of adjacent modern vehicles, determining the communication method and
 traffic into the current flow. data exchange pathways among the vehicle’s internal systems.
 • To address the limitations of in-vehicle IDSs due to the 1) The Network Topology of CAN Bus: Common layouts
 restricted computational resources within vehicles, this for the CAN bus currently include star, bus, and hybrid
 paper proposes the CC-IDPS. It conducts model training topologies. In a star topology, individual control units are
 tasks on cloud servers, and subsequently distributes the directly connected to the main control unit via a hub or switch.
 The bus topology involves connecting various control units
 1 https://github.com/yuecao871441562/IVAD through a single bus, facilitating data transmission on the bus.
2770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

The hybrid topology combines aspects of both star and bus
topologies, employing a specific structure to balance system
stability and data transmission efficiency.
 2) Main Control Unit (MCU): In the CAN bus, there are
typically one or multiple MCUs responsible for coordinating
and managing the entire CAN bus system. The MCUs usually
serve as the central processor of vehicle, tasked with controlling data flow, allocating network resources, and managing the
priority of data transmission[18].
 3) Data Transmission Protocol: The CAN bus employs a
specific communication protocol, known as the CAN protocol,
for data transmission and communication. The CAN protocol
operates at two different speeds: standard CAN (typically at
250 kbit/s) and high-speed CAN (typically at 500 kbit/s or
higher rates). These protocols define the format of message
transmission, the structure of data packets, and transmission
rates, ensuring reliable data transmission on the bus [19].
 4) ECU: In the CAN bus, each control unit is referred as
a CAN node or ECU. These nodes can encompass various
control units for different vehicle systems, such as the engine
control unit, brake control unit, air condition control unit,
among others. Each ECU is capable of sending and receiving
data via the CAN bus to facilitate communication with other
systems.
 5) Message ID (CAN ID): Data transmission on the CAN
bus is identified and differentiated through message IDs. Each
data packet sent to the CAN bus contains a unique ID that
signifies the type of data packet and its sender. Such a design
ensures that data transmitted between different systems on the
bus can be accurately identified and processed.
 6) Data Frame Structure: Data transmission on the CAN
bus relies on data frame structures, categorized into standard
frames and extended frames. Standard frames comprise an
11-bit message ID, while extended frames utilize a 29-bit
message ID, allowing for a larger address space for message
differentiation. The data frame structure also consists of data
fields, control fields, and Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC)
verification fields, ensuring data integrity and accuracy.

B. In-Vehicle Attack Fig. 2. In-vehicle Attacks.

 As depicted in Fig. 2, there are nine primary attacks posing
threats to the IVN. DoS and randomized DoS attacks primarily communication buses or systems, leading to malfunctions
target the Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) or unresponsiveness in critical vehicle components, such as
and ECU systems, while fuzzy and intermittent masquerade infotainment systems and climate control.
attacks are primarily directed towards the Anti-lock Brake 2) Fuzzy Attack: A fuzzy attack involves exploiting uncer-
System (ABS) and airbag systems. Gear attacks predominantly tainties in the data received by the in-vehicle sensors or control
aim at the ABS and Body Control Module (BCM) systems, systems. Attackers manipulate sensor inputs to introduce
while Revolutions Per Minute (RPM) attacks mainly focus on ambiguity and confusion into the vehicle’s decision-making
the ECU and instrument cluster. Malfunction attacks primarily processes. Fuzzy attacks can manifest in various ways, one
target ABS and BCM systems, which is the same as gear spoof of which is injecting random or ambiguous data, such as
attacks. Replay attacks have a broad attack surface, affecting random IDs with unpredictable payloads. The idea behind a
messages flowing through the CAN bus. fuzzy attack is to exploit the lack of precise and unambiguous
 1) DoS Attack: In this attack, malicious attackers aim to information in the data flow, which can lead to erratic behavior
disrupt the normal operation of a vehicle’s interior electronic in the vehicle’s control systems. These attacks can potentially
systems. This attack typically entails sending messages with- compromise the security of the vehicle by creating confusion
out specifying valid CAN IDs or frequently changing the or misinterpretation of sensor data.
CAN ID, which can severely compromise the integrity of 3) Gear Spoof Attack: Attackers can manipulate data from
the IVN. Such actions may result in overloading the internal vehicle sensors or ECUs, deceiving the control systems and
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2771

displaying incorrect gear lever positions, leading to inaccurate
shifting or speed indications. Such attacks may result in the
display of false gear lever positions, misleading drivers, and
potentially causing accidents or discomfort during driving.
 4) RPM Spoof Attack: Attackers manipulate data from
vehicle sensors or ECUs to transmit false tachometer
information to the control system, misleading the actual engine
speed. This action might result in the vehicle displaying
incorrect engine speed information, disrupting the ability of
driver to make accurate driving judgments and potentially
creating safety hazards.
 5) Malfunction Attack: Attackers maliciously manipulate
commands or data within control units, leading to malevolent Fig. 3. Real Data Collection.
manipulation of the control system, which can result in system
malfunctions or incorrect operations. Malfunction attacks can
potentially disable critical vehicle systems such as engine develop and evaluate IDS that can identify malicious activities
start/stop functions, brake system malfunctions, posing a threat in the CAN.
to both vehicle and passenger safety. 2) Survival Analysis Dataset (SAD): The SAD [16] from
 6) Replay Attack: Attackers intercept previously valid the HCRL is designed to support the development and evalcommunication data packets and resend them to the system uation of intrusion detection methods for IVN. It includes
to deceive it into performing the same operations. This action data from three different attack scenarios: flooding, fuzzy, and
may result in the system executing repeated instructions or malfunction, each of which poses a significant threat to vehicle
data packets multiple times, potentially causing system state functionality. The data was collected from multiple vehicles,
confusion or unpredictable behavior. with normal driving data captured alongside attack. For the
 7) Intermittent Masquerade Attack: An Intermittent attack scenarios, messages were injected at specific intervals
Masquerade Attack in IVNs involves an attacker occasionally (e.g., every 20 seconds for 5 seconds) to simulate real-world
impersonating a legitimate node at irregular intervals to avoid intrusion attempts. The SAD [16] includes attributes such as
detection. The attacker varies the message IDs and timing to Timestamp, CAN ID, DLC, and Flag (indicating normal or
mimic normal traffic patterns, making the attack sporadic and injected messages), which are used to analyze the impact
challenging to identify. of these attacks on the IVN. This dataset is essential for
 8) Combination Attack: A combination attack in IVNs developing models that can detect and mitigate these attacks,
involves blending two or more attack types, such as DoS, offering valuable insights into enhancing vehicle security and
replay, fuzzy, and spoof, to create a more sophisticated threat. driver safety.
By mixing these attacks, the goal is to confuse the IDS and
exploit multiple vulnerabilities simultaneously. III. IVAD C ONSTRUCTION
 9) Randomized DoS Attack: Instead of using a constant As existing in-vehicle intrusion detection datasets have
flooding technique, the attacker sends bursts of data packets limited diversity and a small scale of attack types, coupled
at random intervals with varying payload sizes and message with the lack of standardized data formats and labeling
IDs to overwhelm the network or specific ECUs. This unpre- methods among different datasets, there is an urgent need for
dictability makes it harder to detect using simple rate-based a larger-scale dataset encompassing a wider array of attack
or pattern-matching algorithms. types, unified labeling, and standardized data formats. The
 IVAD dataset presented in this paper precisely meets these
C. In-Vehicle Dataset requirements. It is primarily composed of data collected from
 real and simulated environments, supplemented by datasets
 1) Car Hacking Dataset (CHD): The CHD [15] from the
 from the HCRL, including the CHD [15] and SAD [16].
HCRL provides valuable data for automotive cybersecurity
research, specifically for detecting and mitigating attacks on
IVNs. The CHD [15] includes various types of message injec- A. Data Collection and Processing
tion attacks, such as DoS, fuzzy, and spoofing attacks targeting The core of IVAD was collected from the real Smart #1
the RPM and gear system. These attacks were conducted on vehicle. As depicted in Fig. 3, a laptop was connected to the
a real vehicle, with CAN traffic being logged through the OBD-II port via CANalyst-II. The CANalyst-II device is a
OBD-II port during the attacks. Each attack scenario contains professional CAN bus analyzer that enables real-time monitor-
300 instances of message injection, with each attack lasting ing and analysis of CAN bus traffic. In our experimental setup,
between 3 to 5 seconds, and the total recorded data spans 30 to we utilized the CANalyst-II to capture CAN bus messages
40 minutes of CAN traffic. The CHD [15] includes attributes during normal vehicle operation and during simulated attack
like Timestamp, CAN ID, DLC (Data Length Code), DATA scenarios. The device allows us to analyze the captured traffic
(byte values), and Flag to distinguish between normal and to identify patterns indicative of various attacks, such as replay,
injected messages. This dataset is designed to help researchers fuzzy, and DoS attacks. Regarding the implementation of
2772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
different attacks, we simulated various attack scenarios by C LASSIFICATION OF IVAD
injecting malicious CAN messages into the CAN bus using
custom-built scripts and tools. The specific descriptions of the
attacks are as follows:
 • DoS attack: Inject 587,521 blank messages with both
 CAN ID and DATA set to 0 every 0.1 milliseconds.
 • Randomized DoS attack: Inject 100,000 blank messages
 with both CAN ID and DATA set to 0 randomly.
 • Combination attack: Randomly mix 50,000 replay messages (with slightly modified CAN IDs to simulate
 legitimate traffic) and 30,000 fuzzy messages (malformed
 CAN messages with random data fields) before injecting
 them into the CAN bus.
 • Intermittent Masquerade attack: Begin by sending 20,000 there are 2542535 instances of normal traffic, 587521 instances
 crafted messages with valid CAN IDs and slightly altered of DoS attack traffic, 100000 instances of randomized DoS
 data fields to mimic typical network traffic. Wait for attack traffic, 80000 instances of combination attack traffic,
 a random interval between 2 to 5 minutes, then inject 30000 instances of intermittent masquerade attack traffic,
 another set of 10,000 messages, varying both the message 590531 instances of fuzzy attack traffic, 96357 instances of
 frequency and content to avoid detection. replay attack traffic, 597252 instances of gear spoof attack
 • Fuzzy attack: Inject messages of totally random CAN ID traffic, 654897 instances of RPM spoof attack traffic, and
 and DATA values every 0.1 milliseconds. 15974 instances of malfunction attack traffic.
 • Replay attack: Replay the data packets captured in the
 previous 10 seconds every 20 seconds.
 To enhance the variety of attacks in the IVAD, spoof attacks C. Features
such as gear/RPM from the CHD [15] and malfunction attacks After data preprocessing, the retained features in IVAD are
from the SAD [16] were extracted and incorporated into IVAD. CANID, Data [0-7], and Label, which hold the following
The malfunction attack data extracted from the SAD [16] specific meanings:
mainly comes from HYUNDAI YF Sonata, KIA Soul, and 1) CAN ID: The ID segment carries information about the
CHEVROLET Spark vehicles, while the attack data extracted source and priority of a message. It distinguishes different
from the CHD [15] only comes from Hyundai’s YF Sonata. types of messages and facilitates message filtering.
Furthermore, to align with the cloud-vehicle collaborative 2) Data[0-7]: The Data segment contains the actual paydetection environment, we collected data (include normal, DoS load or information that is being transmitted. This segment
attack, fuzzy attack, masquerade attack, combination attack can vary in size, depending on the DLC value specified in the
and replay attack) from a cloud-vehicle collaborative simula- previous segment.
tion environment. This simulation environment is composed 3) Label: The label of the traffic is used to differentiate
of a cloud server and multiple virtual machines (details in whether the flow is malicious or not. Here, ‘1’ represents a
subsequent Section V). malicious message while ‘0’ represents a normal message.
 Since IVAD requires a uniform labeling and data format,
the compiled IVAD undergoes standardized preprocessing.
Initially, the annotation format of the ‘label’ column is IV. P ROPOSED CC-IDPS F RAMEWORK
standardized (1 representing malicious traffic and 0 repre- The CC-IDPS is an efficient protective mechanism designed
senting normal traffic). Also, missing values are removed. to address the security challenges faced by smart vehicles. The
Subsequently, hexadecimal data is converted to decimal form design of this system framework aims to leverage the advanfor subsequent computations using the following formula: tages of cloud computing by centrally processing data from
 multiple IVNs, thereby enhancing the efficiency, accuracy, and
 y = hex _to_dec(f ) (1) real-time capability of intrusion detection and prevention [20].
 The overall framework and general steps of CC-IDPS are
f represents the hexadecimal data to be converted,
 illustrated in Fig. 4, which mainly comprises the following
hex_to_dec() is the function to convert hexadecimal to dectwo entities:
imal, and y denotes the corresponding decimal data after
 • Cloud Server: The cloud server is one of the core
conversion. Finally, this study applies Z-score normalization
 components of this framework, primarily responsible for
techniques to standardize the CAN messages across different
 tasks such as data collection and preprocessing, model
vehicle types. This regularization helps in minimizing the
 training, model distribution, and storing malicious data.
impact of protocol differences on the performance of models.
 • Vehicles: At the vehicle end, the primary responsibilities
 include data uploading, model loading and detecting, and
B. Traffic Classification corresponding defensive operations.
 As shown in Table I, the total number of flows in IVAD is The detection process of CC-IDPS can be divided into four
5295067, mainly categorized into seven types. Among these, major blocks: cloud-based data collection and processing,
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2773

Fig. 4. The Framework of CC-IDPS.

feature engineering, BERT model detection, and feedback with alphabet (line 6-8). An id is created using characters from the
defense. alphabet. It appends these characters to the ret list. During
 character addition, specific letters are added to ret according
 to certain rules (line 10-15), and a shuffle operation is applied
A. Cloud-Based Data Collection to the alphabet (line 16). Finally, the characters in the ret list
 This system initially achieves centralized collection and are concatenated into a string named id (line 18). If the length
processing of IVN data through cloud infrastructure. Each of the generated id is less than the defined minimum length
vehicle uploads IVN data to the cloud server via an (min_length), padding is applied to ensure the id meets the
Internet connection. These data may include information minimum length requirement (line 19-25).
from various vehicle communication buses such as the To further analyze the data and train models, it is necessary
Body-CAN (B-CAN), Multimedia-CAN (M-CAN), and Cabin to extract data from the malicious traffic database for decoding
Communication bus [21]. As the initial cloud server does operations. The primary algorithm used for decoding, referred
not contain data, the CC-IDPS employs the aforementioned to as DecodeID, is illustrated in Algorithm 2. The Algorithm 2
IVAD to train the initial models. Additionally, due to the first defines an empty list traffic to store the decoded list of
substantial volume of collected data, the CC-IDPS optimizes integers. If the input id is an empty string, it directly returns
storage space by storing only malicious traffic. Moreover, an empty list of integers, traffic (line 2-4). It checks whether
the system utilizes the proposed Encode2ID algorithm to the character in the input id are included in the alphabet. If
transform malicious traffic into unique ID fields. This approach any characters in id is not in the alphabet, it returns an empty
not only enables swift identification of duplicate IDs to save list of integers, traffic (line 5-8). The algorithm retrieves the
storage space, but also prevents malicious data theft and first character from id to serve as a prefix (line 9). Then, it
misuse. Furthermore, the Encode2ID algorithm serves as a identifies the position of this prefix within the alphabet and
form of encryption for data processing. rearranges the alphabet based on this position, reversing its
 The specific process of the Encode2ID algorithm is illus- order (line 10-12). Next, the first character of id is removed
trated in Algorithm 1. Firstly, this algorithm computes an (line 13). Following this is a loop that decodes id (line 14).
offset value. It iterates through each number in the numbers Within the loop, it first identifies the current separator used
list, takes the remainder to retrieve the ASCII value corre- for division. Then, id is segmented into several parts, referred
sponding to the letter in the alphabet, and accumulates these to as chunks, based on the separator (line 15-16). It checks
values to form the offset (line 1-4). Then, the calculated offset if the first part of chunks is empty. If so, it returns an empty
undergoes further processing to ensure it falls within the length list of integers, traffic (line 17-20). Subsequently, it converts
range of the alphabet (line 5). Next, based on the computed the first part of chunks into a number and adds the result to
offset value, the algorithm reorders the alphabet to create a traffic (line 21). If there are more than one part in chunks, the
new_alphabet. It extracts the first letter from the new_alphabet alphabet is shuffled (line 22-24). Finally, it updates id with
as a prefix and performs an inverse operation on the entire the remaining part and returns traffic (line 26).
2774 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Algorithm 1 Encode2ID Algorithm 2 DecodeID
Input: traffic, alphabet Input: id, alphabet
Output: id Output: traffic
 1: offset ← 0 1: traffic ← Empty List
 2: for i, v in traffic (i is the element of traffic, v is index) 2: if id is empty then
 do 3: return traffic
 3: offset += return unicode(alphabet[v % 4: end if
 length(alphabet)]+i) 5: alphabet_chars ← convert alphabet to list
 4: end for 6: if any character not in alphabet_chars exist in id then
 5: offset ← (oﬀset + length(traﬃc)) % length(alphabet) 7: return traffic
 6: new _alphabet ← alphabet[offset : ] + alphabet[ : offset] 8: end if
 7: prefix ← alphabet[0] 9: prefix ← id[0]
 8: new _alphabet ← new _alphabet[: :-1] 10: offset ← find index of prefix in alphabet
 9: ret ← [prefix] 11: alphabet ← alphabet[offset: ] + alphabet[:offset]
10: for j in traffic do 12: Reverse alphabet
11: ret.append(Convert new _alphabet[1:] to id) 13: id ← substring id from index 1 to end
12: if j ≥ length(traﬃc)-1 then 14: while id is not empty do
13: Continue 15: separator ← first character of alphabet
14: end if 16: chunks ← split id by separator
15: ret.append(new _alphabet[0]) 17: if chunks is not empty then
16: new _alphabet ← shuffle(new _alphabet) 18: if first chunk in chunks is empty then
17: end for 19: return traffic
18: id ← “ ”.join(ret) 20: end if
19: if length(id )< min_length then 21: traffic.append(Convert chunks[0] to number)
20: id += new _alphabet[0] 22: if length(chunks) >1 then
21: while length(id )< min_length do 23: alphabet ← shuffle(alphabet)
22: new _alphabet ← shuffle(alphabet) 24: end if
23: id += new _alphabet[: min(min_length-length(id ), 25: end if
 length(new _alphabet))] 26: id ← join chunks of id from index 1 to end with
24: end while separator
25: end if 27: end while
26: return id 28: return traffic

 Algorithm 3 ApplyNID
B. Feature Engineering
 Input: CAN traffic set df, window size w
 Due to the relatively unfruitful features related to the CAN Output: df _NID
bus, which adds difficulty to the subsequent model training 1: df _NID ← df
and classification, the CC-IDPS employs sliding window 2: Add w − 1 CANID rows in df _NID
mechanism to extract the CANID of the previous w data 3: for i in range(1, length(df _NID)) do
entries for each data entry as a new feature. Here, w represents 4: for j in range(1, w + 1) do
the size of the sliding window. Algorithm 3 demonstrates the 5: if i ≥ j then
specific process by first assigning df to df _NID (line 1), then 6: df _NID.iloc[i, j] = df _NID.iloc[i − j , 0]
adding w−1 columns of CANID to df _NID (line 2), and 7: end if
finally writing the CANIDs within the window w to their 8: end for
corresponding positions (line 3-9), forming the new df _NID 9: end for
which is then returned. Assuming w is set to 3, then the 10: return df _NID
t-th data entry possesses three CANID features. CANID1
represents the CANID of the current data, CANID2 represents
the CANID of the (t−1)-th data, and CANID3 represents the
CANID of the (t−2)-th data. the BERT is a pre-trained language representation model that
 employs the MLM to generate deep bidirectional language
 representations.
C. BERT Model Training and Detection Translating CAN data into the input form of a BERT model
 BERT, as one of the commonly used models in NLP, has the is crucial for several reasons. First, BERT is designed to
ability to capture contextual relationships and perform subse- process sequential data and relies on contextual relationships
quent tasks [22], [23]. It can learn the potential associations to understand meaning. Therefore, converting CAN messages
between adjacent CAN traffic to aid in the judgment and clas- into a format that resembles natural language allows the model
sification of traffic. To capture these contextual relationships, to leverage its inherent strengths. By structuring CAN features,
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2775

 components: multi-head attention mechanism [25] and feedforward neural network [26]. The pre-processed token Y(i) is
 fed into the encoder layer. Since BERT-base contains L layers
 of encoders, Y(i,l) represents the i-th token input to the l-th
 layer of encoder. After each sub-layer, layer normalization
 is applied with a residual connection incorporated. Thus, a
 residual connection is utilized around each sub-layer followed
 by layer normalization as follows:
     
Fig. 5. The Embedding of CAN. H(i,l) = h Y(i,l) + nor Y(i,l) + h Y(i,l) (2)
     
 F(i,l) = f H(i,l) + nor H(i,l) + f H(i,l) (3)
such as message IDs and payload contents, into sequences, Y(i,l+1) = F(i,l) , ∀l < L (4)
we facilitate the ability of CC-IDPS to identify patterns and
dependencies between adjacent messages. Additionally, this where H(i,l) represents the output of the first sub-layer for
transformation is essential for capturing the temporal dynamics the l-th encoder layer, while F(i,l) represents the output of
of in-vehicle communications, which can provide valuable the second sub-layer for the l-th encoder layer. The function h
insights into normal versus anomalous behavior. The pre- refers to the multi-head attention function, while the function
training of BERT on vast amounts of text data equips it with of f corresponds to the position-wise feed-forward function.
a rich understanding of language context, enabling it to apply Additionally, the function of nor denotes the layer normalizathis knowledge to the automotive domain. By adapting the tion function.
input format, we can maximize the performance of CC-IDPS For the multi-head attention function h, the query Q, key
in detecting intrusions, as it can more effectively analyze the K, and value V are computed based on the input Y(i,l) of the
intricate relationships within the data. Moreover, this approach i-th CAN traffic sequence in the l-th layer of the encoder. The
streamlines the feature extraction process, transforming raw equations are as follows:
CAN data into meaningful representations that enhance clas- Q(i,l) = Y(i,l) W(Q) (5)
sification accuracy.
 Therefore, when applying it to IVN data, the data needs K(i,l) = Y(i,l) W(K ) (6)
to be converted into a format suitable for BERT input. V(i,l) = Y(i,l) W(V ) (7)
Specifically, this involves serializing each feature of the IVN
 where W corresponds to the respective trainable weight matridata (such as message IDs, data frame contents, etc.) into
 ces. The attention function is then computed based on Q, K,
“sentences”, and combining multiple feature sequences into a
 and V as follows:
“document”. Each “document” represents a segment of IVN  
traffic over a period of time. Then, the CC-IDPS converts   Q(i,l) K(i,l) T
 (i,l) (i,l) (i,l)
multiple specific features, such as message IDs, payload Attn Q ,K ,V =σ √ V(i,l) (8)
 d
contents, and timing characteristics from the IVAD, into vector
representations, making them suitable as inputs for the BERT where σ refers to the softmax function, T denotes the
model. Finally, since the goal of this manuscript is to detect transposed matrix, and d represents the dimension of
whether the in-vehicle traffic is malicious, the activation Q(i,l) , K(i,l) , V(i,l) vectors. Finally, the attention results from
function in the final output layer is adjusted to a sigmoid multiple heads are transformed through a linear transformation
function. to obtain the final output h(Y(i,l) ):
 As illustrated in Fig. 5, for the CAN traffic set t, where  
t(i) represents the i-th specific CAN traffic within the set, the head (i,l) = Attn Q(i,l) , K(i,l) , V(i,l) (9)
    
traffic t(i) is prefixed with [CLS] (Classification), while [SEP] h Y(i,l) = linear head (i,l) (10)
is inserted as a delimiter between each subsequent traffic.
The remaining traffic is transformed into corresponding token where linear refers to the linear transformation function.
representations. Subsequently, a learnable segment embedding The inspiration for the design of a feed-forward network
is added for each token representation to indicate whether comes from the fully connected layers in CNN. However,
it belongs to CAN traffic t(i) or t(i + 1). Finally, the in contrast to fully connected layers, positional feed-forward
corresponding position embedding is appended, completing networks adopt a special structure. In pre-training, a positional
the input pre-processing for BERT. feed-forward network consists of two fully connected layers,
 1) Pre-Training: As shown in Fig. 6, the BERT model which are connected through a non-linear activation function
consists of two main steps: pre-training and fine-tuning. (specifically the ReLU activation function), capturing local
During the pre-training phase, the MLM model is employed features in the sequence. Specifically, for an input element
to randomly replace 15% of the pre-processed tokens with a h(i,l) , the positional feed-forward network can be represented
masked token ([MASK]) [24]. These tokens are then used as by the following formula:
input into the encoder layer to predict the original tokens. As  
illustrated in the encoder layer of BERT, it consists of two FFN (X ) = max 0, h(i,l) · W1 + b1 · W2 + b2 (11)
2776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 6. The Main Process of BERT.

where W1 and b1 are the weight matrix and bias vector of the then updated using back-propagation and an optimization
first fully connected layer, while W2 and b2 are the weight algorithm to minimize the loss.
matrix and bias vector of the second fully connected layer. • Model Evaluation: After the completion of Fine-Tuning,
The “·” symbol denotes matrix multiplication, and max(0, ·) the tuned model is evaluated using a test set. Task-specific
represents the element-wise ReLU activation function. After evaluation metrics such as accuracy, F1-Score, etc., are
these steps, F(i,L) is passed through a linear layer followed used to measure the performance of the model.
by the softmax function to activate, and the optimal result The sigmoid function used in binary classification is shown
is selected as the prediction (PredictionMask) for the given below:
[MASK]: 1
    s(x ) = (13)
 1 + e −x
 PredictionMask = σ linear F(i,L) (12)
 where e represents the base of natural logarithm, and x denotes
 the input value. s(x) has the following characteristics: when
 2) Fine-Tuning: Fine-tuning involves using the pre-trained
 x approaches negative infinity, s(x) approaches 0; When x
BERT model as initial parameters. Then, in order to adapt
 approaches positive infinity, s(x) approaches 1; When x = 0,
the CC-IDPS model, additional training is performed on the
 s(x) = 1/2.
labeled classification task. As the CAN traffic in pre-training
does not contain labels, this process falls under unsupervised
training. However, during fine-tuning, the input CAN traffic D. Feedback With Defense
is labeled, making it a supervised training process. The main The traffic processed by the BERT model needs to be
steps of fine-tuning are outlined as follows: integrated with the classification results and fed back to
 • Adding Task-Specific Layers: In order to adapt the BERT the cloud server. The cloud server operates on the traffic
 model for specific tasks, it is necessary to add a layer according to Algorithm 4. Firstly, the cloud server appends
 that is specific to the prediction classification task on a label character to the traffic based on the output of the
 top of the pre-trained BERT model. In this paper, the BERT model. If the traffic i is malicious, it appends ‘1’
 classification task of CC-IDPS is binary (normal, mali- (line 3-4). Conversely, if it is normal, it appends ‘0’ (line 5-6).
 cious). Therefore, this layer is a fully connected layer If there are no results, the traffic i is reclassified through the
 used to extract task-related features from the output of BERT model (line 7-8). Then, the traffic i is encoded using
 BERT. Then, the sigmoid activation function is applied the aforementioned Encode2ID algorithm (line 10). Next, the
 to process the results to output either 0 or 1. encoded id undergoes non-redundant storage (line 11-16), and
 • Parameter Initialization: After adding the task-specific finally, the EventID is returned.
 layers, the parameters of these layers need to be initial- The detection process of vehicles end is shown in
 ized using the pre-trained BERT model from earlier. Algorithm 5. First, the classification model is loaded from the
 • Fine-Tuning: The entire model is trained using the task cloud and the latest version is ensured (line 1 and line 24).
 dataset. In each training step, the task data is fed into Subsequently, two operations are performed on each traffic
 the model, and the loss between the model’s output to be detected: uploading to the cloud and sending to the
 and true labels is calculated. The model parameters are classification model (line 5-6). According to the output result
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2777

Algorithm 4 StoreEventID ECU set (Engine control unit ECU, brake system control unit,
Input: traffic etc.), the vehicle enters limp mode, where only the basic safety
Output: EventID functions of the vehicle are maintained. Then, the vehicle
 1: EventID ← empty list system reports security incidents to Vehicle Security Operation
 2: for i in traffic do Center (VSOC). If this node does not belong to important
 3: if i is malicious then ECU set, it enters bus-off state [27] (line 10-18). If the output
 4: i.append(1) result of the classification model is normal, it will continue to
 5: else if i is normal then perform the next step (line 19-20).
 6: i.append(0) The cloud server utilizes EventID to train new BERT models
 7: else and periodically distribute the updated BERT models to each
 8: send i to BERT model vehicle for updates. At the same time, vehicles load the latest
 9: end if model using the VehicleDetection algorithm, and responds
10: id ← Encode2ID(i ) with appropriate defenses based on the output of model. This
11: if id exist in EventID then feedback and defense mechanism not only notify the vehicles
12: drop i to defend against detected malicious traffic, but also ensure
13: else timely updates of detection models to cope with the evolving
14: EventID.append(id ) new attacks in the network.
15: end if
16: end for
 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
17: return EventID
 A. Environment Setting
 Due to limitations in the number of actual vehicles avail-
Algorithm 5 VehicleDetection
 able, we conducted CC-IDPS testing using a server along
 1: load model from cloud
 with one vehicle (Smart #1) and three virtual machines,
 2: transmit error counter (TEC) = 0
 each hosting a simulated vehicle environment. On the cloud
 3: if model is the latest version then
 server side, we employed a configuration comprising an
 4: for i in traffic do
 AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5995WX processor, Nvidia
 5: upload i to cloud
 RTX4090 GPUs (24GB each, four in total), and 64GB of
 6: send i to model
 RAM. All three virtual machines are equipped with 2GB of
 7: if the output of model is malicious (1) then
 RAM. Each virtual machine was equipped with the Ubuntu
 8: transmit the error frame
 operating system and installed with IC simulator [28] +
 9: TEC (the node of sending i) = TEC + 8
 SavvyCAN [29] as illustrated in the Fig. 7.
10: if TEC < 255 then
 • IC Simulator: IC Simulator comprises a dashboard featur-
11: continue
 ing a speedometer, door lock and turn signal indicators,
12: else
 along with a control panel enabling user interaction
13: if the node of sending i belongs to important
 with the simulated IVN. This facilitates actions such as
 ECU set then
 acceleration, braking, and controlling door locks and turn
14: the vehicle system enters limp mode
 signals.
15: report security incidents to VSOC
 • SavvyCAN: SavvyCAN is a cross-platform QT-based
16: else
 C++ program. It is initially designed as a CAN bus
17: this node enters bus-off state
 reverse engineering and capture tool to work with EVTV
18: end if
 hardware like EVTVDue/CANDue. Over time, it has
19: end if
 expanded its compatibility to include any socketCAN
20: else
 compatible device, Macchina M2, and Teensy 3.x boards.
21: continue
 This versatile tool allows capturing and sending data
22: end if
 across multiple buses.
23: end for
 In addition, this study utilized a CANalyst-II device, a
24: else
 Raspberry Pi equipped with a CAN interface module, and
25: update model from cloud
 a laptop (collect in-vehicle CAN bus data / inject attack
26: repeat line 3-22
 traffic). For DoS, fuzzy, and replay attacks, the built-in
27: end if
 software of CANalyst-II was used to inject the attacks. For
 masquerade attacks, scripts were written using the Python-
 CAN library to impersonate legitimate ECUs and send altered
of the classification model, if the traffic is malicious, the CC- messages. For malfunction attacks, Python-CAN was used
IDPS will transmit the error frame into the CAN bus, causing to send specially formatted CAN messages to induce faults.
the node of sending i to increase its Transmit Error Counter For spoof attacks, the third-party Python library CANard was
(TEC) by 8 (line 7-9). If the TEC less than 255, this algorithm used to send customized spoofed CAN frames, mimicking
will continue. Otherwise, if this node belongs to important legitimate ECU communication. For combination attack, a
2778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 7. The Simulated Environments of IVN (IC simulator+SavvyCAN).

 TRP
random combination of multiple attack types was employed Precision = (15)
to execute attacks. TRP + FAP
 TRP
 Moreover, the CC-IDPS framework is designed specifically Recall = (16)
to provide a solution for a single automobile manufacturer, TRP + FAN
 2 · Precision · Recall
thus avoiding issues related to inter-manufacturer competition F 1 − Score = (17)
and proprietary protocol sharing. The framework ensures that Precision + Recall
all data processing and analysis remain within the bound- where TRP indicates the number of normal traffic samples
aries of a single manufacturer’s ecosystem. Looking forward, that are correctly classified as normal traffic. FAN indicates
if cooperation among different manufacturers becomes nec- the number of normal traffic samples that are misclassified as
essary, the CC-IDPS has also demonstrated the feasibility intrusion traffic. FAP indicates the number of intrusion traffic
of simultaneously processing CAN bus data from multiple samples that are misclassified as normal traffic. TRN indicates
manufacturers, provided that standardization and other related the number of intrusion traffic samples that are correctly
operations are performed before data is uploaded to the cloud. classified as intrusion traffic.
 This setup allowed us not only to simulate CAN bus data The loss is a metric used to measure the discrepancy
while the vehicle is in motion, but also to inject attacks between predicted values and true values. The calculation
into the CAN bus of vehicle. The simulation environment formula for binary classification using cross entropy is as
within the virtual machine loads the initially trained CC-IDPS follows:
model and classifies CAN traffic. Based on the classification
 n
results, the corresponding virtual machine drops identified 1 b

malicious traffic, and uploads this traffic to the cloud server. BL = BLi (18)
 nb
Over time, the cloud server retrained the classification model i
based on the aggregated malicious traffic from the simulated BLi = −[yi log(pi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − pi )] (19)
environments. Specifically, retraining occurs at predefined
intervals or triggers, such as when a significant amount of where BL is the loss of binary classification, BLi is the
new data is accumulated, when there are changes in the loss of the i-th binary classification sample. nb is the total
attack patterns observed, or when performance degradation is number of binary classification samples. yi represents the label
detected in the existing model. Then, it distributed the updated of the i-th binary classification sample, where the positive
model to the virtual machines for renewal. class is denoted as 1 and the negative class is denoted as 0.
 pi represents the probability of the i-th binary classification
 sample being predicted as the positive class.
B. Evaluation Metrics
 AUC represents the area under the Receiver Operating
 To facilitate the comparison of performance between CC- Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is a graphical plot
IDPS and other algorithms, this paper primarily employs the that illustrates the trade-off between a model’s true positive
following performance metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, F1- rate (sensitivity) and its false positive rate (1-specificity) across
Score, loss, and Area Under Curve (AUC). These metrics various threshold values. The AUC value ranges between 0
effectively measure the prediction accuracy of IDPS. Their and 1, where a higher AUC score indicates better model
calculation formulas are as follows: performance at distinguishing between classes. An AUC of 1
 TRP + TRN represents a perfect classifier, while an AUC of 0.5 signifies
 Accuracy = (14) a model with random performance.
 TRP + TRN + FAP + FAN
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2779

 TABLE II
 T HE PARAMETERS OF BERT a broader array of attack types compared to CHD [15] and
 SAD [16]. Secondly, the IVAD possesses a substantially larger
 data volume than CHD [15] and SAD [16]. Thirdly, the
 IVAD contains data collected from both real and cloud-based
 simulation environments. In contrast, the CHD [15] solely
 includes DoS, fuzzy, and spoof attacks on the in-vehicle
 CAN bus, while the SAD [16] comprises flooding, fuzzy,
 and malfunction attack data. Collectively, these factors present
 challenges for the detection and classification models within
 IVAD, resulting in varying degrees of reduced performance
 across different models.
 While larger window sizes may offer better detection accuracy by capturing more contextual information, it is essential to
 ensure that the computational overhead does not compromise
 the real-time detection capabilities of the IDS. Therefore,
 it is crucial to strike a balance between the window size
 and detection efficiency. To verify the effectiveness of the
 sliding window mechanism in extracting CANID, the CC-
 IDPS conducted experiments by setting the sliding window
 sizes (w) to 1, 3, 5, and 7. As depicted in Fig. 9, it is evident
 that when w is set to 5 and 7, the detection accuracy, recall,
 precision, and F1-score of various models outperform the case
 when w is set to 1 and 3. As shown in Fig. 10, with the
 increase in the number of features, only K-Means exhibited
 classification difficulty and a decrease in AUC value. LR
 achieved the highest AUC value at w=3, while DT, CNN-
Fig. 8. The comparison of different models’ AUC on CHD, SAD and IVAD.
 LSTM, and CC-IDPS reached their peak AUC values at w=5,
 with AUC values of 0.9508, 0.9642, and 0.9886, respectively.
 The CC-IDPS attained its highest AUC value at w=5, but
C. Experimental Results decreased to 0.9871 at w=7.
 The main goal of in-vehicle intrusion detection is to Particularly, among the machine learning models, DT
swiftly pinpoint abnormal/malicious behavior on the CAN exhibits the best performance, achieving an AUC of 0.9508.
bus, indicating potential security risks. While multi-class This result is primarily attributed to the advantages of DT
classification tasks offer detailed insights into attack types, in interpretability, robustness, and suitability for various data
they pose challenges like complexity, computational burden, types. Additionally, the CNN-LSTM model also achieves
and dataset requirements. Therefore, the binary classification an AUC of 0.9642, surpassing the performance of several
task is preferred for the CC-IDPS. The parameters selec- machine learning models. Mainly because it can effectively
tion of the BERT model used in CC-IDPS are shown in handling complex multidimensional data and capturing spatial-
Table II. temporal features within the data. Table III presents the
 For IVAD, this paper adopts various machine learning and CNN-LSTM model parameters for IVAD when w = 5.
deep learning models, including K-means, Logistic Regression However, the F1-score of CNN-LSTM remains slightly lower
(LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DT), than CC-IDPS model, which achieves an AUC of 0.9886.
and CNN-LSTM, as comparative models. The reasons for This significant improvement is attributed to BERT’s use of
selecting these models are as follows: K-means serves as a Transformer structure, incorporating pre-training techniques
a simple and intuitive clustering algorithm [30], LR offers such as MLM. This allows BERT to comprehend comprehenfast training speed and is suitable for large datasets [31], sive upper and lower CANID information within the window,
SVM exhibits strong generalization capabilities [32], DT not just local features.
demonstrates robustness against outliers and missing values To validate the advantages of the CC-IDPS model compared
in data [33], and CNN-LSTM excels in handling complex to other NLP pre-trained models, this study selected GPTmultidimensional data while capturing spatial and temporal 2, XLNet, and Enhanced Representation through Knowledge
features within the data [34]. These models represent common Integration (ERNIE) for comparison. As shown in Fig. 11 and
and representative approaches in both machine learning and Table IV, the CC-IDPS model significantly outperformed the
deep learning domains. other three models in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and
 Fig. 8 depicts the detection results (AUC) of the same F1-score. Among them, the GPT-2 model performed the worst,
model on three datasets: CHD [15], SAD [16], and IVAD. with an accuracy and F1-score of only 0.9385 and 0.9273,
It is evident that the performance of the identical model respectively. The XLNet and ERNIE models demonstrated
on IVAD appears relatively inferior. Several primary reasons similar performance, both achieving accuracy and F1-score
account for this discrepancy: Firstly, the IVAD encompasses around 0.95.
2780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 9. The comparison of different window size on IVAD.

 TABLE III
 T HE PARAMETERS OF CNN-LSTM ON IVAD (w = 5)

Fig. 10. The comparison of different window size on IVAD (change line
chart of AUC). is nearly identical, with both outperforming the CNN-
 LSTM (with attention) [34] method. However, under the
 updated dataset, the accuracy and F1-score of all six methods
 To validate the effectiveness of the proposed CC- declined. Nevertheless, due to the feedback update mechanism
IDPS framework, this study replicated the methods of CC-IDPS, its performance remained more stable and
from [34], [35], [36] and [37] for comparison. Table V significantly higher than the other five methods.
presents the performance of six methods on both the initial To further evaluate the robustness of the CC-IDPS model,
dataset (IVAD) and the updated dataset. The updated dataset we conducted additional experiments to test its performance
primarily involves a combination and replacement of other against unknown attacks. These experiments included replayed
attacks within the combination attack of IVAD. As shown DoS attacks, a combination of fuzzy and malfunction attack
in Table V, in the results comparison on the initial dataset, data, and attacks involving the permutation of CAN IDs for
the detection performance of Multi-scale Fusion [35], ECF- gear spoofing and RPM spoofing. As shown in Table VI, the
IDS [36], CE ResNet [37], SupCon ResNet [37] and CC-IDPS CC-IDPS model achieved a detection accuracy of 99.88% for
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2781

 Regarding the feedback and defense mechanism, after calculating, assuming the storage of an original data sequence
 ‘79, 320, 305, 304, 1349, 69, 41, 36, 255, 41, 36, 0,
 255, 1’, which occupies 168 bytes, after applying the
 Encode2ID algorithm described in this paper, it transforms
 into ‘BfgjOZoHPJK7lfraNXPl58eSWrS3syjmOcxR’, occupying 85 bytes. Consequently, the Encode2ID algorithm in this
 study saves 49.4% of storage space. At the same time, the
 Encode2ID algorithm also serves a certain privacy protection,
 preventing the traffic from being stored in plain text within
 the cloud-based database. For the aforementioned array occupying 168 bytes, the Encode2ID algorithm is compared with
 traditional cryptographic algorithms such as MD5, SHA-256,
 DES, and RSA. As shown in Table VII, although MD5 and
Fig. 11. The comparison of CC-IDPS and other pre-trained models.
 SHA-256 message digest algorithms are more space-efficient,
 they lack the capability of providing decryption reversibility,
 TABLE IV
 T HE C OMPARISON OF CC-IDPS AND OTHER P RE -T RAINED M ODELS meaning original plaintext cannot be retrieved. In comparison
 to DES and RSA algorithms, the Encode2ID algorithm not
 only operates without requiring a key, but also generates
 strings occupying less space.
 As shown in Table VIII, the total training time of CC-
 IDPS on the cloud server is 403s, involving the training of
 355,539 samples over 11,110 iterations. Simultaneously, the
 total testing time on the vehicle end is 31s, encompassing
 the testing of 152,375 samples. These results highlight that
normal data, which is consistent with the high performance leveraging the abundant computational resources of the cloud
seen in previous tests. More importantly, even when exposed server, the training time of CC-IDPS model on the cloud server
to unknown attack scenarios, the CC-IDPS maintained an is 1.133ms per traffic flow. Furthermore, the detection time
impressive detection accuracy of 98.26%. When compared per traffic flow on the vehicle end is 0.203ms. The total time
with other SOTA methods, the CC-IDPS outperformed the from feeding attack traffic into the model to issuing a warning
Multi-scale Fusion [35], ECF-IDS [36], CE ResNet [37], is 0.286ms. Since the computational overhead on the cloud
and SupCon ResNet [37] models in both detection accuracy primarily occurs during model training on the cloud server,
and F1-score. Specifically, the F1-score for CC-IDPS was it does not impose a significant computational burden on the
significantly higher, indicating not only a greater ability to vehicle end. The vehicle end is mainly responsible for traffic
correctly identify attack traffic but also fewer false positives detection based on the loaded model, which greatly enhances
and false negatives. detection efficiency and saves computational resources on the
 vehicle end.

D. Cost of CC-IDPS
 Taking into account the comprehensive analysis of the cloud VI. D ISCUSSION
server training and virtual machine simulation environment In cloud-vehicle collaborative scenarios, the communication
testing times depicted in Fig. 12, adopting w = 5 achieves the latency is influenced by the specific network environment. The
best overall performance. This selection ensures optimal detec- results of this study indicate that, within a small local area
tion accuracy metrics while maintaining efficient detection network, the communication latency from vehicles to cloud
times. Fig. 13 displays the AUC curve comparisons of various servers is typically maintained around 3 ms. This low latency
models when w = 5, where the CC-IDPS model exhibits the is advantageous for real-time intrusion detection, allowing for
highest AUC, reaching up to 0.997. The AUC of CNN-LSTM swift response times to potential threats. However, in practical
also reached 0.989, second only to CC-IDPS, and higher deployments, the communication path between cloud services
than all other models. Furthermore, DT, within the scope of and vehicles may involve intermediaries such as Roadside
machine learning, achieved the highest AUC of 0.988. Despite Units (RSUs). The inclusion of these devices could introduce
a marginal 0.008 AUC difference between CC-IDPS and the additional latency, potentially affecting the performance of the
second-ranking CNN-LSTM, within the cloud-vehicle collabo- CC-IDPS. Future research should investigate the implications
rative system handling massive IVN traffic, this slight variation of varied network topologies on communication latency to
significantly mitigates false positives. Next, Fig. 14 illustrates optimize system performance under different conditions.
the loss curve during training iterations. It demonstrates that Furthermore, the dynamic nature of attack strategies in the
the training loss quickly decreases from an initial value of 0.7 field of in-vehicle intrusion detection necessitates continuous
to approximately 0.05 within the first 2000 iterations and then updates to detection models. Regular database updates are
gradually stabilizes. critical to maintaining the relevance and effectiveness of these
2782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE V
 T HE C OMPARISON OF CC-IDPS AND OTHER L ITERATURES U NDER I NITIAL /U PDATED DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 D ETECTION R ESULTS OF CC-IDPS AND SOTA M ETHODS AGAINST U NKNOWN ATTACKS

Fig. 12. The training/test time of CC-IDPS on different window size. Fig. 14. The training loss of CC-IDPS on IVAD (w = 5).

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF E NCODE /E NCRYPTION A LGORITHMS

 updates, thereby enhancing the resilience of the IDS against
 emerging vulnerabilities in the automotive domain.

Fig. 13. The AUC of models on IVAD (w = 5).
 VII. R ELATED W ORK
 The relevant work on in-vehicle IDSs has garnered significant attention in both academia and the industry. Some
models against evolving threats. Ideally, updates should occur studies have focused on designing intelligent algorithms and
at intervals that reflect the changing threat landscape, with machine learning models to identify abnormal behavior and
common practices including daily or weekly refreshes to network attacks. These approaches encompass statistical analincorporate newly collected data. In situations characterized by ysis, machine learning, deep learning, among other techniques,
rapid shifts in attack patterns or an influx of new attack vectors, aiming to achieve real-time monitoring and threat detection
more frequent updates may be required. This adaptability is within IVNs. Furthermore, researchers are also concentrating
vital for ensuring that the CC-IDPS can identify and respond on aspects such as feature extraction from IVN data, model
to novel threats effectively. Future work should focus on training, and data labeling to construct more accurate and
developing adaptive algorithms that can facilitate real-time reliable IDSs.
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2783

 TABLE VIII
 T RAINING /T EST T IME OF CC-IDPS intrusion detection represents a favorable choice. A Rec-CNN
 model [11] employed CNN to train images generated by the
 recurrence plots algorithm using CAN traffic. The recurrence
 plots algorithm facilitates the Rec-CNN model in capturing
 the dependencies and correlations between arbitration IDs.

 D. Intrusion Detection Methods Based on Collaborative
 Model
A. Intrusion Detection Methods Based on Time Series
 There is scarce literature on collaborative intrusion detection
Prediction and Spatial-Temporal Features
 within IVNs utilizing cloud computing resources. In 2023,
 Several studies have focused on utilizing time series Qin et al. [45] primarily investigated a cloud-vehicle colprediction (TSP) and spatial-temporal features to detect laborative IDS based on multi-dimensional features for the
anomalous traffic in the context of IDS. For example, a hybrid Internet-of-Vehicle (IoV), known as CVMIDS. To address
deep learning-based IDS (HyDL-IDS) [10] was introduced. the heterogeneity of vehicle data, the CVMIDS abstracts
This model integrates Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) disparate vehicle data into a common feature space, thereby
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) structures to leverage enabling model training based on multi-dimensional features
spatial-temporal representations of traffic in an IVN. The and detection of multiple attack categories. By establishing a
CANnolo [38] was proposed to identify anomalies in CAN. feature space that combines dimensions such as time, traffic,
It employs LSTM-autoencoders to analyze the time and data and voltage, the CVMIDS expanded its capability to detect
sequences of CAN. In addition, Qin et al.[39] proposed an various types of attacks, demonstrating its robustness and
intrusion detection method that utilizes anomaly analysis based efficiency through experimental validation.
on TSP, using an LSTM structure to analyze each data field of
CAN messages. This approach achieved outstanding detection E. Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
performance by effectively capturing the temporal patterns of
IVN traffic. The research on IPS for in-vehicle CAN buses has also
 attracted considerable attention and participation. In 2021,
 De Araujo-Filho et al. [46] proposed an unsupervised IPS for
B. Intrusion Detection Methods Based on BERT Model automotive CANs to detect and hinder attacks without altering
 The BERT model, known for its excellent performance the ECUs’ architecture or requiring restricted information. It
in Natural Language Processing (NLP), can be applied to evaluates two machine learning algorithms for detecting fuzzy
intrusion detection on the CAN bus. The CAN-BERT [40] and spoof attacks, achieving high accuracy and F1-score with
is designed to learn arbitration ID sequences for intrusion minimal data bytes. In 2019, Olufowobi et al. [27] presented
detection on the CAN bus. It was evaluated using the “Car a novel algorithm for detecting and recovering from message
Hacking: Attack & Defense Challenge 2020” dataset [41], spoof attacks targeting the CAN bus, a critical component of
achieving F1-Score ranging from 81% to 99%. Another BERT- IVNs. Leveraging the predictable runtime behavior of CAN
based IDS model is CANBERT [42], which was tested using message frames, the algorithm utilizes the CAN bus’s error
the OTIDS dataset [43] and achieved an accuracy rate of over handling capability for reboot-based recovery of compromised
99%. network nodes.
 Compared to the CAN-BERT [40] and CANBERT [42]
models, the main innovation of our CC-IDPS model lies in F. Motivation
its utilization of cloud resources for training and updating
 Table IX summarizes the related works in existing studies
the BERT model, while CAN-BERT and CANBERT are
 pertaining to in-vehicle IDSs. It can be inferred that despite
limited to offline training, lacking the capability for real-time
 the proliferation of research on in-vehicle IDSs in recent
model updates. Meanwhile, CAN-BERT and CANBERT lack
 years, most of these systems have primarily accomplished
subsequent deep analysis and processing operations for postthe task of detection and classification, lacking subsequent
processed malicious traffic. Furthermore, Our IVAD dataset
 defensive actions against malicious traffic. Meanwhile, while
has a broader source base and richer feature set compared to
 these works predominantly utilize datasets from HCRL and
the datasets utilized by CAN-BERT and CANBERT.
 private sources, the range of attack types within these datasets
 is limited, posing insufficient challenges for their models.
C. Intrusion Detection Methods Based on CNN Model Moreover, there is a considerable scarcity of research
 Utilizing a CNN as the base model in combination with focusing on utilizing abundant cloud computational resources
other methods is also a promising choice for intrusion detec- for model training in IVN IDSs. The advantages of IVN
tion. The CANintelligentIDS model [44] integrated CNN and intrusion detection with the help of cloud resources are as
attention-based Gate Recurrent Unit (GRU) to detect attacks. It follows: 1) Cloud-based solutions offer scalable computational
consists of two types of detection: analyzing data sequences to resources that can handle the intensive processing requiredetect individual attacks and considering real-world scenarios ments of advanced intrusion detection algorithms, such as
to detect blended attacks in the form of custom vectors. those based on deep learning. 2) Leveraging cloud infras-
Besides, the fusion of recurrence plots with CNN for in-vehicle tructure allows for the aggregation and analysis of threat
2784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE IX
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORK

intelligence from multiple vehicles, enabling faster detection [5] X. Wang, M. He, J. Wang, and X. Wang, “Towards efficient neuof emerging threats and the dissemination of updates to all ral networks through predictor-assisted NSGA-III for anomaly traffic
 detection of IoT,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 3,
connected vehicles. 3) Cloud platforms facilitate the central- pp. 982–995, Jun. 2024.
ized training of sophisticated models like BERT, ensuring they [6] “Teen hacker says he’s found way to remotely control 25 Tesla EVs
are continuously updated with the latest data. These updated around the world.” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://fortune.com/2022/
 01/12/teen-hacker-david-colombo-took-control-25-tesla-ev/
models can then be distributed to vehicles via Over-The-Air [7] D. Keuper and T. Alkemade, The Connected Car Ways to
(OTA) updates, ensuring all vehicles benefit from the most Get Unauthorized Access and Potential Implications, Computest,
current intrusion detection capabilities. Zoetermeer, The Netherlands, 2018.
 [8] M. Tiwari, I. Maity, and S. Misra, “RATE: Reliability-aware task service
 in fog-enabled IoV environments,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
 VIII. C ONCLUSION vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1525–1534, Aug. 2024.
 [9] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
 This paper constructs the IVAD by integrating real-world detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
scenarios, simulated cloud vehicle environments, and multiple vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no.100198.
data samples from CHD [15] and SAD [16]. Additionally, the [10] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and
 G. Kumar, “A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system
proposed CC-IDPS fully leverages the advantages of cloud using spatial-temporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” Veh.
computing, multi-dimensional features, and cloud-vehicle col- Commun., vol. 35, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100471.
laboration to enhance the comprehensiveness and precision [11] A. K. Desta, S. Ohira, I. Arai, and K. Fujikawa, “Rec-CNN: In-vehicle
 networks intrusion detection using convolutional neural networks trained
of detecting IVN attacks. Initially, the CC-IDPS extracts on recurrence plots,” Veh. Commun., vol. 35, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100470.
CANID information utilizing a sliding window mechanism and [12] Z. Li, P. Wang, Z. Wang, and D.-C. Zhan, “Flowgananomaly:
employs cloud servers to train the BERT model, distributing Flow-based anomaly network intrusion detection with adversarial learnit to vehicles for the detection and classification of CAN bus ing,” Chin. J. Electron., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 58–71, 2024.
 [13] Z. Zhang, F. Liu, Y. Ge, S. Li, Y. Zhang, and K. Xiong, “An
traffic. Subsequently, through the VehicleDetection algorithm, intrusion detection method based on depthwise separable convolution
vehicles are informed to take appropriate defensive actions and attention mechanism,” Chin. J. Internet Things, vol. 7, no. 1,
against malicious attack traffic. Meanwhile, the Encode2ID pp. 49–59, 2023.
 [14] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of
and DecodeID algorithms proposed in this paper are employed recent deep-learning-based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle
to store related malicious traffic. This approach not only saves network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2,
space but also achieves certain privacy protection purposes. pp. 1843–1854, Feb. 2022.
 [15] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
The stored malicious traffic can be utilized for subsequent detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
training and updating of the BERT model. This research aims Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2018, pp. 1–6.
to provide comprehensive and innovative solutions for the [16] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh.
future security of IVNs, contributing to the development of Commun., vol. 14, pp. 52–63, 2018.
safer and more reliable smart vehicles. [17] S.-F. Lokman, A. T. Othman, and M.-H. Abu-Bakar “Intrusion detection
 system for automotive controller area network (CAN) bus system: A
 review,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–17,
 R EFERENCES Jul. 2019.
 [1] R. Jin, X. He, and H. Dai, “Collaborative IDS configuration: A two-layer [18] S. Woo, H. J. Jo, I. S. Kim, and D. H. Lee, “A practical security
 game-theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 4, architecture for in-vehicle CAN-FD,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 no. 4, pp. 803–815, Dec. 2018. vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 2248–2261, Aug. 2016.
 [2] M. S. E. Sayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, M. A. Azer, and A. D. Jurcut, “A flow- [19] R. Malekian, N. R. Moloisane, L. Nair, B. T. Maharaj, and
 based anomaly detection approach with feature selection method against U. A. Chude-Okonkwo, “Design and implementation of a wireless
 DDoS attacks in SDNs,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, OBD II fleet management system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 4,
 no. 4, pp. 1862–1880, Dec. 2022. pp. 1154–1164, Feb. 2017.
 [3] S. Li, Y. Cao, S. Liu, Y. Lai, Y. Zhu, and N. Ahmad, “HDA-IDS: [20] K. L. Lim, J. Whitehead, D. Jia, and Z. Zheng, “State of data platforms
 A hybrid DoS attacks intrusion detection system for IoT by using for connected vehicles and infrastructures,” Commun. Transp. Res.,
 semi-supervised CL-GAN,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238, Mar. 2024, vol. 1, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 100013.
 Art. no. 122198. [21] Y. Koh, S. Kim, Y. Kim, I. Oh, and K. Yim, “Efficient CAN dataset
 [4] Y. Cao et al., “Towards cyber security for low-carbon transportation: collection method for accurate security threat analysis on vehicle internal
 Overview, challenges and future directions,” Renew. Sustain. Energy network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Innov. Mobile Internet Services Ubiquitous
 Rev., vol. 183, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 113401. Comput., 2022, pp. 97–107.
LI et al.: CC-IDPS FOR IVN 2785

[22] J. D. M.-W. C. Kenton and L. K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of Sifan Li received the B.S. degree from Nanchang
 deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. University in 2021. He is currently pursuing the
 NAACL-HLT, vol. 1, 2019, p. 2. M.S. degree with the School of Cyber Science and
[23] Z. Zhang et al., “Semantics-aware BERT for language understand- Engineering, Wuhan University, China. His research
 ing,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, 2020, pp. 9628–9635. interests include IoT intrusion detection, in-vehicle
[24] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training security, and aerospace-sky-earth security.
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
 arXiv:1810.04805.
[25] J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Tu, and M. R. Lyu, “On the diversity of multi-head
 attention,” Neurocomputing, vol. 454, pp. 14–24, Sep. 2021.
[26] G. Bebis and M. Georgiopoulos, “Feed-forward neural networks,” IEEE
 Potentials, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 27–31, Oct./Nov. 1994.
[27] H. Olufowobi, S. Hounsinou, and G. Bloom, “Controller area network Yue Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 intrusion prevention system leveraging fault recovery,” in Proc. ACM Ph.D. degree from the Institute for Communication
 Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2019, pp. 63–73. Systems, Centre for Communication Systems
[28] S. Craig. “ICSim: Instrument cluster simulator for socketcan.” 2020. Research, University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.,
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/zombieCraig/ICSim in 2013. Further to his Ph.D. study, he had con-
[29] C. Kidder. “SavvyCAN: QT based cross platform canbus tool.” 2020. ducted a Research Fellow with the University of
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/collin80/SavvyCAN Surrey, and an Academic Faculty with Northumbria
[30] H. Narasimhan, R. Vinayakumar, and N. Mohammad, “Unsupervised University, U.K., Lancaster University, U.K., and
 deep learning approach for in-vehicle intrusion detection system,” IEEE Beihang University, Beijing, China. He is currently
 Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 103–108, Jan. 2023. a Professor with the School of Cyber Science and
[31] D. Tanaka, M. Yamada, H. Kashima, T. Kishikawa, T. Haga, and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. His
 T. Sasaki, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection and explanation using research interests include intelligent transport systems, including E-Mobility,
 density ratio estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. V2X, and edge computing.
 (ITSC), 2019, pp. 2238–2243.
[32] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
 “Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure Yu’ang Zhang received the B.Eng. degree from
 and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2022, where
 no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022. he is currently pursuing the M.Sc. degree with
[33] Y. Jeong, H. Kim, S. Lee, W. Choi, D. H. Lee, and H. J. Jo, the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His
 “In-vehicle network intrusion detection system using CAN frame- research interests focus on the misbehavior detection
 aware features,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, in V2X applications.
 pp. 3843–3853, May 2024.
[34] H. Sun, M. Chen, J. Weng, Z. Liu, and G. Geng, “Anomaly detection for
 in-vehicle network using CNN-LSTM with attention mechanism,” IEEE
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10880–10893, Oct. 2021.
[35] J. Zhou, S. Li, Y. Cao, H. J. Hadi, and H. Lin, “Robust intrusion detection system in CAN bus through multi-scale feature fusion,” in Proc.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2024, pp. 1316–1321. Tongxin Liao received the M.S. degree from
[36] S. Li, Y. Cao, H. J. Hadi, F. Hao, F. B. Hussain, and L. Chen, “ECF- Hunan University in 2023. She is currently pursuing
 IDS: An enhanced cuckoo filter-based intrusion detection system for the E.D. degree with the School of Electronic
 in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 4, Information and Communication, Huazhong
 pp. 3846–3860, Aug. 2024. University of Science and Technology, China. Her
[37] T.-N. Hoang and D. Kim, “Supervised contrastive ResNet and transfer research interests include cloud computing and
 learning for the in-vehicle intrusion detection system,” Expert Syst. blockchain.
 Appl., vol. 238, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 122181.
[38] S. Longari, D. H. N. Valcarcel, M. Zago, M. Carminati, and S. Zanero,
 “CANnolo: An anomaly detection system based on LSTM autoencoders
 for controller area network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18,
 no. 2, pp. 1913–1924, Jun. 2021.
[39] H. Qin, M. Yan, and H. Ji, “Application of controller area network Fei Yan received the Ph.D. degree from Wuhan
 (CAN) bus anomaly detection based on time series prediction,” Veh. University, Wuhan, China, in 2007, where he is
 Commun., vol. 27, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 100291. currently an Associate Professor with the School
[40] N. Alkhatib, M. Mushtaq, H. Ghauch, and J.-L. Danger, “CAN-BERT do of Cyber Science and Engineering. He is also a
 it? Controller area network intrusion detection system based on BERT Co-Founder of ChinaSigTC (China special interest
 language model,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl. group on trusted cloud). He was an Associate
 (AICCSA), 2022, pp. 1–8. Chair of Program Committee of Chinese Trusted
[41] H. Kang, B.-I. Kwak, Y. Lee, H. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, Computing and Information Security Conference
 “Car hacking and defense competition on in-vehicle network,” in Proc. from 2017 to 2019. His research interests include
 Workshop Autom. Auton. Veh. Secur., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–6. system security, trusted computing, and blockchain.
[42] E. Nwafor and H. Olufowobi, “CANBERT: A language-based intrusion
 detection model for in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), 2022, pp. 294–299.
[43] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion Hai Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 detection system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc. from the Department of Thermal Engineering,
 15th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), 2017, pp. 57–5709. Huazhong Sciences and Technologies University,
[44] A. R. Javed, S. Ur Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. Reddy, Wuhan, China, in 1999, the M.S. degree in com-
 “CANintelliIDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller puter science from the University of Pierre and
 area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Marie Curie, Paris, France, in 2005, and the
 Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr.–Jun. 2021. Ph.D. degree from the Institute Telecom–Telecom
[45] J. Qin, Y. Xun, and J. Liu, “CVMIDS: Cloud-vehicle collaborative intru- ParisTech, Paris, in 2008. He held a Postdoctoral
 sion detection system for Internet-of-Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., Research with France Telecom. He was a Researcher
 vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 321–332, Jan. 2024. with ZTE Europe. Since 2012, he has been with
[46] P. F. De Araujo-Filho, A. J. Pinheiro, G. Kaddoum, D. R. Campelo, Wuhan University, Wuhan, where he is currently an
 and F. L. Soares, “An efficient intrusion prevention system for CAN: Associate Professor with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His
 Hindering cyber-attacks with a low-cost platform,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, research interests include the Internet of Things, edge computing, sensor
 pp. 166855–166869, 2021. networks, and future networks.