3364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 A Comprehensive Benchmark and Empirical Study
 of Trace Anomaly Detection
 Yongqian Sun , Member, IEEE, Minyi Shao , Xiaohui Nie , Member, IEEE, Kaiwen Yang, Xingda Li,
 Bowen Hao, Shenglin Zhang , Member, IEEE, Changhua Pei , Dongbiao He , Yanbiao Li , Member, IEEE,
 and Dan Pei , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The growing complexity of modern Internet applica- developers and engineers to independently develop, deploy and
tions and the widespread use of microservice architectures have update services, greatly boosting development efficiency and
amplified the need for efficient trace anomaly detection to maintain system responsiveness [1]. However, the highly modular and
system stability. Despite the fact that many trace anomaly detection
algorithms have been proposed to identify abnormal behaviors, a distributed structure also poses challenges in system monitoring
comprehensive evaluation of these methods is lacking, which makes and management.
it difficult for developers to choose the most suitable algorithm for To ensure the smooth operation and efficient management
real-world applications. To address this gap, we present TADBench, of microservice systems, trace anomaly detection serves as an
a comprehensive and extensible benchmark for trace anomaly indispensable tool for maintaining service quality and enhancing
detection. TADBench consolidates diverse publicly available trace
datasets and algorithms into a unified repository, standardizes data user experience. It enables the real-time identification of issues
formats, and incorporates manual anomaly labels. To ensure repro- within the service interaction network, facilitating the prompt
ducibility and fair comparisons, we propose a modular evaluation localization and resolution of faults and thereby preventing
framework supporting end-to-end model assessment. Additionally, service interruptions or performance degradation [4]. Moreover,
we provide practical guidance for algorithm selection based on spe- tracing request propagation paths is essential for enhancing
cific data attributes by evaluating their performance across datasets
with different characteristics, thereby effectively bridging the gap system observability and maintainability. Developers can gain
between academic research and industrial deployment. To the best a comprehensive understanding of service interaction patterns
of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive empirical study of by monitoring the dependencies and sequences of service calls,
trace anomaly detection algorithms. Our findings aim to facilitate which allows them to optimize service performance and imthe adoption of these methods in production environments, offering
 prove system stability [5], [6]. Furthermore, historical trace
actionable insights for developers and researchers.
 analysis can reveal long-term performance trends and abnor-
 Index Terms—Trace anomaly detection, empirical study. mal patterns, offering crucial insights for system optimization
 and future architectural improvements [7]. Thus, effective trace
 I. INTRODUCTION anomaly detection technologies are vital for comprehensively
 N RECENT years, the rapid development of modern Internet understanding system states and ensuring the stable operation
I applications, accompanied by the expansion of business operations, has led to a significant increase in system complexity.
 and efficient management of microservice systems.
 Nowadays, many trace anomaly detection algorithms have
Microservice architecture [1] has emerged as the preferred ar- been developed to swiftly identify potential abnormal behaviors.
chitectural choice for many Internet applications due to its well- Despite extensive research in this field, comprehensive public
documented advantages in scalability, flexibility, maintainabil- benchmarks for evaluating these algorithms remain largely unity, and efficient resource use [2], [3]. This architecture enables available. This gap can be attributed to several challenges:
 (1) Data availability: Although many anomaly detection al-
 Received 14 April 2025; revised 6 October 2025; accepted 7 October 2025. gorithms and trace datasets have been open-sourced, previous
Date of publication 16 October 2025; date of current version 11 December 2025. efforts have failed to systematically consolidate these valuable
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of resources. This lack of integration makes it difficult for re-
China under Grant 62272249 and Grant 62302244 and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant XXX-63253249. searchers to access datasets and tools efficiently, as well as
(Corresponding author: Xiaohui Nie.) to conduct meaningful comparisons and validations of existing
 Yongqian Sun, Minyi Shao, Kaiwen Yang, Xingda Li, Bowen Hao, and methods. Besides, existing trace datasets generally lack well-
Shenglin Zhang are with the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China (e-mail: sunyongqian@nankai.edu.cn; 2120230754@mail. defined anomaly labels, limiting their utility and the accuracy
nankai.edu.cn; 2112122@mail.nankai.edu.cn; 2210352@mail.nankai.edu.cn; of anomaly detection models. Inconsistency in data formats
2120230749@mail.nankai.edu.cn; zhangsl@nankai.edu.cn). also makes data processing and analysis more difficult, further
 Xiaohui Nie, Changhua Pei, Dongbiao He, and Yanbiao Li are with the
Computer Network Information Center (CNIC), Chinese Academy of Sciences complicating subsequent research efforts.
(CAS), Beijing 100083, China (e-mail: xhnie@cnic.cn; chpei@cnic.cn; her- (2) Absence of standardized evaluation framework: Inconbertt12@gmail.com; lybmath@cnic.cn). sistent data preprocessing methods, inaccurate algorithm imple-
 Dan Pei is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: peidan@tsinghua.edu.cn). mentations, and the lack of unified testing pipelines contribute to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2025.3622122 reproducibility problems. In addition to making it challenging

 1939-1374 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3365

to compare algorithms equitably, these drawbacks impede innovation by directing researchers’ focus away from developing
novel approaches and into redundant implementation tasks.
 (3) Difficulty in algorithm adoption for different applications:
While several algorithms may perform better in different scenarios, it is still difficult for operations personnel to quickly
identify the optimal algorithm for real-world production environments. Limited empirical analysis and recommendation
strategies further exacerbate the difficulties in selecting and
applying anomaly detection algorithms, which may lower the
effectiveness of troubleshooting.
 To tackle these challenges, we propose TADBench, a comprehensive and extensible benchmark for trace anomaly detection.
TADBench makes diverse publicly available trace datasets and
algorithms into a unified repository with standard data formats
and accurate anomaly labels. For Challenge 1: We collect,
organize, and make a publicly available repository containing
trace datasets and anomaly detection algorithms. This repository provides researchers with the necessary resources for indepth study and comprehensive comparisons. In addition, we
standardize the formats of available trace datasets and provide
anomaly labels based on human feedback. These enhancements
significantly improve the datasets’ usability and ensure greater
accuracy for future analysis. For Challenge 2: In response to
the lack of a standardized evaluation framework, we develop a Fig. 1. Microservice System and Trace.
comprehensive framework that includes trace collection, trace
preprocessing, model adaptation, and model evaluation. This
enables thorough empirical assessments of diverse algorithms 4) Algorithm Recommendation Strategies: We propose dataacross multiple datasets, ensuring reproducibility and promoting driven recommendation strategies for selecting the most
robust comparative studies. For Challenge 3: Based on exten- suitable anomaly detection algorithms based on trace charsive experimental results, we propose tailored recommendation acteristics and operational requirements.
strategies for selecting anomaly detection algorithms. These
strategies account for the unique characteristics of various trace II. BACKGROUND
datasets and provide practical guidance for selecting the most
appropriate algorithm for specific scenarios. A. Trace Structure
 The key contributions of this paper can be summarized as Microservice architecture has fundamentally transformed the
follows: way modern applications are developed and operated, enabling
 1) Public Benchmark: We establish an open-source repos- systems to be more modular, scalable, flexible, and durable. In
 itory containing trace data and algorithms and offer this architecture, an application is composed of a collection
 a unified and standardized benchmark for evaluating of loosely coupled services, each responsible for a specific
 trace anomaly detection algorithms. The open-source data business function. These services communicate with each other
 repository has a total size of 3.6 GB, containing ap- through lightweight protocols and are independently deployable,
 proximately 1.04 million traces. Our code is available at allowing for rapid iteration and fault isolation. However, as
 https://github.com/nkalgo/TADBench.git. the number of services grows, tracking and managing their
 2) Accurate Data Labeling: We standardize available trace interactions becomes increasingly complex. This is where disdatasets and provide manually labeled anomaly annota- tributed tracing plays a crucial role. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
 tions, improving the datasets’ quality and applicability. a microservice system typically consists of three layers: the
 Around 210,000 traces are labeled as structural anomalies service layer, where microservices like ts-travel-service and tsor latency anomalies. ticketinfo-service function; the container layer, which provides
 3) Empirical Study: In response to the question of whether runtime environments for these services, ensuring resource isoa universally effective trace anomaly detection algorithm lation and scalability; and the server layer, where the containers
 exists, we conduct a comprehensive and systematic em- are hosted on physical or virtual machines.
 pirical study of trace anomaly detection algorithms, ana- Distributed tracing records the flow of requests as they proplyzing their performance across several datasets and iden- agate through different system components, giving insight into
 tifying their strengths and limitations. To the best of our how microservices interact with one another. By tracing each
 knowledge, this is the first comprehensive empirical study request’s path across different services, it becomes possible
 in this area. to understand not only the performance attributes of distinct
3366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. Latency Anomaly. Fig. 3. Structural Anomaly (unexpected).

services but also their dependencies and interactions with one
another. Common distributed tracing systems mainly include
Jaeger [8], Zipkin [9], and SkyWalking [10], all of which adhere
to the OpenTracing [11] specification. OpenTracing defines two
core components: traces and spans. Traces serve as essential
tools for describing the execution paths of requests and play a
pivotal role in comprehending and evaluating system behavior.
Conceptually, a trace can be represented as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) that encapsulates all the services and operations Fig. 4. Structural Anomaly (missing).
involved in processing a request, along with their temporal
dependencies, thereby providing a holistic view of system behavior. extends the execution time of the corresponding span. Similarly,
 An example of a trace is shown in Fig. 1. The illustrated trace contention for limited resources (e.g., memory, disk I/O, or
comprises seven spans, with each span representing a specific thread pool capacity) increases operation waiting times, thereby
service call. Each trace is uniquely identified by its own trace amplifying service latency. In addition, anomalous network con-
ID, providing a global reference for tracking the entire execution ditions, including packet loss or congestion between microserflow. Meanwhile, each individual span in the trace captures vices, introduce transmission delays in requests and responses,
detailed call-related information, including the trace ID, a unique further prolongs trace latency beyond its normal statistical range.
span ID, and the parent span ID. The parent span ID establishes These issues are reflected in trace data as abnormally prolonged
hierarchical relationships among spans, thus constructing the durations of specific spans, leading to service-level latency that
structure of the entire trace. Furthermore, spans typically record exceeds the normal statistical range.
time-related information such as the start time and duration, as Structural Anomalies: Deviations from expected service inwell as the service name, specific operation name, and status vocation sequences inside a trace are known as structural anomacode. lies. These deviations may include unexpected service calls,
 missing calls, and call order errors.
 Unexpected service calls occur when a service or operation
B. Trace Anomalies
 is invoked unexpectedly, as shown in Fig. 3, where Service B
 Trace data is primarily utilized for system operation and incorrectly invokes Service G instead of Service E. This type
maintenance, supporting tasks such as fault diagnosis, root of anomaly may result from configuration drift (e.g., outdated
cause analysis, and system visualization. Among these tasks, service registries) leading to incorrect routing rules, fallback
trace anomaly detection is of particular importance. Generally logic failures (e.g., circuit breakers redirecting traffic to uninspeaking, trace anomalies can be categorized into two primary tended or non-redundant services), or dependency mismatches
types: (e.g., API version upgradation without backward compatibil-
 Latency Anomalies: Latency anomalies occur when the ex- ity). These business-related configuration or deployment issues
ecution time of an operation exceeds its normal range, which can inadvertently cause services to interact with incorrect or
can be detected when spans exhibit abnormally long durations. unexpected counterparts, thereby introducing anomalies in the
Typically, such anomalies not only impact the target service but expected trace.
can also have cascading effects on its upstream dependencies, Missing calls refer to cases where an expected service or
which may impair overall system performance and have a neg- operation is absent, like Service E is missing in Fig. 4. These
ative impact on user experience. For instance, Spans 0, 1, and 2 anomalies may be caused not only by system failures or network
have abnormally high latencies of 237 ms, 235 ms, and 230 ms, latency, but more critically by business process incompleteness.
respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 2. For instance, a workflow step may be skipped due to unmet
 The reasons for causing latency anomalies may include per- preconditions such as data validation failures, authorization deformance bottlenecks, resource contention, and network delays. nials, or business rule violations. Additionally, service outages,
For example, a bottleneck within a service’s processing (e.g., communication timeouts, or misconfigured routing (such as
inefficient database queries or excessive CPU usage) directly incorrect service addresses, unpublished APIs, or authentication
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3367

 1) VAE-Based Algorithms: Variational Autoencoders
 (VAEs) [13] serve as the core model for this category.
 These methods aim to reconstruct normal patterns in trace
 data, leveraging the learned latent representations to identify
 anomalies.
 TraceAnomaly: TraceAnomaly [14] employs deep variational
 Bayesian networks with posterior flow [15] to model normal
 trace patterns. It uses a Service Trace Vector (STV) to represent
 data, with each dimension denoting a distinct call path and the
Fig. 5. Structural Anomaly (out-of-order). corresponding response time indicated by its value.
 CRISP: Adopting the same anomaly detection model as
 TraceAnomaly, CRISP [16] encodes traces by extracting the
 critical path using a recursive algorithm. It constructs a Service
 Critical Path Vector (SCPV) by subtracting the durations of child
 spans when recording spans on the critical path.
 TraceVAE: Using Graph-VAE architectures [17], [18], [19],
 TraceVAE [20] separately models structural and temporal features via a structure VAE and a time VAE. Additionally, Trace-
Fig. 6. Algorithm Overview. VAE incorporates Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [21] to
 capture correlations among nodes in the trace graphs.
 GTrace: By combining graph-wise and node-wise VAE modfailures) can also interrupt the normal flow, preventing certain els, GTrace [12] reconstructs both structural and latency features
calls from being made. Furthermore, operational decisions such of trace graphs. To enhance detection efficiency, it groups traces
as temporary service disruptions during deployments may lead with the same substructures. Moreover, GTrace adopts Treeto the absence of expected service interactions in the trace. LSTM [22] to generate shared encodings for identical sub-tree
 Moreover, call order errors occur when the sequence of ser- structures, further supporting its substructure-based grouping
vice invocations deviates from the expected order. For example, strategy.
in Fig. 5, Service F mistakenly invokes Service E, whereas it 2) GNN-Based Algorithms: In this category, Graph Neural
should have been Service B invoking Service E. Such errors Networks (GNNs) [23], [24] serve as the foundation. These
often stem not merely from race conditions in asynchronous models excel at capturing structural and relational information
systems, but more specifically from concurrency control issues in trace graphs.
in event-driven architectures where events are processed in PUTraceAD: As a semi-supervised anomaly detection
improper sequences, violating logical dependencies between method, PUTraceAD [25] trains a model based on GATs and the
services. Moreover, version incompatibilities between microser- nnPU [26] algorithm using a limited amount of labeled abnorvices can induce unintended temporal sequencing of operations, mal traces. Notably, when generating graph representations for
which often materializes as observable structural anomalies in traces, PUTraceAD uses WordPiece [27] and a pre-trained BERT
the trace. model [28] to generate 768-dimensional embeddings for service
 and operation names while creating graph representations for
 traces.
C. Trace Anomaly Detection Algorithms TraceCRL: Following the GraphCL (Graph Contrastive
 Many algorithms for trace anomaly detection exhibit unique Learning with Augmentations) framework [29], TraceCRL [30]
design principles and robust performance under specific condi- leverages contrastive learning and graph neural networks to
tions. Traditionally, algorithms in this domain have been cate- learn effective trace representations. Initially, it utilizes Deepgorized into statistic-based and model-based approaches [12]. Walk [31] to generate vector representations for each operation.
However, as deep learning has become more and more popular, Compared to other algorithms that only use duration as the
an increasing number of algorithms now employ deep learning temporal feature for each invocation, TraceCRL incorporates
models, rendering the traditional classification inadequate for more detailed temporal features, such as the quantile of the invocapturing the complexity and diversity of state-of-the-art trace cation’s start time and the proportion of the local execution time.
anomaly detection techniques. To address this limitation, we By employing One-Class SVM [32] as a subsequent detection
propose a classification based on underlying architectures, pro- model, TraceCRL is widely used for anomaly detection tasks.
viding a more precise and systematic framework. Accordingly, 3) LSTM-Based Algorithms: Long Short-Term Memory
we divide these algorithms into three main categories: VAE- (LSTM) networks [33] are used in this category to model
based, GNN-based, and LSTM-based algorithms, which repre- sequential dependencies and detect both latency and structural
sent the dominant design paradigms in the field. An overview of anomalies in traces.
this classification is presented in Fig. 6. Except for PUTraceAD, Multimodal LSTM: Multimodal LSTM [34] combines tempowhich is a semi-supervised learning algorithm, all others in Fig. 6 ral and structural features into a joint representation. Each span
are unsupervised. is encoded using a vector with one-hot call path encoding and
3368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 7. Evaluation Framework.

normalized duration. Rare calls are excluded to reduce noise and
maintain consistency. LSTM networks are applied to model the
sequential relationships.
 In summary, a wide range of trace anomaly detection algorithms have been developed in recent years, each with unique
design models. Selecting an appropriate detection algorithm
for real-world applications remains a critical challenge. This Fig. 8. Different Trace Formats. (a) Data format for GAIA. (b) Data format
paper aims to address this issue by conducting a comprehensive for AIOps2022.
evaluation of various algorithms under different conditions.
Through extensive experiments, we systematically analyze
their performance, highlight their advantages and drawbacks, and 2023 respectively. AIOps2020 originates from a realand provide recommendations for the most effective selection world production microservice system, while AIOps2022
strategy. and AIOps2023 simulate anomalies through fault injection.
 However, the specific details in different datasets may vary,
 as exemplified by the GAIA and AIOps2022 datasets shown
 III. TADBENCH DESIGN
 in Fig. 8(a) and Fig. 8(b), respectively. These differences en-
 To systematically evaluate the performance of trace anomaly compass various aspects, including the meaning of fields, field
detection algorithms, we propose an evaluation framework de- names, the number of fields, and the units of values. In previous
picted in Fig. 7, which consists of four main stages: trace experiments, researchers often had to preprocess each dataset
collection, trace preprocessing, model adaptation, and model separately to meet the format requirements of different algoevaluation. First, we collect the available trace data, followed rithms. When new datasets emerged, adapting them to various
by preprocessing to standardize the data format. Next, the algo- algorithms was time-consuming and severely hindered experirithms need to ensure proper data format adaptation to receive mental progress. Furthermore, there were significant difficulties
and process the pre-processed data for evaluation. Finally, the in comparing the features of various datasets or combining them.
performance of different algorithms is evaluated based on the To address these challenges, we propose a standardized format
experimental results. consisting of two primary classes: Trace and Span, as demonstrated in Fig. 9.
 r Trace Class: Each trace is uniquely identified by its
A. Dataset Overview and Unified Format
 trace_id and contains fields such as root_span (denoting
 In this study, we conduct an in-depth analysis of multi- the start of the trace) and span_count (denoting the total
ple datasets, including TrainTicket [35], [36], GAIA (Generic number of spans). The anomaly_type field categorizes
AIOps Atlas) [37], AIOps2020 [38], AIOps2022 [39] and anomalies into four types: 0 (normal), 1 (only latency
AIOps2023. These datasets are generally based on the Open- anomaly), 2 (only structural anomaly), and 3 (both latency
Tracing format mentioned in Section II-A. and structural anomalies). Additionally, the source field
 r TrainTicket: The TrainTicket dataset, sourced from the denotes the data source.
 open-source data in the PUTraceAD [25] paper, is gen- r Span Class: Each span records detailed call information,
 erated through fault injection in the microservice system including trace_id, span_id, parent_span_id, and chil-
 TrainTicket. dren_span_id, which collectively construct the trace tree.
 r GAIA: GAIA, dedicated to anomaly detection, log analysis, Each span also contains time information (start_time and
 and fault localization, is derived from CloudWise microser- duration), service and operation details (service_name and
 vice simulation system. operation_name), anomaly labels (anomaly) and status
 r AIOps2020, AIOps2022 and AIOps2023: The AIOps2020, information (status_code). The latency and structure fields
 AIOps2022, and AIOps2023 datasets originate from the further specify latency and structural anomaly, while the
 CCF International AIOps Challenge held in 2020, 2022, extra field captures additional contextual details.
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3369

 TABLE I
 DATASET CHARACTERISTICS

 TABLE II
 DATASET ANOMALY RATIO

 GAIA, AIOps2020 and AIOps2023 lack operation-level metrics.
 Table II summarizes the anomaly ratios for the five datasets
 across three categories: total, structure, and latency. The total anomaly ratios range from 21.8% (AIOps2020) to 53.6%
 (AIOps2023). For structural anomalies, the ratios range from
 3.5% (AIOps2020) and 39.0% (AIOps2023). For latency
 anomalies, the ratios range from 21.5% (AIOps2020) to 35.9%
 (AIOps2022).

 B. Dataset Labeling
 Despite being publicly accessible, the five datasets are gen-
Fig. 9. Unified Format. erally collected systematically without specific labels. Consequently, researchers cannot directly distinguish between normal and abnormal traces in these datasets, posing challenges
 for further analysis and application. Without proper labeling,
 This unified format eliminates the need to preprocess raw data it is impossible to successfully validate the performance of
for each algorithm separately. Instead, we merely convert the anomaly detection algorithms. Therefore, recognizing that trace
data into this unified format, and then adapt the format to various anomalies are generally categorized into latency and structural
algorithms. Consequently, each new dataset in any format can anomalies, we develop the labeling process shown in Fig. 10.
be compatible with any algorithm without the need for extra data These datasets usually contain fault microservice information
preprocessing once it has been converted to the unified format. and fault occurrence time. Using the critical data, we divide
Besides, this unified format supports a systematic comparison the traces into two categories: normal traces and fault-injected
of datasets, enabling operators to gain deeper insight into sys- traces. For latency anomaly detection, we assess whether the
tem behavior, and facilitating efficient anomaly diagnosis and latency of each service in a fault-injected trace falls within the
resolution. normal range. As discussed in Section II-B, some business-
 To evaluate the differences between the five datasets, we related anomalies—such as performance bottlenecks, resource
examine their respective characteristics, with the results sum- contention, and network delays—produce detectable latency
marized in Table I. Key features are systematically compared distribution shifts in trace data. To enhance accuracy, we group
in the table, with particular attention paid to differences in services based on their shared calling paths from the root service,
average trace depth (ranging from 3.3 to 5.5), average span rather than relying solely on service names. Next, we use a
numbers per trace (ranging from 9.3 to 39.0), monitoring gran- Gaussian distribution to model the service latency distribution
ularity (service/operation-level), service scale (ranging from in normal traces. Specifically, let μ and σ denote the mean and
10 to 40), average service numbers per trace (ranging from standard deviation of the latency distribution, respectively. A
1.3 to 7.8), operation scale (ranging from 29 to 64), and service latency L in a fault-injected trace is considered abnormal
average operation numbers per trace (ranging from 7.6 to if it satisfies:
11.6). Notably, TrainTicket has the highest operation scale (64),
while AIOps2022 contains the most services (40). Additionally, / [μ − 3σ, μ + 3σ]
 L∈ (1)
3370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 10. Trace Labeling Process.

following the 3-sigma rule, which assumes that 99.73% of normally distributed data falls within three standard deviations of
the mean. We employ the 3-sigma rule because it is a statistically
robust and widely accepted method for detecting rare, extreme
deviations from an established normal pattern [14]. If such an
anomaly is detected, both the service and the trace are labeled
as latency anomalies.
 For structural anomaly detection, we compare the structural
differences between faulty and normal traces. Initially, we collect all patterns and their frequencies from normal traces. Then,
for each fault-injected trace, we examine if its structure exists
in the normal dataset. If the structure is rare or absent, we apply
the Jaccard similarity to identify the most similar pattern from
the normal traces. The Jaccard similarity between two traces T
and P is defined as:
 Fig. 11. Algorithm SDK.
 |S(T ) ∩ S(P )|
 J(T, P ) = (2)
 |S(T ) ∪ S(P )|
 automatically compatible with all algorithms, eliminating the
where S(T ) and S(P ) denote the set of services in traces T and need for cumbersome format adjustments. The open-source code
P respectively. We then select the most similar normal pattern we have released already incorporates this functionality.
through: In addition, to ensure the standardization, modularity, and
 P ∗ = arg max J(T, Pi ) (3) extensibility of algorithm evaluation, we construct an algorithm
 Pi ∈P Software Development Kit (SDK), as illustrated in the Fig. 11.
where P is the collection of normal trace patterns. Subsequently, By requiring each algorithm to inherit from the common abstract
we perform a detailed examination by manually comparing the base class, we standardize the format of inputs and outputs across
faulty trace T with the most similar normal pattern P ∗ . The different algorithms. This design not only simplifies the intetrace is finally labeled as a structural anomaly if this compari- gration of new algorithms into the evaluation pipeline but also
son confirms the presence of deviations such as missing calls, reduces the effort required for extra adaptation or modification.
unexpected service calls, or call order errors. More importantly, it facilitates fair and consistent comparisons.
 The SDK also serves as a scalable and extensible foundation for
C. Algorithm Adaption future research, enabling rapid prototyping, algorithm benchmarking, and collaborative development in the field of trace
 In general, different algorithms often call for specific trace anomaly detection.
formats in their architecture. In prior studies, researchers who
intended to use open-source algorithm code had to implement
 D. Evaluation Metrics
additional data preprocessing steps to meet the algorithm requirements, which incurred considerable time overhead. To ad- In this study, we utilize several evaluation metrics to measure
dress this, our work have standardized the data format, allowing the performance of the anomaly detection models, including
us to simply add code to each algorithm’s implementation that Precision, Recall, F1-score, Accuracy, and Time Consumpconverts the unified format into the specific format required by tion. These metrics evaluate both the effectiveness and efficiency
the algorithm. As a result, when a new dataset needs to be of the trace anomaly detection algorithms. They are defined as
applied to these algorithms for detection, it only needs to be follows, where TP refers to the number of anomalous traces
converted to the standardized format now, which will then be accurately detected as anomalies, FP refers to the number of
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3371

 anomaly types: total anomalies, structural anomalies, and latency anomalies. Moreover, the leaderboard supports interactive
 functionality, allowing users to dynamically sort results based on
 any chosen metric. This design enables researchers to explore the
 strengths and weaknesses of algorithms from multiple dimensions. By offering a unified and visually accessible platform for
 comprehensive performance comparison, this leaderboard not
 only facilitates the identification of state-of-the-art methods but
 also encourages further improvement in trace anomaly detection
 research.

 IV. EVALUATION
 In this section, we focus on the evaluation to address the
Fig. 12. Trace Anomaly Detection Algorithm Leaderboard. following research questions:
 r RQ1: Is there an algorithm that consistently outperforms
 others across all datasets?
normal traces mistakenly detected as anomalies, FN refers to
 r RQ2: How well do the algorithms perform across various
the number of anomalous traces that fail to be identified as such, dataset conditions?
and TN refers to the number of normal traces correctly detected
 r RQ3: How can we choose the algorithm that works best
as normal. for a certain dataset?
 r Precision: the proportion of real anomalous traces over all
 the predicted anomalous traces, which can be calculated
 A. Experimental Setup
 using the following formula:
 After performing anomaly labels on each of the five datasets
 TP
 Precision = (4) including TrainTicket, GAIA, AIOps2020, AIOps2022 and
 TP + FP AIOps2023, we evaluate the performance of the trace-based
 r Recall: the proportion of predicted anomalous traces over anomaly detection algorithms on these datasets separately. For
 all the real anomalous traces, which can be calculated using each dataset, we divide the normal traces into a training set and
 the following formula: a test set in a 2:1 ratio, while all abnormal traces are included in
 the test set.
 TP
 Recall = (5) During experiments, we generally use default hyperparam-
 TP + FN eters from the corresponding papers on anomaly detection alr F1-score: the harmonic mean of the precision and recall, gorithms. If the training or detection performance on a parwhich can be calculated using the following formula: ticular dataset is suboptimal, the hyperparameters are adjusted
 Precision × Recall to optimize the results. All experiments are performed on a
 F1-score = 2 × (6) server configured with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5416S CPUs,
 Precision + Recall
 376 GB of RAM, and seven NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs, each
 r Accuracy: the proportion of correctly predicted traces over
 with 48 GB of GPU memory.
 all the traces, which can be calculated using the following
 formula:
 B. Overall Performance (RQ1)
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (7)
 TP + TN + FP + FN Table III summarizes the overall performance of various
 r Time Consumption: A key metric for assessing model effi- algorithms across datasets, and Fig. 13 presents a radar chart
 comparing the F1-scores achieved by different algorithms on
 ciency, particularly in large-scale or real-time applications.
 various datasets. The findings reveal that no single algorithm
 This is quantified by the time required for the training and
 consistently outperforms others across all datasets. Specifitesting phases.
 cally, GTrace [12] achieves optimal performance with F1-scores
 of 99.4% and 71.8% on the TrainTicket and AIOps2020 datasets
E. Algorithm Leaderboard
 respectively. TraceVAE [20] demonstrates leading performance
 To provide a clearer and more comprehensive comparison on the GAIA and AIOps2022 datasets with F1-scores of 90.9%
of trace anomaly detection algorithms, we design and imple- and 78.9% respectively, while PUTraceAD [25] achieves the
ment a dedicated leaderboard, as illustrated in Fig. 12. This highest F1-score of 74.7% on the AIOps2023 dataset. These
leaderboard systematically displays the performance of different results highlight that the effectiveness of each algorithm is inalgorithms on different datasets. Specifically, it reports a set of fluenced by dataset characteristics. GTrace’s innovative strategy
key evaluation metrics—including precision, recall, F1-score, of “predicting latency with structure” proves effective in part
accuracy, and time consumption—across three representative datasets, while TraceVAE’s integration of GNNs and VAEs
3372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE III
 OVERALL PERFORMANCE (F1: F1-SCORE; ACC: ACCURACY)

Fig. 13. F1-score Comparison Across Datasets.
 Fig. 14. Algorithm Performance under Different Trace Depths.

 TABLE IV
 ALGORITHM PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT ANOMALY TYPES
 Furthermore, this table indicates that current latency detection
 methods still have room for improvement, making it a promising
 direction for future research.

 C. Performance on Various Data Characteristics (RQ2)
 In order to thoroughly analyze the impact of data characteristics on the performance of trace anomaly detection algorithms,
 we first combine data from the five distinct datasets into a
addresses complex data characteristics. PUTraceAD’s semi- single, comprehensive dataset. This aggregated dataset serves
supervised architecture demonstrates unique advantages on the as a unified foundation for further analysis. To better understand
AIOps2023 dataset containing 53.6% anomalies. how different features affect algorithm performance, we then
 To evaluate the algorithms’ performance in detecting different reclassify the combined data based on specific feature values,
types of anomalies, we calculate the F1-scores for both structural thereby establishing different subsets where data with similar
and latency anomalies. This analysis does not take into account characteristics are clustered together. These newly constructed
the dataset differences, as detailed in Table IV. TraceVAE datasets are subsequently applied to evaluate the performance
achieves a structural anomaly detection F1-score of 96.8%, of different algorithms. The results indicate that these data
highlighting the exceptional performance of its Structure VAE characteristics significantly influence algorithm performance:
module. The model’s GNN encoder explicitly captures topolog- Trace Depth: Fig. 14 clearly illustrates that different alical dependencies within trace data, significantly enhancing its gorithms excel at different trace depths. Specifically, when
structural modeling capabilities. In contrast, GTrace achieves trace depth is ≤ 3, TraceVAE achieves the highest F1-score
a latency anomaly detection F1-score of 78.2%, primarily due of 92.2%, slightly outperforming PUTraceAD (91.6%) and
to its focus on modeling latency features at the span level, GTrace (91.4%). Both GTrace and TraceVAE show distinct
unlike other algorithms that operate solely at the trace level. performance advantages as trace depth increases. Notably, when
This span-level modeling allows GTrace to capture fine-grained the trace depth is more than 6, TraceVAE significantly outlatency variations within traces, leading to more precise anomaly performs other algorithms, reaching an F1-score of 82.3%,
detection that might be overlooked by trace-level approaches. while GTrace drops to 66.5%. This suggests that many anomaly
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3373

 Fig. 16. Algorithm Performance under Different Service Counts.
Fig. 15. Algorithm Performance under Different Span Counts.
 small max_node_count constrains the model’s ability to deal
detection methods are capable of effectively handling relatively with highly complex traces involving a large number of spans.
simple traces with shallow invocation paths. However, when Meanwhile, CRISP [16] becomes more competitive at higher
trace depth grows, the complexity of invocation logic and span counts, suggesting that its focus on extracting critical
multi-layer service interactions increases, resulting in wider paths is well-suited for scenarios requiring a lot of invocation.
fault propagation and more noticeable variations in algorithm In contrast, methods like PUTraceAD and Multimodal LSTM
performance. In such scenarios, TraceVAE’s dual-variable graph maintain high accuracy for relatively simple traces but show
variational autoencoder [17], [18], [19] appears better equipped diminished performance as trace complexity grows, due to their
to capture long-range dependencies and contextual information. limited capacity for modeling long-range dependencies. For
Meanwhile, GTrace shows its strength in moderate-depth situa- traces with high span counts, approaches capable of capturing
tions, and PUTraceAD remains competitive for traces with small extensive dependencies, like GTrace, are expected to yield better
depth. anomaly detection results.
 Span Count: As shown in Fig. 15, GTrace achieves the Service Count: Fig. 16 illustrates that for traces with 1-4
highest F1-score for traces with 1-5 spans (99.7%), 11-30 spans services, TraceVAE achieves the highest F1-score (89.7%), fol-
(70.7%), and more than 30 spans (60.8%), demonstrating its lowed by GTrace (83.5%) and Multimodal LSTM (78.3%). Simrobust performance across both simple and highly complex ilarly, TraceVAE maintains its dominance at 5-8 services with an
traces. In contrast, TraceVAE excels at 6-10 spans, attaining F1-score of 67.9%, while GTrace and Multimodal LSTM are still
an F1-score of 74.2%, which suggests that its architecture is competitive at 57.7% and 57.0%, respectively. However, when
well-suited to traces of moderate complexity. Notably, both the number of services exceeds 8, GTrace outperforms the other
TraceVAE (99.4%) and PUTraceAD (99.1%) also approach 99% methods, reaching 68.1%, whereas TraceAnomaly trails behind
at 1-5 spans, indicating that simple traces can be effectively at 59.6%. As the number of services in a trace increases, fault
handled by a variety of methods. Moreover, CRISP exhibits a diagnosis becomes more challenging. These results suggest that
unique performance trend: it improves steadily with increasing TraceVAE is particularly effective in relatively simple service
span count, starting from 24.3% for traces with 1–5 spans and topologies, where modeling key service-to-service interactions
reaching 59.3% when the span count exceeds 30. Meanwhile, can capture most of the anomaly-relevant information. However,
other methods, such as Multimodal LSTM [34] and Trace- GTrace demonstrates better performance for traces with more
CRL [30], exhibit moderate performance but do not outperform services. This is primarily attributed to GTrace’s Node-wise
the optimal algorithm in any particular range. The span count VAE encoder, which leverages the service name field to capof a trace reflects both the breadth and depth of its execu- ture each service’s impact on overall trace latency. In contrast,
tion logic, encompassing horizontal service calls at the same other anomaly detection methods such as PUTraceAD, CRISP,
level and vertical, multi-layered interactions across different and TraceCRL show relatively limited adaptability, and their
services. Traces with more spans often involve more frequent inability to consistently model detailed inter-service interactions
service calls, denser data interactions, and greater opportunities hinders their performance, especially as system scale increases.
for fault propagation. GTrace’s Tree-LSTM [22], specifically These observations underscore the importance of capturing nudesigned for tree structures, effectively captures dependencies anced interactions across multiple services, which is critical for
between parent-child nodes, aligning well with typical trace accurate anomaly detection in large-scale trace data.
structures. However, although TraceVAE achieves outstanding Anomaly Ratio: According to Fig. 17, GTrace achieves the
results for traces with a medium or small number of spans, highest F1-score (68.7%) when the anomaly ratio is 0%, whereas
its detection capability may be limited by its fixed span count TraceVAE leads at 0.5% (69.1%). For 1%, GTrace again outrequirement, determined by a predefined max_node_count. A performs other methods at 61.8%, but when the anomaly ratio
3374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE V
 TRAINING TIME AND DETECTING SPEEDING OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS

Fig. 17. Algorithm Performance under Different Anomaly Ratios.

reaches 3%, TraceVAE stands out with 56.6%. Other algorithms,
including Multimodal LSTM, TraceAnomaly, and CRISP, ex- Fig. 18. A decision tree based on multiple datasets’ characteristics.
hibit moderate performance across all anomaly levels. Notably,
PUTraceAD loses detection capability for 0% or 0.5% but
achieves 41.9% at 1% and 55.0% at 3%. This is consistent with Conversely, TraceVAE requires a significant amount of trainits positive-unlabeled learning paradigm, which relies on the ing time, which reflects the computational complexity of its
presence of a sufficient number of positive (abnormal) samples to dual-variable graph variational autoencoder architecture, even
perform effective training. PUTraceAD’s detection performance if it has demonstrated outstanding detection performance in
deteriorates in the absence of sufficient anomalies to direct prior experiments. The model’s training cost may hinder its
the optimization process. Additionally, since abnormal traces real-time adaptability or deployment in resource-constrained
account for approximately 1% of total traces [40] in real-world environments. Similarly, TraceCRL exhibits considerable time
production environments, GTrace’s robustness at this ratio is consumption during trace representation generation, even with
particularly noteworthy. However, as the anomaly ratio further GPU acceleration. The model’s reliance on contrastive learning
increases, unlike methods such as GTrace that use negative frameworks, involving large numbers of positive and negative
log-likelihood (NLL) directly as anomaly scores, TraceVAE’s sample pairs, results in high computational complexity. Notechniques, including Bernoulli & Categorical Scaling, Node tably, GTrace achieves remarkable detection speed, primarily
Count Normalization, and Gaussian Std-Limit [20], reduce en- attributed to its caching techniques and trace grouping strategies,
tropy gaps effectively, mitigate the negative impact of noise, which allow shared representations and precomputed features
and enable more accurate differentiation between normal and to be reused across similar trace structures. By avoiding redunanomalous traces. The findings underscore the importance of dant computation, GTrace effectively minimizes time consumpdesigning models that can handle increased noise effectively, tion during detection phases, making it suitable for real-time
ensuring reliable anomaly identification even in highly contam- anomaly detection scenarios where detection efficiency is critiinated datasets. cal.

D. Efficiency Analysis of Different Algorithms E. Recommended Algorithms (RQ3)
 To evaluate the detection efficiency of various algorithms, we In previous experiments, we evaluated the performance of
measure the time consumption during the training and detection various algorithms on datasets characterized by distinct individphases using the same dataset. Specifically, 51,386 traces are ual features, primarily focusing on the impact of single features
randomly sampled from the TrainTicket dataset as the training on detection performance. However, real-world datasets typiset, while the test set comprises 51,309 normal traces and 25,197 cally exhibit multiple coexisting features, necessitating a more
abnormal traces. The time consumption details are presented in comprehensive evaluation. To bridge this gap and approximate
Table V. more realistic application scenarios, we extend our analysis
 The results reveal notable differences in time efficiency by employing a decision tree model [41] to integrate multiple
among the algorithms. Multimodal LSTM demonstrates the dataset characteristics, as illustrated in Fig. 18. The results
lowest training overhead, owing to its approach of independently demonstrate that when the proportion of abnormal data in the
modeling temporal and structural features with LSTMs. This dataset exceeds 10%, the semi-supervised anomaly detection
architecture simplifies the learning process and leads to supe- method PUTraceAD is preferred due to its ability to effectively
rior training efficiency compared to other models with more utilize anomaly information. For datasets with lower anomaly
complex graph-based encoders or latent variable mechanisms. proportions, the choice of the algorithm depends on additional
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3375

factors. If the number of spans in a trace is ≤ 5 or > 30, we our recommended strategy. For example, we recommend PUrecommend GTrace, benefiting from its Tree-LSTM architecture TraceAD for data with high anomaly ratios. For traces with a
that handles both shallow and complex hierarchical structures large number of spans or a large number of services, GTrace
efficiently. For traces with 6–10 spans, the selection depends on is the preferred choice. Conversely, for trace data with shallow
the trace depth: TraceVAE performs better for traces with a depth depth, we suggest TraceVAE. Additionally, when higher detecof 3 or less, whereas GTrace is more effective for deeper traces tion efficiency is the primary goal, GTrace is the most suitable
due to its ability to capture long-range dependencies. For traces option.
with spans ranging from 11 to 30, TraceVAE is preferable when Future Research Directions: Despite the progress made by exthe anomaly proportion is ≤ 1% or > 3%; otherwise, GTrace isting trace anomaly detection algorithms, our empirical results
remains the optimal choice. reveal current limitations and future optimization directions.
 This hierarchical decision-making framework provides a sys- r Towards fine-grained span-level anomaly detection: Many
tematic and practical strategy for selecting the most suitable anomaly detection algorithms [14], [16], [20], [25], [34]
anomaly detection algorithm across diverse real-world scenar- operate primarily at the trace level, labeling an entire
ios, effectively accounting for the interplay of multiple dataset trace as normal or abnormal. This trace-centric approach
characteristics. is insufficient for detailed diagnosis. Future work should
 focus on optimizing the capability for span-level detection,
 which is essential for root cause analysis.
 V. THREATS TO VALIDITY r Building upon the strengths of prior methods: Researchers
 Algorithms: The primary threat to validity in this empirical should aim to adopt effective design elements from existstudy lies in the models’ configuration. By default, we utilize the ing work while minimizing architectural constraints that
hyperparameter settings given in the original publications for the may negatively impact model performance. For example,
corresponding algorithm and conduct each experiment at least TraceVAE’s use of a fixed span count per trace leads to
three times. However, when suboptimal results are observed performance degradation on traces with high span counts,
on certain datasets, adjustments are made to improve detection which should be avoided in future designs. Building upon
performance. While using default hyperparameters is a practical established methodologies while addressing their limitaapproach, fine-tuning these parameters to align with the unique tions, future anomaly detection methods can integrate the
characteristics of each dataset may result in better detection entropy gap reduction strategies pioneered in TraceVAE.
outcomes. Specifically, this involves implementing Bernoulli & Cate-
 Datasets: The external threat to validity stems from the gorical Scaling for structural anomaly identification, Node
datasets used in the evaluation. Although five distinct datasets Count Normalization for dimensional consistency, and
are employed to assess algorithm performance, their data fea- Gaussian Std-Limit thresholding for latency anomalies.
tures may not comprehensively reflect the wide range of real- These techniques are to be synergistically combined with
world scenarios. Each dataset has unique characteristics and in- the hierarchical graph encoding architecture of GTrace,
herent limitations, potentially failing to capture the full diversity which separates global structure modeling from node-level
and complexity of the data encountered in practical applications. feature processing through its innovative dispatching layer.
To overcome this restriction, we will focus on collecting more Furthermore, the entire system can leverage GTrace’s optidatasets from a broader range of scenarios and domains in the mized caching strategy that utilizes dynamic programming
future. and LRU-cached trees to enable batched processing of
 merged subgraphs, thereby enhancing overall efficiency
 and scalability.
 VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
 This section builds upon the empirical findings and provides
a deeper exploration of the insights gained from benchmark- VII. CONCLUSION
ing trace anomaly detection algorithms. We first discuss the This paper presents a comprehensive empirical study on
data-driven strategy required for selecting an optimal existing anomaly detection algorithms used in distributed tracing sysalgorithm. Following this, we address the current limitations ob- tems, addressing critical challenges in selecting and applying
served in anomaly detection methodologies and outline promis- suitable models for real-world scenarios. By systematically
ing research directions. evaluating multiple state-of-the-art algorithms across diverse
 Insights for Existing Algorithm Selection: Our extensive eval- datasets, we provide an in-depth analysis of their respective
uation demonstrates that the most architecturally complex or strengths and limitations under varying data characteristics,
recently published method is not necessarily the most effective including trace depth, span count, service count, and anomaly
across all scenarios. The effectiveness of an algorithm is deeply ratio. The labeled datasets and algorithm implementation have
intertwined with the characteristics of trace data. Therefore, been made publicly available. Future studies can seamlessly
to select the most appropriate method for a specific scenario, apply these models to new datasets by simply converting
practitioners first need to conduct a thorough analysis of their the data into our standardized format, eliminating the need
production trace data, considering factors like span count, ser- for additional format-specific preprocessing for each model.
vice count, trace depth, and anomaly ratio, and then follow This not only supports experiment reproducibility but also
3376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

significantly facilitates future research in trace anomaly de- [22] M. Ahmed, M. R. Samee, and R. E. Mercer, “Improving tree-LSTM with
tection. Furthermore, we offer practical guidance for select- tree attention,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. Semantic Comput., 2019,
 pp. 247–254.
ing suitable algorithms based on different data characteristics, [23] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
bridging the gap between academic research and industrial learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
applications. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
 [24] M. Zhang, Z. Cui, M. Neumann, and Y. Chen, “An end-to-end deep
comprehensive empirical study on trace anomaly detection, learning architecture for graph classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
providing valuable insights to guide both research and practical Intell., 2018, vol. 32, no. 1. pp. 4438–4445.
deployment. [25] K. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Peng, and C. Sha, “PUTraceAD: Trace anomaly
 detection with partial labels based on GNN and PU learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE 33rd Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2022, pp. 239–250.
 [26] R. Kiryo, G. Niu, M. C. du Plessis, and M. Sugiyama, “Positive-unlabeled
 learning with non-negative risk estimator,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural
 REFERENCES Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 1674–1684.
 [27] M. Schuster and K. Nakajima, “Japanese and Korean voice search,”
 [1] M. Villamizar et al., “Evaluating the monolithic and the microservice
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2012,
 architecture pattern to deploy web applications in the cloud,” in Proc.
 pp. 5149–5152.
 10th Comput. Colombian Conf., 2015, pp. 583–590.
 [28] T. Wolf et al., “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
 [2] N. Dragoni et al., “Microservices: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow,” in
 ing,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.: Syst.
 Present and Ulterior Software Engineering, M. Mazzara and B. Meyer,
 Demonstrations, Q. Liu and D. Schlangen, Eds., Oct. 2020, pp. 38–45.
 Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 195–216.
 [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6
 [3] P. Jamshidi, C. Pahl, N. C. Mendonça, J. Lewis, and S. Tilkov, “Microser-
 [29] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
 vices: The journey so far and challenges ahead,” IEEE Softw., vol. 35,
 learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 no. 3, pp. 24–35, May/Jun. 2018.
 2020, vol. 33, pp. 5812–5823.
 [4] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies
 [30] C. Zhang et al., “TraceCRL: Contrastive representation learning for
 through service-level deep Bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int.
 microservice trace analysis,” in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw.
 Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 48–58.
 Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 1221–1232,
 [5] J. Kaldor et al., “Canopy: An end-to-end performance tracing and analysis
 doi: 10.1145/3540250.3549146.
 system,” in Proc. 26th Symp. Operating Syst. Princ., 2017, pp. 34–50.
 [31] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning of
 [6] X. Guo et al., “Graph-based trace analysis for microservice architecture unsocial representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 derstanding and problem diagnosis,” in Proc. 28th ACM Joint Meeting Eur.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710, doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623732.
 Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., 2020, pp. 1387–1397,
 [32] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
 doi: 10.1145/3368089.3417066.
 “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 [7] C. Zhang et al., “DeepTraLog: Trace-log combined microservice anomaly
 Process. Syst., S. Solla, T. Leen, and K. Müller, Eds., 1999, vol. 12,
 detection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 44th
 pp. 582–588.
 Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 623–634.
 [33] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
 [8] Jaegertracing.io, “Jaeger,” Accessed: Nov. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 Neural Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997,
 https://www.jaegertracing.io/
 doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
 [9] Twitter, “Zipkin,” Accessed: Nov. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
 [34] S. Nedelkoski, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Anomaly detection from system
 zipkin.io/
 tracing data using multimodal deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf.
[10] “Apache skywalking,” Accessed: Nov. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: http:
 Cloud Comput., 2019, pp. 179–186.
 //skywalking.apache.org/
 [35] X. Zhou et al., “Fault analysis and debugging of microservice systems:
[11] Opentracing.io, “Opentracing,” Accessed: Nov. 2, 2025. [Online]. Avail-
 Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study,” IEEE Trans.
 able: http://opentracing.io/
 Softw. Eng., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 243–260, Feb. 2021.
[12] Z. Xie et al., “From point-wise to group-wise: A fast and accurate mi-
 [36] X. Zhou et al., “Benchmarking microservice systems for software engicroservice trace anomaly detection approach,” in Proc. 31st ACM Joint Eur.
 neering research,” in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2018, pp. 323–324,
 Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 1739–1749,
 doi: 10.1145/3183440.3194991.
 doi: 10.1145/3611643.3613861.
 [37] CloudWise, “GAIA,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
[13] D. P. Kingma, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf.
 CloudWise-OpenSource/GAIA-DataSet
 Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, Apr. 14-16, 2014, pp. 1–14.
 [38] NetManAIOps, “AIOps challenge 2020 data,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
[14] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies
 https://github.com/NetManAIOps/AIOps-Challenge-2020-Data
 through service-level deep Bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int.
 [39] Google Cloud Platform, “Online boutique,” Accessed: Nov. 2, 2025. [On-
 Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 48–58.
 line]. Available: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-
[15] D. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing
 demo
 flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1530–1538.
 [40] S. Zhang et al., “Efficient and robust trace anomaly detection for large-scale
[16] Z. Zhang, M. K. Ramanathan, P. Raj, A. Parwal, T. Sherwood, and
 microservice systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng.,
 M. Chabbi, “CRISP: Critical path analysis of large-scale microservice
 2023, pp. 69–79.
 architectures,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., Jul. 2022, pp. 655–672.
 [41] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone, Classification and
[17] Y. Kwon, J. Yoo, Y.-S. Choi, W.-J. Son, D. Lee, and S. Kang, “Efficient
 Regression Trees, 1st ed. New York, NY, USA: Chapman and Hall/CRC,
 learning of non-autoregressive graph variational autoencoders for molecu-
 2017.
 lar graph generation,” J. Cheminformatics, vol. 11, no. 1, 2019, Art. no. 70,
 doi: 10.1186/s13321-019-0396-x.
[18] J. Mitton, H. M. Senn, K. Wynne, and R. Murray-Smith, “A graph VAE
 and graph transformer approach to generating molecular graphs,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1–7.
[19] M. Simonovsky and N. Komodakis, “GraphVAE: Towards generation of Yongqian Sun (Member, IEEE) received the BS desmall graphs using variational autoencoders,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Artif. gree in statistical specialty from Northwestern Poly-
 Neural Netw., Rhodes, Greece, 2018, pp. 412–422. technical University, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the
[20] Z. Xie et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection on microservice traces PhD degree in computer science from Tsinghua Unithrough graph VAE,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2874–2884, versity, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently an asdoi: 10.1145/3543507.3583215. sistant professor with the College of Software, Nankai
[21] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio, University, Tianjin, China. His research interests in-
 “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, clude anomaly detection and root cause localization
 2018, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= in service management.
 rJXMpikCZ
SUN et al.: COMPREHENSIVE BENCHMARK AND EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TRACE ANOMALY DETECTION 3377

 Minyi Shao received the BE degree in software en- Shenglin Zhang (Member, IEEE) received BS degree
 gineering in 2023 from Nankai University, Tianjin, in network engineering from the School of Computer
 China, where she is currently working toward the ME Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an,
 degree with the Department of Software Engineering. China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in computer
 Her research interests include AIOps and anomaly science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
 detection in service management. in 2017. He is currently an associate professor with
 the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin,
 China. His current research interests include failure
 detection, diagnosis and prediction for service management.

 Xiaohui Nie (Member, IEEE) received the BE degree
 in computer science and technology from Jilin University, Jilin, China, in 2013, and the PhD degree in Changhua Pei received the BE and PhD degrees
 computer science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, in computer science from the Department of Com-
 China, in 2019. He is currently an associate profes- puter Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
 sor with the Computer Network Information Center, in 2012 and 2017, respectively. He is currently an
 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research associate professor with the Computer Network Ininterests include AIOps and internet security. formation Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 Beijing, China. His research interests include AIOps
 and AI for networking.

 Dongbiao He received the BE degree from Jilin
 Kaiwen Yang received the BE degree in software
 engineering in 2025 from Nankai University, Tianjin, University, China, in 2013, and the PhD degree in
 computer science and technology from Tsinghua
 China, where she is currently working toward the ME
 University, Beijing, China, in 2019. He is currently
 degree with the Department of Software Engineering.
 an associate professor with the Computer Network
 Her research interests include AIOps and LLM.
 Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
 His research interests include networking and edge
 computing systems.

 Yanbiao Li (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 Xingda Li is currently working toward the BE de- in mathematics and the PhD degree in computer
 gree with the Department of Software Engineering, science from Hunan University, Changsha, China,
 Nankai University. His research interests include in 2009 and 2016, respectively. He is currently a
 anomaly detection and root cause localization. professor with the Computer Network Information
 Center, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China.
 His research interests include efficient and reliable
 routing, and satellite network.

 Dan Pei (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE and
 Bowen Hao received the BE degree in software engineering in 2023 from Nankai University, Tianjin, MS degrees in computer science from the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
 China, where he is currently working toward ME
 University, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the
 degree with the Department of Software Engineering.
 PhD degree in computer science from the Computer
 His research interests include LLM for AIOps and
 software engineering. Science Department, University of California, Los
 Angeles, in 2005. He is currently an associate professor with the Department of Computer Science and
 Technology, Tsinghua University. His research focuses on network and service management in general.
 He is an ACM senior member.