IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025 19285

 A Dual-Discriminator Generative Adversarial
 Network for Anomaly Detection
 Da Ding, Youquan Wang , Haicheng Tao, Member, IEEE, Jia Wu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jie Cao

 Abstract—Multivariate time series anomaly detection has I. I NTRODUCTION
shown potential in various fields, such as finance, aerospace, and
security. The fuzzy definition of data anomalies, the complexity
of data patterns, and the scarcity of abnormal data samples
pose significant challenges to anomaly detection. Researchers
 I N RECENT years, the proliferation of the Internet of
 Things (IoT) technology has driven the development of
 smart grids [1], [2] and intelligent transportation systems [3],
have extensively employed autoencoders (AEs) and generative [4]. As shown in Fig. 1, a large amount of system operation
adversarial networks (GANs) in studying time series anomaly data is collected by deploying sensors and actuators. Accudetection methods. However, relying on reconstruction error, rately and timely identifying abnormal information within
the AE-based anomaly detection algorithm needs more effective
regularization methods, rendering it susceptible to the problem of this data is crucial for taking corrective measures, addressing
overfitting. Meanwhile, GAN-based anomaly detection algorithms issues, and minimizing economic losses and human casualties
require high-quality training data, significantly impacting their [5]. Therefore, anomaly detection has emerged as a critical
practical deployment. We propose a novel GAN based on a dual- research area, aiming to precisely and promptly locate anomadiscriminator structure to address these issues. The model first lous patterns within the collected information. As depicted in
processes the data with the generator to obtain the reconstruction
error and then calculates pseudo-labels to divide the data into two Fig. 2, an anomaly is a deviation from a pattern recognized
categories. One data category is input into the first discriminator, by human cognition, resulting in a perceptual change (e.g.,
where a minor loss between the data and its reconstructed appearance corruption, style change, blurring, or occlusion) or
counterpart is better. The other data category is input into the a semantic change (e.g., class change or inversion behavior)
second discriminator, where a larger loss between the data and to the pattern. Anomalies in time series are usually divided
its reconstructed counterpart is better. Through this process, the
model can effectively constrain the generator, retaining informa- into point anomalies and collective anomalies; as illustrated
tion on normal data during data reconstruction while discarding in Fig. 2(a), a point anomaly is a type of anomaly when
information on abnormal data. After conducting experiments on the data of a single point exceed the range of normal data
multiple benchmark datasets, the proposed GAN based on a distribution. Collective anomaly, as shown in Fig. 2(b), is
dual-discriminator structure achieved good results in anomaly a set of continuous data point sequences as a whole that
detection, outperforming several advanced methods. Additionally,
the model also performed well in practical transformer data. is considered anomalous even though individual data points
 may not be anomalous. Threshold-based judgment is the most
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, dual-discriminator struc- straightforward approach to anomaly detection, which proves
ture, generative adversarial networks (GANs), industrial applications, pseudo-labels. feasible when applied to individual time series. However,
 as the number of collection devices and detection targets
 increases, along with the exponential growth in collected data
 volume and dimensionality, the interdependencies among the
 Received 28 September 2023; revised 14 June 2024, 3 November 2024, 17
March 2025, and 25 May 2025; accepted 26 June 2025. Date of publication data become more intricate. Consequently, the threshold-based
5 September 2025; date of current version 9 October 2025. This work was method becomes ineffective, necessitating the development
supported in part by the Key Research and Development Projects of Jiangsu of novel approaches to address this challenge. Hence, this
Province under Grant BE2020001-1; in part by the Fundamental Research
Projects on Cutting-Edge Leading Technologies in Jiangsu Province under study proposes an effective method for anomaly detection in
Grant BK20202011 and Grant BK20192004C; in part by the National Natural multivariate time series data to address the aforementioned
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 72172057; in part by challenges.
the 2023 Nanjing International/Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan Science and
Technology Cooperation Program (Joint Research) under Grant 202308010; IoT has provided abundant data for the advancement of
and in part by the Key Scientific Research and Innovation Projects of deep learning. Concurrently, deep learning has offered numer-
Nanjing University of Finance and Economies under Grant XKYC2202303. ous methods for detecting anomalies in IoT data [6], [7],
(Corresponding author: Jie Cao.)
 Da Ding is with the College of Computer Science and Software [8]. For instance, clustering algorithms treat data that devi-
Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211100, China (e-mail: ate from cluster centers as anomalies, while classification
dingda1996@hhu.edu.cn). algorithms identify data that do not conform to distribution
 Youquan Wang and Haicheng Tao are with the School of Computer
and Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Finance and Eco- patterns as anomalies. However, these methods either fail
nomics, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, China (e-mail: youq.wang@gmail.com; to find the correlations among time series data or require
haicheng.tao@gmail.com). additional information about anomalous data, rendering them
 Jia Wu is with the School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney,
NSW 2113, Australia (e-mail: jia.wu@mq.edu.au). unsuitable for high-dimensional data and large-scale series
 Jie Cao is with the School of Management, Hefei University of Technology, anomaly detection. Moreover, to handle large amounts of
Hefei, Anhui 230009, China (e-mail: cao jie@hfut.edu.cn). data, supervised methods necessitate the laborious task of
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3585978, provided by the authors. effectively labeling the data, requiring substantial resources.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3585978 Consequently, unsupervised methods have garnered significant
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
19286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 1. Comprehensive transformer anomaly detection system.

 ously train a generator and a discriminator. The generator
 aims to encode synthetic data based on the original data, while
 the discriminator distinguishes between samples of generated
 data and samples of original data. Recent work in anomaly
 detection has also explored the use of adversarial training [11],
 [14], [15], [16]. The AnoGAN method, proposed by Schlegl
 et al. [14], addresses the challenge of unsupervised anomaly
 detection. It utilizes deep convolutional learning to capture
 the characteristics of normal images and introduces a novel
 scoring scheme for mapping them to the latent space. However,
 this approach has high computational complexity. Zenati et al.
 [17] developed a bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) model, which
 showed improved performance in mapping images to the
 latent space compared to prior work. We propose a novel
 GAN architecture called TadGAN [18] that uses an autoencoder (AE) with an L2 objective function to reconstruct time
 series and evaluate errors to identify anomalies. TadGAN is
Fig. 2. Difference between univariate time series and multivariate time trained on clean training sets, i.e., sets containing only normal
series in anomaly detection. (a) Univariate time series with point anomaly.
(b) Multivariate time series with collective anomalies.
 samples. To address the impact of polluted data, the author
 proposes FGANmoraly [10], which filters out possible abnorattention in the industry [9], [10], [11]. A commonly used
 mal sample discriminators with pseudo-labels before training.
approach in unsupervised anomaly detection is to map data
 However, this approach may lead to false positives and result
into a low-dimensional space and then map the data in the
 in wastage of resources. Motivated by the aforementioned
low-dimensional space back to a high-dimensional space. This
 research contributions, this article presents a more comprehenprocess allows normal data to retain information during the
 sive approach that effectively learns both the generator and
reconstruction phase while causing anomalous data to lose
 the discriminator while making optimal use of the available
information. By employing appropriate reconstruction techdata and minimizing the impact of contaminated data on the
niques, precise data reconstruction can be achieved, resulting
 model.
in significant reconstruction errors for anomalous data. This
 This article proposes the novel dual-discriminator GAN
approach enables cost-effective and highly accurate anomaly
 (DDGAN) for anomaly detection. The main goal is to train a
detection [12].
 generator that can accurately reconstruct data while enlarging
 Anomaly detection involves the handling of nonlinear
 the reconstruction error between abnormal data and recondata with complex temporal correlations; thus, deep learnstructed abnormal data. Our approach involves the following
ing methods are used in this field. Generative adversarial
 key components.
networks (GANs) have emerged as promising techniques for
unsupervised anomaly detection. The pioneering work of 1) Given the intrinsic temporal characteristics and intricate
Goodfellow et al. [13] introduced GANs, which simultane- correlations present in multitime series data, we employ
DING et al.: DUAL-DISCRIMINATOR GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 19287

 an LSTM-based AE to facilitate the reconstruction of using a given radius and determine the anomaly score based
 such data. on the number of neighbors [25]. On the other hand, density-
 2) Considering the specific data requirements of GAN based methods detect anomaly data based on the density of
 networks, we propose a dual safeguard mechanism con- neighbors surrounding an object. Mahela et al. [26] proposed
 sisting of a filter and a dynamic dictionary, which aims a network anomaly detection method based on fuzzy clusto mitigate the potential introduction of contaminated tering, while Xing et al. [27] presented K-means clustering
 data. and weighted K-nearest neighbor regression-based algorithm
 3) To fully exploit the available data, we design two to detect anomaly footprints of transmission line. Parwez
 discriminators: one that receives normal data labeled as et al. [28] introduced K-means clustering and hierarchical
 0 and another that receives anomalous data stored in the clustering to analyze anomalous behavior of mobile wireless
 dynamic dictionary. networks. However, the implementation of nearest neighbor-
 4) We propose a new training loss function that considers based methods requires prior knowledge regarding the duration
 the constraints imposed by the two discriminators on the and quantity of anomalies while also disregarding the temporal
 AE to achieve more accurate data reconstruction. dimension of interrelationships among time series data.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section II The reconstruction-based methods involve mapping the
presents an overview of related research in the field of anomaly original data to high-dimensional or low-dimensional space
detection. Section III presents the relevant definitions used in using a constructed model and then evaluating data anomathis article. Section IV provides a more detailed exposition of lies based on the error between the reconstructed data and
the DDGAN model. Section V explains how the model is used the original data. However, this method may need more
for anomaly detection and presents the experimental results. information when mapping abnormal data to low-dimensional
Section VI summarizes the principal findings of this article space, leading to inaccurate reconstruction and larger errors.
and proposes potential avenues for future research. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a classic algorithm
 of this type, but it is limited to linear data and requires
 II. R ELATED W ORK a Gaussian distribution. Several methods such as AE [29],
 In recent years, the increase in data types, changes in [30], and variational long short-term memory (VLSTM) [31]
application scenarios, and diversification of anomaly types have been proposed to address the above limitation. These
have posed greater demands on anomaly data detection. The methods lack effective regularization and may suffer from
simplest method for anomaly detection involves threshold- overfitting, resulting in poor performance [32]. GAN introbased judgments [19]. However, with the growing complexity duces adversarial regularization to alleviate overfitting, but this
of interdata correlations and the diversification of data types, approach assumes an uncontaminated training set, and it fails
this straightforward approach is no longer applicable to the to effectively model the data distribution when a significant
current complex environment of anomaly data detection. Con- amount of contaminated data is present in the training set
sequently, researchers have shifted their focus to the study of [13]. To avoid capturing the distribution of anomalous data,
unsupervised anomaly detection methods. These methods can the model employs a filtering mechanism on the discriminator
be categorized into one-class classification, nearest neighbor- using pseudo-labels for potential anomalous samples before
based algorithms, and reconstruction-based methods [20]. This training. However, this approach can lead to data waste and
article provides a detailed investigation and research on these the possibility of mislabeled instances due to the utilization of
methods. pseudo-labels, resulting in suboptimal performance.
 Currently, research on anomaly data detection methods
based on one-class classification has been extensively con- III. P RELIMINARIES
ducted. One-class detection entails learning the discriminative
boundary of normal data, considering any value deviating Definition 1 (Multivariate Time Series): The dataset
from the data boundary as an anomaly. Classical algorithms D = {D1 , D2 , . . ., DN } consists of N sequential data
include one-class SVM [8], [21] and isolation forest [22]. instances, each Di having a fixed length of K, noted as
Ruff et al. [23] introduced a deep support vector method based Di = {xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiK }. The time intervals between consecutive
on deep learning and one-class classification, where the model data points are uniform, ranging from seconds to hours.
is trained by optimizing the objectives of anomaly detection. Definition 2 (Reconstruction): Reconstruction involves
Miao et al. [24] introduced distributed online OCSVM, a mapping the original data D into a low-dimensional space
distributed online one-class classification method capable of and then mapping it back into a high-dimensional space. The
detecting anomaly data in distributed data. However, the afore- original data are denoted as D = {D1 , D2 , . . ., DN }, Di =
mentioned methods exhibit subpar performance when applied {xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiK }, while the data representation after reconto high-dimensional data. struction is denoted as D̂ = {D̂1 , D̂2 , . . ., D̂N }, D̂i = { x̂i1 , x̂i2 ,
 Nearest neighbor-based algorithms identify objects as . . ., x̂iK }.
anomaly data by measuring the distances between different Definition 3 (Reconstruction Error): The reconstruction
entities, considering objects that are far from other data points error quantifies the distance between the input data DN and the
as anomalies. The nearest neighbor-based algorithms can be reconstructed data D̂N , and it will be mathematically expressed
further categorized into distance- and density-based methods. as
Distance-based methods define the neighbors of an object eN = DN − D̂N . (1)
19288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3. Data D are passed through an encoder and decoder in the generator to obtain reconstructed data G(D). Based on the reconstruction error E between
D and the reconstructed data G(D), the filter calculates pseudo-labels for the data. The data with a pseudo-label of 0 are fed into the discriminator DN , while
the data with a pseudo-label of 1 undergo further updates in the dynamic dictionary and serve as input for the discriminator DA . The discriminators are
subsequently trained using these refined samples.

 Problem Statement: By performing a transformation on On the other hand, the discriminators, denoted by DA and
the original data, denoted as D = {D1 , D2 , . . ., DN } and DN , are trained based on the original data and reconstructed
Di = {xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiK }, where N represents the sampling time, data, respectively. The original data are labeled as real, and the
anomaly detection assigns a label y ∈ {0, 1} (0 for normal and reconstructed data are labeled as fake to train discriminator DA
1 for abnormal) to each data point at a given sampling time. and discriminator DN . The discrimination mappings fdisA and
Reconstructing the inputted original data as D̂={D̂1 , D̂2 , . . ., fdisD are
D̂N } and D̂i = { x̂i1 , x̂i2 , . . ., x̂iK }. The anomaly score of the data
 fdisA : X → [0, 1]
is calculated by computing the reconstruction error between
the input data D and the reconstructed data D̂. Based on this fdisD : X → [0, 1] . (3)
anomaly score, a determination is made regarding whether the The discriminator utilizes a ladder feed-forward network to
original data is anomalous or not. accept time series data and produce results. Prior to inputting
 the data into the discriminator DN , a pseudo-label filter is
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY utilized to remove significant abnormal data from the original
 In this section, more details on the implementation of the and reconstructed data. Additionally, a dynamic dictionary
DDGAN will be presented. is employed to store the most conspicuous portion of the
 filtered abnormal data, which is subsequently inputted into the
A. Overview of the Proposed Model discriminator DA . This process enables effective training of the
 This section will provide a detailed description of the generator under the dual constraints of discriminators DA and
DDGAN, which comprises two main parts: training and detec- DN .
tion. The architecture of DDGAN is depicted in Fig. 3, and
it consists of a generator, a filter, a dynamic dictionary, and B. Pseudo-Labels
two discriminators. X and D represent the feature space and GANs can learn the underlying distribution of training data
latent vector space, respectively. The generator G first maps and generate samples that follow that distribution. However,
the observations into latent vector space and then reconstructs the exclusive training of GAN models on normal data results in
them into the feature space limited diversity in generated samples, as the absence of expofen : X → D sure to abnormal samples during training restricts the model’s
 ability to generate diverse samples. Similarly, training GANs
 fde : D → X . (2)
 on abnormal data only leads to the generation of abnormal
Specifically, the encoder is an LSTM network, while the samples while being ineffective in generating normal samples
decoder is symmetric to the encoder. due to the lack of training on normal data. Furthermore,
DING et al.: DUAL-DISCRIMINATOR GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 19289

the inclusion of abnormal samples in the training set may where S epoch is the function about the current iteration and
introduce errors in the learned data distribution, leading to satisfies the following:
reduced accuracy in data detection. (
 1, if n = 1
 A method involving the use of pseudo-labeling and dynamic S epoch = (8)
arrays is proposed to filter and optimize the input to the ∞, if n → ∞.
discriminator. Pseudo-labeling allows discriminator DN to Combining Equation (6) and Equation (8), we can get the
receive “pseudo-normal data” as input, while dynamic arrays following:
enable discriminator DA to receive “pseudo-abnormal data” as
input. By leveraging pseudo-labeling and dynamic arrays, the P (xw ) = σ (zw ∗ θ)
   
vision of training the discriminator on a single type of data is (ew − M (E)) 1
achieved, overcoming the challenges of obtaining normal or =σ ∗ 1− . (9)
 V (E) S epoch
abnormal samples in practical applications.
 Furthermore, a reconstruction method is adopted to calculate C. Dynamic Dictionary and Data Augmentation
the distance between normal and abnormal data distributions.
 By constraining z-score zw with the impact factor, the
This method aims to minimize the error loss between normal
 anomaly probability of the data can change with the iterations.
data and reconstructed data while increasing the error loss
 At initialization, all data are assigned the same anomaly
between abnormal data and reconstructed data. This approach
 probability. As the training progresses, data are assigned
allows for the generation of abnormal samples while maindifferent anomaly probabilities, resulting in different anomaly
taining the fidelity of normal samples, thus addressing the
 labels. Data labeled 0 are marked as “pseudo-normal data,”
limitations of GANs in generating diverse samples from both
 while data labeled 1 are marked as “pseudo-anomalous data.”
normal and abnormal data distributions. The specific process
 The “pseudo-normal data” and “pseudo-anomalous data” are
is presented in Algorithm 1. The original data D = {D1 , D2 ,
 expressed as
. . ., DN }, and Di = {xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiK } is input into G to obtain n o
reconstructed data D̂={D̂1 , D̂2 , . . ., D̂N }, D̂i = { x̂i1 , x̂i2 , . . ., x̂iK }. Dd0 = Dd10 , Dd20 , . . . , Ddt 0
Based on Equation (1), the error E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , eN } based on
 Ddt 0 = xd10t , xd20t , . . . , xdK0t
 ˚
define between the original data D and the reconstructed data n o
G(D) can be expressed as Dd1 = Dd11 , Dd21 , . . . , Ddk 1
 Ddk 1 = xd11k , xd21k , . . . , xdK1k
 ˚
 ew = Dw − D̂w . (4)
 w = t + k. (10)
The mean and variance of E are represented by M(E) and
V(E), respectively, enabling the calculation of the z-score zw During this phase, assigning pseudo-labels to the data can
 achieve the classification of normal and abnormal data. While
 (ew − M (E)) “pseudo-normal data” are normal data as much as possible, it
 zw = . (5)
 V (E) cannot be guaranteed that “pseudo-abnormal data” are necessarily abnormal data. This can lead to disastrous consequences
Based on this z-score, the probability of x being anomalous is for the discriminator DA , which is specifically trained to detect
designed as abnormal data; it is necessary to reextract the abnormal data
 P (Dw ) = σ (zw ) . (6) from the discriminator DA . Here, a dynamic dictionary Dd
 is introduced. As mentioned earlier, the error ew is greater
As shown in Equation (6), if the error ew is equal to the mean than the mean M(E), and the probability of the data P(xw )
M(E) or the z-score zw equals 0, the probability of the data being labeled as anomalous is greater than 0.5. Therefore,
P(Dw ) being labeled as anomalous is 0.5. If the error ew is the dynamic dictionary is sorted based on the reconstruction
greater than the mean M(E), the probability of the data P(Dw ) error, and data with the top L largest errors are considered as
being labeled as anomalous is greater than 0.5. Conversely, if real abnormal data and used for training the discriminator DA .
the error ew is smaller than the mean M(E), the probability of Then, the dynamic dictionary Dd can be obtained as follows:
the data P(Dw ) being labeled as anomalous is smaller than
 Dd = Dd1 , Dd2 , . . . , DdL .
 ˚
 (11)
0.5. This approach provides a robust method for detecting
anomalous data. This forces the discriminator DA to learn to distinguish real
 During the initial training phase, the model may need to abnormal data, thereby improving its ability to recognize
acquire more information to represent the latent information abnormal data.
of the data accurately. Therefore, the same parameters are During each iteration, the discriminator DA is updated
set for all data in the initial stage. In the subsequent phase, using L real anomalous data from the dynamic dictionary and
an impact factor θ is introduced to influence the anomaly reconstructed anomalous data
probability; the factor θ should be consistent for all data under
 n o
 Dd = TOPL Dd1 , Dd2 , . . . , DdL , Dd11k , Dd21k , . . . , Ddk 1k
the initial conditions, showing more influence with the increase
of training. Therefore, the factor θ is defined as = Dd1 , Dd2 , . . . , DdL .
 ˚
 (12)
 1 Through this iterative process, the generator G and the dis-
 θ =1− (7) criminator DA engage in a game of optimization, continually
 S epoch
19290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 between normal and reconstructed data and increasing the
 distance between anomaly and reconstructed data. To achieve
 this goal, we employ different loss functions for DA and
 DN . For discriminator DN , which takes normal data and their
 corresponding reconstructions as inputs, we design its loss
 function to gradually reduce the distance between normal and
 reconstructed data via backpropagation after each iteration of
 training
 LN = BCEloss Dd0 + BCEloss G Dd0
  
 t
 1 Xh    i
 =− li log Ddi 0 + (1 − li ) log 1 − Ddi 0
 t
 i=1
 t
 1 Xh      i
 − li log G Ddi 0 +(1 − li ) log 1−G Ddi 0 .
 t
 i=1
 (16)
Fig. 4. Data augmentation model. Data stored in the dynamic dictionary (left)
and Ded after data augmentation (right). However, the original data are marked as real, and the reconstructed data are marked as fake; then, the original data are
 labeled as 1 and the reconstructed data are labeled as 0. The
improving their performance and achieving the recognition and
 loss of discriminator DN can be defined as
generation of anomalous data. Eventually, at the end of the
 LN = BCEloss Dd0 + BCEloss G Dd0
  
training, the generator G will be able to encode anomalous
data, and the discriminator DA will accurately identify anoma- t
 1 X h  d0    i
lous data and save it in the dynamic dictionary for use in the =− log Di + log 1 − G Ddi 0 . (17)
next training cycle. t
 i=1
 Data augmentation can increase the quantity and quality For discriminator DA , which takes anomaly data Dd and their
of data in situations where data is scarce. This article adopts corresponding reconstructions as inputs, we design its loss
a random mask data augmentation method that follows a function to further increase the distance between anomaly and
geometric distribution, as shown in Fig. 4, where black repre- reconstructed data after each iteration of training
sents the masked state denoted by 0 and color represents the
 LA = BCEloss D ed − BCEloss G D ed
  
unmasked state denoted by 1. Given the mask ratio r and mask
length lm , p st :st+1 represents the noise transition probability t
 1 X
 =− edi
 edi + (1 − li ) log 1 − D
  
from time t to t + 1, and the complete transition matrix can li log D
 L
be expressed as i=1
 t
   1 X
 p0:0 p0:1 edi + (1 − li ) log 1 − G D
 edi .
  
 P= + li log G D
 p1:0 p1:1 L
 i=1
 2
 1 1 r
 3 (18)
 1− ·
 = 4 1 lm
 6 lm 1 − r 7 . (13) Similar to discriminator DN , the original data are labeled as
 1 r 5
 1− · 1 and the reconstructed data are labeled as 0; the loss of
 lm lm 1 − r discriminator DA can be expressed as
 Positive sample pairs are obtained by randomly applying
 LA = BCEloss D ed + BCEloss D ed
  
two independent masking operations to each dimension. M is a
 t
binary noise mask matrix that follows a geometric distribution: 1 X
 =− edi − log 1 − G D
 edi .
  
 log D (19)
 ed = Dd ⊗ M
 D (14) L
 i=1

where D ed represents the transformed multidimensional time Through the training of discriminators DA and DN , we are
series after data augmentation able to simultaneously reduce the distance between normal and
 reconstructed data and increase the distance between anomaly
 ed+ /$
  
 exp cos D ed · D and reconstructed data.
 Lcon = − log PS (15)
 ed edi /$
  
 i=0 exp cos D · D
 E. Adaptive Weighted
where D ed+ denotes the positive pairs and S represents the
total number of samples. This section proposes a novel training function based on
 reconstruction error for anomaly detection, which requires
 precise reconstruction of data to retain normal information
D. Dual-Discriminator while discarding anomaly information, to reduce the distance
 In this section, we propose novel designs for the discrim- between normal and reconstructed data, and to expand the
inators DA and DN with the aim of reducing the distance distance between anomaly and reconstructed data. To achieve
DING et al.: DUAL-DISCRIMINATOR GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 19291

 T
this, we redesign the training function to differentiate the 1X
 LaDA = log DA [G (xi )] (24)
contributions of normal and anomaly data to the loss function. T
 i=1
The function is formulated as
 Lad = LaDN + LaDA
 t
 1 X d0   " T T
 #
 Lre = Di − D̂di 0 ∗ 1 − ydi 0 1 X X
 w =− log DN [G (xi )] − log DA [G (xi )] . (25)
 i=1 T
 i=1 i=1
 k
 X  
 − Ddi 1 − D̂di 1 ∗ 1 − ydi 1
 i=1 Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Label Generation Algorithm
 Require: Sequence data D = {D1 , D2 , . . . , DN }
 t
 !
 1 X
 = Ddi 0 − D̂di 0 (20) Ensure: Pseudo-labels l = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lN }
 w
 i=1 1: D ← G(D) .Apply graph-based model G(·) for represenwhere w is the total amount of all data and yi is the true tation or reconstruction
label of Di , meaning that only true data will contribute to 2: Compute error ei for each Di using 4
the reconstruction loss. However, in an unsupervised learning 3: for each sample Di do
scenario, labels are unavailable, and it is impossible to separate 4: Compute probability P(Di ) using 9
normal samples from abnormal ones. To solve this prob- 5: Sample η ∼ Uniform(0, 1)
lem, we propose a new reconstruction objective specifically 6: if η > P(Di ) then
designed for the anomaly detection task 7: Set pseudo-label li ← 0
 8: else
 e−zi Set pseudo-label li ← 1
 δi = Pw −z (21) 9:
 a=1 e
 a
 10: end if
 11: end for
where the reconstruction error is larger than the average, and
 12: return l
the data will receive smaller weights; the reconstruction error
is smaller than the average, and the data will receive larger
weights. Smaller reconstruction errors correspond to larger
 Algorithm 2 Adversarial Training Algorithm
weights, and larger reconstruction errors correspond to smaller
 Require: Fragmented training data T = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT }, test
weights. We also introduce a balancing factor, with the final
 data X = {(x1t , . . . , xit )}, max epochs P, adversarial loss
weight being
 Pw  rate ν
 e−zi 1 a=1 e−za + S epoch − 1 · e−zi Ensure: Trained Generator G, Discriminators DA , DN
 δi = Pw −z · (22) 1: Initialize weights of G, DA , and DN
 a=1 e
 a N S epoch · e−zi
 2: for each epoch from 1 to P do
where N is a normalization factor. At the initial State, the 3: for each fragment index κ from 1 to n do
weights and the contribution to the loss function are equal. 4: DN receives Dd0 from Equation 10
As the epoch increases, the weights will gradually approach 5: Compute loss LN via Equation 17
Equation (21). Ultimately, Equation (20) is approximated by 6: Update DN using LN
 w
 X 7: DA receives Dd from Equation 12
 Lre = Di − D̂i · δi . (23) 8: Compute loss LA via Equation 19
 i=1 9: Update DA using LA
The reconstruction loss function of Equation (23) allows 10: end for
DDGAN to focus more on fitting the data. 11: Compute Lcon via Equation 15
 12: Compute Lre via Equation 23
 13: Compute Ldgan via Equation 26
F. Model Training 14: Update Generator G with combined loss
 Given a training dataset T = {x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xT }, this article 15: end for
proposes an alternate training approach for a generator and two 16: for each test fragment xit in X do
discriminators, DA and DN , where the training loss functions 17: Generate reconstruction: x̂it = G(xit )
for discriminators DA and DN are defined in Equation (19) and 18: Computepreconstruction score:
Equation (17), respectively. Unlike traditional GANs, where 19: score = (xit − x̂it )2
only an adversarial loss function is used to train the Generator, 20: end for
this article utilizes both discriminators DA and DN and obtains
 However, the double discriminator-based adversarial loss
their respective adversarial loss functions. By combining these
 function ignores the temporal correlation of time series data.
two adversarial loss functions, a double discriminator-based
 Therefore, this article combines Equation (23) and Equation
adversarial loss function is derived, as shown in the following:
 (25) to obtain the generator’s loss function, as shown in the
 1X
 T following:
 LaDN = − log DN [G (xi )]
 T
 i=1
 Ldgan = Lre + ϑ · Lad + ςLcon (26)
19292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE I TABLE II
 DATASETS AVERAGE P RECISION , R ECALL , F1-S CORE , AND AUC OF D IFFERENT
 M ETHODS ON S IX P UBLIC DATASETS

where ϑ is used to adjust the weight of Lad and ς is used to
adjust the weight with Lcon . The specific training process is
presented in Algorithm 2. R measures the proportion of true positive samples among
 all positive samples, and it is calculated as
 TP
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS R= (28)
 TP + FN
 This section conducts extensive experiments to evaluate where FN is the number of false negatives.
the effectiveness of DDGAN, with additional experimental F1 is the harmonic mean of P and R, and it is calculated
results and analyses provided in the Appendixes (see the as
Supplementary Material). P∗R
 F1 = 2 ∗ . (29)
 P+R
A. Experimental Setup B. Tasking Setting
 1) Public Datasets and Baselines: We evaluate our method In experiments, the sliding window width is uniformly set
on six public datasets: MSL [33] (NASA’s Mars rover mission to 150. The model is trained using the Adam optimizer with a
data), SMAP [34] (soil moisture satellite data), SMD [35] learning rate of 1e−4 . The RNN encoder has an RNN hidden
(server performance metrics), SWaT [36] (water treatment dim of 50, and the decoder consists of multiple linear layers
ICS data), WADI [37] (water distribution network simulation), with a hidden dim of 50. The hyperparameter is set to 0.5. The
and PSM [38] (eBay’s server metrics). Details of the dataset training was conducted in a Windows environment equipped
information are shown in Table I. These datasets cover diverse with a 2.50-GHz 12th Gen Intel1 Core2 i5-12400F CPU and an
domains, including space exploration, environmental moni- 8-GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 GPU. The training dataset
toring, industrial systems, and cloud computing, providing is divided into a training set and a validation set in a 7:3 ratio to
comprehensive benchmarks for anomaly detection. obtain the optimal model and avoid overfitting or underfitting.
 For comparison, we select seven state-of-the-art unsuper- As the model is considered an unsupervised learning model,
vised anomaly detection methods: USAD [39] (adversar- it cannot directly adjust hyperparameters based on the F1-
ial AEs), OmniAnomaly [35] (stochastic RNN), TranAD score on the validation set as in supervised learning. To avoid
[40] (transformer-based), GDN [41] (graph neural net- reliance on predetermined thresholds, we can search for all
work), BeatGAN [9] (beat-aware GAN), FGANomaly [10] possible thresholds to determine the normality and abnormal-
(pseudo-label enhanced GANomaly), and Anomaly Trans- ity of observed values and select the optimal F1-score as
former [42] (self-attention based). These baselines represent the performance metric for model evaluation. We obtain the
major technical directions in time series anomaly detection, anomaly scores in the test set and evaluate them individually
including reconstruction-based, GAN-based, and attention- as thresholds. Finally, the threshold yielding the best F1-score
based approaches. is selected as the final result. Then, we conducted multiple
 2) Evaluation Metrics: We adopt precision (P), recall (R), experiments based on the final selected model and used the
F1-score (F1), and the area under the precision–recall curve mean and variance of the multiple experiments as the final
(AUC) to evaluate the performance. These metrics are defined results of the model.
as follows: P measures the proportion of true positive samples
among all samples, and it is calculated as C. Overview Performance
 TP We conducted an extensive evaluation of DDGAN in six
 P= (27)
 TP + FP datasets, comparing its performance with multiple baseline
where TP is the number of true positives and FP is the number 1 Registered trademark.

of false positives. 2 Trademarked.
DING et al.: DUAL-DISCRIMINATOR GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 19293

 TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE OF E IGHT U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS C OMPARED TO DDGAN ACROSS S IX P UBLIC DATASETS . I T S HOWS
 P RECISION , R ECALL , F1-S CORE , AND AUC FOR E ACH M ETHOD , W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE IV
P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORES P ERFORMANCE OF LSTM-AE, LSTM-DN , LSTM-DA , DD GAN, D D GAN, AND DDGAN IN F OUR P UBLIC
 DATASETS

methods. As shown in Table II, DDGAN significantly outper- demonstrated outstanding performance in recall, F1-score,
formed eight other unsupervised anomaly detection methods and AUC, successfully achieving a perfect recall rate and
across these six public datasets, demonstrating its excep- a 7.31% increase in F1-score compared to baseline. In the
tional performance in unsupervised anomaly detection tasks. SMD dataset, DDGAN exhibited excellent performance across
Table III also provides a detailed comparison of DDGAN and all evaluation metrics, achieving an accuracy of 99.96%,
other baseline models on public datasets. In the MSL dataset, a recall rate of 100.00%, an F1-score of 99.97%, and an
our method achieved an AUC score of 91.92%, surpassing all AUC of 99.97%, highlighting its significant advantages over
baselines by an improvement of 2.46%. Although the F1-score other methods. However, in the SMAP dataset, our method
was not the highest, it still exhibited suboptimal performance. performed poorly. This was primarily due to the emphasis
In the PSM dataset, DDGAN excelled in accuracy, F1, and on temporal relationships while failing to adequately consider
AUC metrics, with an impressive increase of 2.03% in the intersensor correlations, which resulted in unsatisfactory accu-
F1-score over the baseline, achieving an AUC of 98.88%, a racy and recall rates. Nonetheless, the AUC metric still reached
6% improvement. Despite a slightly lower recall compared optimal levels, while the F1-score achieved suboptimal results.
to USAD, our recall rate remained high at 98.51%. On the In summary, our method demonstrated superior performance
SWAT dataset, DDGAN achieved the best results across recall, across most datasets, outperforming several baseline methods
F1-score, and AUC, with a recall improvement of 3.04% across various evaluation metrics, underscoring the practiover the baseline. For the WADI dataset, our method also cality and effectiveness of unsupervised anomaly detection
19294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

tasks. It is crucial to note that the pseudo-label generation
in this study relies on a reconstruction error-based dynamic
dictionary screening mechanism, theoretically grounded in the
core hypothesis that “normal samples exhibit significantly
lower reconstruction errors than anomalies.” However, this
mechanism shows high sensitivity to data distributions: in scenarios with severe class imbalance, fixed-capacity dictionaries
easily lead to insufficient representation of normal samples,
thereby generating pseudo-label noise. Additionally, the mean
squared error (mse) used for reconstruction error calculation
has inherent limitations, resulting in inadequate sensitivity to
localized subtle anomalies.
 Fig. 5. Mean values achieved by different methods under various parameter
 configurations.

D. Ablation Study
 DDGAN demonstrates significant improvements over most anomalous data, thereby addressing the scarcity of such data.
baseline models. This section presents ablation experiments Overall, the ablation study results indicate that improvements
designed to validate the effectiveness of various modules, to the model from different perspectives effectively enhance
structures, and methods within the algorithm. Specifically, anomaly detection capabilities and performance, and these
we compared DDGAN with five other models: LSTM-AE, enhancements are not mutually exclusive.
LSTM-DN , LSTM-DA , and ddGAN. LSTM-AE represents a
conventional LSTM-based AE, while LSTM-DN integrates a E. Parameter Sensitivity
discriminator trained on normal data into the LSTM-based AE
and LSTM-DA employs a discriminator trained on anomalous This section investigates the impact of selecting different
data. The ddGAN model combines an LSTM-based AE trained S epoch strategies on the performance of the model. We explore
exclusively on anomalous data but excludes the dynamic the choices of S epoch from a set of [log, N, n log, n2 ]. We
dictionary. The distinction between DdGAN and DDGAN lies examine various S epoch strategies and present their effects on
in the absence of data augmentation in the dynamic dictionary the model’s mean values in Fig. 5. It is observed that, in
component. The ablation experiments were conducted on four most cases, employing n2 strategies leads to improved perforpublic datasets: MSL, SMAP, SWaT, and SMD. Table IV mance. All four strategies exhibit a monotonically increasing
presents the results of the ablation experiments. It is evident trend, albeit with varying rates of increase as the number of
that DDGAN outperforms LSTM-AE, LSTM-DN , LSTM-DA , epochs progresses. Strategy n2 notably demonstrates the highddGAN, and DdGAN across the four public datasets, particu- est increase in both optimal and mean values. These findings
larly excelling in recall and F1-score, indicating that DDGAN underscore the appropriateness of the research approach based
possesses stronger generalization capabilities in unsupervised on reconstruction error. By adopting strategy n2 for anomaly
anomaly detection tasks. Furthermore, the results in Table IV detection, the model effectively accentuates the discrepancy
indicate that both single-discriminator (handling normal or between abnormal and reconstructed data, thereby yielding
anomalous data) and dual-discriminator architectures con- a substantial enhancement in the effectiveness of anomaly
tribute to enhancing anomaly detection performance. Notably, detection through reconstruction error analysis.
the discriminators for normal and anomalous data show significant improvements across all datasets when compared VI. C ONCLUSION
to the traditional LSTM-AE, highlighting the effectiveness This study addresses the data dependency and overfitting
of integrating LSTM-AE with GANs for anomaly detection challenges of GANs in multivariate time series anomaly
tasks. The results from ddGAN and DdGAN demonstrate detection by proposing a dynamic dictionary-based GAN
the benefits of incorporating a dynamic dictionary for storing (DDGAN) framework. The methodological innovation lies in
anomalous data to train the anomaly discriminator. DDGAN’s the synergistic integration of a pseudo-label filtering mechainclusion of data augmentation within the dynamic dictio- nism and a dynamic dictionary optimization strategy, which
nary addresses the challenge of anomalous data scarcity, collaboratively establishes a representation system for normal
and the results suggest that this approach is effective in and abnormal samples. Specifically, the dynamic dictionary
improving model performance. The aforementioned ablation enables adaptive storage of anomalous samples based on
experiments reveal that the combination of the normal data reconstruction error thresholds, while the pseudo-label mechadiscriminator and the anomalous data discriminator, along nism iteratively refines the screening accuracy of normal data.
with components such as the dynamic dictionary and data Notably, the method may encounter challenges in scenarios
augmentation, enhances anomaly detection performance. The with class imbalance due to dictionary capacity constraints that
dynamic dictionary serves as an auxiliary component for could compromise normal pattern characterization. Compared
storing limited anomalous data, playing a crucial role during to existing approaches, the core breakthroughs include the
the training process. Meanwhile, the data augmentation com- dual-discriminator architecture design and the joint optimizaponent alleviates the issue of data imbalance by enhancing the tion mechanism of dynamic weight loss functions, which
DING et al.: DUAL-DISCRIMINATOR GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 19295

collectively enhance both normal data reconstruction fidelity [21] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn.,
and anomaly discrimination capability. Future research will vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273–297, 1995.
 [22] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” Data mining,
prioritize addressing technical bottlenecks in multimodal fea- vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 413–422, 2008.
ture fusion and fine-grained anomaly classification while [23] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
exploring adaptive dictionary capacity adjustment strategies to Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
improve model robustness. [24] X. Miao, Y. Liu, H. Zhao, and C. Li, “Distributed online
 one-class support vector machine for anomaly detection over
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1475–1488
 R EFERENCES , Apr. 2019.
 [25] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for
[1] D. Yue, Z. He, and C. Dou, “Cloud-edge collaboration-based distribution mining outliers from large data sets,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf.
 network reconfiguration for voltage preventive control,” IEEE Trans. Manage. Data, May 2000, pp. 427–438.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 11542–11552, Dec. 2023. [26] O. P. Mahela, B. Khan, H. H. Alhelou, and P. Siano, “Power
[2] K. Huang, S. Wu, B. Sun, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Metric learning- quality assessment and event detection in distribution network
 based fault diagnosis and anomaly detection for industrial data with with wind energy penetration using stockwell transform and fuzzy
 intraclass variance,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, clustering,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 6922–6932,
 no. 1, pp. 547–558, Jan. 2024. Nov. 2020.
[3] R. W. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Lu, K. T. Chui, and B. B. Gupta, “Deep network- [27] K. Xing, C. Hu, J. Yu, X. Cheng, and F. Zhang, “Mutual
 enabled haze visibility enhancement for visual IoT-driven intelligent privacy preserving k -Means clustering in social participatory
 transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, sensing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 2066–2076,
 pp. 1581–1591, Feb. 2023. Aug. 2017.
[4] T. Truong-Huu et al., “An empirical study on unsupervised network [28] M. S. Parwez, D. B. Rawat, and M. Garuba, “Big data analytics for
 anomaly detection using generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. 1st user-activity analysis and user-anomaly detection in mobile wireless
 ACM Workshop Security Privacy Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 20–29. network,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 2058–2065,
[5] A. Mahmoud and A. Mohammed, “A survey on deep learning for Aug. 2017.
 time-series forecasting,” in Machine Learning and Big Data Analytics [29] X. Tao, D. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Lu, and C. Adak,
 Paradigms: Analysis, Applications and Challenges, 2020, pp. 365–392. “Unsupervised anomaly detection for surface defects with dual-siamese
[6] Z. Zhang et al., “Time series anomaly detection for smart grids via network,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7707–7717
 multiple self-supervised tasks learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Knowl. , Nov. 2022.
 Graph (ICKG), Nov. 2022, pp. 392–397. [30] G. Zhu et al., “A multi-task graph neural network with variational graph
[7] H. Tao et al., “HAN-CAD: Hierarchical attention network for context auto-encoders for session-based travel packages recommendation,” ACM
 anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” World Wide Web, vol. 26, Trans. Web, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1–30, Aug. 2023.
 no. 5, pp. 2785–2800, Sep. 2023. [31] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM
[8] P. Wu, J. Liu, and F. Shen, “A deep one-class neural network for enhanced anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 anomalous event detection in complex scenes,” IEEE Trans. Neural Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021.
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2609–2622, Jul. 2020. [32] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
[9] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. from overfitting,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958,
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439. 2014.
[10] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “GAN-based [33] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderanomaly detection for multivariate time series using polluted training strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 set,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219, dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Dec. 2023. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[11] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval-
 [34] T. Nakamura, M. Imamura, R. Mercer, and E. Keogh, “MERLIN:
 uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
 Parameter-free discovery of arbitrary length anomalies in massive time
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
 series archives,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
 Jun. 2022.
 2020, pp. 1190–1195.
[12] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
 [35] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3, p. 15, 2009.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
[13] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 27th Int.
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 2. Cambridge, MA, USA:
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 MIT Press, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[14] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and [36] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment
 G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial testbed for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Worknetworks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. shop Cyber-physical Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016
 Med. Imag., 2017, pp. 146–157. , pp. 31–36.
[15] Y. Wang, J. Cao, Z. Bu, J. Wu, and Y. Wang, “Dual structural consistency [37] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
 preserving community detection on social networks,” IEEE Trans. distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 11301–11315, Nov. 2023. systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water
[16] Y. Wang, J. Cao, Z. Bu, and M. Leng, “Temporal dual-attributed network Netw., Apr. 2017, pp. 25–28.
 generation oriented community detection model,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. [38] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn-
 Topics Comput., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 403–418, Apr. 2024. chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
[17] H. Zenati, C.-S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and V. Chandrasekhar, in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug.
 “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
 Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 6094–6103. [39] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[18] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veera- “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 machaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using generative in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), pp. 3395–3404.
 Dec. 2020, pp. 33–43. [40] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
[19] D. M. Hawkins, Identification of Outliers. London, U.K.: Chapman & networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” 2022,
 Hall, 1980. arXiv:2201.07284.
[20] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep [41] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 665–674. May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
19296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

[42] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Jia Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” 2021, degree in computer science from the University of
 arXiv:2110.02642. Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia.
 He is currently an Associate Professor and the
 Research Director at the Centre for Applied Artificial Intelligence and the Director of Higher Degree
 Research (HDR) at the School of Computing, Mac-
 Da Ding is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with quarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia. He has
 the College of Computer and Information, Hohai authored or co-authored more than 200 refereed
 University, Nanjing, China. journal articles and conference papers, including
 His current research interests include anomaly IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS
 detection and time series analysis. AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery
 from Data (TKDD), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND
 L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA
 (TMM), KDD, ICDM, WWW, and NeurIPS. His current research interests
 include data mining and machine learning.
 Prof. Wu has been serving as the Program Committee Chair/the Demo
 Chair/the Contest Chair/the Tutorial Chair/the Publicity Chair/the Program
 Committee Chair (Senior) for Prestigious Data Mining and Artificial Intel-
 Youquan Wang received the Ph.D. degree in ligence Conferences over ten years, such as KDD, ICDM, WSDM, IJCAI,
 computer application technology from Nanjing Uni- AAAI, WWW, NeurIPS, CIKM, and SDM. His research team was a recipient
 versity of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. of the CIKM’22 Best Paper Runner-Up Award, the ICDM’21 Best Student
 He is currently a Lecturer at Jiangsu Provincial Paper Award, the SDM’18 Best Paper Award in Data Science Track, the
 Key Laboratory of E-Business, Nanjing University IJCNN’17 Best Student Paper Award, and the ICDM’14 Best Paper Candidate
 of Finance and Economics. His research interests Award. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE TNNLS, ACM TKDD, and Neural
 include deep learning and data mining. He has Networks.
 authored or co-authored more than 30 refereed journal articles and conference papers in these areas.
 Dr. Wang is a member of ACM and CCF.

 Jie Cao received the Ph.D. degree in information
 Haicheng Tao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. science and engineering from Southeast University,
 degree in computer science from Nanjing University Nanjing, China, in 2002.
 of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. He is currently a Professor with the School
 He is currently a Lecturer with Nanjing University of Management, Hefei University of Technology,
 of Finance and Economics, Nanjing. His research Hefei. His main research interests include data mininterests include data mining, machine learning, arti- ing, deep learning, and business intelligence.
 ficial intelligence, and optimization. Dr. Cao has been selected in the Program for
 New Century Excellent Talents in University and
 awarded with the Young and Mid-Aged Expert with
 Outstanding Contribution in Jiangsu.