IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025 13373

 A Hierarchical Framework With Spatio-Temporal
 Consistency Learning for Emergence Detection
 in Complex Adaptive Systems
 Siyuan Chen , Xin Du , and Jiahai Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Emergence, a global property of complex adaptive
systems (CASs) constituted by interactive agents, is prevalent in real-world dynamic systems, e.g., network-level traffic
congestions. Detecting its formation and evaporation helps to
monitor the state of a system, allowing it to issue a warning signal for harmful emergent phenomena. Since there is
no centralized controller of CAS, detecting emergence based
on each agent’s local observation is desirable but challenging.
Existing works are unable to capture emergence-related spatial
patterns, and fail to model the nonlinear relationships among
agents. This article proposes a hierarchical framework with
spatio-temporal consistency learning (HSTCL) to solve these
two problems by learning the system representation and agent
representations, respectively. Spatio-temporal encoders (STEs)
composed of spatial and temporal transformers are designed to
capture agents’ nonlinear relationships and the system’s complex
evolution. Agents’ and the system’s representations are learned
to preserve the spatio-temporal consistency by minimizing the
spatial and temporal dissimilarities in a self-supervised manner
in the latent space. Our method achieves more accurate detection
than traditional methods and deep learning methods on three
 Fig. 1. (a) Illustrates the emergence through the traffic flow. (b) Shows that
datasets with well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent behaviors. emergence detection is framed as a CPD problem.
Notably, our hierarchical framework is generic in incorporating
other deep learning methods for agent-level and system-level
detection.
 Index Terms— Complex adaptive systems (CASs), emergence
detection, self-supervised learning on dynamic graphs, spatio- autonomous, adaptive, and interacting agents, whose interactemporal modeling. tions at the micro level can result in emergent phenomena
 at the macro level, namely, emergence [1], [2], [3]. Fig. 1(a)
 presents an example. When there is adequate space among
 I. I NTRODUCTION cars, the road net enjoys a smooth traffic flow. When the distances between cars significantly narrow down, network-level
M ANY real-world dynamic systems can be regarded
 as complex adaptive systems (CASs) composed of congestion occurs as an emergent phenomenon. Emergence
 is irreducible to the properties of agents that constitute CAS,
 Received 17 January 2024; revised 20 July 2024 and 19 September 2024; and it is unpredictable by nature [1], [4]. Nonetheless, it will
accepted 28 September 2024. Date of publication 21 October 2024; date
of current version 9 July 2025. This work was supported in part by the be beneficial to detect the formation and evaporation of
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant emergence, specifically, weak emergence that is scientifically
2018AAA0101203; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of relevant [5]. It can help monitor some global properties of
China under Grant 62406083, Grant 62472461, and Grant 62072483; and in
part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under the system and issue a warning signal when an undesirable
Grant 2022A1515011690. (Corresponding author: Jiahai Wang.) phenomenon arrives. For example, reporting a traffic jam based
 Siyuan Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Cyber on the feedback of cars can help with the health management
Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
chensiyuan@gzhu.edu.cn). of traffic systems. It will complement existing monitors relying
 Xin Du is with the Civil Aviation Electronic Information Engineering on static devices like sensors or cameras [6].
College, Guangzhou Civil Aviation College, Guangzhou 510403, China Emergence detection can be formulated as an online
(e-mail: duxin@gcac.edu.cn).
 Jiahai Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Engi- change-point detection (CPD) problem by regarding the
neering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China (e-mail: time steps when emergence forms or evaporates as change
wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn). points [7], [8]. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the number of congested
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3477320, provided by the authors. streets can serve as a global variable to monitor the emergence.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3477320 However, CASs are distributed by nature, i.e., there is no
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
13374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

centralized controller that can access the states of all agents. representations, these encoders are especially suitable
Therefore, methods requiring all agents’ states to compute for online detection.
a global metric for emergence detection become impractical 3) The agent representations and the system representation
under the distributed setting. Hence, it is desirable to detect are learned to preserve the intrinsic spatio-temporal
emergence using agents’ local observation, which is feasible consistency in a self-supervised manner. The training
because all agents experience the downward causation [7] strategy avoids data augmentations that may break
when the emergence forms, as shown in Fig. 1(a). For spatio-temporal consistency and negative samples that
example, cars slow down in a crowded street. Based on this increase the computational overhead.
observation, O’toole et al. [7] proposed DETect, the only fea- 4) Extensive experiments on three datasets with
sible emergence detection method for the distributed setting. well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena
In DETect, each agent analyzes its relationship with neighbors, validate the superiority of HSTCL over DETect and
communicates with them, and sends feedback when finding a deep learning methods. Notably, other deep learning
noticeable change in the relationship. DETect concludes the methods can be incorporated into our framework for
formation or evaporation of emergence when the number of emergence detection.
feedback gets significantly larger.
 Though making a big step, DETect has two main limitations. II. R ELATED W ORK
First, it simply counts agents’ feedback to monitor the emer- A. Emergence Detection
gence, which may neglect the spatial patterns that are highly
 Detecting the emergence of CAS, generally requires at
correlated to emergence. Second, it adopts linear regression to
 least one global monitor [2]. Depending on how the monitor
model an agent’s relationship with its neighbors, which may
 acquires the information of agents for detection, existing
fail to capture nonlinear relationships.
 methods fall into three design choices of architectures:
 This article tries to overcome the above limitations from
 1) a single monitor with direct access to agents’ states;
a graph perspective. CAS can be regarded as a dynamic
 2) a monitor collecting agents’ information indirectly, e.g.,
graph [9], and thus emergence detection can be cast to online
 from static sensors; and 3) a monitor collecting feedback from
CPD in dynamic graphs under the distributed setting. Based
 mobile agents. Our method belongs to class 3.
on this formulation, it suffices to learn a system-level repre-
 Class 1 methods define global variables to monitor the
sentation aware of emergence-related patterns, and agent-level
 system state, e.g., information entropy [10], [11], [12], [13],
representations encoding the nonlinear relationships. When
 statistical divergence [14], and Granger-emergence [15]. These
emergence forms or evaporates, the system representations
 methods require centralized monitoring, and are thus inapbetween adjacent time steps are expected to be inconsisplicable under the distributed setting. Class 2 methods allow
tent, which can serve as a detecting signal for emergence.
 distributed monitoring. However, they require prior knowledge
Specifically, a hierarchical framework with spatio-temporal
 of emergence to decide what to detect at each sensor [16],
consistency learning (HSTCL) is proposed for emergence
 [17], falling short in detecting unknown emergent phenomena.
detection. HSTCL is of a three-layer structure, “agents-
 DETect [7], the only existing method from class 3, overcomes
region monitors-global monitor,” which allows to capturing of
 the limitations of the first two classes. Each agent serves as a
emergence-related spatial patterns by aggregating agent-level
 local detector, and agents’ feedback is aggregated to monitor
detecting results from bottom-up. HSTCL can be conceptually
 the emergence. Our method inherits the advantages of DETect,
implemented by the efficient end-edge-cloud collaborative
 and further introduces region monitors between agents and the
framework. Spatio-temporal encoders (STEs) composed of
 global monitor, allowing us to analyze spatial patterns ignored
spatial and temporal transformers are designed to model the
 by DETect. STEs are tailored to model nonlinear relationships
complex variation of agents’ nonlinear relationships and the
 among agents, which is difficult for the linear models adopted
system states in highly dynamic scenarios. Representations of
 by DETect.
agents and the system are learned to jointly preserve the spatial
and temporal consistency by, respectively, minimizing the spa- Similar to region monitoring, Santos and Zhao [18] detect
tial and temporal dissimilarities in the latent space. Compared emergence by utilizing subsystem-level information. Their
with DETect, HSTCL can capture nonlinear spatio-temporal work requires collecting and labeling data of predefined subrelationships with the aid of STEs, and identify system-wide systems, which is not applicable to emergence detection rooted
emergence-related spatial patterns beyond agents’ scope. As a in agents’ local observations. More backgrounds of CAS and
framework, HSTCL is more flexible than DETect. It can emergence, along with a detailed description of DETect are
incorporate other deep learning methods to further boost the shown in Appendix A (supplementary material).
performance. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
 1) The hierarchical framework HSTCL can capture B. Related Graph Mining Tasks
 emergence-related spatial patterns by aggregating Emergence detection can be viewed as CPD in dynamic
 agent-level detecting results from the bottom-up. graphs [19], [20]. It is also closely related to graph-level
 2) STEs composed of spatial and temporal transform- anomaly detection (AD) [21], [22] and multivariate time series
 ers are designed to model the nonlinear relationships AD [23], [24], since emergence is a novel global property.
 among agents and the evolution of the system. Fea- Structural changes from the perspectives of edges [25], singletured by parallel execution and incremental updates of view [26] and multiview [19] graph Laplacian have been
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13375

sustainably explored for CPD. Finer-grained detection is also Definition 1 (Dyanmic Graph): A dynamic graph is comstudied on overlapping communities with respect to different posed of a graph series {G t }t=1 T
 , where G t = (V, E t , Xt ) is a
stages of evolution [27]. snapshot at time t, with V as the set of nodes over all time
 Nonetheless, these methods cannot jointly model the steps, E t as the set of edges at time t, and Xt as the node
changes in node features and structures. Graph neural networks features at time t.
(GNNs) [28] can overcome this limitation. sGNN [20] adopts Definition 2 (CPD in Dynamic Graphs): The task of CPD
siamese GNNs to compare the similarity between two adja- in dynamic graphs aims to find a set of change points
cent graph snapshots, but it ignores the temporal dependence K
 T ∗ = {tk∗ }k=1 from a graph series {G t }t=1T
 . The change points
of graph snapshots. An offline detection method [29] uses split [1,
 S K ∗ −1 ∗ ∗T ] into contiguous segments such that [1, T ] =
the Gaussian mixture model to cluster the graph snapshots k=1 [t , t
 k k+1 ], with t ∗
 1 = 1 and t ∗
 K = T .
and identifies a change point when adjacent graph snapshots The node features xt ∈ R4 is an agent’s 2-D position
belong to different clusters. However, it is unsuitable for online and velocity. The topology of graphs can change over time,
detection because it needs to acquire the information of graphs including the addition and removal of nodes and edges.
over all time steps. For convenience, this article groups all appearing nodes and
 T
 For graph-level AD, the structural changes of dynamic net- assumes the node set is time-invariant, i.e., V = ∪t=1 V t [19].
 t
works are studied from the levels of nodes, communities, and The edge set E is essentially dynamic because the edge
the full-graph [30], [31]. Related multiscale dependence is also is defined by thresholding the distance between two agents,
explored via graph framelets [32] and graph contrastive learn- as will be described in Definition 3. Specifically, the curve
ing [33] in general graph learning methods. For time series of the number of edges over time is reported in Appendix D
AD, the anomaly-related multiscale spatio-temporal patterns (supplementary material).
are modeled by dilated temporal convolution and multihop Under the distributed setting, the global monitor does not
GNNs [24], and the cross-time spatial dependence is modeled have direct access to agents’ states. Each agent as a local
by the fuzzy embedding [34]. The anomaly is measured by detector has limited vision and shares limited messages.
prediction error [23], [24], one-class classification loss [35], Definition 3 (Distributed Setting for Emergence Detection):
and contrastive loss [36]. However, these methods are origi- A qualified emergence detection method under the distributed
nally designed for centralized detection. Protogerou et al. [37] setting should satisfy the following three conditions.
proposed a distributed graph AD method, where each node 1) Condition 1: An agent only senses the states of other
shares the latent vector with its neighbors. This will raise agents within a certain radius. Formally, the neighborprivacy concerns and increase the communication cost. Thus, hood of agent j at time t is defined as N jt = {i : dit j ≤
methods from graph-level CPD and AD are inapplicable for δ}, where dit j is the Euclidean distance.
emergence detection, but they can adapt to our framework 2) Condition 2: An agent j only communicates with its
regarding the distributed settings [7], where agents can only neighbors in N jt .
sense their neighbors’ states and share the detecting results. 3) Condition 3: The only message that an agent j shares
 with its neighbors or uploads to some monitor is its
C. Self-Supervised Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data detecting score for emergence, i.e., a scalar s tj ∈ [0, 1].
 Rich deep learning methods that capture multiscale Inspired by Ranshous et al. [47], this article uses a dissimilarity
spatio-temporal correlations have been developed for function to calculate the detecting scores, and defines the
spatio-temporal data like videos [38] and dynamic graphs [39], criterion for CPD as follows.
with applications to spatio-temporal forecasting [39], task Definition 4 (Criterion for CPD): Given a graph series and
scheduling [40], and decision-making [41]. However, the a dissimilarity function d(G, G ′ ) ∈ R≥0 , a change point t is
scarcity of labels makes it difficult to effectively train detected when d(G t , G t−1 ) > c and d(G t , G t+1 ) ≤ c for some
complex models. Self-supervised learning is explored to threshold c.
leverage rich information underlying the unlabeled data,
with success in time series [42], videos [43], and static B. Motivation and Overview of HSTCL
graphs [33], [44]. However, the efforts in dynamic graphs are The distributed setting stated in Definition 3 poses severe
limited. Contrastive learning is a typical paradigm, but it is challenges to existing spatio-temporal modeling techniques
nontrivial to construct different views of a node or a graph and emergence detection methods:
that preserve spatio-temporal semantics [45], [46]. Besides,
 1) Conditions 1 and 3 state that the hidden vectors of
the large number of negative samples substantially increases
 agents are not shared. Thus, the common practice of
the computational overhead. To avoid these issues, this article
 stacking multiple GNN layers [48] to capture long-range
develops noncontrastive spatio-temporal learning strategies.
 dependence over multihop neighbors is inapplicable.
 2) Conditions 2 and 3 state that it is hard to reach con-
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
 sensus among agents via local communication within a
A. Problem Formulation limited time, because the communication graph changes
 Regarding the time steps when the emergence forms or constantly and it is not necessarily connected [49].
evaporates as change points, emergence detection in CAS can See Appendix A (supplementary material) for further
be formulated as CPD in dynamic graphs as follows. demonstration.
13376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

 a three-step process, corresponding to its three-level structure
 s1:T = AgentDetect X1:T ∈ RT ×|V|
 

 y1:T = CoarseGrain s1:T ∈ RT ×M
 

 sG1:T = SystemDetect y1:T ∈ RT .
 
 (1)
 s1:T is agent-level detecting scores, which are coarse-grained
 to M regions’ states y1:T . sG1:T is system-level detecting scores
 based on region states. Sections III-C and III-D will describe
 the process of HSTCL in detail.

 C. Agent-Level Detection
 1) Spatio-Temporal Encoder: To make online detection at
Fig. 2. Overview of HSTCL. HSTCL contains three hierarchies, agents,
region monitors, and a global monitor, which can be conceptually imple- time τ , each agent records its state and its neighbors’ states
mented by the end-edge-cloud collaborative framework. Agents sense the in the last w time steps. Denoting τ (w) = τ − w + 1 as the
states of neighbors, measure the change in relationships, and communi- initial step of the time window, these states are transformed
cate with them to make agent-level detection. The detecting results are
coarse-grained to region states, whose spatial patterns are used for sys- to agent representations by the agent-level STE
tem-level detection. Representations of agents and the system are learned τ
 hτj (w):τ = STE A xτj (w):τ , xit : i ∈ N jt t=τ (w) ∈ Rw×D . (2)
   
via the STCL technique to support agent-level and system-level detection,
respectively.
 Due to Conditions 1 and 3 of the distributed setting, each
 agent cannot acquire their neighbors’ latent representations.
 Thus, the popular design choice of integrated dynamic GNNs
 3) Condition 3 states that the global monitor is unable to that model spatio-temporal entangled relations [51], [52] is
 make global detection by utilizing agents’ states in an inapplicable. Instead, this article adopts a stacked architecture
 end-to-end manner. composed of a spatial transformer and a temporal transformer [53], disentangling spatial and temporal dependency.
 These challenges motivate the key design choice of HSTCL,
 The spatial transformer models the relationship between an
that is, modeling the spatio-temporal dependency at differagent and its neighbors at each time step. The state of an agent
ent levels and aggregating the information hierarchically.
 xtj is first embedded as a hidden vector through a single-layer
An overview of HSTCL is shown in Fig. 2. It contains three
 perceptron, i.e., etj = Emb(xtj ). Then, a scaled dot-product
hierarchies from bottom-up, agents, region monitors, and a
 attention mechanism [53] with a skip connection is applied to
global monitor. It can be conceptually implemented by the
 calculate the spatial representation
end-edge-cloud collaborative framework [50]. The area where X
 ztj = etj + αit j f V eit − etj
 
all agents move is split into several connected regions. In each (3)
region, every agent senses the states of its neighbors and i∈N jt
detects if its relationship with neighbors changes significantly.
Each agent communicates with its neighbors to enhance the where eit − etj measures the spatial difference between agent
agent-level detecting results. The detecting results of agents j and its neighbor i in the latent space. It may capture
within the same region are aggregated by the corresponding nonlinear relations that are not fully reflected in quantities
region monitor. The regional results are analyzed by the global of the raw space, e.g., relative positions and velocities. f V
monitor to make a system-level detection that is aware of is a value function implemented by a linear mapping. αit j =
emergence-related patterns. softmax({ait j : i ∈ N jt }) is the normalized attention score, with
 Agent-level detection compresses an agent’s local obser- ait j defined as
vations into a single detection score, while system-level 1 ⊤
 ait j = √ f Q etj f K eit
 
detection unifies these scores to gain a global view. They (4)
 D
are supported by agent-level and system-level representation learning, respectively. STEs are designed to capture where f Q and f V are linear layers accounting for the query
nonlinear agent-to-agent and region-to-region relationships. function and the key function, respectively. The spatial trans-
Spatio-temporal consistency learning (STCL) strategy guides former does not require temporal embeddings of neighbors
STEs to learn agents’ and the system’s representations that pre- within a time window, which is desirable because the neighserve both spatial and temporal consistency. Both agent-level bors frequently change.
and system-level STCL preserve the temporal consistency of The temporal transformer is instantiated as a standard transrepresentations within a time window. The former preserves former [53], because it is powerful for sequential modeling,
the spatial consistency between each agent’s and its neighbors’ and it allows parallel execution, which is favorable for online
representations, and the latter preserves the spatial consistency detection. At its core is a temporal attention mechanism that
between the system’s and the regions’ representations. The maps spatial representations to temporal representations
  ⊤ 
inconsistency in system representation serves as a detection 1
 hτj (w):τ = softmax √ qτj (w):τ kτj (w):τ vτj (w):τ
 
 (5)
signal for emergence. Formally, HSTCL can be described as D
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13377

 via a temporal pooling function PoolT , mean pooling here

 vtj = ProjT htj , v(τj ) = PoolT vτj (w):τ .
   
 (6)

 To ensure that the short-term representation is consistent with
 the transient representations, and thus capturing the tendency
 within the time window, this article minimizes the dissimilarity
 between them. The dissimilarity is defined as the complement
Fig. 3. Procedure of agent-level STCL. of the cosine similarity
  1
 d v(τj ) , e 1 − cos v(τj ) , e
   
 htj = htj . (7)
 2
where qτj (w):τ , kτj (w):τ , and vτj (w):τ are query, key, and value Then, the temporal consistency loss is defined as the average
vectors transformed from zτ (w):τ , respectively. temporal dissimilarity of all agents within the time window
 Disentangling the spatial and temporal information also
 τ
makes the spatio-temporal encoder friendly to streaming data 1 X X  (τ ) et 
 LT = d vj , hj . (8)
because the agent representations can be updated incremen- w|V| j∈V t=τ (w)
tally. As the time step τ increases by 1, only the current spatial
representation zτj +1 needs to be computed, while zτj (w)+1:τ can b) Spatial consistency loss: When emphasizing the spabe reused. For the temporal transformer, intermediate results tial consistency, htj is mapped to a spatial space via the
like the unnormalized attention scores and the query vectors spatial projection Proj S . To avoid disturbing the optimization
that only involve zτj (w)+1:τ can be stored. The normalized of the temporal counterpart, this article further transforms
attention scores and the temporal representations can be com- the resulting vectors with a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
puted by further incorporating zτj +1 . Details can be found in construct an asymmetric branch, i.e.,
Appendix C (supplementary material).
 ntj = Proj S htj , m(τj ) = PoolT MLP nτj (w):τ . (9)
    
 2) Spatio-Temporal Consistency Learning: Since the labels
of emergence are rarely known a priori, this article proposes to train STE in a self-supervised manner by preserving By minimizing the dissimilarity between the short-term
the spatio-temporal consistency of the agent representations. representation of each agent and its neighbors, the model
STCL is inspired by an influential noncontrastive method learns to preserve spatial consistency, i.e.,
called bootstrapping your own latent (BYOL) [54], which
 1 X X  (τ ) (τ ) 
avoids explicit negative samples by aligning different views LS = d m j ,e ni (10)
of the same sample encoded by asymmetric neural networks. κ|V| j∈V i∈N
 j
BYOL is briefly introduced in Appendix A (supplementary
material). where N j contains κ random neighbors from the temporal
 Unlike BYOL that uses a single objective, STCL disen- neighborhood ∪τt=τ (w) N jt . The sampling probability of a neightangles the learning objectives of temporal consistency and bor is proportional to its frequency.
spatial consistency since they characterize different aspects As STE A is responsible for the representation, while ProjT
of the dynamic system. For each aspect, an online network and Proj S are responsible for projections, they are simply
and a target network with asymmetric network structures are implemented as MLPs. Mean pooling is adopted for PoolT and
designed to process different views of the same agent. These Pool S for simplicity, and more advanced spatial pooling [48],
views are constructed by leveraging the intrinsic spatial and [55] and temporal pooling [56] methods are left for future
temporal relations within the data other than data augmentation work.
that may damage the spatio-temporal semantics [45]. Given a c) Optimization: Combining the temporal consistency
view of some agent, the online network is trained to align the loss and the spatial consistency loss, the overall loss for
output of the target network for another view. The procedure agent-level learning is
of agent-level STCL is depicted in Fig. 3.
 In Sections III-C2a–III-C2c, a symbol with a tilde stands LAgent = LT + L S . (11)
for an element from the target branch, e.g., a vector e h and
 Directly minimizing the above loss will lead to collapsed
a function e f . Symbols without a tilde come from the online
 representations [54]. To avoid this, the parameters 2 A of the
branch. A vector with a superscript t is called a transient reponline branch are optimized by a gradient-based algorithm,
resentation at time t, e.g., ht . A vector with a superscript (τ )
 e.g., Adam [57], while parameters 2e A of the target branch are
stands for a short-term representation within a time window
 updated by exponential moving average [54]
[τ (w), τ ], e.g., h(τ ) .
 a) Temporal consistency loss: When emphasizing the 2 A ← Opt LAgent , 2 A , 2 e A ← η2 e A + (1 − η)2 A (12)
 
temporal consistency, the agent representation htj is mapped
to a temporal space via the temporal projection ProjT . The where η ∈ [0, 1] is a decay rate. The final 2 A for emergence
resulting vectors vtj are reduced to a short-term representation detection is obtained when the iterative process converges.
13378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

 3) Communication: Although each agent can make detection independently, sharing the detecting scores will make
the detection more robust. In DETect [7], an agent only
communicates with a randomly selected neighbor. Taking a
step further, our method allows each agent to update its own
score s tj by combining the scores of all neighbors and the
dissimilarity between representations of adjacent steps
 (1 − α) X τ
 s τj +1 = α · d h(τj ) , h(τj −1) +
  
 Fig. 4. Procedure of system-level STCL.
 si . (13)
 |N jτ | + 1 τ
 i∈N j ∪{ j}

where h(τj ) = pT hτ (w):τ . α ∈ [0, 1] is a mixing coefficient.
  By minimizing the dissimilarity between u(τ ) and e rtG , the
When α = 1, the messages from neighbors are ignored, and model learns to preserve system-level temporal consistency
when α = 0, the agent is overwhelmed by its neighbors’ τ
 1 X
 d u(τ ) ,e
 rtG .
 
detecting scores. The communication cost can be controlled LST = (18)
 w t=τ (w)
by setting a budget for the number of neighbors.
 b) Spatial consistency loss: The system-level spatial
D. Coarse Graining and System-Level Detection consistency loss ensures that the system representation u(τ ) is
 consistent with the representation of each region. A regional
 1) Coarse Graining: The area where all agents move is
 M spatial projection ProjRS together with a regional temporal
split into several adjacent regions {Rm }m=1 in a grid shape.
 pooling function PoolRT is applied to obtain the region rep-
The detecting scores of agents within a region are aggregated
 resentation within a time window
as the region’s state
 w(τ ) g rτm(w):τ .
 
 m = PoolRT ProjRS e (19)
 X
 ymt = s tj . (14)
 e
 j∈Rm w(τ
 By minimizing the dissimilarity between u(τ ) and e )
 m , the
These regions form a region graph RG t = (RV, RE, yt ), with characteristics of each region are preserved in the system
RV as the set of regions, RE as the set of edges between representation
regions, and yt as the region states at time t. The formulation 1 X
 w(τ
 d u(τ ) , e )
 
 LSS = (20)
can be naturally extended to regions with irregular boundaries κ m∈D m

and complex graph structures [58], [59]. This article considers
grid-shape region graphs for a proof of concept, while more where D contains κ sampled regions from RV. For simplicity,
complex scenarios are left for future work. ProjRT and ProjRS are implemented as MLPs, while PoolRT
 2) Region Representation: As in agent-level detection, and PoolRS are mean pooling, as in agent-level detection. The
a region-level STE with a similar network structure is applied overall loss for system-level learning is the sum of temporal
to the region graph for obtaining the representation rtm for each consistency loss and spatial consistency loss
region, i.e., LSystem = LST + LSS . (21)
 τ
  
 rτm(w):τ = STE R ymτ (w):τ , ynt : n ∈ RN m t=τ (w)
 
 (15) The parameters of region-level online and target networks
where RN m is the set of region m’s neighboring regions. are updated in the same way as (12). Currently, agent-level
Based on region representations, a system representation is and system-level STCL are trained separately. The reasons are
learned to gain a global view of the system. Hence, the twofold: 1) the construction of region states requires highvariation in system representations indicates the formation quality agent-level detecting scores and 2) it is hard to define
or evaporation of emergence. Likewise, temporal and spa- meaningful system-level training signal for agent-level models
tial consistency losses are designed to guide the learning without the truth change points. A joint optimization of the two
procedure. hierarchies is left for future work.
 3) Spatio-Temporal Consistency Learning: The system-level detecting score is defined as the dissimia) Temporal consistency loss: The procedure of larity between system representations of adjacent time steps
system-level detection is depicted in Fig. 4. A regional spatial sGτ = d u(τ ) , u(τ −1) .
 
 (22)
projection ProjRS with a regional spatial pooling function
PoolRS is applied to obtain the transient system representation A summary of notations used in this article is shown in
 Appendix B (supplementary material). The pseudo codes for
 rtG = PoolRS ProjRS rtm : m ∈ RV .
   
 (16) STCL and emergence detection are shown in Appendix C
Then, a regional temporal projection ProjRT followed by a (supplementary material).
regional temporal pooling function PoolRT is applied to obtain
the short-term system representation E. Time Complexity Analysis of HSTCL
 This article analyzes the time complexity of HSTCL from
 u(τ ) = PoolRT ProjRT rτG(w):τ .
   
 (17)
 its implementation within the end-edge-cloud collaborative
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13379

framework and in a single machine, respectively, correspond- TABLE I
ing to the potential real-world deployment and the actual S TATISTICS OF DATASETS
implementation in our experiments for proof of concept. Their
complexities mainly differ in agent-level detection.
 In the end-edge-cloud collaborative implementation, agents
accomplish the computation in parallel [60], [61]. Recall that
D is the dimension of the hidden vector. For agent j, the time
complexity of spatial encoding at time t is O(|N jt |D 2 ), and the
time complexity of temporal encoding within a time window is
O(w D 2 +w 2 D). Thus, the total complexity of spatio-temporal
encoding is O(w D 2 + w 2 D + τt=τ (w) |N jt |D 2 ). The time
 P
 pared with BYOL, it avoids potentially harmful data
complexities for evaluating the temporal consistency loss and augmentations, and can handle multiple objectives in
the spatial consistency loss are O(w D 2 ) and O(κ D 2 ), respec- a disentangled way. It is free of negative samples,
tively. The time complexity of communication is O(|N jt |) at significantly reducing the computational cost for spatioeach time step. Therefore, at both the training and inference temporal data.
stages, the time complexity is linear with respect to the number 4) HSTCL is flexible in integrating other deep learning
of neighbors, which can be controlled by setting a budget. methods as long as they satisfy the distributed setting
Hence, the distributed implementation scales well to large- described in Definition 3. First, existing nondistributed
scale systems. AD and CPD methods can be transformed into dis-
 In the single-machine implementation, the complexity of tributed detectors by adapting them to agent-level and
agent-level detection is relevant to the number of agents. The system-level detection separately. Second, STEs can
time complexity of spatial encoding at time t is O(|E t |D 2 ), be implemented by other spatio-temporally disentanand the time complexity of temporal encoding within a time gled GNNs. Third, STCL can be replaced by other
window is O(|V|(w D 2 + w2 D)). Thus, the total complex- self-supervised training schemes like contrastive learnity of spatio-temporal encoding is O(|V|(w D 2 + w 2 D) + ing. Finally, other dissimilarity functions and detection
 τ
 t=τ (w) |E |D ). The time complexities for evaluating the
 t 2
P
 criteria can be adopted for emergence detection.
temporal consistency loss and the spatial consistency loss are
O(w|V|D 2 ) and O(κ|V|D 2 ), respectively. The time complex- IV. E XPERIMENTS
ity of communication is O(|E t |) at each time step. Therefore,
 A. Datasets
at both the training and inference stages, the time complexity
is linear with respect to the number of agents and the number For a fair comparison, this article follows DETect [7] and
of edges. adopts three simulation environments implemented by NetL-
 In both implementations, the system-level detection is con- ogo [62] to generate data. These simulators are equipped with
ducted by the global monitor. The time complexity of system- well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena. In all
level spatio-temporal encoding is O(|RV|(w D 2 + w 2 D) + simulators, agents move in a 2-D-bounded world composed of
|RE|w D 2 ). The complexities of evaluating system-level patches. The resulting datasets are briefly described as follows.
temporal consistency loss and spatial consistency loss are 1) Flock [63]: Each agent is a bird. The emergence is the
O(w D 2 ) and O(κ D 2 ), respectively. Thus, the complexity of flocking behavior. The objective measure of emergence
system-level detection is linear with respect to the number is the number of patches that contain no birds.
of regions and the number of edges, which are generally 2) Pedestrian [11]: Each agent is a pedestrian walking
irrelevant to the number of agents. either from left to right or in the opposite position. The
 In Section IV-G, this article provides a running time anal- emergence is the counter-flow. The objective measure of
ysis that matches the time complexity analysis to verify the emergence is the number of lanes formed by pedestrians.
scalability of HSTCL. 3) Traffic [7]: Each agent is a car running on the road net
 of Manhattan, New York City. The road net contains
F. Characteristics of HSTCL 6657 junctions and 77 569 road segments. The cars are
 HSTCL is characterized by the following features. routed by a routing engine GraphHopper [64] based on
 1) By hierarchically aggregating agent-level detecting real-world car records. The emergence happens when
 results, HSTCL can capture emergence-related spatial a significant number of streets get congested. Thus,
 patterns ignored by DETect, where agents’ feedback is the objective measure of emergence is the number of
 summed up indiscriminately. congested road segments.
 2) Thanks to the spatio-temporal disentangled architec- On the Flock and Pedestrian datasets, real-world data is
 ture, STE can capture agents’ nonlinear relationships unavailable. Thus, reasonable behavioral rules are designed
 under the distributed setting, where popular designs of for agents. On the Traffic dataset, the real-world data is
 spatio-temporal integrated GNNs are infeasible. combined with simulation rules to mimic agents’ behaviors.
 3) STCL preserves the spatio-temporal consistency within Visualizations of emergent behaviors on all datasets and
 both agent-level and system-level representations. Com- more details of the Traffic dataset are shown in Appendix D
13380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

 where J I ∗ , b I / I∗ ∪ b
 
(supplementary material). A summary of important statistics I = I∗ ∩ b I is the Jaccard index [68]
of the datasets is shown in Table I. Each dataset contains measuring the overlapping degree between two segments.
20 times of simulations, with five times as the training set, In the original paper of DETect [7], the detecting perforfive times as the validation set, and the rest as the testing set. mance is quantitatively evaluated by checking if the number
Following O’toole et al. [7], the objective measure is evaluated of detected events is significantly larger during the emergent
every 50 steps. The ground truth change points are labeled periods than the nonemergent periods. Nonetheless, the deviby running offline CPD algorithms provided by ruptures [65]. ation between detected change points and the ground truth
Offline CPD algorithms have access to the whole series, and is not assessed. Therefore, this article hopes to fill the gap
thus the labeled change points are more reliable and accurate. by introducing the two metrics, and push the current research
The results are checked manually. It turns out that change toward more timely emergence detection.
points make up no more than 1% of all evaluation steps. The
severe imbalance between change points and normal points
further increases the challenge of emergence detection. C. Baselines
 A natural question arises: Why not examine the perfor- To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, this
mance of detectors on real-world datasets? To the best of article compares it with DETect and some state-of-the-art
our knowledge, there is no benchmark based on purely real- deep learning methods in closely related fields, including
world data. Currently, collecting such data can be difficult in dynamic network CPD method sGNN [20], time series CPD
three aspects: 1) the emergent behavior should be properly method TS-CPP [69], time series AD method GDN [23], and
understood because labeling emergence formation and evap- graph-level AD method OCGTL [36]. Advanced techniques
oration requires prior knowledge; 2) contiguously recording like GNNs and contrastive learning are used in these methods.
all agents’ states for a long period can be challenging to the They are adapted to our framework at both agent-level and
sensing devices; and 3) due to some unavailability issues of system-level detection. They are renamed with the suffix
real data, it is hard to ensure the diversity. The simulators can “+H,” short for hierarchical framework.
overcome these limitations, and they may generate potentially
diverse and challenging data that are uneasy to collect in 1) DETect: A decentralized method for online emergence
practice, helping to evaluate the detector’s performance more detection. Each agent detects the change in relationships
comprehensively. We will try to construct qualified real-world between its neighbors and itself via a linear model.
datasets in the future. The detecting results are aggregated to make a global
 decision.
 2) sGNN+H: A dynamic network CPD method that uses
B. Evaluation Metrics siamese GNNs to learn the graph similarity between two
 Due to the unpredictability of emergence, it can be difficult graph snapshots. A top-k pooling module is applied to
to detect the exact change points. The formation or evaporation summarize the node-wise distances in the latent space
of emergence can happen in a short period rather than a into a graph similarity.
specific time step. Therefore, it is reasonable to accept more 3) TS-CPP+H: A time series CPD method based on conthan one detection around a true change point in practice. trastive learning. Temporal convolutional networks [70]
In this article, the detections within a given tolerance θ are are used for time series encoding, and the similarity
regarded as one true positive (TP), while the rest detections between two contiguous time segments is used as the
are regarded as false positive (FP), i.e., indicator for CPD.
 4) GDN+H: A GNN-based method for multivariate time
 TP = t ∗ ∈ T ∗ : ∃t ∈ Tb, s.t. |t − t ∗ | ≤ θ
 
 series AD. It uses graph attention to capture the rela-
 FP = t ∈ Tb : ∀t ∗ ∈ T ∗ , |t − t ∗ | > θ
 
 tionships between sensors and defines the maximum
where T ∗ and Tb are the set of true change points and the set deviation score for AD.
of detected ones, respectively. This article sets θ = 20 for all 5) OCGTL+H: A graph-level AD method that combines
datasets. Defining the precision Prec = (TP/TP + FP) and the one-class classification and neural transformation learnrecall rate Rec = (TP/|T ∗ |), the F1 score can be computed ing [71], an advanced self-supervised learning technique.
as The codes of all baselines are publicly available. The code
 2 × Prec × Rec of DETect1 is directly applied to our experiments. The code
 F1 = . of sGNN,2 TS-CPP,3 GDN,4 and OCGTL5 are adapted to our
 Prec + Rec
 framework. Implementation details of HSTCL are described
 The F1 score measures the overall accuracy of CPD. This
 in Appendix D (supplementary material). The threshold c in
article further uses the covering metric [66], [67] to measure
 Definition 4 is decided by maximizing the F1 score on the
the overlapping degree between the ground truth segments and
 validation set.
the detected segments. Let A∗ be the set of ground truth
segments I ∗ , with a similar definition for A b and b I. The 1 https://github.com/viveknallur/DETectEmergence/
covering metric is defined as 2 https://github.com/dsulem/DyNNet
 3 https://github.com/cruiseresearchgroup/TSCP2
 b = 1
 X
 Cover A∗ , A |I ∗ | · max J I ∗ , b
   4 https://github.com/d-ailin/GDN
 I
 T I ∗ ∈A∗ I∈A
 b b 5 https://github.com/boschresearch/GraphLevel-AnomalyDetection
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13381

 TABLE II
D ETECTING P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS . B OTH THE M EAN VALUE AND THE S TANDARD D EVIATION A RE R EPORTED . T HE B EST R ESULTS
 A RE IN B OLD . T HE I MPROVEMENTS A RE S IGNIFICANT ( p-VALUE < 0.05). T HE R ELATIVE I MPROVEMENTS A RE C OMPUTED W ITH
 R ESPECT TO DET ECT

 TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY. B OTH THE M EAN VALUE AND THE S TANDARD D EVIATION A RE R EPORTED . T HE B EST R ESULTS OF AGENT-L EVEL AND S YSTEM -
 L EVEL D ETECTION A RE IN B OLD . T HE I MPROVEMENTS A RE S IGNIFICANT ( p-VALUE < 0.05)

D. Comparison With Baselines without modeling the spatial relationships, i.e., removing the
 The detecting performance of different methods is shown spatial encoder and training without the spatial consistency
in Table II. The metrics of DETect are relatively low on loss. The results are shown in Table III.
all datasets, showing that emergence detection can be diffi- 1) Effect of System-Level Detection: Without system-level
cult for traditional methods even on the simulation datasets. detection, the average F1 score and covering metric of
Deep learning methods generally outperform DETect in both HSTCLAgent decrease by 0.0943 and 0.0970, respectively. The
metrics, and HSTCL achieves the highest performance. The results verify that the spatial patterns of agent-level detecting
results verify the superiority of our framework, which can results help with emergence detection.
capture emergence-related spatial patterns and model nonlinear To see what patterns are captured by HSTCL, a case study
spatio-temporal dynamics. sGNN+H is relatively poor on is conducted on the Traffic dataset. Fig. 5 visualizes the
the Pedestrian dataset. It ignores the temporal dependence congesting states of the road net and the region states when the
between adjacent graph snapshots and simply averages the network-level congestion forms. Fig. 5(a) shows that congested
similarities within the time window. HSTCL captures the road segments constitute a connected subnetwork with a
temporal dependence via the STEs and learns a short-term diameter of 80, accounting for more than (1/3) of the diameter
representation of the system within the time window, which of the road net. The phenomenon confirms the emergence
can better reflect the system-level variation in the latent space. of widespread congestion. Such emergence-related pattern is
GDN+H calculates the detecting score based on next-step almost faithfully reflected in region states. The results also
prediction error, which can be sensitive to the noise in the show that HSTCL can detect the emergence of widespread
states. HSTCL calculates the score based on the consistency of congestion even when the traffic flow is not provided.
representations, which is resistant to potential noise. HSTCL 2) Effect Of Agent-Level Detection: Compared with
jointly preserves spatial and temporal consistency, and thus HSTCLAgent , the average F1 score and the covering metric of
outperforms TS-CPP+H which ignores spatial consistency and HSTCLSelf decrease by 0.0264 and 0.0171, respectively. The
OCGTL+H which ignores temporal consistency. results show that modeling the nonlinear relationship between
 an agent and its neighbors is indispensable for agent-level
 detection. Note that HSTCLAgent is better than DETect on the
E. Ablation Study Flock and Pedestrian datasets, and on par with it on the Traffic
 Some variants of HSTCL are introduced to verify the neces- dataset, which again verifies the effectiveness of agent-level
sity of capturing emergence-related patterns and modeling spatio-temporal modeling.
agents’ relationships with neighbors. HSTCLAgent removes To see how HSTCLAgent captures the relationships, this
system-level detection. HSTCLSelf makes agent-level detection article conducts a case study on the Flock dataset. Inspired
13382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 5. Case study of spatial patterns on the Traffic dataset. In (a), each line segment represents a road segment. Segments in red are congested, while those
in gray are normal. In (b), each grid represents a region state. The darker the color, the more agent-level detections are collected. Best viewed in color.

 somehow comprehensively capture the relationships defined by
 some intuitive metrics with respect to agents’ states.
 3) Effect of Spatial and Temporal Consistency Losses:
 To validate the effectiveness of STCL for both agent-level
 and system-level detection, this article introduces variants
 of HSTCLAgent and HSTCL trained with only the spatial
 or the temporal consistency loss. The resulting methods
 are denoted as HSTCLAgent-S , HSTCLAgent-T , HSTCLS , and
 HSTCLT , respectively. As shown in Table III, removing any
 term in the loss function will lead to degenerated performance in most cases. For example, HSTCLAgent-T removes the
 agent-level spatial consistency loss, and noticeable drops in
 both metrics can be observed on all datasets. The results verify
 that inconsistency in spatial relation is an accurate indicator of
 emergence. Similarly, HSTCLS removes the system-level temporal consistency loss and both metrics decrease. The results
 verify that temporal inconsistency of the whole system helps to
Fig. 6. Case study of agents’ relationships on the Flock dataset. The variation
curves of the objective measure, agents’ dissimilarity in latent space, and detect the emergent behavior. Thus, the spatial consistency loss
agents’ relationships with respect to three indicators are visualized. Best and temporal consistency loss are complementary to learning
viewed in color. discriminative representations for emergence detection.

by O’toole et al. [7], three indicators are used to measure
the relationships with respect to agents’ states, including the F. Hyperparameter Analysis
distance to the center of neighbors, the number of neighbors, 1) Effect of Region Granularity: The area where agents
and the difference between an agent’s velocity and its neigh- move is split into many regions for system-level detection.
bors’ average velocity. The objective measure of emergence The granularity of regions decides how many details are
is set as a reference. Agents’ and their neighbors’ dissimi- preserved for global analysis. To study the effect of region
larity in representations stands for relationships in the latent granularity, this article trains the system-level detector on
space. The variation curves of the aforementioned metrics are the Traffic dataset under several N × N grids, with N ∈
shown in Fig. 6. As expected, during the emergent period {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30}. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The
of flocking, birds get crowded, and thus, the distances are F1 score is lowest when N = 5. Maybe coarsening too
smaller, the neighbor count increases, and the difference in much will result in inadequate information that cannot support
velocity decreases. Unexpectedly, the difference in velocity accurate detection. The F1 score and covering metric increase
between 400 and 600 steps is larger than those in other periods. on the whole as N grows but start to decrease at N = 20.
This anomalous phenomenon may be attributed to the flocking An exception is that the covering metric decreases at N = 10.
simulation rules. Birds are set to align during the emergent The F1 score is the harmonic mean of the precision and the
period and move randomly during the nonemergent period. recall rate. Since the threshold c for determining a change
The second emergent period is relatively long and thus the point is searched by maximizing the F1 score on the validation
subsequent nonemergent period witnesses a sharp increase in set, it is possible that the precision or the recall rate increases
velocity difference. The unstable behavior of the last metric while the other metric decreases, leading to the growth of the
shows that a single metric may not always be reliable for F1 score and the drop of the covering metric. Some examples
indicating emergence. are provided in Appendix D (supplementary material). When
 Different metrics present different patterns, yet these pat- N is too large, the regions are too small to collect sufficient
terns are approximately captured by the latent representations. feedback from agents and present stable spatial patterns. Thus,
The tendency of the dissimilarity curve also agrees with that of our method achieves the highest performance for N = 20 with
the objective measure. These results show that our method can a moderate computational cost.
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13383

Fig. 7. Effect of region granularity on the Traffic dataset. The dashed vertical Fig. 9. Effect of window size in system-level detection on the Pedestrian
line indicates the best results. Best viewed in color. dataset. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 8. Effect of agents’ communication on the Traffic dataset. The dashed
vertical line indicates the best results. Best viewed in color. Fig. 10. Running time and GPU memory consumption of system-level
 detection with respect to w on the Pedestrian dataset.
 2) Effect of Mixing Coefficient for Communication: Agents
communicate with neighbors to make agent-level detections.
The mixing coefficient α in (13) balances the importance of
an agent’s current observation and its neighbors’ detecting
scores. α is set to 0.05 to keep consistent with DETect.
To see how α affects the detecting accuracy, this article
evaluates HSTCLAgent on the Traffic dataset with α ranging
from 0.1 to 1. As shown in Fig. 8, the F1 score and covering
metric can be promoted by increasing α, i.e., assigning a larger
weight to agents’ current observation. However, when α = 1,
i.e., agents ignore the detecting scores of their neighbors, Fig. 11. Effect of threshold θ on the Pedestrian dataset. Best viewed in color.
the F1 score drops significantly, verifying the necessity of
communication. The results show the possibility of tuning 4) Effect of Threshold θ: In the experiments, the threshold
α to improve the detecting accuracy. Furthermore, α can be θ is set to 20 on all datasets for fairly comparing the detecting
personalized and adaptive over time. Optimizing the choices precision of different methods. Apparently, the F1 scores
of α is left for future work. are affected by the choices of θ. This article evaluates the
 3) Effect of Window Size for Emergence Detection: The F1 scores of HSTCL and DETect on the Pedestrian dataset for
window size w is the temporal scope of emergence detection. θ ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100}, and the results are shown in Fig. 11.
Like the granularity of regions, there is a tradeoff between For both methods, the F1 score grows approximately as θ
precision and efficacy with respect to w. It is set to 10 for increases, because a larger tolerance allows to include more
agent-level detection, since the objective measure of emer- detected change points. On the whole, HSTCL consistently
gence is evaluated every 50 steps and the states of agents are achieves higher detecting precision than DETect for all θ,
downsampled every 5 steps. In this way, agents can make rel- yet the difference narrows down as θ increases. Besides, the
atively accurate and timely detections. However, performance variance of DETect’s F1 scores tends to grow up for a larger
degeneration is observed for system-level detection with the θ, while HSTCL preserves a considerably smaller variance,
same window size. It is conjectured that system-level detection showing that the performance of HSTCL is more stable.
needs a larger temporal scope with coarse-grained spatial In practice, a relatively smaller threshold is more favorable,
information. The effect of w is studied on the Pedestrian because detected change points with smaller displacement help
dataset, with w ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100}. As shown in Fig. 9, the to detect the emergence more timely.
F1 score generally increases as w grows, while the covering To further differentiate the detecting quality of DETect and
metric peaks at w = 40. Although the F1 score peaks at HSTCL, this article visualizes their detected change points on
w = 60, both the running time and the memory consumption the Pedestrian dataset. As shown in Fig. 12, DETect fails to
will increase, as depicted in Fig. 10. Since online detection detect change points in several periods, and the detected points
is sensitive to the computational cost, w is set to 40 for are relatively far from the nearest ground truth. By contrast,
system-level detection to achieve a good tradeoff between HSTCL successfully detects all change points with signifiaccuracy and efficiency. This choice is also practical since the cantly smaller deviations.
global monitor generally has a larger capacity than a single 5) Sensitivity Analysis: It is crucial to analyze the senagent. sitivity of HSTCL with respect to the initial parameters
13384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 12. (Top) Visualization of the ground truth change points, and change
points detected by (middle) DETect and (bottom) HSTCL on the Pedestrian
dataset. The variation curves are in black. The change points are marked as
 Fig. 13. Runtime of different methods on all datasets. Best viewed in color.
stars. The periods of emergence are in green. The normal periods are in purple.
Best viewed in color.
 HSTCL, TSCPP+H, and OCGTL+H are comparable. However, OCGTL+H takes more time in agent-level detection than
for instructing its real-world applications. As reported in other methods, which may be due to its computationally costly
Tables II and III, the standard deviations for both agent-level design of transformation learning. Notably, on the large-scale
and system-level detection of HSTCL are relatively small, Traffic dataset, the efficiency of HSTCL becomes closer to
which indicates that HSTCL is relatively robust to the stochas- sGNN+H, which demonstrates the scalability of HSTCL.
tic nature of deep learning, including the weight initialization On the Traffic dataset where agents are significantly more
and the training process. In Section IV-Fa)–d), this article than regions, the overall running time is dominated by agentanalyzes the effect of region granularity N × N , mixing level detection. On the Flock and Pedestrian datasets where
coefficient α for communication, window size w, and the regions are more than agents, system-level detection dominates
threshold θ for evaluating metrics. To summarize, HSTCL the running time for HSTCL and TSCPP+H. For GDN+H,
is sensitive to N × N , α, and w, but is relatively stable OCGTL+H, and sGNN+H, agent-level detection takes more
with respect to θ. In practice, one can use the historical time. This may be attributed to the simplicity or ignorance
data as a validation set to determine essential parameters and of temporal modeling, and that agent graphs are denser than
adjust these parameters when there is a distribution shift of region graphs. Note that the running time of all methods
the online data. Specifically, α can be tuned without retrain- is evaluated on a single machine. In practice, agent-level
ing the agent-level model. Adjusting N may not affect the detection can be accomplished by each agent in parallel. Thus,
deployment of edge monitors because one monitor can collect it is expected that all distributed detection methods scale well
agents’ feedback from several regions, but the system-level as the number of agents grows.
model should be updated. Adjusting w requires updating the
agent-level model and the system-level model sequentially. V. C ONCLUSION
When the system is nonstationary, it can be analyzed on
multiple time scales simultaneously to achieve timely detection This article proposes a hierarchical framework named
with relatively low cost [72]. HSTCL for emergence detection in CAS under the distributed
 setting. By aggregating agent-level detecting results from
 the bottom-up, HSTCL learns a system representation that
G. Running Time Analysis captures emergence-related patterns. Nonlinear relationships
 To study the efficiency of all methods for online emergence between agents and their neighbors are encoded in agent
detection, this article reports their average running time per representations through STE. These representations are learned
step for agent-level detection and system-level detection in in a self-supervised manner by preserving the spatio-temporal
Fig. 13. Although DETect is the most efficient on the Flock consistency. HSTCL surpasses the traditional methods and
dataset which contains only 150 agents, its running time grows deep learning methods on three datasets with well-known
steeply with respect to the number of agents and peaks on the yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena. HSTCL is flexible
Traffic dataset which contains 2522 agents. Such inefficiency in incorporating deep learning methods from graph-level CPD
may be due to its concrete implementation in NetLogo. Among and AD for effective emergence detection.
deep learning methods within our framework, GDN+H and In the future, HSTCL can be extended from three dimensGNN+H are faster than others because of their simplicity sions: data, problems, and methods. On the data dimension,
in spatio-temporal modeling. The overall running time of we plan to acquire real-time data streams from devices in
CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 13385

the Internet of Things to test HSTCL’s effectiveness in live [16] R. L. Grossman et al., “Discovering emergent behavior from network
environments. Besides, allowing the addition and removal of packet data: Lessons from the angle project,” in Next Generation of Data Mining. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2008,
agents will make the simulators more realistic and bring extra pp. 267–284.
challenges to dynamic graph learning [51]. It is also promising [17] M. A. Niazi and A. Hussain, “Sensing emergence in complex systems,”
to utilize simulators based on large language models [73] to IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 2479–2480, Oct. 2011.
 [18] E. Santos and Y. Zhao, “Automatic emergence detection in complex
promote the quality of simulation data and make the evaluation systems,” Complexity, vol. 2017, pp. 1–24, Jan. 2017.
results more convincing. These simulators can better incorpo- [19] S. Huang, S. Coulombe, Y. Hitti, R. Rabbany, and G. Rabusseau,
rate domain knowledge, and recover complex agent behaviors “Laplacian change point detection for single and multi-view dynamic
beyond predefined simulation rules. When real-world observa- graphs,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1–32,
 Apr. 2024.
tions of agent states are sparse and incomplete, graph learning [20] D. Sulem, H. Kenlay, M. Cucuringu, and X. Dong, “Graph similarity
methods can be developed to complement missing information learning for change-point detection in dynamic networks,” Mach. Learn.,
and possible auxiliary information can be leveraged to assist vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 1–44, Jan. 2024.
 [21] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
the detection [74]. When the systems contain heterogeneous with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
agents, category-aware STEs and learning strategies can be pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
designed to modeling heterogeneous dynamics and interacting [22] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin,
patterns [75]. On the problem dimension, it is more realistic to and H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly
 detection in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
consider partially missing messages and time delays in agents’ no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jun. 2024.
communication, which will trigger the research of more robust [23] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
detectors. On the method dimension, distributed GNNs and in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
advanced CPD methods can further boost the performance of [24] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning
emergence detection. Besides, it is promising to develop graph for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
learning methods that can capture emergence-related higher Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024, doi:
 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667.
order structures of a system. [25] Y. Wang, A. Chakrabarti, D. Sivakoff, and S. Parthasarathy, “Fast change
 point detection on dynamic social networks,” in Proc. 26th Int. Joint
 Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2017, pp. 2992–2998.
 R EFERENCES [26] S. Huang, Y. Hitti, G. Rabusseau, and R. Rabbany, “Laplacian change
 point detection for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 [1] O. Artime and M. De Domenico, “From the origin of life to pandemics:
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 349–358.
 Emergent phenomena in complex systems,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A,
 Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 380, no. 2227, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 20200410. [27] J. Cheng, M. Chen, M. Zhou, S. Gao, C. Liu, and C. Liu, “Overlapping
 [2] S. Kalantari, E. Nazemi, and B. Masoumi, “Emergence phenomena community change-point detection in an evolving network,” IEEE Trans.
 in self-organizing systems: A systematic literature review of concepts, Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 189–200, Mar. 2020.
 researches, and future prospects,” J. Organizational Comput. Electron. [28] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory,
 Commerce, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 224–265, Jul. 2020. models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 [3] E. O’Toole, “Decentralised detection of emergence in complex adap- Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, Apr. 2024.
 tive systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, School Comput. Sci. Statist., Trinity [29] X. Zhang et al., “VGGM: Variational graph Gaussian mixture model for
 College, Dublin, Ireland, 2016. unsupervised change point detection in dynamic networks,” IEEE Trans.
 [4] J. Fromm, “Types and forms of emergence,” 2005, arXiv:nlin/0506028. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4272–4284, 2024.
 [5] M. A. Bedau, “Weak emergence,” Phil. Perspect., vol. 11, pp. 375–399, [30] P. Jiao et al., “Generative evolutionary anomaly detection in dynamic
 Jan. 1997. networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 [6] G. Zeng et al., “Percolation-based health management of complex traffic pp. 12234–12248, May 2023.
 systems,” Frontiers Eng. Manage., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 557–571, Dec. 2021. [31] P. Jiao, T. Li, H. Wu, C.-D. Wang, D. He, and W. Wang, “HB-DSBM:
 [7] E. O’toole, V. Nallur, and S. Clarke, “Decentralised detection of emer- Modeling the dynamic complex networks from community level to
 gence in complex adaptive systems,” ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst., node level,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11,
 vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2017. pp. 8310–8323, Jun. 2023.
 [8] S. Aminikhanghahi and D. J. Cook, “A survey of methods for time series [32] J. Li, R. Zheng, H. Feng, M. Li, and X. Zhuang, “Permutation
 change point detection,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 339–367, equivariant graph framelets for heterophilous graph learning,” IEEE
 Sep. 2016. Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11634–11648,
 [9] J. Gignoux, G. Chérel, I. D. Davies, S. R. Flint, and E. Lateltin, Sep. 2024.
 “Emergence and complex systems: The contribution of dynamic graph [33] Y. Zheng et al., “Toward graph self-supervised learning with contrastive
 theory,” Ecol. Complex., vol. 31, pp. 34–49, Sep. 2017. adjusted zooming,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7,
[10] M. Mnif and C. Müller-Schloer, “Quantitative emergence,” in Organic pp. 8882–8896, Sep. 2024.
 Computing—A Paradigm Shift for Complex Systems. Cham, Switzerland:
 [34] K. Zhu, P. Song, and C. Zhao, “Fuzzy state-driven cross-time spatial
 Springer, 2011, pp. 39–52.
 dependence learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
[11] J. Procházka and K. Olševičová, “Monitoring lane formation of pedestri-
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 8, 2024, doi:
 ans: Emergence and entropy,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Intell. Inf. Database
 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3371109.
 Syst., 2015, pp. 221–228.
 [35] L. Zhao and L. Akoglu, “On using classification datasets to evaluate
[12] Q. Liu, M. He, D. Xu, N. Ding, and Y. Wang, “A mechanism for
 graph outlier detection: Peculiar observations and new insights,” Big
 recognizing and suppressing the emergent behavior of UAV swarm,”
 Data, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 151–180, Jun. 2023.
 Math. Problems Eng., vol. 2018, pp. 1–14, Sep. 2018.
[13] J. Luo, J. Xin, G. Binghui, H. Zheng, W. Wu, and W. Lv, “Dynamic [36] C. Qiu, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Raising the bar in graphmodel and crowd entropy measurement of crowd intelligence system,” level anomaly detection,” in Proc. Thirty-First Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 (in Chinese), Scientia Sinica Informationis, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 99–110, Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 2196–2203.
 2022. [37] A. Protogerou, S. Papadopoulos, A. Drosou, D. Tzovaras, and I. Refani-
[14] D. Fisch, M. Jänicke, B. Sick, and C. Müller-Schloer, “Quantitative dis, “A graph neural network method for distributed anomaly detection
 emergence - a refined approach based on divergence measures,” in in IoT,” Evolving Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–36, Mar. 2021.
 Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Self-Adaptive Self-Organizing Syst., Sep. 2010, [38] Z. Qin, X. Lu, X. Nie, D. Liu, Y. Yin, and W. Wang, “Coarse-topp. 94–103. fine video instance segmentation with factorized conditional appearance
[15] A. K. Seth, “Measuring emergence via nonlinear Granger causality,” in flows,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1192–1208,
 Proc. ALIFE, vol. 2008, 2008, pp. 545–552. May 2023.
13386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

[39] W. Hu et al., “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks via view [63] C. W. Reynolds, “Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral
 fusion for trajectory data analytics,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., model,” in Proc. 14th Annu. Conf. Comput. Graph. Interact. Techn.,
 vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4608–4620, Apr. 2023. Aug. 1987, pp. 25–34.
[40] H. Yuan, J. Bi, and M. Zhou, “Spatiotemporal task scheduling for het- [64] P. Karich and S. Schöder. Graphhopper, Version 0.4. Accessed: Mar. 5,
 erogeneous delay-tolerant applications in distributed green data centers,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://graphhopper.com/
 IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1686–1697, Oct. 2019. [65] C. Truong, L. Oudre, and N. Vayatis, “Selective review of offline
[41] Y. Wang, T. Xu, X. Niu, C. Tan, E. Chen, and H. Xiong, “STMARL: change point detection methods,” Signal Process., vol. 167, Feb. 2020,
 A spatio-temporal multi-agent reinforcement learning approach for Art. no. 107299.
 cooperative traffic light control,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, [66] G. J. J. van den Burg and C. K. I. Williams, “An evaluation of change
 no. 6, pp. 2228–2242, Jun. 2022. point detection algorithms,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06222.
[42] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: [67] P. Arbelaez, M. Maire, C. Fowlkes, and J. Malik, “Contour detec-
 Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. tion and hierarchical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024. Mach. Intell., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 898–916, May 2010.
[43] M. C. Schiappa, Y. S. Rawat, and M. Shah, “Self-supervised learning [68] P. Jaccard, “The distribution of the flora in the Alpine zone. 1,” New
 for videos: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 13s, pp. 1–37, Phytologist, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 37–50, 1912.
 Dec. 2023. [69] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
[44] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
 on graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
 Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023. [70] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
[45] X. Liu, Y. Liang, C. Huang, Y. Zheng, B. Hooi, and R. Zimmermann, convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
 “When do contrastive learning signals help spatio-temporal graph fore- arXiv:1803.01271.
 casting?” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2022, [71] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
 pp. 1–12. transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
[46] Q. Zhang, C. Huang, L. Xia, Z. Wang, Z. Li, and S. Yiu, “Automated Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
 spatio-temporal graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., [72] X. Wang, Q. Kang, M. Zhou, L. Pan, and A. Abusorrah, “Multiscale
 Apr. 2023, pp. 295–305. drift detection test to enable fast learning in nonstationary environments,”
 IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 3483–3495, Jul. 2021.
[47] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos,
 and N. F. Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: [73] C. Gao et al., “S3: Social-network simulation system with large language
 A survey,” Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev., Comput. Stat., vol. 7, no. 3, model-empowered agents,” 2023, arXiv:2307.14984.
 pp. 223–247, Mar. 2015. [74] J. Zhang, Z. Wei, Z. Yan, M. Zhou, and A. Pani, “Online change-point
 detection in sparse time series with application to online advertising,”
[48] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
 IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151,
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Jun. 2019.
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
 [75] S. Chen and J. Wang, “Heterogeneous interaction modeling with reduced
[49] W. Ren and R. W. Beard, Distributed Consensus in Multi-Vehicle accumulated error for multiagent trajectory prediction,” IEEE Trans.
 Cooperative Control, vol. 27. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2008. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 8040–8052, Jun. 2024.
[50] Q. He, Z. Dong, F. Chen, S. Deng, W. Liang, and Y. Yang, “Pyramid:
 Enabling hierarchical neural networks with edge computing,” in Proc.
 ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1860–1870. Siyuan Chen received the B.S. degree in mathemat-
[51] J. Skarding, B. Gabrys, and K. Musial, “Foundations and modeling of ics and applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in
 dynamic networks using dynamic graph neural networks: A survey,” computer science and technology from Sun Yat-sen
 IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 79143–79168, 2021. University, Guangzhou, China, in 2018 and 2023,
[52] S. Wang, J. Cao, and P. S. Yu, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal respectively.
 data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8, He is currently a Lecturer with the School
 pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022. of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering,
[53] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Guangzhou University, Guangzhou. His research
 Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008. interests include graph learning, crowd intelligence,
[54] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self- spatio-temporal data mining, and social network
 supervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), mining.
 Dec. 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[55] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, F. M. Bianchi, and C. Alippi, “Understanding Xin Du received the B.S. degree in computer science
 pooling in graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. and technology from Jiangnan University, Wuxi,
 Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2708–2718, May 2024. China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
[56] D. Lee, S. Lee, and H. Yu, “Learnable dynamic temporal pooling science and technology from Sun Yat-sen University,
 for time series classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, Guangzhou, China, in 2023.
 vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 8288–8296. He is currently a Lecturer with the Civil Aviation Electronic Information Engineering College,
[57] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 Guangzhou Civil Aviation College, Guangzhou. His
 in Proc. ICLR, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 research interests include deep learning and deep
 forum?id=8gmWwjFyLj and https://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.6980
 reinforcement learning.
[58] J. Sun, J. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yi, Y. Liang, and Y. Zheng, “Predicting
 citywide crowd flows in irregular regions using multi-view graph convolutional networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 5,
 pp. 2348–2359, May 2022. Jiahai Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
[59] F. Li, J. Feng, H. Yan, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “Crowd flow prediction for Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Univerirregular regions with semantic graph attention network,” ACM Trans. sity of Toyama, Toyama, Japan, in 2005.
 Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1–14, Oct. 2022. In 2005, he joined Sun Yat-sen University,
[60] H. Hua, Y. Li, T. Wang, N. Dong, W. Li, and J. Cao, “Edge comput- Guangzhou, China, where he is currently a Full
 ing with artificial intelligence: A machine learning perspective,” ACM Professor with the School of Computer Science and
 Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–35, Sep. 2023. Engineering. He is currently leading the Intelligent
 Optimization and Learning Laboratory, Sun Yat-
[61] T. Gong, L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, and T. Tang, “Edge intelligence in intelligent sen University. He has published a series of papers
 transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., in leading conferences and top journals including
 vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 8919–8944, Sep. 2023. AAAI, ACL, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS. His main
[62] S. Tisue and U. Wilensky, “NetLogo: A simple environment for mod- research interests include computational intelligence (deep neural networks
 eling complexity,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Complex Syst., vol. 21, 2004, and metaheuristics) and its applications.
 pp. 16–21. Prof. Wang is a Distinguished Member of CCF, China.