IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 317

 A Membership Inference and Adversarial Attack
 Defense Framework for Network Traffic Classifiers
 Guangrui Liu , Weizhe Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Xurun Wang , Stephen King ,
 and Shui Yu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Malicious traffic identification methods in intrusion AI security defenses ignore the network traffic characteristics,
detection systems have evolved from rule-based matching to resulting in weak protection for ML-NIDS. They not only failed
machine learning. However, security risks such as membership to effectively defend against member inference and adversarial
inference and adversarial attacks hinder the practical deployment attacks, but they also lead to a decrease in ACC. This article
of machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems introduces the HierarchicalDP defense framework to protect ML-
(ML-NIDSs). In this work, we design a defense framework called NIDS. HierarchicalDP reduces the success rate of membership
hierarchical differential privacy (HierarchicalDP) to safeguard inference to 54.4% (ineffective binary classification), lowers the
ML-NIDS against membership inference and adversarial attacks. evasion rate of adversarial samples to 23.2%, and maintains ACC
First, we analyze the principles of membership inference and fluctuations within 4.2%. Furthermore, HierarchicalDP does not
adversarial attacks to find their correlation. Based on this, we affect the inference speed, providing efficient and convenient
propose the feature distribution security metric (FDSM) to mea- defenses for ML-NIDS.
sure the risk of membership inference and adversarial attacks Index Terms—Artificial intelligence (AI) in cybersecurity,
on ML-NIDS. Then, we design the HierarchicalDP framework, artificial intelligence safety, machine learning, responsible artifiwhich partitions network traffic sample features according to cial intelligence, verifiable artificial intelligence.
security levels and introduces distinct noise on each security
level feature to satisfy FDSM, thus defensing against membership inference and adversarial attacks. Finally, we evaluate I. INTRODUCTION
the defensive performance of the HierarchicalDP framework on
two network traffic datasets and four machine-learning models.
The HierarchicalDP defense framework, based on Laplace noise,
reduces the success rate of membership inference from 64.9%
 T HE number of security vendors planning to integrate artificial intelligence (AI) technology into network intrusion
 detection systems is increasing [1]. However, the practical deto 54.4% (ineffective binary classification), the evasion rate ployment of machine learning-based network intrusion detecof adversarial samples from 86.1% to 23.2%, and maintains tion systems (ML-NIDSs) often encounters obstacles [2]. On
model accuracy (ACC) fluctuations within 4.2%. Furthermore,
the HierarchicalDP framework adjusts sample features without
 the one hand, the accuracy of malicious traffic identification by
modifying the model, thereby not affecting the inference speed. ML-NIDS is unstable. On the other hand, the machine learning
HierarchicalDP offers efficient and convenient defenses for security risks make ML-NIDS susceptible to attacks [3].
ML-NIDS deployed in a network. Membership inference and adversarial attacks are two pri-
 Impact Statement—Artificial intelligence (AI)-driven network mary machine learning security risks [4], [5]. Membership inintrusion detection is on the rise. ML-NIDSs are superior to
rule-based NIDS in identifying new network attacks. However,
 ference threatens the privacy of a model. This attack primarily
AI security problems hinder ML-NIDS deployment. Existing stems from vulnerabilities in the model training process, where
 slight differences between training samples can be amplified
 Manuscript received 30 October 2023; revised 18 December 2023; accepted and reflected in the training results of the model. Adversarial
19 January 2024. Date of publication 26 January 2024; date of current version attacks threaten the inference accuracy of a model. This attack
27 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the Joint Funds of the primarily stems from vulnerabilities in the model inference
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U22A2036 and in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under process, where specific small perturbations to test samples can
Grant 2021YFB3101102. This article was recommended for publication by be amplified and reflected in the inference results of the mode.
Associate Editor Qinghua Lu upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. Most existing defenses against membership inference and
(Corresponding author: Guangrui Liu.)
 Guangrui Liu and Xurun Wang are with the School of Cyberspace Science, adversarial attacks are designed for computer vision [6], [7],
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China (e-mail: which neglects particular characteristics of network traffic.
liuguangrui@hit.edu.cn; 22S003113@stu.hit.edu.cn). When applied to network traffic classifiers, these defenses not
 Weizhe Zhang is with the School of Cyberspace Science, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China, and also with Peng only exhibit poor protection performance but also yield a signif-
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China (e-mail: wzzhang@ icant drop in ACC [8], [9]. To address this issue, we introduce
hit.edu.cn). a defense framework custom-built to protect ML-NIDS called
 Stephen King is with Leland High School, San Jose, CA 95120 USA
(e-mail: stephenking192008@gmail.com). HierarchicalDP. This framework leverages the structural char-
 Shui Yu is with the School of Computer Science, University of Technology acteristics of network traffic samples. The HierarchicalDP
Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia (e-mail: shui.yu@uts.edu.au). framework adjusts sample features without modifying the
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/TAI.2024.3357791, provided by the authors. model, thereby not affecting the inference speed. Hierarchi-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAI.2024.3357791 calDP offers efficient and convenient defenses for ML-NIDS

 2691-4581 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Hierarchical differential privacy (HierarchicalDP) defense effectiveness and FDSM operation principle.

deployed in a network. There are three major challenges in by feature smoothing based on the structured characteristics of
designing this new defense framework. traffic samples. First, since differential privacy and adversarial
 1) CH1: How to design a security metric method for robustness are quantifiable metrics for describing membership
 network traffic classifiers? For member inference risk, inference and adversarial attack risks, we analyze their correexisting methods [10] use differential privacy to measure lation and combine them by defining the feature distribution
 the privacy security of the model, but they lack consid- security metric (FDSM). FDSM aims to ensure that the feaeration for the characteristics of network traffic samples. ture probability distribution of samples meets the robustness
 For adversarial attack risk, existing methods [11] conduct requirement under the security budget. Then, we design the
 adversarial robustness testing after model training is fin- HierarchicalDP defense framework based on FDSM, which
 ished, lacking a way to evaluate the adversarial attack risk realizes the smoothing of feature distribution by adding difbefore model training. ferential noise to the critical features of the samples. The crit-
 2) CH2: How to identify the security-sensitive features of ical features contain privacy- and category-sensitive features
 network traffic samples? Network traffic samples exhibit computed by the feature hierarchization strategy based on the
 structured characteristics, with the feature distributions of attention mechanism. HierarchicalDP can defend ML-NIDS
 samples in the same category displaying similarity [12]. based on raw traffic or statistical feature datasets. Due to only
 Moreover, the impact of each feature on model privacy modifying input data, it applies to any commonly used machine
 and robustness varies. If privacy- and category-sensitive learning model.
 features can be identified and protected, it can minimize The contributions of our work are summarized as follows.
 the impact of defense methods on model performance. 1) Targeting CH1, we introduce the FDSM. By extending
 This aspect is rarely considered in existing work. the existing descriptions of differential privacy and adver-
 3) CH3: How to design differential privacy for ML-NIDS sarial robustness using Rényi divergence, we unify their
 to defend against member inference and adversarial formal expressions under α-metric and β-divergence.
 attacks? On the one hand, since most ML-NIDS use 2) Targeting CH2, we calculate the contribution of each feaincremental learning to update models [1], the defenses ture to the predicted label using the self-attention mechashould not change the model structure but rather add noise nism. Then, we design a feature hierarchization strategy
 to sample features. On the other hand, different sensitivity to identify the privacy- and category-sensitive features of
 features should add different noise to effectively protect network traffic samples.
 the security of ML-NIDS while keeping the added noise 3) Targeting CH3, we design HierarchicalDP defense
 as small as possible. framework for ML-NIDS. For training samples, we add
 To address the above challenges, we design the Hierarchi- differential noise to privacy-sensitive features, enabling
calDP, as shown in Fig. 1, which solves the above problems a lightweight differential privacy mechanism. For test
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 319

 samples, we introduce differential perturbations to TABLE I
 category-sensitive features, achieving provably secure IMPORTANT NOTATIONS
 techniques for enhancing adversarial robustness.
 Symbol Definition
 4) Furthermore, we evaluate the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP on two publicly available malicious traffic xi = (xi1 , xi1 , . . . , xid ) The vector of sample features
 f i = (fi1 , fi1 , . . . , fid ) The distribution of sample features
 datasets, consisting of packet and session samples, using i(1 ≤ i ≤ n) The index of samples
 four standard models. Compared to the state-of-the-art j(1 ≤ j ≤ d) The index of feature dimensions
 existing methods, HierarchicalDP reduces the member- Y = {Y1 , Y2 , · · · , Ym } The set of sample category labels
 c(1 ≤ c ≤ m) The index of category labels
 ship inference success rate (MIR) by 8.4% and lowers the w ∼ Yc = (w1 , w2 , · · · , wd ) The feature weights of category Yc
 adversarial example escape rate (AER) by 23.7% while Strain The set of training samples
 keeping the impact on ACC within 4.2%. Stest The set of testing samples
 X The set of all possible samples
 The rest is organized as below. Related works are discussed F The model of machine learning
in Section II. The analysis of the correlation between member α The norm of the metric
privacy and adversarial robustness and the formal definition of β The order of divergence
FDSM are introduced in Section III. The feature hierarchization strategy and HierarchicalDP algorithms are explained in
Section IV. Experiment results are shown and discussed in Various studies enhance the adversarial robustness of ma-
Section V. Finally, we conclude our work in Section VI. chine learning models, but they interpret the adversarial example differently. Standard robustness enhancement techniques
 II. RELATED WORKS [11] include adversarial training, feature denoising, and random
 transformation. However, most existing works only test the ef-
 In this section, we review related works in machine learning fectiveness of methods experimentally and rarely theoretically
on differential privacy and adversarial robustness, as well as re- analyze the adversarial robustness. Diochnos et al. [18] gave a
lated works on the attention mechanism, an essential technique more reasonable formal description of adversarial robustness,
for HierarchicalDP to determine key sample features. but there is room for generalization.

A. Differential Privacy C. Attention Mechanism
 Differential privacy was proposed by Dwork et al. [13], The attention mechanism was proposed by Bahdanau et al.
which uses randomized responses to ensure that the database [20] to improve the effectiveness of models in processing
output is affected by a single record below a threshold. It sequential information. The core idea of the attention mechabecame the gold standard for data security due to its rigorous nism is the kernel regression theory proposed by Nadaraya and
quantitative proof of privacy leakage. Chatzikokolakis et al. Watson in statistics. The self-attention mechanism allows for
[14] extended the measure of dataset variation from Hamming analyzing the correlations among the internal elements in a sindistance to an arbitrary metric space. Mironov [15] generalized gle sequence. The multiheaded self-attention (MSA) proposed
the extent of the difference in statistical information of datasets by Vaswani et al. [21] improves the accuracy of feature corfrom Max-divergence to Rényi divergence. relation by taking the average of multiple correlation matrices.
 The differential privacy mechanism for machine learning Since attention scores and weights reflect the impact of different
models [10] is divided into adding random noise to the output, features on the classification results of machine learning modgradient, loss function, and input. Adding noise to the output els, many works use the attention mechanism to estimate and
and loss function significantly affects the ACC. Differential rank the contribution of sample features to category labels [22].
privacy can be achieved by adding a small amount of noise
to the gradient with the help of composition theory, but strict
 III. FEATURE DISTRIBUTION SECURITY METRIC
differential privacy cannot be achieved. Studies on adding noise
to the input have focused on distributed problems related to In this section, we analyze the characteristics of network
local differential privacy. traffic samples. Then, we propose a FDSM for ML-NIDS,
 which unifies the definitions of differential privacy and adver-
B. Adversarial Robustness sarial robustness. Table I lists the important notations used in
 this article.
 Adversarial example was discovered by Szegedy et al. [16],
which enables a machine learning model to output a high
 A. Network Traffic Characteristics
confidence misclassification result by adding a specific small
perturbation to the sample. Goodfellow et al. [17] formally Previous studies have analyzed the relationship between difdescribed adversarial examples and improved model adversarial ferential privacy and adversarial robustness in machine learning
robustness through adversarial training. The first concise def- [23]. However, due to the lack of the premise assumption with
inition of adversarial robustness was given by Diochnos et al. structured samples, providing a unified description of both as-
[18]. Then, Pinot et al. [19] further analyzed the relationship pects is challenging. Furthermore, existing research either conbetween adversarial robustness and differential privacy. fuses the machine learning training and inference processes [19]
320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

or only examines one of the scenarios [24]. In this section, our IV. HIERARCHICALDP
contribution lies in systematically exploring these relationships
 In this section, we propose a feature hierarchization strategy
and articulating their practical significance.
 for samples, analyze the correlation between different levels
 Two data preprocessing methods exist for network traffic
 of features with differential privacy or adversarial robustness,
samples in ML-NIDSs [12].
 and induce the theoretical basis of HierarchicalDP. Then, we
 1) Packet samples (network traffic samples based on packet
 introduce the attention mechanism network for computing feafield information): Each packet is an independent sample,
 ture weights and explain the implementation of HierarchicalDP
 and the field information of each packet is recorded.
 using Laplace noise as an example.
 2) Session samples (network traffic samples based on session statistics information): Packets are grouped into
 A. Feature Hierarchization Strategy
 sessions, and each session is a sample, with the statistical
 information of the session being recorded. Existing differential privacy mechanisms in machine learn-
 Both types of samples exhibit structured characteristics, with ing, such as Gaussian mechanisms, face the curse of dimenthe feature distributions of samples in the same category dis- sionality. The noise in high-dimensional settings is unbearably
playing similarity. This is because traffic sessions with the same considerable and severely affects model performance [1]. An innetwork attack have similar structural characteristics, while tuitive question is whether differential privacy can be achieved
different network attacks have significant structural differences. by adding noise to only a subset of sample features.
The purpose of highlighting the structural characteristics of Due to the structured characteristics of network traffic samnetwork traffic samples is to determine the presence of privacy- ples, whether packets or sessions, the assumption of sparsity in
and category-sensitive features. critical features can be fully exploited. Only a subset of sample
 For packet samples, their file format complies with the net- features is relevant to differential privacy or adversarial robustwork transmission protocol, providing structural characteristics ness. In contrast, most features are nearly irrelevant to privacy
to the features and making it possible to identify sensitive or robustness. For instance, the protocol feature is always TCP
features by the self-attention mechanism. in the semiconnect scanning traffic category. Obfuscating this
 For session samples, which store features in a tabular format, feature does not contribute to privacy protection. Therefore, the
sensitive features can be identified based on feature meanings. primary objective is to identify the key features of differential
Of course, sensitive features of session samples can also be privacy and adversarial robustness. To achieve this, we propose
identified by the self-attention mechanism. a feature hierarchization strategy. The following four levels are
 sufficient for a nonredundant partitioning of sample features,
 while more detailed levels would result in unnecessary compu-
B. FDSM tational overhead.
 FDSM achieves the following. Feature hierarchization strategy. For any d-dimensional sam-
 1) Differential privacy of the training dataset Strain should ple xi ∼ Yc , there exists four levels of features.
 be guaranteed before the training samples are input into 1) Level-1 features (intraclass critical features) are strongly
 the model. correlated to the Yc category, with dimension number j ∈
 2) Adversarial robustness of the testing dataset Stest should S 1 ∼ Yc .
 be guaranteed before the testing samples are input into 2) Level-2 features (interclass critical features) are weakly
 the model. correlated to the Yc category but strongly correlated to
 The definition of FDSM is as follows. any other category, with dimension number j ∈ S 2 ∼ Yc .
 Definition 1 (FDSM): A randomized mechanism M : X → 3) Level-3 features (intraclass noncritical features) are
X satisfies (α-γ, β-)-FDSM if for any similar sample feature weakly correlated to any category but strongly correlated
vectors xi , xi ∈ X to a particular sample xi , with dimension number j ∈
 S 3 ∼ Yc .
 Dβ (f (M (xi ))f (M (xi ))) ≤ , s.t. dα (xi , xi ) ≤ γ (1) 4) Level-4 features (interclass noncritical features) are
 weakly correlated to any category or sample, with dimenwhere  is the safety budget under β-divergence. As  decreases sion number j ∈ S 4 ∼ Yc .
or β increases and γ increases or α decreases, the machine Level-1 features are decisive for sample xi to belong to catlearning model is safer. xi is any sample feature vector whose egory Yc , so their values are generally stable. Level-2 features
difference with xi satisfies dα (xi , xi ) ≤ γ. γ is the maxi- are related to adversarial robustness because adjusting these
mum difference between similar samples xi and xi under the features causes the machine learning model to infer xi to other
α-metric. X is all possible values of the sample feature vectors categories. Level-3 features are related to differential privacy
xi . M is a randomization mechanism for the feature vector because these features carry information unique to xi . Level-4
xi . f is the feature distribution of X obtained by the machine features take almost the same value in any sample. Accordingly,
learning model F . we define several foundational concepts in HierarchicalDP.
 FDSM is derived from differential privacy and adversarial Definition 2 (Range and sensitivity of HierarchicalDP):
robustness, and the derivation process is described in Appendix Let there be n samples in any dataset S, each sample with
A (see the supplementary material). d-dimensional features. There are m categories in S, and
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 321

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the defense effects of HierarchicalDP on the model training and inference process. During model training, high privacysensitive features of training samples are protected to defend against membership inference. During model inference, high category-sensitive features of testing
samples are protected to defend against adversarial attack.

 m
each category Yc has nc samples, n = c=1 nc . For any 6) For the Lv-l of class Yc (1 ≤ l ≤ 4), the intraclass Lv-l
sample, xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) has (for training sample) or implic- sensitivity in S is Δf l ∼ Yc = maxi,j dα (wj xij , wj xij ),
itly has (for testing sample) a category label Yc (1 ≤ c ≤ m). where xi , xi ∼ Yc , j ∈ S l ∼ Yc and wj is the jth dimen-
Each category Yc  possesses a feature weight vector w ∼ Yc = sion of w ∼ Yc .
 j=1
(w1 , w2 , . . . , wd ), d wj = 1. The weight vector of the uni- Where wj denotes the importance of the jth feature for xi
 m
versal sample set X is w = c=1 nnc w ∼ Yc . f denotes the to belong to class Yc . Considering the samples in S as raninformation of the feature distribution obtained by the machine dom vectors, the sample xi ∼ Yc has d-dimensional features
learning model F from xi ∼ Yc . xij (1 ≤ j ≤ d), where the jth feature xij takes a value that
 1) The global sample range in S is R = maxi dα (xi , xi ). follows the probability distribution pj ∼ Yc , then the sample
 2) For the class Yc , the intraclass sample range in S is R ∼ xi ∼ Yc follows the joint probability distribution p1,2,··· ,d ∼ Yc .
 Yc = maxi dα (xi , xi ), where xi , xi ∼ Yc . HierarchicalDP protects data privacy by ensuring that sam-
 3) The global sample sensitivity in S is Δf = maxi dα (w  ples of the same class are indistinguishable, then γ = Δf ∼ Yc
 xi , w  xi ). in (α-γ, β-)-FDSM. It assumes that the number of samples
 4) For the class Yc , the intraclass sample sensitivity in each category minc nc  1 and Δf ∼ Yc Δf . Intraclass
 in S is Δf ∼ Yc = maxi dα (w  xi , w  xi ), where privacy protection can reduce the noise variance with a fixed
 xi , xi , w ∼ Yc . privacy budget . As shown in Fig. 2, during the model training
 5) For the jth feature of class Yc (1 ≤ j ≤ d), the process, HierarchicalDP focuses on protecting privacy-sensitive
 intraclass feature sensitivity in S is Δfj ∼ Yc = features of training samples. Since different samples of the same
 maxi dα (wj xij , wj xij ), where xi , xi ∼ Yc and wj is the class have significant differences in level-2 and level-3 features,
 jth dimension of w ∼ Yc . the privacy correlation of these features is high.
322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. Architecture of HierarchicalDP. It is divided into the feature weight calculation network and the noise and perturbation generation algorithm. The
former calculates the importance weights of each feature for different categories. The latter levels the features according to the weights and adds different
noises to the training and testing samples based on the leveling results to achieve differential privacy and adversarial robustness.

 HierarchicalDP enhances inference robustness by ensuring calculation network is divided into the MSA and the multilayer
that samples do not change their feature distributions due to perceptron (MLP). The MLP can be replaced with the target maminor perturbations, then γ = Δf ∼ Yc in (α-γ, β-)-FDSM. chine learning model to compute more accurate feature weights.
It assumes that the sample feature distribution of the same cat- The MSA can be represented as
egory in Stest is centralized and R ∼ Yc R. Adding intraclass
 1
 h
perturbations to samples can destroy the structure of the adver- MSA(xi ) = softmax(W k xi + bk )
sarial perturbation without changing the feature distribution too h
 k=1
much. As shown in Fig. 2, during the model inference process, e xij
HierarchicalDP focuses on protecting category-sensitive fea- softmax(xi ) = d
 xij
 j=1 e
tures of testing samples. Changes in level-1 and level-2 features
are more likely to cause class changes, hence the higher class where xi = (xi1 , xi1 , . . . , xid ) is the d-dimensional feature veccorrelation of these features. tor of the ith input sample. xi is multiplied by the matrix W k
 and adds the bias vector bk , essentially a spatial mapping of
 xi . The mapping result is input to the softmax function, which
B. HierarchicalDP
 changes each vector dimension into a weight in the interval
 The architecture of the HierarchicalDP is shown in Fig. 3, [0, 1]. This process is repeated h times to obtain h weight
which is divided into two parts: the feature weight calculation vectors w1i , w2i , . . . , whi . The final weight vector wi of xi is
network and the noise and perturbation generation algorithm. the average of the h weight vectors.
 1) Feature Weight Calculation Network: Feature weight The MSA is a parametric Nadaraya–Watson kernel regrescalculation network is based on the method proposed by Škrlj sion using a radial basis function. The feature vector xi is
et al. [25]. The difference is that our method can compute fea- mapped to a new space using matrix W k and vector bk . The
ture weight vectors for different categories. The feature weight softmax function weighted the average of the mapped vectors
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 323

to obtain the feature weight vectors. The weights are calculated Algorithm 1 Feature Hierarchization Strategy
multiple times and averaged to mitigate the effect of the initial- Input: weight vectors w ∼ Yc , safety budget , intra-class feaization of W k and bk on the results. ture sensitivities Δfj ∼ Yc
 The MSA is connected to the MLP using the  (Hadamard Output: S ∼ Yc =
product). The weight vectors wi are multiplied by the corre-  1 feature  hierarchization results
 S , S2, S3, S4
sponding dimensions of the feature vectors xi . The weighted 1: for c = 1 to m do
feature vectors are input into the MLP. The parameters of MSA 2: Initialize Sall = {1, 2, · · · , d};
(W k and bk ) and MLP are trained to optimize the cross-entropy 3: for j = 1 to d do
loss to make the feature weights more accurate. 4: if wj ≥  then  the j-dimension of w ∼ Yc
 When the network training is completed, the MLP can be 5: put j into S 1 ;
removed. Samples in Strain are reinput into the MSA. Each xi ∈ 6: 2
 put j into Stemp ;
Strain outputs a d-dimensional weight vector wi . Let there be 7: else if Δfj ≤ d then
 
  Δfj ∼ Yc
n
samples in Strain and nc samples for each category Yc , n = 8: put j into S 4 ;
 m
 c=1 nc . The weight vector w ∼ Yc of the Yc category and the 9: end if
weight vector w of the universal sample set X are as follows: 10: end for
 11: end for
 1 
 w ∼ Yc = MSA(xi ) 12: for c = 1 to m do
 nc 13: S 2 ← Stemp
 2
 − S1;
 xi ∼Yc

 1
 n 14: S ← Sall − S 1 − S 2 − S 4 ;
 3

 w= MSA(xi ). 15: end for
 n
 i=1 16: return S ∼ Yc ;

 2) Noise and Perturbation Generation Algorithm:
The noise and perturbation generation algorithm contains
three parts: the feature hierarchization strategy algorithm,
the privacy-sensitive features protection algorithm, and Algorithm 2 Privacy-Sensitive Features Protection
category-sensitive features protection algorithm. Input: training set Strain , privacy budget , intra-class Lv-
 The feature weight calculation network can provide the 2 ∨ 3 feature sensitivity Δfj2∨3 ∼ Yc , feature hierarchizaweight of each feature for each category. The security budget tion results S ∼ Yc
 and feature sensitivity Δfj determine how the feature levels Output: training set Strain satisfying (α-γ, β-)-FDSM
are classified based on the weights wj . The noise added to each 1: for c = 1 to m do
level feature can be adjusted according to the problem. This 2: for i = 1 to nc do
article focuses on the most common Laplace noise [13], but the 3: for j = 1 to d do
methods involved can be extended to other types of noise. 4: if j ∈ S 2 or j ∈ S 3 then
 2∨3
 The differential privacy can result to different probabilities 5: noise z ∼ Laplace(0, Δf );
for the two queries generating the same value smaller than e . 6: ij ← xij + z;  xi ∈ Strain , xi ∈ Strain
 x
The different probabilities are resulted from adding the ran- 7: else
dom noise to the output. The reason of HierarchicalDP adding 8: ij ← xij ;
 x
noise to only a subset of features to achieve (α-γ, β-)-FDSM 9: end if
is as follows. 10: end for
 A machine learning model F gets a randomly returned fea- 11: end for
ture vector xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ) for a query of Strain or Stest . 12: end for
Suppose the difference in the probability of the two features 13: return S train ;
xij , xij returning the same value for two queries is initially
smaller than e ; adding noise to these features is not needed.
So  and Δfj determine which xij does not require adding
noise. In particular, if the  → ∞ or Δfj → 0, any xij does lead to privacy disclosure. It may be counterintuitive. Hownot need to add noise. Algorithm 1 shows how to hierar- ever, it is easy to understand when considering that overfitting
chize the features of network traffic samples based on their is one of the fundamental causes of membership inference
feature weights. Algorithm 2 shows how HierarchicalDP pro- and adversarial attack. Overfitting is precisely caused by modtects the privacy-sensitive features of network traffic samples. els learning too much detail about irrelevant features. On the
Algorithm 3 shows how HierarchicalDP protects the category- one hand, the adversarial robustness of models trained with
sensitive features of network traffic samples. Strain is also improved. Algorithm 2 can be used jointly with
 The proof that Algorithms 2 and Algorithm 3 satisfy Algorithm 3 to achieve a more robust model security protec-
(α-γ, β-)-FDSM is shown in Appendix C (available online). tion. On the other hand, depending on the actual requirements,
The HierarchicalDP mechanism does not add noise to features using only one of Algorithm 2 or Algorithm 3 to achieve more
with high weights, as the features with lower weights often lightweight security protection.
324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 3 Category-Sensitive Features Protection A. Methodology
Input: training set Stest , robustness budget , intra-class Lv- 1) Datasets: We evaluated the defensive effectiveness
 1 ∨ 2 feature sensitivity Δfj1∨2 ∼ Yc , feature hierarchiza- of HierarchicalDP using two network traffic datasets listed
 tion results S ∼ Yc in Table II.
Output: testing set Stest satisfying (α-γ, β-)-FDSM USTC-TFC2016 [26] is a network traffic classification task
 1: for i = 1 to n do containing 20 categories and 65k samples. Each sample is com-
 2: for j = 1 to d do posed of 28 × 28 = 784 features and a classification label. We
 3: if j ∈ ∀S 1 ∼ Yc then randomly selected ten categories for testing.
 max Δf 1∨2
 4: perturbation z ∼ Laplace(0, c  ); CICIDS2017 [27] is an intrusion detection task composed of
 5: ij ← xij + z;
 x  xi ∈ Stest , xi ∈ Stest malicious network traffic containing 22 categories and 238 000
 6: else samples. Each sample is composed of 78 features and a clas-
 7: ij ← xij ;
 x sification label. Due to the uneven distribution of samples in
 8: end if each category, we integrated the categories according to the
 9: end for method in [28].
10: end for
 2) Models: We evaluated the defensive effectiveness of Hi-
11: return Stest ; erarchicalDP using four machine learning models.
 MLP is a three-layer neural network consisting of an input,
 hidden, and output layer. It is the simplest feedforward neural
 network structure.
 V. EXPERIMENTS Deep neural network (DNN) is a deeper feedforward neural
 network with one input layer, eight hidden layers, and one
 We evaluate HierarchicalDP by answering four key output layer.
questions. Convolutional neural network (CNN) is a neural network
 1) Q1: Does HierarchicalDP correctly partition sample fea- suitable for image recognition, consisting of one input layer,
 tures into security levels? five convolutional layers, five pooling layers, three fully con-
 2) Q2: Does HierarchicalDP achieve optimal defense effec- nected layers, and one output layer. The size of the convolutiveness by adding noise to each security level feature?
 tional kernel is 3 × 3.
 3) Q3: How effective is HierarchicalDP in defending against
 LSTM is a recurrent neural network suitable for processing
 membership inference and adversarial attacks? How does
 temporal tasks, and we used the network structure from [29].
 it compare with other best-effort defenses?
 We trained three baseline models for each dataset in our
 4) Q4: How does HierarchicalDP perform on datasets other
 experiments. Table II shows the training and testing set for each
 than network traffic?
 dataset and the corresponding accuracy of each baseline model.
To address the above questions, we selected a packet sample
 The USTC-TFC2016 dataset structure resembles image data,
dataset (USTC-TFC2016) and a session sample dataset (CImaking it suitable for CNN models. The CICIDS2017 dataset
CIDS2017) for experimentation. We evaluated the performance
 structure exhibits strong temporal characteristics, making it
of both datasets using four typical machine learning models.
We compared the defense effect of HierarchicalDP against two suitable for LSTM models.
types of membership inference and two types of adversarial 3) Evaluation Metrics: We use three metrics to evaluate the
attacks. Section V-A describes the datasets, prior defenses, and defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP:
our evaluation methodology. Subsequent sections address each MIR represents the probability of inferring whether a given
question in turn. The evaluation code is available at https:// sample is from the training set through membership inference.
github.com/liuguangrui-hit/HierarchicalDP. AER represents the probability that an adversarial example
 Evaluation highlights: HierarchicalDP provides reasonable can escape the recognition of the model.
and quantifiable privacy budgets and robustness budgets for ACC represents the classification accuracy of the model on
different models on network traffic datasets. This is the first the testing set.
work that unifies and implements differential privacy and adver- 4) Attack Methodology: We randomly selected 1000 samsarial robustness. HierarchicalDP provides the privacy budget ples for each dataset as cases for membership inference and
 ≤ 0.2 and the robustness budget  ≤ 0.2 under D∞ diver- adversarial attacks, among which 500 samples were from the
gence, with the sensitivity γ ≤ 1 under d1 metric. Comparing testing set and 500 samples were from the training set.
HierarchicalDP to the best-effort defenses on membership in- For membership inference, we choose two methods based
ference, HierarchicalDP models give better privacy protection on the loss function of the target model and the predictions of
(e.g., 69.2% versus 50.0% MIR for CICIDS2017 on LSTM) the shadow model. Modification of prediction entropy (MPE)
and similar ACC fluctuations (less than 3.2%). Comparing Hi- [30] is a prediction-based inference attack based on prediction
erarchicalDP to the best-effort defenses on adversarial attacks, entropy modification. Enhanced membership inference (EMI)
HierarchicalDP models give better adversarial robustness (e.g., [31] is a shadow model-based EMI attack.
18.7% versus 10.9% AER for MNIST on CNN) and similar For adversarial attacks, we choose two methods with higher
ACC fluctuations (less than 4.2%). transferability and richer attack forms. Nesterov iterative fast
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 325

 TABLE II
 EVALUATION DATASETS AND BASELINE MODELS

Symbol Feature Size Training Set Size Testing Set Size Target Labels Model Architecture (Baseline Accuracy)
USTC-TFC2016 784 6k 3k 10 MLP (0.859), DNN (0.897), CNN (0.916)
CICIDS2017 78 20k 10k 7 MLP (0.854), DNN (0.887), LSTM (0.901)

Fig. 4. Grading results of different class features in USTC-TFC2016: (a) BitTorrent; (b) Facetime; (c) FTP; (d) Gmail; (e) Miuref; (f) MySQL; (g) Neris;
(h) Nsis-ay; (i) Outlook; and (j) WorldOfWarcraft.

gradient sign method (NIFGSM) [32] is an iterative adversarial obvious as possible and the number of features balanced while
attack based on the Nesterov accelerated gradient method with ensuring the privacy and robustness budget  ≤ 0.2. Figs. 4 and
high transferability of adversarial examples. AutoAttack project 5 show the feature hierarchization results for each dataset.
gradient descent (APGD) [33] is an extended version of the For USTC-TFC2016 ( = 0.2), as shown in Fig. 4, the level-
PGD attack that integrates multiple attack methods. 1 and level-2 features are concentrated in the upper part of the
 5) Prior Defenses for Comparison: We compared Hier- image. In contrast, the level-3 and level-4 features are in the
archicalDP, a defense method based on Laplace noise, with lower part. This is because the USTC dataset converts the PCAP
previous defense methods. files into 28 × 28 image pixels in hexadecimal form and append
 For membership inference defense, we choose two methods 0x00 if the PCAP file is shorter than 784 bytes. The feature
involving loss function optimization and model output correc- hierarchization result graph reflects this process well. The leveltion. Adversarial regularization (AdvReg) [34] is an enhanced 1 features account for 7.8%, the level-2 features account for
adversarial training technique that minimizes the prediction 9.4%, the level-3 features account for 26.6%, and the level-4
loss of the model and maximizes the cost of inference attacks. features account for 56.1%.
MemGuard [35] is a defense technique that adds noise to the For CICIDS2017 ( = 0.2), as shown in Fig. 5, since it is not
confidence to create an adversarial deception against member- an image sample, its features do not have a positional relationship inference attackers. ship. Due to the brief nature of CICIDS features, the sample
 For adversarial attacks defense, we choose two methods in- dataset tends to focus on distinguishing between malicious and
volving sample feature smoothing and reverse adversarial per- benign instances for better intrusion detection. Consequently,
turbations. Denoised smoothing (DenSmo) [36] is a technique the differences among malicious samples are relatively small,
that trains a denoiser for the target model and smooths sample but the distinction between malicious and benign samples is sigfeatures to eliminate adversarial perturbations. Antiadversaries nificant. However, attack traffic with similar functions (such as
(AntiAdv) [37] is a technique that adds a noise vector with Dos and DDoS) also exhibits more similar feature distributions.
the opposite direction of adversarial perturbations to testing The level-1 features account for 19.4%, the level-2 features
samples to counteract their adversarial effects. account for 26.7%, the level-3 features account for 16.5%, and
 the level-4 features account for 37.4%.
B. Security Level Partitioning Results (Q1)
 Q1: Does HierarchicalDP correctly partition sample fea- C. Impact of Noise (Q2)
tures into security levels? Q2: Does HierarchicalDP achieve optimal defense effec-
 We used the feature hierarchization strategy to partition the tiveness by adding noise to each security level feature?
features of each dataset. First, we normalized the sample fea- We choose the USTC-TFC2016 dataset and the MLP model
ture vectors. Then, we tried to make the feature differences as as an example.
326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 5. Grading results of different class features in CICIDS2017: (a) Benign; (b) Bot; (c) Bruteforce; (d) DDoS; (e) Dos; (f) PortScan; and (g) web-attack.

Fig. 6. Trends of MIR and ACC as the number of protected features in training samples increases (USTC-TFC2016 on MLP). The number of features is
increased in three ways, increasing ten each time: (a) MIR of MPE; (b) MIR of EMI; and (c) ACC of MLP.

 1) Validation of Feature Privacy Relevance: During model arranged in descending order of weight and increasing the
training, HierarchicalDP noise is gradually added to more fea- number of protected features by one each time.
tures in the training samples input into the model in the follow- b) Low category-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP
ing three orders, and the changes in ACC and MIR are observed. noise is added to the fourth, third, second, and first level
 a) High privacy-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP features of the testing samples in order, with features
 noise is added to the second, third, first, and fourth level arranged in ascending order of weight and one protected
 features of the training samples in order, with features feature added each time.
 arranged in descending order of weight and increasing c) Random: Add HierarchicalDP noise to features ranthe number of protected features by ten each time. domly, increasing the number of protected features by one
 b) Low privacy-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP each time.
 noise is added to the fourth, first, third, and second level As shown in Fig. 6, MIR decreases the fastest when profeatures of the training samples in order, with features tecting high privacy-sensitive priority and the slowest when
 arranged in ascending order of weight and increasing the protecting low privacy-sensitive priority. When protecting high
 number of protected features by ten each time. privacy-sensitive priority, after protecting all level-2 and level-3
 c) Random: Add HierarchicalDP noise to features ran- features (the top 30%), adding more protected features leads to
 domly, increasing the number of protected features by ten MIR decrease slowly. However, adding HierarchicalDP noise to
 each time. the training samples significantly impacts the ACC. Therefore,
 2) Validation of Feature Category Relevance: During only HierarchicalDP noise to level-2 and level-3 features can
model inference, HierarchicalDP noise is gradually added to protect privacy without severely affecting the ACC. When promore features in the testing samples input into the model in the tecting low privacy-sensitive features priority, MIR decreases
following three orders, and the changes in the ACC and AER rapidly after protecting the bottom 30% of the features. This is
are observed. mainly due to two reasons: 1) HierarchicalDP starts to protect
 a) High category-sensitive features priority: Hierarchi- high privacy-sensitive features (level-3) and 2) enough features
 calDP noise is added to the first, second, third, and fourth have been protected. When protecting low privacy-sensitive
 level features of the testing samples in order, with features features, ACC begins to rapidly decrease after protecting the
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 327

Fig. 7. Trends of AER and ACC as the number of protected features in testing samples increases (USTC-TFC2016 on MLP). The number of features is
increased in three ways, increasing one each time: (a) AER of NIFGSM; (b) AER of APGD; and (c) ACC of MLP.

Fig. 8. Comparison of MIR for different models under various member Fig. 9. Comparison of MIR for different models under various member
inference defenses against MPE [30]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS. inference defenses against EMI [31]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

bottom 40% of the features, mainly due to adding noise to high affects the ACC. When protecting high category-sensitive feacategory-sensitive features (level-1). tures priority, after protecting all level-1 features (the top
 As shown in Fig. 7, AER decreases the fastest when pro- 10%), increasing the number of protected features leads to a
tecting high category-sensitive features priority and the slow- higher AER. This is because the adversarial samples are loest when protecting low category-sensitive features priority. cated on the model classification boundary, and adding noise
Adding HierarchicalDP noise to the testing samples hardly to too many features can easily change the sample category.
328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 10. Comparison of the impact of various member inference defenses Fig. 11. Comparison of AER for different models under various adversarial
on ACC: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS. attack defenses against NIFGSM [32]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

Therefore, adding HierarchicalDP noise only to level-1 features Fig. 9 compares the defense effectiveness of various defense
can achieve the best defense effect against adversarial attacks. methods against EMI attacks. HierarchicalDP shows improved
 performance on the USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS2017 datasets
 compared to existing methods, reducing MIR by an average of
D. Effectiveness of Defense (Q3) 8.6% on various models. Fig. 10 shows the impact of various
 Q3: How effective is HierarchicalDP in defending against defense methods on ACC. The effect of adding HierarchicalDP
membership inference and adversarial attacks? How does it noise during model training on accuracy is similar to that of
compare with other best-effort defenses? other methods, with fluctuations within 3.2%.
 We applied HierarchicalDP protection to model input sam- Regarding the robustness of testing samples, Fig. 11 comples during training and inference. We test the differences pares the effectiveness of various defense methods against
between the model with and without defense in ACC, MIR, NIFGSM attacks. HierarchicalDP offers significantly imand AER. We also compared the defense effectiveness of proved performance on the USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS2017
HierarchicalDP with other membership inference defenses and datasets, reducing AER by an average of 26.9% on various
adversarial attack defenses. models. Fig. 12 compares the defense effectiveness of various
 Regarding the privacy of training samples, Fig. 8 com- defense methods against APGD attacks. HierarchicalDP shows
pares the effectiveness of various defense methods against MPE slightly improved performance on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset
attacks. HierarchicalDP shows slightly improved performance compared to existing methods, reducing AER by an average of
on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset compared to existing methods, 10.8% on various models. HierarchicalDP offers significantly
reducing MIR by an average of 4.0% on various models. Hi- improved performance on the CICIDS2017 dataset, reducing
erarchicalDP offers significantly improved performance on the AER by an average of 28.8% on various models. Fig. 13
CICIDS2017 dataset, reducing MIR by an average of 15.5% shows the impact of various defense methods on ACC. The
on various models. This is because the CICDIDS2017 dataset effect of adding HierarchicalDP noise during model training
has a stronger structural regularity. A more accurate calcula- on accuracy is smaller than other methods, with fluctuations
tion of feature weights is caused by more explicit features. within 4.2%.
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 329

Fig. 12. Comparison of AER for different models under various adversarial Fig. 13. Comparison of the impact of various adversarial attack defenses
attack defenses against APGD [33]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS. on ACC: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

 13.5%. Table V shows the defense effectiveness of Hierarchi-
E. Extending Experiments (Q4)
 calDP against membership inference attacks on different mod-
 Q4: How does HierarchicalDP perform on datasets other els in the CIFAR-10 dataset classification task. With the model
than network traffic? ACC impact controlled within 4.5%, HierarchicalDP shows
 Structured characteristics are not only present in network slight defense effectiveness against membership inference attraffic samples but also in center-aligned image samples. To tacks. On average, the MPE attack reduced the MIR by 11.0%,
demonstrate this point, we conducted defense effectiveness and the EMI attack reduced the MIR by 2.6%. This is due to
tests of HierarchicalDP on both a center-aligned image dataset the structured characteristics of image samples in the MNIST
(MNIST) and a noncenter-aligned image dataset (CIFAR-10). dataset resulting from central processing, while the CIFAR-10
The experiments utilized the MLP, DNN, and CNN models samples lack central processing.
mentioned in Section V-A. Table III presents the training set Regarding the robustness of testing samples, Table VI shows
and testing set configuration for each dataset, along with the the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP against adversarial
corresponding accuracy of each baseline model. This section attacks on different models in the MNIST dataset classificafocuses on the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP across tion task. With the model ACC impact controlled within 2.7%,
different image classifiers. The specific privacy budget settings HierarchicalDP effectively defends against adversarial attacks.
and feature hierarchization results are shown in Appendix B On average, the NIFGSM attack reduced the AER by 59.7%,
(available online). and the APGD attack reduced the AER by 65.7%. Ta-
 Regarding the privacy of training samples, Table IV shows ble VII shows the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP
the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP against member- against adversarial attacks on different models in the CIFARship inference attacks on different models in the MNIST dataset 10 dataset classification task. With the model ACC imclassification task. With the model ACC impact controlled pact controlled within 5.8%, HierarchicalDP shows little dewithin 2.4%, HierarchicalDP effectively defends against mem- fense effectiveness against adversarial attacks. On average,
bership inference attacks. On average, the MPE attack reduced the NIFGSM attack reduced the AER by 9.0%, and the
the MIR by 11.7%, and the EMI attack reduced the MIR by APGD attack reduced the AER by 10.1%. This indicates
330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE III
 EXTENDING EXPERIMENTS DATASETS AND BASELINE MODELS

 Symbol Feature Size Training Set Size Testing Set Size Target Labels Model Architecture (Baseline Accuracy)
 MNIST 784 6k 3k 10 MLP (0.746), DNN (0.760), CNN (0.808)
 CIFAR-10 1024 × 3 10k 10k 10 MLP (0.425), DNN (0.379), CNN (0.608)

 TABLE IV VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
 DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST MEMBERSHIP
 INFERENCE ON THE MNIST DATASET In this article, we propose the feature hierarchization strategy
 and HierarchicalDP to ensure the differential privacy of ML-
 MIR of MPE [30] MIR of EMI [31] ACC of Model NIDS while improving their adversarial robustness. Hierarchi-
 Model
 w/o w/ w/o w/ w/o w/ calDP is a differential privacy technique that protects network
 MLP 0.702 0.599 0.700 0.503 0.746 0.739 traffic sample classifiers, including packet samples and session
 DNN 0.616 0.517 0.620 0.500 0.760 0.736 samples. Compared to the state-of-the-art existing methods,
 CNN 0.599 0.507 0.613 0.524 0.808 0.803
 HierarchicalDP reduces the MIR by 9.2% and lowers the AER
 by 23.3% while keeping the impact on ACC within 4.2%.
 Another essential advantage of HierarchicalDP is decou-
 TABLE V pling. Compared to the differential privacy mechanism that adds
 DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST MEMBERSHIP
 INFERENCE ON THE CIFAR-10 DATASET
 noise to the gradient, HierarchicalDP only adds noise to the
 sample features and does not require modification to the model.
 MIR of MPE [30] MIR of EMI [31] ACC of Model In addition to the network traffic classifier, HierarchicalDP can
 Model also be used for other structured sample classifiers, such as
 w/o w/ w/o w/ w/o w/
 center-aligned image samples. Future research will focus on
 MLP 0.644 0.602 0.633 0.600 0.425 0.417
 DNN 0.807 0.756 0.794 0.741 0.379 0.362 utilizing graph convolutional neural networks to discover more
 CNN 0.737 0.501 0.736 0.743 0.608 0.563 accurate relationships between features, aiming to enhance the
 defensive performance of HierarchicalDP. This approach is intended to be applicable in fields with unstructured samples, such
 TABLE VI as complex images.
 DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS We focus the safety of machine learning on sample data
 ON THE MNIST DATASET and seek to avoid machine learning models that are currently
 uninterpretable. Only the bond of feature weights is left between
 AER of NIFGSM [32] AER of APGD [33] ACC of Model
 Model the data and the model. On the one hand, we unify differential
 w/o w/ w/o w/ w/o w/ privacy and adversarial robustness in machine learning through
 MLP 0.913 0.315 0.925 0.289 0.746 0.743 a formal description that will inspire cross collaboration among
 DNN 0.930 0.328 0.914 0.262 0.760 0.753
 CNN 0.893 0.301 0.974 0.292 0.808 0.781
 relevant researchers. On the other hand, machine learning is
 essentially the fitting of model distributions to data distributions, and security issues arise in both distributions. This article focuses on addressing privacy and robustness problems
 TABLE VII
 DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
 through data distribution. However, the above issues can also
 ON THE CIFAR-10 DATASET be addressed through model distributions. It relies on developing interpretable machine learning and will be the focus of
 AER of NIFGSM [32] AER of APGD [33] ACC of Model future work.
 Model
 w/o w/ w/o w/ w/o w/
 MLP 0.802 0.695 0.824 0.719 0.425 0.398
 DNN 0.891 0.776 0.901 0.894 0.379 0.377 REFERENCES
 CNN 0.857 0.808 0.891 0.701 0.608 0.550 [1] I. H. Sarker, “Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications and
 research directions,” SN Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–21, 2021.
 [2] H. Peng, S. Bao, and L. Li, “A survey of security protection methods
 for deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., early access,
that HierarchicalDP is only suitable for protecting structured Sep. 12, 2023.
sample classifiers. [3] B. Liu, M. Ding, S. Shaham, W. Rahayu, F. Farokhi, and Z. Lin, “When
 machine learning meets privacy: A survey and outlook,” ACM Comput.
 In summary, HierarchicalDP provides strong privacy pro- Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–36, 2021.
tection and robustness improvement for structured data. As [4] K. A. Crockett, L. Gerber, A. Latham, and E. Colyer, “Building trustnetwork traffic datasets typically exhibit highly structured char- worthy AI solutions: A case for practical solutions for small businesses,”
acteristics, HierarchicalDP is well suited to enhance the privacy IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 778–791, Aug. 2023.
 [5] J. Curzon, T. A. Kosa, R. Akalu, and K. El-Khatib, “Privacy and artificial
and robustness of these datasets. It also offers protection for intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 96–108,
centralized image datasets. Apr. 2021.
LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK 331

 [6] C. Qin et al., “Feature fusion based adversarial example detection against [29] R.-H. Hwang, M.-C. Peng, V.-L. Nguyen, and Y.-L. Chang, “An LSTMsecond-round adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 4, based deep learning approach for classifying malicious traffic at the
 no. 5, pp. 1029–1040, Oct. 2023. packet level,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 3414–3428, 2019.
 [7] I. Ilahi et al., “Challenges and countermeasures for adversarial attacks [30] L. Song and P. Mittal, “Systematic evaluation of privacy risks of machine
 on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 3, learning models,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., vol. 1, 2021,
 no. 2, pp. 90–109, Apr. 2022. pp. 2615–2632.
 [8] T. Zhu, D. Ye, W. Wang, W. Zhou, and P. Yu, “More than privacy: [31] J. Ye, A. Maddi, S. K. Murakonda, V. Bindschaedler, and R. Shokri,
 Applying differential privacy in key areas of artificial intelligence,” IEEE “Enhanced membership inference attacks against machine learning
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2824–2843, Jun. 2022. models,” in Proc. 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 [9] A. Triastcyn and B. Faltings, “Bayesian differential privacy for ma- pp. 3093–3106, 2022.
 chine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, [32] J. Lin, C. Song, K. He, L. Wang, and J. E. Hopcroft, “Nesterov
 pp. 9583–9592. accelerated gradient and scale invariance for adversarial attacks,” 2019,
[10] S. Sajadmanesh and D. Gatica-Perez, “Locally private graph neural arXiv:1908.06281.
 networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, [33] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness
 pp. 2130–2145. with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[11] R. Shao, P. Perera, P. C. Yuen, and V. M. Patel, “Open-set adversarial Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 2206–2216.
 defense with clean-adversarial mutual learning,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., [34] M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr, “Machine learning with
 vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 1070–1087, 2022. membership privacy using adversarial regularization,” in Proc. ACM
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 634–646.
[12] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traf-
 [35] J. Jia, A. Salem, M. Backes, Y. Zhang, and N. Z. Gong, “MemGuard:
 fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 Defending against black-box membership inference attacks via adversartraffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
 ial examples,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 2019, pp. 259–274.
[13] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating noise [36] H. Salman, M. Sun, G. Yang, A. Kapoor, and J. Kolter, “Denoised
 to sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Proc. Theory Cryptogr. Conf., smoothing: A provable defense for pretrained classifiers,” in Proc. Adv.
 New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 265–284. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21945–21957.
[14] K. Chatzikokolakis, M. E. Andrés, N. E. Bordenabe, and C. Palamidessi, [37] M. Alfarra, J. C. Pérez, A. Thabet, A. Bibi, P. H. Torr, and B. Ghanem,
 “Broadening the scope of differential privacy using metrics,” in Proc. “Combating adversaries with anti-adversaries,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 Int. Symp. Privacy Enhancing Technol. Symp., pp. 82–102, New York, Artif. Intell., vol. 36, 2022, pp. 5992–6000.
 NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[15] I. Mironov, “Rényi differential privacy,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Comput.
 Secur. Found. Symp. (CSF), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017,
 pp. 263–275.
[16] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” in Proc.
 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations (ICLR), 2014.
[17] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
[18] D. Diochnos, S. Mahloujifar, and M. Mahmoody, “Adversarial risk
 and robustness: General definitions and implications for the uniform distribution,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 31, 2018,
 pp. 10380–10389. Guangrui Liu received the B.E. degree in informa-
[19] R. Pinot, F. Yger, C. Gouy-Pailler, and J. Atif, “A unified view tion security from the School of Computer Science
 on differential privacy and robustness to adversarial examples,” in and Technology, China University of Mining and
 Proc. Workshop Mach. Learn. CyberSecurity (ECMLPKDD), 2019, Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China, in 2018. He
 pp. 368–373. is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
[20] D. Bahdanau, K. H. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation cyberspace security with the School of Cyberspace
 by jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin,
 Representations (ICLR), 2015, pp. 1–15. Heilongjiang, China.
[21] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. His main research interests include artificial in-
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010. telligence security and network traffic analysis.
[22] A. Bommert, X. Sun, B. Bischl, J. Rahnenführer, and M. Lang,
 “Benchmark for filter methods for feature selection in high-dimensional
 classification data,” Comput. Statist. Data Anal., vol. 143, 2020,
 Art. no. 106839.
[23] M. Lecuyer, V. Atlidakis, R. Geambasu, D. Hsu, and S. Jana, “Certified
 robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy,” in Proc.
 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press,
 2019, pp. 656–672.
[24] H. Phan, M. T. Thai, H. Hu, R. Jin, T. Sun, and D. Dou, “Scalable
 differential privacy with certified robustness in adversarial learning,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 7683–7694.
[25] B. Skrlj, S. Dzeroski, N. Lavrac, and M. Petkovic, “Feature importance
 Weizhe Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 estimation with self-attention networks,” 2020, arXiv:2002.04464.
 B.Eng., M.Eng., and Ph.D. degrees in engineering
[26] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic of computer science and technology from Harbin Inclassification using convolutional neural network for representation stitute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China,
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Piscataway, NJ, USA: in 1999, 2001, and 2006, respectively.
 IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 712–717. He is currently a Professor with the School of
[27] D. Stiawan, M. Y. B. Idris, A. M. Bamhdi, and R. Budiarto, “CICIDS- Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
 2017 dataset feature analysis with information gain for anomaly detec- of Technology, and the Director of the Cyberspace
 tion,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132911–132921, 2020. Security Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory,
[28] G. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Li, K. Fan, and S. Yu, “VulnerGAN: A Shenzhen, China. His research interests primarily
 backdoor attack through vulnerability amplification against machine include parallel computing, distributed computing,
 learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., cloud and grid computing, and computer network. He has published more
 vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 28–46, 2022. than 100 academic papers in journals, books, and conference proceedings.
332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 Xurun Wang received the B.E. degree in infor- Shui Yu (Fellow, IEEE) obtained his Ph.D. demation security from the School of Cyberspace gree in computer science from Deakin University,
 Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Melbourne, Australia, in 2004.
 Heilongjiang, China, in 2022, where he is currently He is a Professor with the School of Comworking toward the Ph.D. degree in Cyberspace puter Science and the Deputy Chair of Univer-
 Security. sity Research Committee, University of Technol-
 His main research interests include artificial in- ogy Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia. His retelligence security and network traffic analysis. search interests include cybersecurity, network science, big data, and mathematical modeling. He
 has published five monographs and edited two
 books and published more than 500 technical papers
 at different venues, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND
 SECURE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED
 SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE
 COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, IEEE/ACM
 Stephen King is currently working toward the
 TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, and IEEE INFOCOM. His current h-index
 graduate degree with Leland High School, San Jose,
 is 72. He promoted the research field of networking for big data since 2013,
 CA, USA.
 and his research outputs have been widely adopted by industrial systems, such
 as Amazon cloud security.
 Prof. Yu is currently serving on the editorial boards as an Area Editor of
 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS and an Editor of IEEE
 INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL. He served as a Distinguished Lecturer of
 IEEE Communications Society (2018–2021). He is a Distinguished Visitor of
 IEEE Computer Society, and an Elected Member of Board of Governors
 of IEEE VTS and ComSoc, respectively. He is a member of ACM and AAAS.