Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Full length article

A multi-source log semantic analysis-based attack investigation approach
Yubo Song a,b ,∗, Kanghui Wang a,b , Xin Sun c , Zhongyuan Qin a , Hua Dai c , Weiwei Chen a,b ,
Bang Lv c , Jiaqi Chen a
a School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
b
 Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
c
 State Grid Zhejiang Electric Power Co., Ltd. Research Institute, Hangzhou, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: As Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) become increasingly complex and destructive, security analysts often
Advanced persistent threat use log data for performing attack investigation. Existing approaches based on single-source logs fail to
Attack investigation capture the causal dependencies between complex attack behaviors. We propose a novel attack investigation
Provenance graph
 approach based on the semantic analysis of multi-source logs. This approach constructs a provenance graph
Data provenance
 that integrates both application and operating system logs, which can reduce the false positive rate in the
 attack investigation. Given the substantial size of the graph generated from multi-source logs, we reduce its
 complexity by merging repeated log events, deleting unreachable nodes, and removing temporary file nodes.
 To resolve the issue of lacking explicit objectives in current attack investigation approaches, we introduce a
 new multi-stage investigation approach that enhances the speed of attack investigation. This approach divides
 an intrusion process into seven distinct attack stages and use a graph pattern matching algorithm to match
 attack subgraphs belonging to specific attack stages with the provenance graph. This results in an intrusion
 process composed of attack subgraphs representing individual stages. Experimental results demonstrate that
 our attack investigation approach increases precision by 15.1% and recall by 12.2%. In terms of time efficiency,
 our approach reduces investigation time by over 60%, with a minimal decrease of less than 2% in the F1 score.

1. Introduction analysts in quickly understanding the sequence and scope of an attack,
 thereby enabling the formulation of effective defense strategies. With
 Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) (Navarro et al., 2018), as a ongoing improvements in kernel-level monitoring frameworks (Gehani
typical representative of modern complex network attacks, are highly and Tariq, 2012; Pohly et al., 2012), existing attack investigation
complex and have a long attack cycle. APT attacks usually have multi- approaches increasingly utilize logs to construct provenance graphs
ple stages, including initial access, maintaining authority, lateral move- for causal analysis of attack behaviors. Provenance graphs, which are
ment, external network penetration, etc.1 , and different techniques and directed acyclic graphs, display data causality with nodes representing
strategies may be used in each stage. Although existing intrusion detec- system and application entities and directed edges representing interaction systems can identify some attack behaviors, due to the complexity tions between entities, such as process file reads and writes. However,
of APT attacks, it is often difficult to build a complete attack picture such kernel-level monitoring frameworks generate vast amounts of
based on a single security incident. Therefore, security analysts need log data (Ma et al., 2018), leading to coarsely granulated provenance
to conduct attack investigation to fully understand the cause-and-effect graphs. These logs treat applications as monolithic entities, failing to
relationship between the attacker’s attack behaviors and the various differentiate between entities within applications, causing interactions
links involved in the intrusion process, so as to capture the attack path
 generated by different threads to be collectively attributed to the
and effectively block or mitigate the attack.
 application, thus creating numerous false dependencies (Inam et al.,
 Logs as primary data recording system and application operations,
 2023). This issue, known as the dependency explosion problem (Lee
can capture and document key information in system activities in
 et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2016), complicates security
real time, and allow users to retrospectively trace the entire sequence
 analyses and reduces the effectiveness of current attack investigation
and causality of events in chronological order. This capability aids

 ∗ Corresponding author at: School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
 E-mail addresses: songyubo@seu.edu.cn (Y. Song), wangkanghui@seu.edu.cn (K. Wang), sun_xin@zj.sgcc.com.cn (X. Sun), zyqin@seu.edu.cn (Z. Qin),
dai_hua@zj.sgcc.com.cn (H. Dai), chenweiwei@seu.edu.cn (W. Chen), lv_bang@zj.sgcc.com.cn (B. Lv), chenjq@seu.edu.cn (J. Chen).
 1
 https://attack.mitre.org

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104303
Received 20 October 2024; Received in revised form 20 December 2024; Accepted 27 December 2024
Available online 2 January 2025
0167-4048/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

approaches. To address the problem of dependency explosion, Lee Most current research focuses on system-level provenance graph conet al. (2013) employed reverse engineering to decompose long-running struction. These system-level provenance graphs are typically created
processes into multiple execution units and detected the causal rela- by deeply parsing system calls in user space or kernel space to depict
tionships between these units through binary analysis, thus enabling the causal relationships and flow of information between entities within
the construction of fine-grained provenance graphs. Similarly, Ma et al. the system. In Windows systems, Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) is
(2017) significantly reduced spatial overhead by adding annotations to used for logging, while Linux systems utilize the built-in auditing tool
the source code of executable files to identify execution units. However, Linux Audit, which intercepts system calls in user space to track varthe approach of obtaining and modifying the source code or executable ious system events. However, this approach incurs significant runtime
files of programs compromises the integrity of the original programs, overhead. To alleviate this issue, Ji et al. (2016) introduced software
making it less feasible in practical applications. debugging’s record and replay technology, which reduced operational
 To address the issues outlined above, we introduce a novel at- costs while ensuring the security and completeness of data provenance.
tack investigation approach that differs from existing approaches by Furthermore, considering the limitations of Linux system-level
integrating application logs with operating system logs to construct a provenance approaches in monitoring kernel operations, which often
provenance graph. This integration enhances the granularity of nodes miss critical information needed for forensic analysis and attack detecwithin the provenance graph. We further optimize the initial prove- tion, Pohly et al. (2012) were the first to propose intercepting system
nance graph to reduce its complexity, thereby enhancing the accuracy calls within kernel space, thereby enabling comprehensive collection
of attack investigation. Moreover, our approach incorporates a multi- of system log data. Building on this, Bates et al. (2015) introduced
stage attack investigation approach that divides an intrusion process Provmon, which added richer semantic information to system entities,
into several specific stages, assisting security analysts in clearly iden- such as file versions, remote IP addresses, and port numbers of network
tifying the objectives of investigation. This approach utilizes expert events. However, since both the approaches of Pohly et al. (2012)
knowledge from threat reports to generate attack subgraphs and em- and Bates et al. (2015) were designed for older kernel versions, they
ploys graph pattern matching algorithms to align subgraphs from spe- are not directly operational on current Linux systems. To address
cific attack stages with the provenance graph, thereby aiding analysts this issue, Pasquier et al. (2018) developed CamQuery, which utilizes
in quickly analyzing causal relationships between attack behaviors the latest kernel features combined with Linux security modules and
within an intrusion process and speeding up the attack investigation. NetFilters to capture log data within kernel space.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: Existing attack investigation approaches can be categorized based
 on the granularity of detection into the following types: fine-grained
 • We proposed a provenance graph construction method that in- attack investigation approaches focusing on nodes and edges in the
 tegrates application logs and operating system logs. Initially, by provenance graph, coarse-grained approaches based on subgraphs, and
 analyzing the characteristics of application logs, specific log event approaches that lie between these two, focusing on paths or sequences.
 fields are extracted. Application logs and operating system logs Fine-grained attack investigation approaches aimed to detect
 are then represented in a uniform log event format, and by whether interactions between nodes in the provenance graph were
 refining entities, the granularity of nodes in the provenance graph abnormal. For instance, Zengy et al. (2022) utilized a knowledge
 is enhanced. Subsequently, entities and their causal relationships graph and a GNN-based recommendation system to detect malicious
 are extracted from the unified log events that merge the semantics interactions between nodes, while Han et al. (2021) employed node
 of application and system logs. These entities, linked causally to embedding and autoencoder models to determine if a process derived
 existing detection points and arranged in reverse chronological from a software installation graph was malicious. Although fine-grained
 order, are added to the provenance graph to form the initial approaches offered the highest precision in detection, they typically
 provenance graph. lacked a comprehensive understanding of contextual information and
 • We designed three optimization rules for the generated initial were time-consuming and labor-intensive. Ding et al. (2023), recognizprovenance graph. By merging repeated log events, deleting un- ing that log text and provenance graphs were different representations
 reachable nodes, and removing temporary file nodes, an opti- of the same data that provided similar information, opted to use
 mized provenance graph is obtained. This reduces the scale of the log files as input and predicted entities related to attacks using the
 initial provenance graph without affecting its main structure. BERT model. This approach maintained fine-grained attack investiga-
 • We proposed a multi-stage attack investigation method to accel- tion while preserving an understanding of the context. Cheng et al.
 erate the speed of attack investigations. First, based on the char- (2024) employed a novel graph neural network-based encoder–decoder
 acteristic multi-stage and interconnected nature of network intru- architecture to learn the temporal evolution of structural changes in
 sions, and integrating MITRE ATT&CK and kill chain knowledge, provenance graphs, thereby quantifying the degree of anomaly for
 the entire intrusion process is divided into seven stages for staged each system event. Subsequently, they reconstructed attack activities
 provenance analysis. Additionally, expert knowledge from threat based on this fine-grained information. Rehman et al. (2024) employed
 reports is incorporated, transforming these reports into attack word2vec (Rong, 2014) and GNN to generate semantic and contexsubgraphs representing known attack semantics. These attack tual embeddings, respectively, and constructed a lightweight classifier
 subgraphs then serve as the targets for a graph neural network- model that utilizes stored embeddings for real-time anomaly detection.
 based graph pattern matching algorithm. This approach associates Coarse-grained attack investigation approaches aim to detect attack
 the unknown behavioral semantics in the provenance graph with subgraphs. For instance, Han et al. (2020) proposed Unicorn, which
 known attack semantics from threat reports. By combining the uses sliding time windows to segment logs and construct evolving
 seven stages of an intrusion process and their sequential order, subgraphs. Kapoor et al. (2021) developed ProvGem, which captures
 semantic associations between stages are established, ultimately contextual information of nodes through multiple embeddings and clasyielding an intrusion process composed of attack subgraphs. sifies graphs based on aggregated node embeddings using supervised
 learning. Yang et al. (2023) introduced ProGrapher, which employs
 graph2vec (Narayanan et al., 2017) to calculate graph embeddings and
2. Related work uses unsupervised approaches to detect anomalous snapshots. Li and
 Chen (2024) combined provenance graphs with process context infor-
 Existing approaches for constructing provenance graphs are pri- mation, extracting activity features of processes from the provenance
marily divided into two categories: system-level provenance graph graphs and employing a CNN-BiLSTM (Sinha and Manollas, 2020)
construction and execution unit-level provenance graph construction. model to detect intrusion activities. While coarse-grained approaches

 2
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

are faster, their precision is lower, requiring security analysts to invest 3.3. Attack investigation
considerable effort in pinpointing malicious nodes and attack events
within the attack subgraphs. Attack investigation is a critical technique within the domain of log
 Path or sequence-based attack investigation approaches, which offer analysis, aimed at identifying malicious activities from extensive system
a granularity between the aforementioned types, focus on detecting and network device logs and reconstructing complete intrusion proanomalous paths or sequences in the provenance graph. Wang et al. cesses. Unlike log anomaly detection, which merely spots irregularities,
(2020) introduced ProvDetector, which utilizes the doc2vec (Le and attack investigation seeks to restore and comprehend the entire attack
Mikolov, 2014) word embedding model to convert execution paths process, delineating the causal chain behind an attack rather than just
into vectors for cluster analysis, identifying abnormal program exe- pinpointing anomalies. Modern systems involve numerous components
cution paths. Alsaheel et al. (2021) proposed ATLAS, which extracts and exhibit complex behaviors, often over prolonged attack durations,
sequences of attack behaviors and normal behaviors from the prove- making attack investigation an exceptionally labor-intensive task. To
nance graph, vectorizes these sequences, and uses them as input to unearth attack patterns and their underlying causal logic amidst such
train an LSTM model. This model learns the sequential patterns of complex data, contemporary attack investigation approaches increasboth attack and normal behaviors, achieving high accuracy and recall ingly leverage deep learning technologies. These advanced approaches
rates in its results. Ying et al. (2024) optimized the process of attack
 automate the tracing process, thereby more effectively revealing coninvestigation through semantic tracking and path analysis. It was built
 cealed attack patterns and streamlining the task of security analysis in
on a dual-stage framework that utilized provenance graphs to simcomplex network environments.
plify the investigation process, focusing on the creation of suspicious
semantic graphs and conducting path-level contextual analysis. Yue
et al. (2024) proposed a new attack investigation approach based on 4. Overview
attack intent-driven and sequence-based learning. This approach constructed sequences of attack and non-attack events from the provenance In this section, we describe the overall architecture of the multigraph and then used a trained tag-sequence-based semantic model to stage attack investigation framework proposed in this paper, as shown
reconstruct attack scenarios. in Fig. 1. Our primary research focuses on the construction of provenance graphs from semantically fused multi-source logs and the multi-
3. Preliminaries stage attack investigation. The provenance graph, enriched with multisource semantic information, forms the basis for ensuring the correct-
3.1. Provenance graph ness and completeness of the attack investigation results, aiming to
 achieve rapid and accurate attack investigation.
 Recent literature has utilized the concept of data provenance. Com- During the construction phase of the provenance graph, due to the
pared with manually discovering attack traces from raw logs, data single semantic nature and dependency explosion problem inherent
provenance is to build a log provenance graph through a provenance- in existing provenance graphs built from operating system logs, we
based system. In these provenance graphs, all system entities from the propose a approach that integrates both operating system and aplogs are treated as vertices, and causal relationships between entities plication logs. Initially, we analyze the characteristics of application
are treated as edges. Log events, which represent interactions between logs to extract specific log event fields, representing both application
entities, are characterized by four main attributes: the subject 𝑆 per- and operating system logs in a uniform log event format. By refining
forming the action, the object 𝑂 affected by the action, the time 𝑇 entities, we enhance the granularity of nodes in the provenance graph.
of the event, and the type (𝑃 ) of the operation. Thus, an event can Furthermore, we extract entities and their causal relationships from
be represented as a quadruple: 𝐸 = (𝑂 ← 𝑆 , 𝑇 , 𝑃 ), where 𝑆 is the the semantically enriched log events, incorporating entities into the
subject, 𝑂 is the object, 𝑇 is the time, and 𝑃 is the operation. This provenance graph in reverse chronological order that have causal links
causal relationship is also known as a dependency. For two log events with existing detection points, resulting in an initial provenance graph.
𝐸𝑖 = (𝑂𝑖 ← 𝑆𝑖 , 𝑇𝑖 , 𝑃𝑖 ) and 𝐸𝑗 = (𝑂𝑗 ← 𝑆𝑗 , 𝑇𝑗 , 𝑃𝑗 ), if 𝑂𝑖 = 𝑂𝑗 , 𝑆𝑖 ≠ 𝑆𝑗 , Provenance graphs constructed solely based on operating systemand 𝑇𝑖 < 𝑇𝑗 , then 𝐸𝑖 is said to causally influence 𝐸𝑗 , or 𝐸𝑗 is dependent level logs often exhibit coarse granularity. This is because such logs
on 𝐸𝑖 . The provenance graph, denoted as 𝐺 = (𝑆 , 𝑂, 𝐸), is a collection
 typically treat applications as monolithic entities, unable to distinof all entities and log events, where 𝑆 represents the set of subjects,
 guish the characteristics of individual entities within the application.
𝑂 represents the set of objects, and 𝐸 represents the set of events.
 This approach results in different threads’ interactions being attributed
This graph visualizes entities as nodes and log events as edges between
 collectively to the entire application, thereby creating numerous inthem, where multiple edges between two nodes can represent various
 accurate dependencies within the provenance graph. These imprecise
types of causal relationships between those entities.
 relationships lead to a dependency explosion, where the size and
 complexity of the provenance graph drastically increase. To address
3.2. Graph pattern matching
 this issue and prevent an overly large provenance graph due to the
 Graph pattern matching (Mawhirter et al., 2021) is a technique used integration of application logs, we propose three optimization rules.
to identify specific subgraph patterns within large graph datasets. In These rules include merging repeated log events, deleting unreachable
this process, a query graph is defined, which represents the specific nodes, and removing temporary file nodes. With these measures, we can
pattern that needs to be located within a target graph. The graph pattern effectively reduce the size of the initial provenance graph without
matching problem is typically defined as follows: given a query graph compromising its structural integrity, making it more streamlined and
pattern 𝑄 = (𝑉𝑄 , 𝐸𝑄 ), where 𝑉𝑄 is a set of vertices and 𝐸𝑄 is a set of efficient.
edges with endpoints in 𝑉𝑄 , the task is to find all subgraphs in an input In the multistage attack investigation phase, addressing the chalgraph 𝐺 that are isomorphic to 𝑄. Graph pattern matching algorithms lenges of current attack investigation approaches, which often struggle
are designed to recognize collections of subgraphs that are isomorphic to capture the semantic nuances of attack behaviors and lack clear
to multiple query patterns. Specifically, if there are two query patterns, objectives during the provenance process, we propose a semantically
𝑄1 and 𝑄2 , the system should be able to identify all subgraphs in the associated multistage attack investigation approach. We extract text
data graph that are isomorphic to each of these patterns separately. To summaries and entity-relationships from threat intelligence reports
achieve this, algorithms typically generate a matching order that aids collected from threat intelligence platforms, transforming involved enin systematically searching for and identifying subgraphs in the data tities such as processes, files, and IP addresses into graph nodes and
graph that correspond to the query patterns. translating interactions like calls and read-write actions into directed

 3
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Fig. 1. An overall architecture of the proposed approach in this paper, where 𝐴𝑃𝑘 represents the attack subgraph belonging to the attack phase 𝑃𝑘 .

 5.1.2. Initial provenance graph construction
 This section aims to integrate application log data with operating
 system log data into a standard format, enabling the fusion of semantic
 behaviors at the application layer with underlying operational semantics at the system layer. Because operating system logs capture the
 overall behavior of the system and application logs record the internal
 activities of specific programs, the entities involved in these logs differ.
 Fig. 2. An example of entity refinement in Firefox.
 Direct merging of these two types of logs to construct a provenance
 graph is not feasible. By representing both application and system logs
 in a normalized format, we extract common log events, thus facilitating
 the integration of user actions within applications and low-level system
edges, representing the attacks from the threat reports as attack suboperations.
graphs. We have designed a graph pattern matching algorithm based
 Initially, we parse raw logs using the approach described in the
on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which calculates node attribute
 log parsing subsection, transforming unstructured log data into strucembeddings based on node type, name, and path, integrating node
 tured formats and capturing the meaning of each field within the log
and neighboring information to derive node embeddings, which are messages. Subsequently, we extract log events from these messages.
then refined by a globally context-aware attention network to obtain Traditional approaches typically extract entities and relationships from
the subgraph embeddings. We incorporate a Neural Tensor Network logs, thereby converting log statements into log events. Our approach
to evaluate the similarity between attack subgraphs extracted from incorporates application layer logs, allowing for further refinement of
threat reports and those in the provenance graph. Finally, we divide entities within the logs. Specifically, we utilize ProcessID, ProcessName,
the entire attack process into seven specific phases, classify attacks and SubthreadID to refine the entities in logs and additionally enrich
into appropriate intrusion phases based on descriptions in the threat log events by including fields such as IP, Files, Operations, and URIs. For
reports, and extract the respective phase-specific attack subgraphs. This example, we refine the Firefox process entity based on the SubthreadID
approach focuses on matching attack subgraphs specific to each phase, found in the Firefox logs. Using the this field in the logs, we differenthereby narrowing the scope of the provenance and enhancing the tiate the Firefox entity into two separate entities: Firefox_e35c7c0 and
speed of attack investigation. Firefox_15a49800, as shown in Fig. 2.
 In addition, to extract general log events, we have designed a
 standardized format for log entries. Specifically, each log event from
5. System design
 application and system logs is parsed into a structured entry comprising
 an EventID, Timestamp, ProcessID, SubthreadID, ProcessName, Opera-
 In this section, we describe the design details of our proposed ap- tion, and the resources being accessed, such as Files, IPs, and URIs.
proach in detail. As shown in Fig. 1, this approach consists of two parts: If the original logs do not contain information for these fields, their
provenance graph construction and multi-stage attack investigation. We values are set as null. Table 1 shows an example of a generalized log
will further explain these two parts in the following subsections. event extracted from Firefox logs.
 After extracting a generalized representation of log events from
5.1. Provenance graph construction application and system logs, the next step is to construct a provenance
 graph that integrates log data from both the application and system. Before this, considering that integrating application logs imposes
5.1.1. Log parsing additional computational and storage burdens, we utilize the effi-
 Log parsing is a foundational technique for attack investigation cient lossless compression algorithm Snappy2 to compress the merged
based on logs. We adopt an external tool, LogPPT, as proposed by Le logs. Lossless compression ensures that all original log fields (such as
and Zhang (2023), to transform raw unstructured logs into structured timestamps, process IDs, IP addresses, operation types, etc.) remain
formats. Their approach, which involves innovative prompt adjustments to detect keywords and parameters from a small set of labeled
 2
log data, has proven both effective and efficient in log parsing. https://github.com/google/snappy

 4
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Table 1
 An example of a common log event extracted from the Firefox log.
 EventID Timestamp ProcessID SubthreadID ProcessName IP File URI Operation
 1 15:24:48 3165 15f8b100 firefox 58.192.118.142 – seu.edu.cn DNS
 2 15:24:48 3165 161d5820 firefox – page.html ../page.html Access
 3 15:24:48 3165 8a73000 firefox – list.html ../list.html Access

unchanged during both compression and decompression. This algorithm significantly reduces the storage space required for log data,
while enabling rapid decompression when needed, thus ensuring the
efficiency of the provenance graph construction process.
 It is important to note that the provenance graph is constructed
offline after an attack is detected. The motivation for constructing a
provenance graph is to aid security analysts in identifying suspicious
behavior or entities within the system, such as new or modified files
or dubious processes. The provenance graph is built based on such Fig. 3. An example of merging identical sockets.
detection points, showing all entities and events causally affecting the
state of the detection points. We read the logs in reverse chronological
order to ensure that the most recently generated logs are read first, and
 into a single edge, retaining the earliest timestamp from the events as
older logs later. We initialize the provenance graph 𝐺0 to contain only
entities 𝑂0 and 𝑆0 , where entities 𝑂0 and 𝑆0 form the most recent log the timestamp for the merged event. By merging the repeated events
event 𝐸0 = {𝑂0 ← 𝑆0 }. For each subsequent log event read, if entity 𝑂𝑖 in the initial provenance graph, we significantly reduce the number of
is already in the graph, it implies that this log event is relevant to the nodes, thereby simplifying the structure of the entire provenance graph
provenance graph we are analyzing. Further, if another entity 𝑆𝑖 from and easing the analysis workload for security personnel. Moreover,
this log event is not yet in the graph, we add entity 𝑆𝑖 and establish merging these nodes and edges does not affect the causal analysis of
a new directed edge between 𝑂𝑖 and 𝑆𝑖 , representing a dependency the provenance graph.
between these two entities. This process is repeated until the updated Deleting Unreachable Nodes. When analyzing a provenance graph
provenance graph 𝐺 is formed. The specific process of constructing the starting from a certain detection point, we only focus on the graph
provenance graph is illustrated in Algorithm 1. nodes and edges that have a causal relationship with this detection
Algorithm 1 Provenance Graph Construction point. Therefore, we can remove the unreachable nodes and edges in
Require: Log dataset 𝐿, Log event 𝐸𝑖 = {𝑂𝑖 ← 𝑆𝑖 }, Initial Provenance the provenance graph that have no causal link to the detection point,
 Graph 𝐺0 thereby reducing the size of the provenance graph. Additionally, con-
Ensure: Updated Provenance Graph 𝐺 sidering the diversity of nodes in the provenance graph, we implement
 1: for each event 𝐸𝑖 in log 𝐿 do different strategies for nodes represented by different types of entities
 2: for each object 𝑂𝑖 in graph 𝐺 do during deletion. Specifically, for a process node, it must not only lack a
 3: if 𝐸𝑖 affects 𝑂𝑖 by the time threshold for 𝑂𝑖 then causal relationship with the detection point to be eligible for removal,
 4: if 𝑆𝑖 not in graph 𝐺 then but it must also have terminated. The reason for this is that if the
 5: add 𝑆𝑖 to graph 𝐺 process is still active, it may still exhibit new behaviors in the future
 6: set time threshold for 𝑆𝑖 to time of 𝐸𝑖 that could have a causal link to the detection point. For other types of
 7: end if nodes, such as files or sockets, they can be removed as long as they do
 8: add edge from 𝑆𝑖 to 𝑂𝑖 to graph 𝐺 not have a causal relationship with the detection point, without losing
 9: end if any current or future information related to the detection point.
10: end for Removing Temporary File Nodes. Logs often contain a large
11: end for number of temporary files, which have very short lifecycles and are
12: return 𝐺
 quickly deleted after use. For example, temporary files in Linux systems
 are typically used to store temporary data generated during program
5.1.3. Provenance graph optimization execution, including caches and temporary logs, or as a means of
 Due to the large scale of logs involving numerous entities and inter-process communication, and are usually located in the system’s
relationships, the provenance graph constructed from these logs is temporary directories such as /tmp or /var/tmp. Firefox temporary
also quite large, posing significant challenges for subsequent analysis. files primarily store browser cache data, session restoration informa-
Therefore, this section establishes three optimization rules for the initial tion, and temporary files from downloads. These temporary files usually
provenance graph to reduce its complexity effectively by merging exist for a very short period, only interact with the single process that
repeated log events, deleting unreachable graph nodes, and removing
 created them, and do not participate in broader system interactions.
temporary file nodes.
 Therefore, in the context of attack investigation, these files do not
 Merging Repeated Log Events. If certain nodes and edges repreintroduce any explicit information flow. Based on these characteristics,
sent the same type of events, and such events occur repeatedly within
 we can safely remove nodes associated with these temporary files from
a short timeframe, we can merge these nodes and edges to simplify
 the provenance graph, a process that neither results in the loss of
the repeated events into a single event. This approach is taken because
these repeated events typically represent continuous access to the same critical analytical data nor affects the integrity and accuracy of the
resource or are part of a sequence of continuous actions, which can be provenance graph and attack analysis.
regarded as a single event in the provenance graph. For instance, if a These optimization rules effectively reduce the complexity of the
process makes multiple socket connections to the same IP address, the initial provenance graph while preserving essential information, allowinitial provenance graph might depict these connections with multiple ing security analysts to focus more on the nodes and events that are
nodes and edges, as shown in Fig. 3. We can merge these identical significant for security analysis, thus enhancing both the efficiency and
socket nodes into one node and consolidate the corresponding edges accuracy of the overall analysis.

 5
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

5.2. Attack investigation approach 5.2.1. Attack subgraph extraction
 Before extracting the attack subgraphs, we first need to obtain
 Existing approaches of building provenance graphs based on logs specific descriptions of the attack from threat reports. These reports
for attack investigation exhibit two deficiencies: are widely distributed across security blogs, cybersecurity forums, and
 major threat intelligence communities. The descriptions of attacks in
 • Attack investigation process takes a long time. Due to the lack of these reports are presented not only in natural language but also
 clear objectives in the investigation process, exhaustive searches in structured and unstructured standard formats such as OpenIOC,5
 are typically employed to locate all nodes connected to the trace STIX, and MISP. The main content includes key processes, files, and
 origin within the provenance graph, and to determine whether other entities involved in the attack process, observed suspicious operathese nodes are part of an intrusion event. This approach of tions, and their interconnections. Previous work has explored extracting
 exhaustive search overlooks the semantic associations between text summaries from unstructured online threat intelligence, extractdifferent attack behaviors throughout the intrusion event, lacks ing entity-action relationships, and automatically categorizing online
 purposefulness, and results in a blind and time-consuming search threat intelligence into the MITRE ATT&CK TTPs matrix. Among them,
 process. TTPDrill (Husari et al., 2017), based on natural language process-
 • Difficult to discover semantics at the attack behavior level. Node- ing and information retrieval technologies, extracts attack descriptions
 from unstructured online threat intelligence and converts them into
 based attack investigation primarily analyzes the attributes or
 the formatted version of STIX 2.1, then classifies the attacks according
 states of nodes, focusing on the relationships between nodes at
 to MITRE ATT&CK TTPs. In this paper, we obtain threat reports from
 a fine granularity. However, it lacks contextual and relational
 four threat intelligence platforms: Symantec,6 Fortinet,7 TrendMicro,8
 understanding, easily overlooking the semantic links between varand Welivesecurity,9 and preprocess them using the existing automated
 ious attack behaviors, rendering the final reconstructed intrusion
 threat report analysis tool, TTPDrill.
 process lacking in interpretability.
 A complete network intrusion is often complex and contains multi-
 Simultaneously, we have observed that a successful network intru- ple stages of intrusion. For each stage, the attacker might employ many
sion is often complex and exhibits the following two characteristics: different attack approaches from the TTPs, and the purpose of this
 section is to represent these attack approaches (such as SQL injection,
 • The entire intrusion process consists of multiple stages. The pro- DLL file hijacking attacks) in a causal graph form, to facilitate matching
 cess can be summarized in sequence as follows: information col- attack behaviors and determining intrusion stages in subsequent attack
 lection, penetration, maintaining authority, privilege escalation, in- investigation. The representation of these attack approaches in the
 ternal reconnaissance, lateral movement, and impact, with each provenance graph is referred to as attack subgraphs.
 stage involving various specific attack behaviors. For instance, We find that security analysts have already conducted detailed
 in one network intrusion, the penetration stage involved SQL studies on existing network intrusions and have provided detailed
 injection and Shiro deserialization attacks, while the maintaining textual descriptions of their attack implementation processes in threat
 authority stage utilized Dirty COW privilege escalation and SUID reports. Fig. 4 shows an excerpted description of an intrusion, recordexploitation attacks. ing the process by which the attacker loads the malicious DLL file
 • There is a fixed sequence between each two stages of the intrusion imjputyc.dll by executing imjpuex.exe, which then loads the
 process. The next stage of intrusion can only commence after imjputyc.dat file. These textual descriptions are essentially the
 successfully implementing the attacks in the previous stage. For same as log records—they are records of a set of action behaviors, and
 example, if attackers intend to transfer important data files from their format is also very similar, as shown in Fig. 5. For each sentence
 the victim’s machine to a Command & Control (C&C) server in the attack description, we can summarize it using an entity-action-
 (corresponding to the impact stage), they must first gain access entity triplet. Therefore, based on the approach for extracting the
 to the victim’s machine through some means (corresponding to provenance graph from logs outlined in Section 5.1.2, we can transform
 entities such as processes, files, and IP addresses involved in the attack
 the penetration stage).
 description into nodes in the graph. The action relationships between
 In this section, we address the issue of extensive time consump- entities, such as calls and read/write operations, can be converted into
tion due to the lack of clear objectives in the attack investigation directed edges in the graph. In this way, we extract the attack subgraph
in Section 5.2.1. Referring to the MITRE ATT&CK framework,3 and from the attack description. The specific process is shown in Fig. 4.
the kill chain knowledge, we divide the entire intrusion process into It is important to note that each log entry in the log data is
seven stages. Based on MITRE’s Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures discrete, and each log statement is relatively short, which makes it
(TTPs) knowledge base4 we map the semantics of attack behaviors convenient to extract entities and action relationships. Unlike log data,
to the respective intrusion stages. Furthermore, we categorize threat attack descriptions are often long texts that describe each step of the
reports into these pre-defined seven intrusion stages based on the attacker’s operations. Therefore, we need to slightly modify the extracattack descriptions within the reports, and extract attack subgraphs tion approaches for entities and actions based on this characteristic
corresponding to specific intrusion stages from them. In Section 5.2.2, of attack descriptions. Specifically, we need to treat the entire attack
we design a graph pattern matching algorithm based on graph neural description as a log event, with each sentence as a log entry, sequentially
networks, using the attack subgraphs as matching targets, and aligning extracting the actions and entities described in each sentence, and then
the unknown behavior semantics in the provenance graph with the merging them in order to form the attack subgraph. Finally, we obtain
known attack semantics represented by the attack subgraphs. In Sec- the process descriptions of the attacks from the threat intelligence
tion 5.2.3, we combine the seven stages of the intrusion process and the platforms and extract the attack subgraphs to build a database of attack
sequence between these stages to achieve semantic linkage between the subgraphs.
stages, ultimately producing an intrusion process composed of elements
formed from attack subgraphs. 5
 https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/openioc-basics
 6
 https://symantec-enterprise-blogs.security.com/blogs/threat-intelligence
 7
 https://www.fortinet.com/blog/threat-research
 3 8
 https://attack.mitre.org/matrices/enterprise/ https://www.trendmicro.com/en_us/about/threat-research.html
 4 9
 https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/enterprise/ https://www.welivesecurity.com/en/threat-reports/

 6
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Fig. 4. Attack subgraph extraction process.

 In calculating the embedding vectors for node attributes, we view
 the paths in the provenance graph as sentences in natural language
 (Wang et al., 2020). We treat nodes representing entities and their attributes as nouns within these sentences, and edges representing causal
 relationships as verbs. Using the word2vec model (Rong, 2014), we
 convert each word in the sentence into a vector. Through the word2vec
 model, we learn the semantics of each attribute and transform them
 Fig. 5. Comparison of log records and attack descriptions. into word vectors. To represent the overall semantics of a node, we
 aggregate the attributes of the node to obtain the node’s embedding
 vector 𝑒0𝑛 :
5.2.2. Graph pattern matching algorithm ∑
 𝑒0𝑛 = 𝑎𝑖 𝑣 𝑖 (1)
 Previous studies (Liu et al., 2023; Mawhirter and Wu, 2019; Chen 𝑖∈𝐴𝑛
et al., 2020; Han et al., 2019; Mawhirter et al., 2021) have explored
 where 𝐴𝑛 represents all attributes of node 𝑛, 𝑖 is one of the attributes, 𝑣𝑖
how to search for small graphs that match specific patterns within
 is the embedding vector of attribute 𝑖, and 𝑎𝑖 is the weight of attribute
large graphs. However, these works, not being designed for log at-
 𝑖. Since each attribute of the node represents different meanings and
tack investigation tasks, primarily focus on exact subgraph matching
 may contribute differently to the overall semantics, it is necessary to
in isomorphic, undirected graphs. They do not consider the flow of assign different weights to each attribute. We use TF-IDF (Qaiser and
information and causal relationships between nodes, making them Ali, 2018) to calculate the weight 𝑎𝑖 for each attribute.
unsuitable for direct application in large-scale, heterogeneous, directed Node Embedding. In the attack subgraph, the relationships beprovenance graphs. Based on these considerations, we have designed tween a node and its neighboring nodes can provide crucial clues about
a graph pattern matching algorithm tailored for attack investigation its behavior and potential maliciousness. Therefore, we aggregate the
tasks. This algorithm is built upon existing graph neural networks neighbor information into the node’s embedding value to capture the
and includes modules for attribute embedding, node embedding, and context and relationships of the node within the graph. Since the attack
subgraph embedding. subgraph is constructed based on expert knowledge and generally
 Attribute Embedding. Since the attack subgraphs are heteroge- contains no noise, and the size of the graph is relatively small, we refer
neous, the nodes in the graph represent different types of entities, such to prior work SimGNN (Bai et al., 2019) and use Graph Convolutional
as process entities and file entities. Each type of entity has multiple Networks (GCN) to compute node embeddings for the attack subgraph.
instances, such as instances of the process entity svchost.exe and However, provenance graphs built from logs are often large and
chrome.exe, each with its own process number, process name, and contain redundant nodes, making the semantic contribution of each
path, as shown in Table 2. In the attribute embedding network, our goal neighbor node vary. Therefore, we refer to DeepHunter (Wei et al.,
is to combine the semantic information of each node instance to obtain 2021) and incorporate an attention aggregation layer in the GNN, ema feature vector for each node. Specifically, we convert each node’s at- ploying an attention mechanism to learn the semantic weights of each
tributes into embedding vectors. By aggregating the embedding vectors neighbor node, more accurately capturing the target node’s neighbor
of the node attributes, we ultimately obtain an embedding vector that information. In the attention aggregation layer, an initial embedding
represents each node. vector 𝑒0𝑛 for node 𝑛 and its neighbors are weighted through an attention

 7
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Table 2
 Typical properties and relationships of nodes.
 Node type Property Relationship Shapes in the graph
 File File Name, Path, User read, write, exec rectangle
 Process PID, Process Name, Path, User start, end oval
 Socket Source IP, Destination IP, Source Port, Destination Port, Protocol create, connect rhombus

mechanism. These weights determine the contribution of each neighbor approach only matches subgraphs specific to certain intrusion stages,
node during the update of node 𝑛’s embedding vector. This process eliminating the need for comprehensive matching against all potential
is iterative and continues for 𝑙 iterations. After 𝑙 rounds of attention attack subgraphs.
aggregation, all intermediate embedding vectors 𝑒0𝑛 , 𝑒1𝑛 , … , 𝑒𝑙𝑛 of node 𝑛 Our attack investigation strategy is divided into two key phases:
are integrated using a layer-wise dense connection aggregator (Wang backward provenance and forward provenance. The backward proveet al., 2019), outputting the final embedding vector 𝑒𝑙+1𝑛 . nance phase traces back in time to find the initial entry point of the
 Subgraph Embedding. In the subgraph embedding section, we use intrusion; the forward provenance phase, on the other hand, proceeds
node embeddings to generate low-dimensional embedding vectors for along the timeline to discover potential subsequent attack activities.
both the attack subgraph and the provenance graph. When calculating Before starting the provenance, we extract attack descriptions from an
the weights for different node embeddings, we adopted the Global open-source network threat report repository and classify them into
Context-Aware Attention network proposed by SimGNN (Bai et al., seven stages based on the ATT&CK framework TTPs: information collec-
2019), which allows us to weight the contributions of different nodes tion, external penetration, maintaining privileges, privilege escalation,
in the subgraph embedding pair. Nodes similar to the global context internal reconnaissance, lateral movement, and impact. Additionally,
are assigned greater weights, meaning that such node embeddings we extract the corresponding attack subgraphs for each stage from the
contribute more to the subgraph embedding. The following formula reports. The specific attack investigation process includes the following
elucidates the subgraph embedding approach we used: steps:
 ∑
 𝑁
𝑉𝐺 = 𝜎(𝑒𝑇𝑛 𝑐)𝑒𝑛 Step 1 During attack investigation, a given suspected malicious node is
 𝑛=1 typically taken as the starting point 𝐺𝑛 for the provenance. Based
 ( (( ) )) (2)
 ∑𝑁
 1 ∑
 𝑁
 on the attack stage 𝑃𝑛 to which this provenance starting point
 = 𝜎 𝑒𝑇𝑛 t anh 𝑒 𝑊1 𝑒𝑛
 𝑛=1
 𝑁 𝑚=1 𝑚 belongs, we first initiate backward provenance to try to find the
 entry point of this intrusion. We take the set of attack subgraphs
where 𝑉𝐺 is the graph embedding value, 𝜎(⋅) is the sigmoid function, 𝐴𝑛−1 in stage 𝑃𝑛−1 as the target to match. For all attack subgraphs
t anh(⋅) is a nonlinear activation function, and 𝑊1 is a learnable weight 𝐴𝑘𝑛−1 in the set 𝐴𝑛−1 , we use the graph matching algorithm
matrix. described in Section 5.2.2 to search for matching subgraphs 𝐺𝑛−1
 Similarity Calculation. Simply calculating the dot product of two in the provenance graph constructed in Section 5.1.
graph embeddings may not sufficiently reflect their interrelationship.
 Step 2 After step 1, we have backtracked from the provenance starting
Therefore, when calculating the similarity between two subgraphs, we
 point in the provenance graph to find the previous step of the
use Neural Tensor Networks (NTN) (Socher et al., 2013) to model the
 intrusion 𝐺𝑛−1 . By repeating step 1, we can search for matching
relationship between the two graph embeddings:
 ( [( )] ) subgraphs 𝐺𝑛−2 , 𝐺𝑛−3 , . . . , 𝐺𝑛−𝑘 in the provenance graph for
 𝑉𝑖
𝑔(𝑉𝑖 , 𝑉𝑗 ) = t anh 𝑉𝑖𝑇 𝑊2[1∶𝐾] 𝑉𝑗 + 𝐸 +𝑏 (3) stages 𝑃𝑛−2 , 𝑃𝑛−3 , . . . , until 𝑛−𝑘 = 0, where we find the matching
 𝑉𝑗 subgraph 𝐺0 of the initial attack stage. The search process ends,
where 𝑊2[1∶𝐾] ∈ R𝐷×𝐷×𝐾 is a 𝐷 × 𝐷 × 𝐾 dimensional weight tensor, and we have identified the attack behaviors 𝐺0 , 𝐺1 , … , 𝐺𝑛−1
the notation [1 ∶ 𝐾] represents indices from 1 to 𝐾, used to indicate that occurred before the provenance starting point 𝐺𝑛 .
multiple components of the weight tensor, 𝐸 ∈ R𝐾×2𝐷 is a 𝐾 × 2𝐷 Step 3 Based on the attack stage 𝑃𝑛 of this provenance starting point,
dimensional weight matrix, and 𝑏 ∈ R𝐾 is a bias vector in R𝐾 space. 𝐾 we initiate forward provenance to try to find if there are subis a hyperparameter used by the model to generate a similarity score sequent attack behaviors. Similarly to backward provenance,
for each pair of graph embeddings. the first step is to go through the attack subgraph matching
 After initially calculating the similarity between the two graph em- process described in step 1 to obtain the matching subgraph
beddings using a neural tensor network, we use a standard multilayer 𝐺𝑛+1 . The difference is that the matching target in the forward
fully connected neural network to gradually reduce the vector dimen- provenance phase is the set of attack subgraphs 𝐴𝑛+1 in stage
sion of the similarity score, ultimately obtaining a low-dimensional 𝑃𝑛+1 . By repeating step (1), we can find the attack behaviors
vector 𝑠̂𝑖𝑗 ∈ R, representing the final similarity between the two graph 𝐺𝑛+1 , 𝐺𝑛+2 , … , 𝐺𝑛+𝑚 that occurred after the provenance starting
embeddings. Additionally, we use mean squared error to compute the point 𝐺𝑛 .
loss function, as follows: Step 4 By merging the results of backward provenance and forward
 1 ∑ provenance, we obtain the complete process of this attack
= (𝑠̂ − 𝑠(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 ))2 (4)
 || (𝑖,𝑗)∈ 𝑖𝑗 𝐺0 , 𝐺1 , … , 𝐺𝑛−1 , 𝐺𝑛 , 𝐺𝑛+1 , … , 𝐺𝑛+𝑚 . The specific process is shown
 in Algorithm 2.
where  is the set of training graph pairs, and 𝑠(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 ) is the true
similarity between 𝐺𝑖 and 𝐺𝑗 . After the aforementioned steps, we have avoided the issue of blind
 matching caused by unclear provenance targets. By clearly defining the
5.2.3. Multi-stage attack investigation provenance targets, we have significantly reduced the analysis time.
 A complete intrusion typically involves multiple closely connected
stages. Based on this characteristic, our attack investigation strategy 6. Evaluation
begins by identifying the specific stage of the investigation starting
point within the entire attack process, thereby limiting the scope of 6.1. Evaluation preparation
provenance to this particular stage. We then use graph matching algorithm within this scope to search for potential attacks in the provenance To validate the effectiveness of the provenance graph construction
graph. Unlike other graph matching-based provenance approaches, our approach and attack investigation approach proposed in this paper,

 8
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

Algorithm 2 Fast Intrusion Tracing Algorithm privilege escalation (National Vulnerability Database (NVD), 2016),
 EternalBlue, SSH remote connection, and file modification. In dataset
Require: Origin 𝐺𝑛 , Attack Subgraph Collection 𝐴, Attack Phase
 D1, the attacks performed at each stage of the intrusion include port
 Collection 𝑃 , Provenance Graph 𝑇
 scanning, SQL injection, adding scheduled tasks, Dirty Cow privilege es-
Ensure: 𝐺 = {𝐺0 , 𝐺1 , … , 𝐺𝑛−1 , 𝐺𝑛 , 𝐺𝑛+1 , … , 𝐺𝑛+𝑚 }
 calation, asset collection, SSH remote connection, establishing a reverse
 1: 𝑃𝑛 ← getPhase(𝐺𝑛 )
 proxy, and modifying webpage content. In dataset D2, the attacks per-
 2: // Backward Povenance
 formed at each stage of the intrusion include subdomain enumeration,
 3: while 𝑛 > 0 do
 phishing emails, modifying the registry, SUID exploitation (National
 4: 𝐴𝑛−1 ← getAttackGraph(𝑃𝑛−1 )
 Vulnerability Database (NVD), 2021), EternalBlue, account enumera-
 5: for subAttackGraph in 𝐴𝑛−1 do
 tion, and sensitive file leakage.
 6: if subAttackGraph in 𝑇 then
 During the provenance graph construction phase, to validate the
 7: 𝐺𝑛−1 ← subAttackGraph
 role of application logs and the effectiveness of the optimization rules
 8: end if
 for provenance graphs,we selected attack reports published by threat
 9: end for
 intelligence platforms (Jiang et al., 2017; Trellix Research Team, 2023;
10: 𝑛←𝑛−1
 Trend Micro Research Team, 2016), replicated three APT attack scenar-
11: end while
 ios, and simulated normal user operations during non-attack periods.
12: // Forward Povenance
 Moreover, to evaluate the spatial and temporal overhead of integrating
13: while 𝑚 − 𝑛 > 0 do
 application logs, we simulated regular user activities such as web
14: 𝐴𝑛+1 ← getAttackGraph(𝑃𝑛+1 )
 browsing, video watching, downloading, and editing files. Simulations
15: for subAttackGraph in 𝐴𝑛+1 do
 also included routine operations executed by security operations per-
16: if subAttackGraph in 𝑇 then
 sonnel in Bash, including SSH remote login, system status checks,
17: 𝐺𝑛+1 ← subAttackGraph
 service management, user and group management, configuring firewall
18: end if
 rules, and viewing log files. Finally, we conducted stress tests on
19: end for
 the Web server using the ApacheBench11 tool, simulating multi-user
20: 𝑛←𝑛+1
 concurrent access to Apache and Nginx servers. When evaluating the
21: end while
 role of application layer logs, we primarily used precision and recall as
22: return 𝐺 = {𝐺0 , 𝐺1 , … , 𝐺𝑛−1 , 𝐺𝑛 , 𝐺𝑛+1 , … , 𝐺𝑛+𝑚 }
 metrics.
 In evaluating the effectiveness of provenance graph optimization,
Table 3 we first compare the number of nodes and edges in the graph before
Dataset used to construct the provenance graph for the test phase. and after applying the optimization rules to measure the extent to
 Dataset Number of attacking entities Number of normal entities Size (MB) which the optimization simplifies the graph’s scale. However, consid-
 𝐷0 47 28 904 930 ering the potential for false negatives during the optimization process
 𝐷1 23 19 441 654 (i.e., the deletion of critical information related to the attack behavior),
 𝐷2 31 21 694 746 we further conduct experiments using dataset D0. Specifically, for
 each attack subgraph in D0, we extract and mark the critical paths
 and critical nodes. We define a critical path as the core sequence of
 events leading from the attack’s origin to its final objective, while a
we conducted corresponding experiments. Our log collection was percritical node refers to an indispensable entity along these paths (such
formed on the Linux platform, while the construction of provenance
 as key processes, critical files, or vital network connections). Prior
graphs and attack subgraphs was carried out on the Windows platform,
 to optimizing the provenance graph constructed from dataset D0, we
with the GNN model deployed on the PyTorch platform. Additionlabel the critical paths and nodes for all attack subgraphs in D0. To
ally, we utilized the open-source graph computing framework Apache
 assess the retention of key information in the optimized provenance
Tinkerpop10 to construct a PostgreSQL graph database. The implemengraph, we define the ‘‘Critical Information Retention Rate’’ (CIRR) as
tation of our approach was deployed on a Windows computer equipped
 an evaluation metric. Assuming equal weight is assigned to both critical
with an Intel i7-13700KF CPU @ 3.4 GHz, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090,
 nodes and critical paths, the CIRR is calculated as follows:
and 64 GB of memory. ( )
 We recreated attack behaviors and mimicked normal user actions, 1 |𝑁after ∩ 𝑁critical | |𝑃after ∩ 𝑃critical |
 𝐶 𝐼 𝑅𝑅 = + × 100% (5)
using the operating system and application logs generated during this 2 |𝑁critical | |𝑃critical |
time period as the test dataset for our approach. Since user behavior where 𝑁critical is the set of all critical nodes labeled before optimization,
dominates the dataset with only a small portion being attack behaviors, and 𝑁after is the set of nodes in the optimized provenance graph; 𝑃critical
we predominantly mimic normal user activities, such as browsing the is the set of all critical paths labeled before optimization, and 𝑃after is
web, watching videos, and using office software. As for the attack the set of paths that remain in the optimized graph. In evaluating the
behavior data, we first selected a subset of threat reports, and then, additional spatial overhead brought by integrating application logs into
based on the descriptions in these reports, randomly chose a time to the provenance graph, we mainly compared the size of application logs
replicate the attack behavior. This approach ensures that the ratio of with operating system logs. For the additional temporal overhead, we
attack behavior logs to normal user behavior logs in the dataset is closer compared the time taken to generate the provenance graph before and
to real-world scenarios. Following this methodology, we generated after integrating application logs.
three datasets, D0, D1, and D2, as shown in Table 3. In these datasets, In the attack investigation phase, we selected threat reports from
attack entities refer to specific objects or elements that can be clearly open-source threat intelligence platforms such as Symantec, Fortinet,
identified during the execution of the attack and can only be associated TrendMicro, and Welivesecurity as datasets for extracting attack subwith the attack event itself. We used this criterion to distinguish them graphs, as shown in Table 4. These reports detailed the operational
from normal entities. procedures of specific attacks. We applied the automated tool TTP-
 In dataset D0, the attacks performed at each stage of the intrusion Drill (Husari et al., 2017) to preprocess the threat reports, extracting
include port scanning, SQL injection, modifying the registry, Dirty Cow necessary entities such as processes and files and their relationships to

 10 11
 https://tinkerpop.apache.org/ https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/ab.html

 9
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

Table 4 experimental results shown in Table 5.
Threat Report Data Source Statistics.
 After comparative analysis, we observe a significant improvement
 Data source name Quantity (portions) in the performance of the classic attack investigation approach, AT-
 Symantec Threat Intelligence 28 LAS, when application logs are integrated into the provenance graph
 TrendMicro Security Encyclopedia 26
 alongside operating system logs. Specifically, within the framework of
 Fortinet Security Intelligence 21
 Welivesecurity Threat Intelligence 11
 traditional provenance graphs, which rely solely on operating system
 Total 86 logs, the semantic information provided is relatively limited, making
 it challenging to fully capture the nuanced behaviors of users at the
 application layer. This limitation often results in the incorrect classification of entire application entities as hostile when some internal
construct attack subgraphs, with manual fine-tuning to reduce noise. actions might be benign, leading to a higher rate of false positives and
We used the publicly available log dataset ATLAS (Alsaheel et al., 2021) an average precision rate of only 0.73 in our simulated attack scenarios.
to construct the provenance graph and optimized it according to the However, in the provenance graphs constructed using the approach
rules proposed in this paper, using this provenance graph as the basis proposed in this paper, which integrates application logs, there is a
for training our graph matching model. In addition, we use datasets D1 more precise representation of user behaviors at the application layer.
and D2 as test sets to evaluate the effectiveness of our graph matching This improvement significantly reduces the instances of false positives,
algorithm and attack investigation approach. thereby enhancing the precision of ATLAS. With the integration of
 In the evaluation experiments of the graph matching algorithm, application logs, ATLAS’s average precision rate in the provenance
we primarily use two metrics: the time required to generate similarity graphs increases to 0.84, an improvement of 15.1% over traditional
scores between two graphs and the Mean Squared Error (MSE). The graphs. Additionally, we observed a notable improvement in recall
MSE is the average of the squared differences between the calculated rates. In traditional provenance graphs, ATLAS’s average recall was
similarity scores and the true similarities, defined as follows: only 0.82. However, in provenance graphs built using our approach,
 1∑
 𝑛
 which minimizes erroneous dependencies and refines the granularity
MSE = (𝑠 − 𝑠̂𝑖 )2 (6)
 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖 of application entities, ATLAS’s average recall rose to 0.92, a 12.2%
 increase over traditional approaches.
where 𝑠𝑖 is the true similarity and 𝑠̂𝑖 is the similarity calculated by the
 From the above experimental data and analysis, we conclude that
graph matching algorithm. For the true similarity 𝑠(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 ) between 𝐺𝑖
 integrating application logs significantly enhances the semantic accuand 𝐺𝑗 , we first compute the normalized Graph Edit Distance (GED):
 racy and completeness of provenance graphs. This advancement not
 GED(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 )
normalizedGED(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 ) = |𝐺 |+|𝐺 | (7) only allows the provenance graphs to reflect user behavior at the ap-
 𝑖 𝑗
 plication level more precisely but also provides a more comprehensive
 2
 and accurate basis for subsequent log analysis tasks, such as attack
where |𝐺𝑖 | represents the number of nodes in graph 𝐺𝑖 and GED(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 )
 investigation. By integrating application logs, we can more accurately
represents the graph edit distance between 𝐺𝑖 and 𝐺𝑗 . Then, we map
 capture malicious activities in complex attack scenarios, reduce false
the similarity scores to the range (0, 1] using the exponential function
 positives, and enhance overall analysis efficiency.
𝜆(𝑥) = 𝑒−𝑥 :
𝑠(𝐺𝑖 , 𝐺𝑗 ) = 𝑒−normalizedGED(𝐺𝑖 ,𝐺𝑗 ) (8) 6.2.2. Optimization effects of provenance graph
 To validate the effectiveness of the three provenance graph opti-
Furthermore, we evaluate the overall performance of our proposed mization rules proposed in this paper, we constructed five different
attack investigation approach using Precision, Recall, F1-Score, and the provenance graphs based on log data generated from three simulated
time taken. APT attack scenarios. These graphs were evaluated based on the num-
 In terms of model parameter settings, we set the number of layers ber of nodes and edges they contain, which served as metrics to
in the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to 3, using ReLU as the measure the scale of the provenance graphs and to further analyze
activation function. The output dimensions of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd the effectiveness of the proposed optimization rules. Specifically, we
layers of the GCN are 64, 32, and 16, respectively. In the Neural Tensor generated five provenance graphs: a baseline graph without any op-
Network, we set 𝐾 to 16 and use four fully connected layers to reduce timization, graphs optimized using the rules for merging repeated log
the dimensionality of the module connection results: from 32 to 16, 16 events, deleting unreachable nodes, and removing temporary file nodes, and
to 8, 8 to 4, and finally from 4 to 1. During the training phase, we set finally a graph that applied all three optimization rules simultaneously.
the batch size to 128, optimize using the Adam algorithm, and fix the The number of nodes and edges in these five provenance graphs is
initial learning rate at 0.001. We set the number of iterations to 10,000 shown in Fig. 6.
and select the best model based on the lowest validation loss. Based on the comparison of experimental results, we draw the
 following conclusions: Firstly, without using any optimization rules,
6.2. Evaluation of provenance graph construction approach the provenance graphs we generated are extremely large in scale. The
 average number of nodes in the provenance graphs constructed from
6.2.1. The role of application layer logs three attack scenarios is about 8200, with an average of over 11000
 To assess the actual impact of integrating application layer logs edges. This reflects the redundancy and complexity in the original log
on the semantic completeness of provenance graphs, we simulated data, posing challenges for subsequent forensic and analytical tasks.
three typical APT attack scenarios based on attack reports published Secondly, after applying the three optimization rules to the baseline
by threat intelligence platforms. During these simulated scenarios, we provenance graph, we observed a significant reduction in the size of
meticulously recorded the log data produced by the operating sys- the provenance graphs. Specifically, the rule for merging repeated log
tem and applications. From these logs, we constructed two types of events resulted in an average reduction of 25.5% in the number of nodes
provenance graphs: a traditional provenance graph primarily based on and 23.8% in the number of edges; the deleting unreachable nodes rule
operating system logs, and a multi-layer semantic integrated prove- reduced the number of nodes by an average of 10.1% and the number
nance graph that combines both operating system and application of edges by 10.0%; the removing temporary file nodes rule led to a 15.6%
logs. Subsequently, we evaluated the performance of the classic attack reduction in nodes and a 21.4% reduction in edges. Finally, when all
investigation approach ATLAS (Alsaheel et al., 2021) in terms of pre- three rules were applied simultaneously to the baseline provenance
cision and recall on these two types of provenance graphs, with the graph, the number of nodes decreased by 48.9% and the number

 10
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

Table 5
Comparison of the precision and recall of the classic attack investigation approach ATLAS on the traditional provenance graph (using only operating system logs) and the provenance
graph in this paper (operating system logs + application logs).
 Attack scenario Precision Recall
 Operating system logs Operating system logs + application logs Operating system logs Operating system logs + application logs
 Attack Scenario 1 0.72 0.84 0.82 0.91
 Attack Scenario 2 0.73 0.84 0.81 0.92
 Attack Scenario 3 0.73 0.83 0.83 0.92

 Fig. 6. Comparison of provenance graph optimization effects of three rules.

of edges by 48.8%. This is because provenance graphs constructed Algorithm 3 Critical Information Retention Rate Calculation.
solely based on operating system logs are coarse-grained. Such logs
 Require: The initial provenance graph 𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒 , The optimized
treat applications as monolithic entities, unable to distinguish between
 provenance graph 𝐺𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 , A set of attack entities 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐 𝑘𝐸 𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠
internal entities of the applications. This causes interactions generated
 Ensure: 𝐶 𝐼 𝑅𝑅: Critical Information Retention Rate
by different threads to be collectively considered as interactions of the
 1: 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ← ∅
application, thereby creating numerous false dependencies which ulti-
 2: 𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ← ∅
mately lead to dependency explosion issues. Our experimental results
 3: for each entity 𝑒 in 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐 𝑘𝐸 𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠 do
show that the original provenance graphs contained a large amount
 4: 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ← 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ∪ {𝑒}
of noise and redundancy. The provenance graph optimization rules we
 5: end for
proposed effectively removed these unnecessary parts. While preserv-
 6: 𝐴𝑑 𝑑 𝐶 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑠 ← 𝐼 𝑑 𝑡𝐶 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑠(𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒 , 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐 𝑘𝐸 𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠)
ing the main structure of the provenance graph, it reduced the scale of
 7: 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ← 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ∪ 𝐴𝑑 𝑑 𝐶 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑠
nodes and edges in the initial graph, avoiding redundant computations
 8: 𝑆 𝑢𝑏𝑔 𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑠 ← 𝐼 𝑑 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑓 𝑦𝑆 𝑢𝑏𝑔 𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑠(𝐺𝑏𝑒𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑒 )
of information flow during the analysis. This optimized the consump-
 9: for each subgraph 𝑆 in 𝑆 𝑢𝑏𝑔 𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑠 do
tion of computational resources and the time costs throughout the
 10: 𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑖𝑛−𝑆 ← 𝐸 𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠(𝑆 , 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 )
analysis process. This approach significantly reduced the complexity of
 11: 𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ← 𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ∪ 𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑖𝑛−𝑆
the graph, focusing it more on essential information, thereby alleviating
 12: end for
the dependency explosion problem. Additionally, the streamlined graph
 13: 𝑁𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ← 𝐸 𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑠(𝐺𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 )
facilitates subsequent processing and analysis by security analysts.
 14: 𝑃𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ← 𝐸 𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑀 𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠(𝐺𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 , 𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 )
 Furthermore, to verify whether the optimization rules result in the
 15: 𝑁𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑁𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∩ 𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙
removal of critical information related to attack behaviors, we denote
 16: 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑃𝑎𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∩ 𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙
the provenance graph constructed from dataset D0 as 𝐺before . Initially, |𝑁𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 |
based on the known attack procedures and behavioral semantics, we 17: 𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒 ←
 |𝑁𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 |
label the critical paths and critical nodes for each attack subgraph |𝑃 |
 18: 𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒 ← 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑
 |𝑃𝑐 𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑎𝑙 |
in D0. For instance, in the case of the Dirty Cow privilege escalation (𝑁 𝑜𝑑 𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒+𝑃 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒)
 19: 𝐶 𝐼 𝑅𝑅 ← ∗ 100%
attack subgraph, we label the event chain from executing the Dirty Cow 2
 20: return 𝐶 𝐼 𝑅𝑅
exploit to successfully modifying the /etc/passwd file as the critical
path, and the associated process nodes and /etc/passwd file node
as critical nodes. After marking the critical information, we apply the
proposed three optimization rules to 𝐺before , resulting in the optimized 90.8%. This indicates that while the optimization rules reduced redunprovenance graph 𝐺after . We then compare the number of critical nodes dant information, they effectively preserved the nodes that are crucial
and critical paths still present in 𝐺after with their baseline values in
 for understanding the attack process. Prior to optimization, 24 critical
𝐺before , calculating the Critical Information Retention Rate (CIRR). The
 paths were marked, representing the core event chains in the attack
detailed process is outlined in Algorithm 3.
 subgraphs. After optimization, 22 critical paths were retained, yielding
 The experimental results are shown in Table 6. Before applying the
three optimization rules, we marked 163 critical nodes, which include a path retention rate of approximately 91.7%, which suggests that the
both attack entities and related nodes necessary for understanding optimization process did not significantly disrupt the coherence and
the attack process. After optimization, the number of critical nodes interpretability of the attack behavior chain. The Critical Information
decreased to 148, with a critical node retention rate of approximately Retention Rate (CIRR) was calculated to be approximately 91.25%.

 11
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Fig. 7. Comparison of additional space and time overhead caused by eight typical application logs.

Table 6 system logs recorded during this period, noting the time taken to
Comparison of the number of critical nodes and critical paths before and after applying
 generate this graph. We then merged the logs from these eight applithe three optimization rules.
 cations into the operating system logs and generated the provenance
 Dataset Number of critical nodes Number of critical paths
 graph again, recording the time taken. Finally, we compared the time
 𝐺before 163 24
 required to generate the provenance graphs before and after merging
 𝐺after 148 22
 the application logs. The results are shown in Fig. 7.
 From Fig. 7(a), it is evident that the overall extra space overhead
 from the logs of these eight typical applications was less than 9%,
 which is within an acceptable range and clearly demonstrates that
 integrating additional application layer logs has a minimal impact on
 the space overhead of the provenance graph. The primary contributors
 to space overhead were browser applications FireFox and Chromium,
 and web server applications Apache and Nginx, while the other four
 applications contributed significantly less to the extra space overhead,
 each under 1%. Fig. 7(b) shows that the extra time overhead for
 generating the provenance graph due to merging these application
 Fig. 8. Three attack subgraphs extracted from the threat report. logs was also minimal. Although Firefox and Chromium, due to their
 larger log volumes, contributed relatively higher time overhead, they
 still remained under 1.5%. Overall, given the benefits provided by
 integrating application logs, these minor space and time overheads are
 However, the three optimization rules did not retain all critical
 considered very worthwhile.
information. When the provenance graph contains multiple attack subgraphs, the critical paths and nodes of these subgraphs may overlap
 6.3. Evaluation of attack investigation approach
or interfere with one another. For instance, some log events may have
different levels of importance in different attack scenarios, leading
to the inadvertent removal of key nodes in specific attack subgraphs 6.3.1. Effectiveness of graph matching algorithm
during the optimization process. Additionally, these three optimization To validate the effectiveness of this graph matching algorithm in
rules were designed to reduce the complexity and storage overhead of identifying attack subgraphs, we collected threat reports for each of
the provenance graph. In most cases, these rules effectively eliminate the seven stages of the intrusion process, implemented the attacks as
redundant information, thereby improving the efficiency and usability described in the reports, and logged the activities during these periods.
of provenance analysis. Fig. 8 displays three attack subgraphs extracted from the threat reports. Subsequently, we transformed the collected logs into provenance
6.2.3. Additional space and time overhead graphs as described in Section 5.1 and performed subgraph matching
 To test the additional space and time overhead introduced by inte- within the provenance graphs. The matching results are shown in Fig. 9.
grating application layer logs into the provenance graph, we deployed To evaluate the effectiveness of our attack subgraph matching, we
and ran eight widely used applications on a Linux host. These include compared the mean square error (MSE) between the true similarity and
browser applications FireFox and Chromium, web server applications the model-calculated similarity of attack subgraphs extracted from the
Apache and Nginx, network proxy application Clash, command line threat reports against actual attack behavior graphs in the provenance
application Bash, remote connection application Openssh, and text graphs. The experimental results, as shown in Table 7, demonstrate that
editor Vim. Over a 24-hour experimental period, we simulated normal all attack subgraphs in datasets D1 and D2 have an MSE of less than
user behaviors, performed a variety of operations, and captured the 1.4h, proving the effectiveness of our graph matching algorithm.
resulting operating system logs (Linux Audit) as well as logs from Furthermore, we compared our attack subgraph matching algovarious applications. rithm with several common graph matching algorithms, including: (1)
 Regarding extra space overhead, we assessed this by comparing the Beam (Neuhaus et al., 2006), a sub-exponential time GED algorithm
size of logs generated by these eight applications during the period based on the A* algorithm. (2) SimpleMean, which calculates graph
to the size of logs generated by the operating system. For extra time embeddings by taking a simple average of all node embeddings in
overhead, we first created a provenance graph using only the operating the graph. (3) HierarchicalMean (Defferrard et al., 2016), a graph

 12
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

 Fig. 9. Attack subgraph matching results of dataset D1.

Table 7 Table 8
The mean square error between the calculated similarity and the true similarity. Performance comparison of our approach with other graph matching algorithms.
 Dataset Attack MSE (10−2 ) Approach AvgMSE (10−3 ) AvgTime (seconds)
 Port Scanning 1.39 Beam 10.11 360
 SQL Injection 1.40 SimpleMean 3.12 48
 Adding Scheduled Tasks 1.32 HierarchicalMean 1.62 91
 DirtyCOW Privilege Escalation 1.36 AttDegree 3.05 69
 Dataset D1
 Asset Collection 1.26 AttGlobalContext 3.13 72
 SSH Remote Connection 1.21 Our Approach 1.53 67
 Establish Reverse Proxy 1.29
 Modify Web Page Content 1.17
 Table 9
 Subdomain Collection 1.19
 Comparison between our approach and other attack investigation approaches.
 Phishing Emails 1.27
 Modify Registry 1.21 Dataset Approach Precision Recall F1-Score Time costs (seconds)
 Dataset D2 SUID Exploitation 1.36 ATLAS 0.91 0.91 0.91 120
 EternalBlue 1.26 AIRTAG 0.92 0.91 0.92 40
 Account Enumeration 1.34 Dataset D1
 OmegaLog 0.86 0.87 0.86 165
 Sensitive File Leakage 1.29 Our approach 0.91 0.90 0.91 45
 ATLAS 0.92 0.92 0.92 120
 AIRTAG 0.92 0.92 0.92 40
 Dataset D2
 OmegaLog 0.86 0.88 0.87 180
coarsening convolutional neural network model that applies global Our approach 0.90 0.91 0.91 45
average pooling to aggregate node features into a hierarchical graph
representation. (4) AttDegree, which uses the natural logarithm of node
degrees as attention weights. (5) AttGlobalContext, which computes
 6.3.2. Analysis of multi-stage attack investigation approach
attention weights using the global graph context. We evaluated these
 We conducted a comparative analysis with the existing common
algorithms on their average MSE and average matching time for attack
 attack investigation approach ATLAS (Alsaheel et al., 2021), AIRTAG
subgraph matching. The results are shown in Table 8.
 (Ding et al., 2023), and OmegaLog (Hassan et al., 2020) on datasets D1
 Through experimental comparative analysis, we observed that the
 and D2, analyzing the model’s precision, recall, F1 score, and time conheuristic algorithm Beam lags behind other algorithms in graph matchsumed, to evaluate whether the model achieves the anticipated funcing tasks. Specifically, Beam’s mean squared error (MSE) is signifitional effects. For a uniform comparison standard, we deconstructed
cantly higher than that of neural network-based approaches, indicating
 the attack subgraphs identified during the attack investigation phase
its inadequacy in graph matching accuracy. Moreover, Beam’s graph
 and extracted nodes within them, considering the adjacent nodes of
matching time also far exceeds other approaches, which may be due these subgraphs as the identified attack entities and nodes outside the
to its inefficiency in handling large-scale or complex graph structures subgraphs as normal entities. The experimental results are shown in
using the A* search approach. In contrast, our proposed graph neural Table 9. Through comparative analysis of experimental results, our
network-based pattern matching algorithm exhibits superior perfor- approach demonstrated outstanding performance. We detailed the analmance. Specifically, our algorithm not only performs best in terms of ysis of three core performance metrics: precision, recall, and F1 score,
MSE but also is highly competitive in computation time, second only to which in experiments reached 90.5%, 90.5%, and 91.0%, respectively.
the SimpleMean approach. Our neural network model, by learning the Compared to other mainstream attack investigation approaches such
composite features of nodes and their neighborhoods and dynamically as ATLAS, AIRTAG, and OmegaLog, our approach showed only a minor
weighting the importance of nodes through attention mechanisms, can decrease of 1.1%, 1.1%, and 0.5% against ATLAS, and 1.6%, 1.1%, and
more accurately capture the underlying connections between nodes in 1.1% against AIRTAG, but outperformed OmegaLog by 5.0%, 3.3%, and
graphs with complex interaction patterns, thereby significantly enhanc- 4.9%, respectively. The results indicate that our approach achieved the
ing the accuracy of graph matching. In contrast, although SimpleMean expected effectiveness of attack investigation.
performs well in terms of graph matching time, its lack of dynamic Additionally, from the perspective of time efficiency, our approach
weight adjustment in processing node features results in suboptimal performed exceptionally well in the time required for attack investigagraph matching outcomes, with its MSE being 51.0% higher than our tion, saving 62.5% compared to ATLAS and 73.9% compared to Omegaapproach. Log. Although our approach took 11.1% more time than AIRTAG,

 13
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

considering AIRTAG’s reliance on the BERT model for deep semantic algorithm combined with previously defined seven stages of the inlearning, which requires significant hardware resources and long pre- trusion process to achieve rapid attack investigation. Our evaluation
training times, our approach offers greater time and cost efficiency with real attacks demonstrates that this approach can accurately and
in practical applications. This is because we have found that network swiftly reconstruct the intrusion process and assist security personnel
attacks are often implemented in stages and are closely connected in analyzing its potential causal relationships.
between stages, yet existing attack investigation approaches largely
overlook this, leading to a considerable amount of time spent searching CRediT authorship contribution statement
for non-existent attack behaviors. To address this problem, we predivide network attacks into several specific attack stages, focusing Yubo Song: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Inon specific stage attack subgraphs to narrow the provenance scope, vestigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Kanghui Wang: Writing
thereby aiding security analysts in conducting rapid attack investiga- – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology,
tions. Thus, we can conclude that our attack investigation approach, Investigation. Xin Sun: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Software,
at the cost of slight precision and recall rates, significantly saves time Investigation, Funding acquisition. Zhongyuan Qin: Writing – review
during the provenance phase. & editing, Validation, Project administration. Hua Dai: Project administration, Funding acquisition. Weiwei Chen: Writing – review & editing,
7. Discussion & limitation Investigation. Bang Lv: Project administration, Funding acquisition.
 Jiaqi Chen: Writing – review & editing, Investigation.
 We have introduced a provenance graph construction approach
 Declaration of competing interest
based on semantic fusion, which utilizes the characteristics of application layer logs. By extracting specific log event fields, application
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finanlayer logs and operating system logs are represented in a common
 cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
log event format. Entities and their causal relationships are extracted
 influence the work reported in this paper.
from these common log events to form an initial provenance graph.
Through merging repeated log events, deleting unreachable nodes,
 Acknowledgment
and removing temporary file nodes, an optimized provenance graph
is obtained. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared to tra-
 This work is supported by State Grid Zhejiang Electric Power Co.,
ditional provenance graphs, the downstream forensic tasks, such as
 Ltd. research project No. 5211DS240002.
attack investigation, achieve higher precision and recall on the provenance graph constructed in this study. Additionally, the analysis of
 Data availability
the attack investigation approach proposed in this paper shows that it
can accurately and rapidly replicate attack processes, assisting security
 Data will be made available on request.
personnel in quickly analyzing the causal relationships between attack
behaviors within an attack sequence. Although our logs are collected
on the Linux platform, this approach can be easily extended to other References
platforms like Windows, due to its reliance on log semantic analysis to
construct provenance graphs with specific causal relationships. Alsaheel, A., Nan, Y., Ma, S., Yu, L., Walkup, G., Celik, Z.B., Zhang, X., Xu, D.,
 2021. ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for attack investigation. In: 30th
 This paper utilizes both operating system and application logs to
 USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX Security 21, pp. 3005–3022.
build provenance graphs, reflecting user behavior semantics at the Bai, Y., Ding, H., Bian, S., Chen, T., Sun, Y., Wang, W., 2019. SimGNN: A neural
operating system and application levels. It is worth noting that our network approach to fast graph similarity computation. In: Proceedings of the
current research approach is primarily based on real and complete log Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. pp.
data for provenance analysis. However, as Advanced Persistent Threats 384–392.
 Bates, A., Tian, D.J., Butler, K.R., Moyer, T., 2015. Trustworthy whole-system prove-
(APTs) become increasingly sophisticated, APT attacks may generate nance for the linux kernel. In: 24th USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX Security
false logs or even tamper with existing logs. Consequently, our ap- 15, pp. 319–334.
proach may face certain limitations when APTs intentionally fabricate Chen, X., Dathathri, R., Gill, G., Pingali, K., 2020. Pangolin: An efficient and flexible
or corrupt logs to mislead attack investigations. In future research, we graph mining system on cpu and gpu. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13 (8), 1190–1205.
 Cheng, Z., Lv, Q., Liang, J., Wang, Y., Sun, D., Pasquier, T., Han, X., 2024. KAIROS:
will explore potential countermeasures to address APTs’ anti-forensic
 Practical intrusion detection and investigation using whole-system provenance. In:
behaviors. In our multi-stage attack investigation approach, we divide 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. SP, IEEE, pp. 3533–3551.
the attack process into seven fixed stages using expert knowledge, and Defferrard, M., Bresson, X., Vandergheynst, P., 2016. Convolutional neural networks
extract attack subgraphs from existing threat reports. These subgraphs on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 29,
 3844–3852.
are used as query standards to search for attacks within the provenance
 Ding, H., Zhai, J., Nan, Y., Ma, S., 2023. AIRTAG: Towards Automated Attack
graph. Although this approach significantly reduces the provenance Investigation by Unsupervised Learning with Log Texts. In: 32nd USENIX Security
analysis time, the accuracy of the results is largely dependent on the Symposium. USENIX Security 23, pp. 373–390.
selection of expert knowledge, and it is also challenging to detect Gehani, A., Tariq, D., 2012. SPADE: Support for provenance auditing in distributed environments. In: ACM/IFIP/USENIX International Conference on Distributed Systems
unknown or hybrid attacks. Therefore, future work should focus on
 Platforms and Open Distributed Processing. Springer, pp. 101–120.
reducing the reliance on expert knowledge while improving the model’s Han, M., Kim, H., Gu, G., Park, K., Han, W.-S., 2019. Efficient subgraph matching:
generalization ability to enhance detection capabilities for unknown Harmonizing dynamic programming, adaptive matching order, and failing set
and hybrid attack patterns. together. In: Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management
 of Data. pp. 1429–1446.
 Han, X., Pasquier, T., Bates, A., Mickens, J., Seltzer, M., 2020. Unicorn: Runtime
8. Conclusion provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats. arXiv Preprint arXiv:
 2001.01525.
 We have proposed an attack investigation approach based on se- Han, X., Yu, X., Pasquier, T., Li, D., Rhee, J., Mickens, J., Seltzer, M., Chen, H.,
 2021. {SIGL}: Securing software installations through deep graph learning. In: 30th
mantic analysis of multi-source logs. Specifically, this approach inte-
 USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX Security 21, pp. 2345–2362.
grates operating system logs with application logs to construct an initial Hassan, W.U., Noureddine, M.A., Datta, P., Bates, A., 2020. OmegaLog: High-fidelity
provenance graph. The initial graph is then further optimized to reduce attack investigation via transparent multi-layer log analysis. In: Network and
complexity. Finally, the approach employs a graph pattern matching Distributed System Security Symposium.

 14
Y. Song et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104303

Husari, G., Al-Shaer, E., Ahmed, M., Chu, B., Niu, X., 2017. Ttpdrill: Automatic and Pasquier, T., Han, X., Moyer, T., Bates, A., Hermant, O., Eyers, D., Bacon, J.,
 accurate extraction of threat actions from unstructured text of cti sources. In: Seltzer, M., 2018. Runtime analysis of whole-system provenance. In: Proceedings
 Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. pp. of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
 103–115. pp. 1601–1616.
Inam, M.A., Chen, Y., Goyal, A., Liu, J., Mink, J., Michael, N., Gaur, S., Bates, A., Pohly, D.J., McLaughlin, S., McDaniel, P., Butler, K., 2012. Hi-fi: collecting high-fidelity
 Hassan, W.U., 2023. Sok: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing the whole-system provenance. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Computer Security
 provenance of system intrusions. In: 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. Applications Conference. pp. 259–268.
 SP, IEEE, pp. 2620–2638. Qaiser, S., Ali, R., 2018. Text mining: use of TF-IDF to examine the relevance of words
Ji, Y., Lee, S., Lee, W., 2016. Recprov: Towards provenance-aware user space record to documents. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 181 (1), 25–29.
 and replay. In: Provenance and Annotation of Data and Processes: 6th International Rehman, M.U., Ahmadi, H., Hassan, W.U., 2024. FLASH: A comprehensive approach
 Provenance and Annotation Workshop, IPAW 2016, McLean, VA, USA, June 7-8, to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation learning. In: 2024 IEEE
 2016, Proceedings 6. Springer, pp. 3–15. Symposium on Security and Privacy. SP, IEEE Computer Society, 139–139.
Jiang, G., Mohandas, R., Leathery, J., Berry, A., Galang, L., 2017. CVE-2017-0199. Rong, X., 2014. Word2vec parameter learning explained. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1411.
 https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/cve-2017-0199-hta-handler. (Accessed 2738, URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.2738.
 10 October 2024). Sinha, J., Manollas, M., 2020. Efficient deep CNN-bilstm model for network intrusion
Kapoor, M., Melton, J., Ridenhour, M., Krishnan, S., Moyer, T., 2021. PROV-GEM: detection. In: Proceedings of the 2020 3rd International Conference on Artificial
 Automated provenance analysis framework using graph embeddings. In: 2021 20th Intelligence and Pattern Recognition. pp. 223–231.
 IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications. ICMLA, IEEE, Socher, R., Chen, D., Manning, C.D., Ng, A., 2013. Reasoning with neural tensor
 pp. 1720–1727. networks for knowledge base completion. In: Advances in Neural Information
Le, Q., Mikolov, T., 2014. Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In: Processing Systems, vol. 26.
 International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 1188–1196. Tang, Y., Li, D., Li, Z., Zhang, M., Jee, K., Xiao, X., Wu, Z., Rhee, J., Xu, F., Li, Q.,
Le, V.H., Zhang, H., 2023. Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot learning. In: 2023 2018. Nodemerge: Template based efficient data reduction for big-data causality
 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE, IEEE, pp. analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 2438–2449.
 Communications Security. pp. 1324–1337.
Lee, K.H., Zhang, X., Xu, D., 2013. High accuracy attack provenance via binary-based
 Trellix Research Team, 2023. CVE-2023-38831: Navigating the Threat Landscape of
 execution partition. In: NDSS, vol. 16.
 the Latest Security Vulnerability. https://www.trellix.com/blogs/research/cve-
Li, L., Chen, W., 2024. ConGraph: Advanced persistent threat detection method based
 2023-38831-navigating-the-threat-landscape-of-the-latest-security-vulnerability/.
 on provenance graph combined with process context in cyber-physical system
 environment. Electronics 13 (5), 945. (Accessed 10 October 2024).
Liu, H., Wang, T., Li, Y., Lang, C., Jin, Y., Ling, H., 2023. Joint graph learning and Trend Micro Research Team, 2016. Exploit Kits 2015: Flash Bugs, Malvermatching for semantic feature correspondence. Pattern Recognit. 134, 109059. tising Dominate. https://www.trendmicro.com/en_us/research/16/c/exploit-kits-
Ma, S., Zhai, J., Kwon, Y., Lee, K.H., Zhang, X., Ciocarlie, G., Gehani, A., Yeg- 2015-flash-bugs-compromised-sites-malvertising-dominate.html. (Accessed 10 Ocneswaran, V., Xu, D., Jha, S., 2018. {K er nel − Suppor t ed} {Cost − Ef f ect ive} audit tober 2024).
 logging for causality tracking. In: 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference. Wang, S., Chen, Z., Yu, X., Li, D., Ni, J., Tang, L.-A., Gui, J., Li, Z., Chen, H., Yu, P.S.,
 USENIX ATC 18, pp. 241–254. 2019. Heterogeneous graph matching networks. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1910.08074.
Ma, S., Zhai, J., Wang, F., Lee, K.H., Zhang, X., Xu, D., 2017. MPI: Multiple perspective Wang, Q., Hassan, W.U., Li, D., Jee, K., Yu, X., Zou, K., Rhee, J., Chen, Z., Cheng, W.,
 attack investigation with semantic aware execution partitioning. In: 26th USENIX Gunter, C.A., et al., 2020. You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via data
 Security Symposium. USENIX Security 17, pp. 1111–1128. provenance analysis. In: NDSS.
Mawhirter, D., Reinehr, S., Han, W., Fields, N., Claver, M., Holmes, C., McClurg, J., Wei, R., Cai, L., Zhao, L., Yu, A., Meng, D., 2021. Deephunter: A graph neural
 Liu, T., Wu, B., 2021. Dryadic: Flexible and fast graph pattern matching at scale. network based approach for robust cyber threat hunting. In: Security and Privacy in
 In: 2021 30th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Communication Networks: 17th EAI International Conference, SecureComm 2021,
 Techniques. PACT, IEEE, pp. 289–303.
 Virtual Event, September 6–9, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 17. Springer, pp. 3–24.
Mawhirter, D., Wu, B., 2019. Automine: harmonizing high-level abstraction and high
 Xu, Z., Wu, Z., Li, Z., Jee, K., Rhee, J., Xiao, X., Xu, F., Wang, H., Jiang, G., 2016. High
 performance for graph mining. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on
 fidelity data reduction for big data security dependency analyses. In: Proceedings
 Operating Systems Principles. pp. 509–523.
 of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
Narayanan, A., Chandramohan, M., Venkatesan, R., Chen, L., Liu, Y., Jaiswal, S.,
 2017. Graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs. arXiv Preprint pp. 504–516.
 arXiv:1707.05005. Yang, F., Xu, J., Xiong, C., Li, Z., Zhang, K., 2023. {PROGRAPHER}: An anomaly
National Vulnerability Database (NVD), 2016. CVE-2016-5195. https://nvd.nist.gov/ detection system based on provenance graph embedding. In: 32nd USENIX Security
 vuln/detail/CVE-2016-5195. (Accessed 10 October 2024). Symposium. USENIX Security 23, pp. 4355–4372.
National Vulnerability Database (NVD), 2021. CVE-2021-3156. https://nvd.nist.gov/ Ying, J., Zhu, T., Cheng, W., Yuan, Q., Ma, M., Xiong, C., Chen, T., Lv, M., Chen, Y.,
 vuln/detail/CVE-2021-3156. (Accessed 10 October 2024). 2024. SPARSE: Semantic tracking and path analysis for attack investigation in
Navarro, J., Deruyver, A., Parrend, P., 2018. A systematic survey on multi-step attack real-time. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2405.02629.
 detection. Comput. Secur. 76, 214–249. Yue, H., Li, T., Wu, D., Zhang, R., Yang, Z., 2024. Detecting APT attacks using an
Neuhaus, M., Riesen, K., Bunke, H., 2006. Fast suboptimal algorithms for the com- attack intent-driven and sequence-based learning approach. Comput. Secur. 140,
 putation of graph edit distance. In: Structural, Syntactic, and Statistical Pattern 103748.
 Recognition: Joint IAPR International Workshops, SSPR 2006 and SPR 2006, Hong Zengy, J., Wang, X., Liu, J., Chen, Y., Liang, Z., Chua, T.-S., Chua, Z.L., 2022.
 Kong, China, August 17-19, 2006. Proceedings. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Shadewatcher: Recommendation-guided cyber threat analysis using system audit
 Science, vol. 4109, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 163–172. records. In: 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. SP, IEEE, pp. 489–506.

 15