4508 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 A Resource-Efficient Federated Learning
 Framework for Intrusion Detection
 in IoMT Networks
 Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam , Amitabha Chakrabarty , Md. Golam Rabiul Alam , Member, IEEE,
 and Siti Sarah Binti Maidin

 Abstract—The emergence of medical sensors in Smart home healthcare goods. Because of the sensitivity of the data
Healthcare Systems (SHS) has enabled the development of being communicated, these devices, which account for a 100
sophisticated Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) networks which billion market, require secure connection. [1], [2], [3]. With
is crucial for tracking vital physiological parameters in consumer electronics. These networks are progressively incorporated the increasing use of Wi-Fi, 5G, and NB-IoT in consumer
into consumer devices allowing users to monitor their health electronics for data transmission, stronger security measures
parameters effortlessly. Nonetheless, they encounter considerable are essential to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availsecurity and privacy issues stemming from weaknesses in data ability [4], [5]. Data storage on cloud gateways within these
transfer. Despite the potential of Intrusion Detection Systems consumer-driven healthcare ecosystems further emphasizes
(IDS), there is a critical need for a real-time, highly precise
attack detection system optimized for the edge-centric Internet the need for robust protection mechanisms [6]. The rapid
of Medical Things (IoMT) environment in consumer sensor expansion of IoMT in consumer electronics, combined with
devices. Therefore, we introduce the federated kolmogorov- resource constraints and data diversity, makes it a prime target
arnold network (FedIoMT), an advanced federated learning for attacks, compromising the security of sensitive medical
framework that utilizes meta-learning along with an advanced information and threatening patient safety [7], [8], [9], [10],
clustering method to achieve robust model aggregation. Our
FedIoMT acts as both an adaptive personalized updating mech- [11], [12].
anism and a shared global classifier. In addition, we propose a Recent research indicate that 53% of Internet of Medical
novel intrusion detection model that uses the kolmogorov-arnold Things (IoMT) devices integrated into consumer electronics
convolutional network (KANConvNet) as its local classifier, exhibit substantial susceptibility to hackers, hence prewhich improves scalability and interpretability in the FL frame- senting considerable threats to interconnected healthcare
work updates. Our FedIoMT model demonstrates superior
performance compared to other existing FL-based methods, systems [9], [13]. An examination of 40 IoMT-enabled
achieving validation accuracies of 99.38%, 99.23%, 99.26%, and consumer products identified 18 unique attack vectors, high-
99.2% across four benchmark IoMT datasets under the IID set- lighting the diverse risks aimed at healthcare technology
ting. FedIoMT utilizes significantly more floating point operations in consumer electronics [14]. Ransomware assaults have
per second (FLOP) counts up to 2.8 times more than other models
and also excels in memory efficiency, consuming up to 93% less
 increased by more than 50%, resulting in significant operapeak memory across devices compared to the alternatives. We tional disruptions in consumer-integrated healthcare devices
thoroughly evaluated FedIoMT on embedded consumer devices, and jeopardizing patient safety [15]. Prevalent cyber threats,
demonstrating its resource-efficient characteristics. such as DoS, DDoS, MitM, and Ransomware, threaten the
 Index Terms—Internet of Medical Things, intrusion detection, confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical medifederated learning, Kolmogorov–Arnold networks. FedIoMT. cal consumer products like pacemakers, insulin pumps, and
 smart wearables. These vulnerabilities have a substantial
 influence on healthcare delivery in consumer electronics envi-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ronments [16], [17], [18], [19]. Figure 1 depicts prevalent
 HE Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) connects smart threats to IoMT devices, including Denial of Service (DoS),
T medical devices such as blood pressure monitors and
glucose meters to consumer electronics found in wearables and
 Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Man in the Middle
 (MitM), and Ransomware.
 To improve network security in consumer electronics, par-
 Received 13 October 2024; revised 26 December 2024 and 2 February ticularly IoMT devices, intrusion detection systems (IDS),
2025; accepted 8 February 2025. Date of publication 21 February 2025;
date of current version 14 August 2025. (Corresponding author: alongside machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
Amitabha Chakrabarty.) techniques, are widely employed. IDS leverages heuristic
 Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam, Amitabha Chakrabarty, and Md. Golam Rabiul Alam methods and fuzzy logic to thwart attackers and safeare with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, BRAC
University, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh (e-mail: fahim.islam@bracu.ac.bd; guard IoMT networks [19]. Sajid et al. [20] proposed a
amitabha@bracu.ac.bd; rabiul.alam@bracu.ac.bd). hybrid model combining XGBoost and CNN for feature
 Siti Sarah Binti Maidin is with the Faculty of Data Science and Information extraction, with LSTM optimized for security. Turukmane
Technology, INTI International University, Nilai 71800, Malaysia (e-mail:
sitisarah.maidin@newinti.edu.my). and Devendiran [21] introduced M-MultiSVM with Mud
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3544885 Ring optimization for hyperparameter tuning in IoMT-based
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4509

Fig. 1. Examples of security threats (a) DoS (b) DDoS (c) MitM
(d) Ransomware to IoMT.

security systems. Talukder et al. [22] integrated ML with
 Fig. 2. On the left (a) the activations as they progress through the network. On
SMOTE-TomekLink for more effective intrusion detection. the right (b) the activation function is represented using a B-spline, enabling
Goswami et al. [23] developed a Cu-BLSTM-based IDS to the adjustment between coarse-grained and fine-grained grids.
detect various attacks in IoMT. Chen et al. [24] proposed
a hybrid feature selection model combining chi-square and
information gain with ML/DL algorithms for enhanced protec- model and facilitates individualized sharing with individtion. Despite these advancements, IoMT devices still encounter ual devices. We introduce KANConvNet, derived from the
challenges like limited processing power, diverse environ- Kolmogorov–Arnold Network (KAN), which customizes actiments, and inadequate labeled data [24]. vation functions to accommodate the distinct data of each
 From a data privacy perspective, sharing network data IoMT device, as depicted in Figure 2. Integrating KAN layers
containing sensitive patient information is challenging for into a CNN framework, KANConvNet effectively captures
data owners, such as hospitals [25]. This makes develop- intricate data patterns, enhancing efficiency and robustness
ing effective IDS schemes difficult. Federated learning (FL), within the FedIoMT architecture. Therefore our system model
proposed by Google in 2016, addresses this by enabling ML is crucial for consumer electronics and healthcare. Therefore
on distributed data without sharing sensitive information [26]. the main contributions are listed as follows:
FL enhances IoMT security by improving threat detection • To the best of our knowledge, we introduce the
and resilience against cyber-attacks through decentralized KANConvNet model first time within the FedIoMT
model training, preserving privacy while maintaining high framework, which uses the Kolmogorov-Arnold theoaccuracy [27]. rem and tailored activation functions in a convolutional
 In federated learning, FedAvg and FedProx have different structure to improve scalability, robustness and feature
implications for model performance at the local and global interaction in intrusion detection.
levels [28], [29]. FedAvg works well in IID settings but • Our FedIoMT model incorporates a meta-learning phase
struggles with non-IID data, as it averages local model updates to enhance security and counter adversarial clients using
without accounting for data heterogeneity, leading to slower the TOPSIS method. This approach leverages clustered
convergence and potential bias in the global model. In contrast, local models and ensures KRUM’s robust aggregation of
FedProx introduces a regularization term that stabilizes local similar models tailored to various consumer electronics
updates, improving convergence and robustness in non-IID devices. Additionally, we evaluate the performance using
environments by preventing local models from deviating too the Multi-Krum aggregation strategy for comparative
far from the global model. This makes FedProx more effective analysis, achieving improved computational efficiency
in heterogeneous data scenarios, resulting in more accurate and enhanced robustness.
and stable global model performances [30]. • We perform a comprehensive design space search with
 However, these FL architectures are vulnerable to security a genetic algorithm (GA) to optimize hyperparameters
threats, especially with heterogeneous data, as adversarial and improve model performance though fine tuning the
clients can degrade global model performance through attacks process.
like A Little Is Enough (ALIE) attack and Inner Product • FedIoMT achieves high efficiency, reducing peak memory
Manipulation (IPM) [27], [31], [32]. While robust aggrega- usage by 73.3% to 93.8% while maintaining a high
tion methods exist, they suffer against sophisticated attacks, accuracy of 99.37%, making it suitable for consumer
particularly in Non-IID consumer devices. Defense mea- devices with limited memory.
sures often discover threats too late and some, like FLTrust, Following is a synopsis of the remainder of this paper.
undermine privacy by demanding server access to sensitive In Section II, we introduce our connected work with the
data [31], [34], [35]. previous studies comparing our proposed technique in this
 The study presents FedIoMT, a Federated Learning (FL) domain. In Section III, we address the approach we discuss
methodology tailored for IoMT devices in consumer electron- our data collection, preprocessing methods. In Section IV, we
ics, tackling issues including data heterogeneity and model describe our proposed method defining system initaization In
modification via multi-center clusters and similarity analy- Section V, we mainly focus our optimization process using
sis. FedIoMT utilizes meta-learning to enhance the global selected hyperparameter design exploration through genetic
4510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

algorithm. In Section VI, we define our experiment setup and problems, our FL system incorporates a multi-center server
result analysis defining state of the art with our proposed that facilitates customizable model sharing. Additionally, we
model. In Section VII. we finally conclude our work defining utilize the KANConvNet model to enhance generalization and
contributions and limitations of our work. reliability on consumer driven devices.
 The principal obstacles in the distributed systems in ensur-
 II. R ELATED W ORK ing accurate weight updates in decentralized models are
 Given the limited research on intrusion detection in IoMT data heterogeneity. Besides, it often face problems with
within consumer electronics, this section mainly provides a restricted computational resource. The FedIoMT architecture
concise overview of relevant studies focused on intrusion tackles these difficulties through multiple techniques. It utilizes
detection, emphasizing Federated Learning (FL)-based meth- TOPSIS to mitigate the influence of low-scoring clients during
ods and Personalized Federated Learning (PFL). meta-learning, ensuring that contributions from less dependable clients do not compromise the integrity of the global
A. Intrusion Detection Schemes model. Besides, our Krum-based aggregation guarantees reliable model updates by identifying the most trustworthy client
 Intrusion detection is crucial for network security, especially models and excluding those with poor performance or anomain smart healthcare and IoMT. Shambharkar and Sharma [36] lous data. These solutions collectively enhance the efficiency,
developed a deep learning model combining CNN and robustness, and accuracy of decentralized weight updates,
LSTM with attention mechanisms to detect intrusions by hence improving the overall performance of FedIoMT.
processing 100-dimensional feature vectors. Bouke et al. [37]
improved IoMT intrusion detection using the WUSTL EHMS III. DATA C OLLECTION AND P REPROCESSING
2020 dataset, employing SMOTE-ENN for data balancing
and a sequential deep learning model for high accuracy. This section discusses the dataset, preprocessing steps, data
Faruqui et al. [38] proposed a hybrid CNN-LSTM model using splitting, normalization, and feature selection. The WUSTL-
CIC-IDS2017 and Malimg datasets for feature extraction and EHMS-2020 dataset [45] was used, containing 16,318 samples
data normalization. Shambharkar and Sharma [36] introduced with 87.5% normal and 12.5% attack data. Additional datasets,
LinSVM, ConvSVM, and CatEmb models for network- including ECU-IoHT [46], BlueTrack [47], and RT-IoT [48],
based attack detection, utilizing feature scaling and SMOTE. were employed for benchmarking. The data was split into 60%
Anjelin and Kumar [39] optimized intrusion detection with for training, 20% for local testing, and 20% for global testing,
an Enhanced Elephant Herding Optimization (EHO) algorithm with the global test data containing unknown attack types.
and CNN, achieving high accuracy for IoMT environments. To enhance model convergence and reduce training time,
 min-max normalization was applied. Due to class imbalance,
B. Federated Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods SMOTE-ENN [50] was utilized for data balancing, generating
 synthetic samples to improve model validation and training
 FL has been widely utilized across several domains to without losing data through undersampling. Feature selection
address the challenges of data isolation and privacy pro- was based on information gain [49], with features reducing
tection in consumer eletronics. When applied to intrusion uncertainty in the target variable being retained, and a threshdetection in practical circumstances, FL has demonstrated old value of 0.05 was used.
promising results. Javeed et al. [40] proposed a hybrid FL
model combining CNN and BiLSTM for intrusion detection, IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
leveraging spatial and temporal features while maintaining
data privacy through a zero-trust approach. Olanrewaju-George In this section, we explain our FL system, designed specifand Pranggono [41] developed an FL-based IDS for IoT, ically for IoMT to enable safe and fast learning across
utilizing both unsupervised and supervised deep learning distributed consumer devices. Our FedIoMT model trains
models, with the FL AutoEncoder outperforming non-FL locally using KANConvNet within convolutional layers for
models. Alazab et al. [42] introduced a privacy-preserving better local optimization. Furthermore, in the case of dimen-
IDS using FL with the FedAvg method, enabling collaborative sionality reduction and ranking, we utilize the TOPSIS method
model training without data sharing. Rashid et al. [43] used a for ranking and clustering for similarity analysis along with
hybrid FL model with Stacked CNN and BiLSTM to detect outlier reduction of the updated gradients for the aggregation.
complex threats in WSNs, enhancing privacy. Sarhan et al. [44] Afterward, we implement a robust aggregation approach based
proposed a FL-based CTI sharing scheme for NIDS, allow- on using Krum to protect against adversarial threats. The
ing collaborative model training across organizations without proposed workflow is depicted in Figure 4. Finally, we show
exposing sensitive data. the KANConvNet intrusion detection model as local model for
 However all existing studies mostly employ the FedAvg different consumer sensor based devices for IoMT.
algorithm to improve intrusion detection models, but frequently neglect the difficulties posed by non-IID intrusion A. System Initialization
data in real-world situations. Moreover, these FL frameworks The FL process starts with setting up the server and IoMT
are susceptible to model poisoning assaults that undermine devices as clients, involving model initialization, communicaperformance. Existing models have challenges when using a tion setup, and security protocols to ensure data privacy and
method that calculates global averages. In order to tackle these integrity.
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4511

Fig. 3. Construction Phases of the IDS based on our Proposed FedIoMT Model Architecture.

Fig. 4. Our Proposed FedIoMT Model Workflow.

 1) Model Initialization: The central server initializes the C. Local Optimization
 (0)
global model MG with pre-trained weights, which is dis- Each IoMT device Di optimizes the global model locally
tributed to all IoMT devices Di for i = 1, 2, . . . , N: (t)
 by minimizing its objective function Li (Mi ), defined as:
 (0)    
 MG → Di , ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N}, (1) (t) 1  (t)
 Li M i =  f (x; Mi ), y , (4)
 2) Communication Setup: A secure communication proto- |Di |
 (x,y) ∈Di
col Secure_Channel(Server, Di ) is established for each IoMT
device Di , ensuring protected exchange of model updates and where (·, ·) is the loss function, f (x; M(t) i ) is the model’s
preventing unauthorized access: prediction for input x, and |Di | is the size of the local dataset.
 1) Gradient Descent-Based Optimization: The local
 Secure_Channel(Server, Di ), ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N}, (2) optimization phase fine-tunes the global model to each IoMT
 device’s specific data using gradient descent:
B. Global Model Update  
 (t) (t−1) (t−1)
 Local model updates are aggregated into multi-center clus- Mi ← Mi − η∇Li Mi , (5)
ters using a resilient mechanism to form the new global model (t−1)
 (t) where η is the learning rate and ∇Li (Mi ) is the gradient
MG :
   of the local loss.
 (t) (t) 2) Personalization and Regularization: To address data
 MG = Aggregate {Mi }N i=1 , (3)
 variability among IoMT devices, each device applies L2 reg-
 This process accounts for potential adversarial updates ularization to avoid overfitting and leverage prior knowledge.
and is robust against attacks. The updated global model is The regularized objective function is:
then distributed to all IoMT devices, ensuring synchronous      
 reg (t) (t) (t)
communication and coordinated learning across the network. Li Mi = Li Mi + λ Mi , (6)
4512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

where λ is the regularization parameter and (·) represents
the regularization term.

D. Local to Global Model Transmission
 After local optimization, each IoMT device sends its
 (t)
updated model Mi to the multi-center servers.
 The personalized update algorithm in our FL framework
consists of two main phases: Dimensionality Reduction using
TOPSIS and Robust Aggregation using Krum. These phases
ensure tailored updates for each device while maintaining
resilience against adversarial attacks.
 1) Dimensionality Reduction Using TOPSIS: We utilize the
TOPSIS approach [55] that is mainly employed by the central
server to minimize the dimensionality of the model updates
received from the IoMT devices. This stage is critical for
addressing the high dimensionality and variety of data across
different devices. The procedure involves the following steps:
 a) Normalization: The server first normalizes the model
 (t)
updates Mi from each IoMT device Di . The normalization Fig. 5. TOPSIS-based process for IoMT device model update selection. The
ensures that the models are comparable across different scales. process begins with normalizing device-provided accuracy values, followed
Mathematically, the normalized value m(t) ij for each model
 by identifying ideal and worst solutions. Distances to these solutions are
 calculated, and a closeness coefficient (Ci ) is computed for ranking devices.
parameter j of device Di at round t is calculated as: The top-ranked updates are aggregated to form the global model, ensuring
 (t) contributions from the most reliable devices.
 mij
 m(t)
 ij =  , (7)
 N  (t) 2 d 
  2
 (t)
 i=1 mij Si− = wij − A−
 j . (12)
 j=1
where m(t)
 ij is the j-th parameter of the model update from
device Di at round t, and N is the total number of devices. The relative closeness Ci of each model update to the ideal
 b) Weighted normalization: After normalization, the solution is then calculated as:
server applies a weighted normalization to account for the S−
relative importance of different model accuracy values as Ci = + i − . (13)
 (t) Si + Si
parameters. The weighted normalized value wij is computed
as: The closer Ci is to 1, the more desirable the model update is.
 The whole process is described in Figure 5.
 (t) (t)
 wij = wj · mij , (8) In the context of similarity assessment, the optimal solution
where wj is the weight assigned to the j-th parameter. These is defined as the highest normalized performance metric (e.g.,
weights are determined based on the relevance of each param- accuracy) for each client across all devices, indicating the
eter to the overall model performance. best-performing model, whereas the suboptimal solution is
 c) Ideal and anti-ideal solution identification: The server characterized by the lowest normalized performance metric,
identifies the ideal solution A+ and the anti-ideal solution A− . signifying the worst-performing model. The normalized num-
The ideal solution represents the most desirable set of model bers are utilized to compute the deviation of each device’s
parameters, while the anti-ideal solution represents the least performance from both the optimal and suboptimal solutions.
desirable set. These are calculated as: The closeness coefficient, based on these distances, assesses
   the degree to which a device’s performance corresponds with
 (t)
 A+ = max wij | j = 1, 2, . . . , d , (9) the ideal standard. This guarantees that the optimization of the
 i global model prioritizes inputs from high-performing devices,
  
 A− = min w(t) ij | j = 1, 2, . . . , d , (10) hence augmenting the robustness and efficacy of the entire
 i system.
where d is the total number of parameters in the model. e) Clustering based on similarity: The server clusters the
 d) Similarity calculation: The server computes the sim- model updates into groups based on their similarity Ci values.
ilarity of each model update to both the ideal and anti-ideal The clustering process helps in identifying the most similar
solutions. The distance of each model updates Di to the ideal models, which are then considered for aggregation in the next
solution A+ and the anti-ideal solution A− is given by: phase.

 d 
  2 E. Outlier Reduction
 (t)
 Si+ = wij − A+
 j , (11) The calculation of similarity to the ideal solution A+ and
 (t)
 j=1 anti-ideal solution A− directly identifies model updates Mi
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4513

Algorithm 1 Federated Learning With TOPSIS and
Personalized Updates for IoMT
 (0)
Require: N IoMT devices, initial global model MG , number
 of communication rounds T, learning rate η
 (T)
Ensure: MG
 (0)
 1: Init: MG , secure channels
 2: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} do
 3: M(0)G → Di
 4: end for
 5: for t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T} do
 6: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} in parallel do Fig. 6. KANConvNet model architecture for capturing non-linear interactions
 (t−1) and processing complex feature transformations in FL.
 7: MG → Di
 (t) reg
 8: Mi ← min Li
 (t)
 9: wi → Server for the cluster, ensuring that the aggregation incorporates
10: end for (t)
 contributions from multiple robust updates.
 (t),norm wi (t)
11: wi =  2 g) Aggregation: The global model MG is updated by
 N (t)
 wj
 j=1 averaging the selected models from each cluster:
 (t),norm
 wbest = maxi w , wworst = mini w(t),norm |C |
 1  1  (t)
12:
 i 
 i
 2 (t)
 + d (t),norm MG = Mi , (14)
13: Si = j=1 wi − wbest , Si− = |C| m
  k=1 i∈Sk
 d  (t),norm
 2
 where |C| is the number of clusters, Sk is the set of selected
 j=1 wi − wworst (t)
 indices for cluster Ck , and Mi represents the model updates
 S−
14: Ci = S+ +Si
 − chosen by Multi-Krum for aggregation.
 i i
 (t) (t) h) Personalized model updates: The final global model
15: MG = i∈top-rank αi wi
 (t) is sent back to each device. Personalization is achieved by
16: MG → Di combining the global model with the device’s previous local
17: end for
 model:
18: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} do
 (t+1) (t) (t)
19: Mi
 personal
 ← min Li
 personal Mi = αMG + (1 − α)Mi , (15)
20: end for
 (T) personal N where α ∈ [0, 1] controls the degree of personalization.
21: return MG , {Mi }i=1
 G. KANConvNet Intrusion Detection Model
 The KANConvNet model is inspired by the requirement
that are consistent with the majority. Therefore outliers, having
 for an efficient and interpretable architecture capable of
greater distances and better performances in the client servers
 managing complicated feature interactions in image data,
Si+ to A+ and smaller distances with performance scores Si−
 particularly within a federated learning setting. Using the
to A− , will result in lower similarity scores Ci . This allows
 Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem [56], the model
the system to effectively identify and separate outliers from
 represents non-linear interactions with tailored activation
the rest of the data.
 functions, improving resilience in decentralized training. Its
 convolutional structure allows scalability and adaptability
F. Robust Aggregation Using Multi-Krum while processing diverse, large-scale datasets in federated
 After dimensionality reduction and clustering, the server systems. In the model architecture, KAN introduces a novel
employs the Multi-Krum algorithm [57] for robust aggregation architecture by relocating activation functions to the edges and
to handle adversarial updates while ensuring resilience and applying non-linearity before input summation, fundamentally
reliability in federated learning. redefining learning dynamics. This approach enhances interf) Multi-Krum Selection: For each cluster Ck , Multi- pretability, precision.
Krum evaluates model updates by calculating the pairwise The model begins by preprocessing the input vector x =
squared Euclidean distances between all client updates. The [x1 , x2 , . . . , x46 ] into z0 = Preprocess(x), using normalizadistance between any two models is computed as the sum tion or Fourier transforms. The Kolmogorov-Arnold mapping
of squared differences for each parameter across the model is then applied, transforming the preprocessed data via a linear
state dictionaries. Using these distances, Multi-Krum assigns a transformation and Fourier Transform to z1 = W1 ·F(z0 ) +
score to each model by summing the distances to its n−2f −2 b1 . A custom Kolmogorov-inspired activation function is
closest neighbors, where n is the total number of models, and applied, producing z2 = σKolmogorov (z1 ). The network prof is the number of adversarial updates tolerated. ceeds through multiple dense layers, refining features with
 Instead of selecting just one model, Multi-Krum selects ReLU activations: z3 , z4 , and z5 , each applying distinct
the top m models with the smallest scores as representatives weights and biases. The final transformation layer outputs z6 =
4514 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 B. Search Algorithm
 To efficiently navigate the extensive hyperparameter space,
 we employ a genetic algorithm (GA) [58]. The search
 algorithm iteratively evolves a population of candidate hyperparameter sets to optimize the performance metric f (θ ). All
 the keyword descriptions are given in Table I. The process
 involves several key steps: initialization, evolution through
 crossover and mutations, and fitness evaluation. The search
 algorithm is outlined as follows:
Fig. 7. GA for Hyperparameter Design Space Exploration.

 TABLE I
 C. Genetic Algorithm
 GA T ERMINOLOGY 1) Initialization: The initial population P0 of size N is
 generated by sampling hyperparameter sets from the design
 space H. Each individual i ∈ P0 is represented as θi :
 P0 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN } (17)
 where
 θi = {αi , βi , ei , μi , δi , ωi , λi , γi } (18)
 TABLE II 2) Evolution Crossover: Crossover combines two parent
 H YPERPARAMETER VALUES
 hyperparameter sets θp and θq to produce two offspring θc1 and
 θc2 . The crossover operation is defined as follows:
 θc1 = {θpk | k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}} (19)
 θc2 = {θqk | k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}} (20)
 where k indicates the position of each hyperparameter within
 the set.
 3) Evolution Mutations: Mutation introduces randomness
W5 · σKolmogorov (z5 ) + b5 , culminating in the prediction ŷ = by altering hyperparameters in the offspring with a small
SGD(z6 ). This architecture effectively captures complex data probability Pm . For each hyperparameter θik in θc1 and θc2 , the
patterns for accurate predictions. mutation operation is:
 
 random value from Hk with probability Pm
 θi ←
 k
 (21)
 V. H YPERPARAMETER D ESIGN S PACE E XPLORATION θik with probability 1 − Pm
A. Design Space Definition where Hk represents the range of possible values for the k-th
 hyperparameter.
 In our FL-based system, hyperparameter tuning is crucial
 4) Fitness Score: The fitness score f (θi ) evaluates the
for optimizing model performance. The design space for our
 performance of the federated learning model trained with
genetic algorithm-based hyperparameter optimization encomhyperparamete 3rs θi . The score is computed based on the
passes several key hyperparameters. Let θ represent the set
 model’s accuracy, denoted as A:
of hyperparameters we aim to optimize. The performance of
models is substantially influenced by hyperparameters like as f (θi ) = A(θi ) (22)
learning rate, batch size, and optimizer type. The learning
 The mutation process promotes variation by periodically
rate (α) sets the step size for weight updates during training
 adjusting hyperparameter values, helping to explore the search
which smaller values provide consistent convergence but slow
 space more fully and avoid local optima. It establishes a
training, whereas bigger values may produce instability or
 balance between exploration and exploitation, enabling the
divergence. Batch size (β) affects gradient estimation accuracy
 identification of better hyperparameter combinations that could
and computational efficiency, where smaller batches introduce
 be missed by crossover alone. This finally boosts model
noisier gradients that aid in generalization, while bigger
 performance by fine-tuning important parameters and improvbatches are computationally faster but may lead to overfitting.
 ing robustness across datasets.
The optimizer type (ω) regulates how gradients are applied,
 5) Verification: The GA process is repeated for several
effecting convergence speed and stability.
 generations G, producing new populations Pt at each genera-
 The main and primary hyperparameters included are:
 tion t. The population is updated as follows:
 Thus, the design space H is defined as:
 Pt+1 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN } (23)
 H = {α, β, e, μ, δ, ω} (16)
 Our Algorithm 2 terminates when the improvement in the
 The values taken across 4 datasets are given in Table II. fitness score falls below a threshold . We consider the fitness
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4515

Algorithm 2 GA Design for Hyperparameter Optimization FedProx [51] model. Besides, for the local testing of our
 1: Initialize: Population size N, number of generations Gmax , KANConvNet model, we compare it to the SOTA models such
 mutation probability Pm as DNN, CNN [53] and SVM [54]. We evaluate our model on
 2: Generate initial population P0 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN } where the TPU v2, Raspberry Pi 4, TPU VM v3-8, and GPU A100 to
 θi ∈ H assess its performance across diverse hardware configurations.
 3: for t = 0 to Gmax − 1 do
 4: for each θi ∈ Pt do B. Attack Methods
 5: Evaluate fitness f (θi ) We assess our model’s robustness against various
 6: end for attacks:
 7: Select top N/2 individuals from Pt to form Ptsel • ALIE: Injects undetected noise into updates, corrupting
 8: Crossover: them within (μi −zmax δi , μi +zmax δi ), where μi and δi are
 9: Pt+1 ← ∅ the mean and standard deviation, respectively, and zmax
10: while |Pt+1 | < N do is from [59].
11: Randomly select θp , θq ∈ Ptsel • SF Attack: Flips gradient signs to increase loss, with no
12: Generate offspring θc1 , θc2 by: need for access to other clients’ updates [60].
13: for each k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8} do • RN Attack: Adds Gaussian noise to model parameters to
14: θc1 [k] ← θp [k] or θq [k] (randomly chosen) degrade performance [61].
15: θc2 [k] ← θp [k] or θq [k] (randomly chosen) • LF Attack: Alters class labels in datasets to cause targeted
16: end for misclassification [62].
17: Pt+1 ← Pt+1 ∪ {θc1 , θc2 } 1) Attack Performance Analysis: In analyzing the robust-
18: end while ness of our model with multiple attack types to alter the
19: Mutation: gradients and labels, we apply those gradient manipulation
20: for each θi ∈ Pt+1 do attacks. The ALIE attack injects noise, SF reverses gradient
21: for each k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8} do signs, RN adds Gaussian noise, and LF modifies labels to
22: if random probability < Pm then create misclassification. As demonstrated from Figure 13, the
23: θi [k] ← random value from Hk performance with all models along the FedIoMT reduces a
24: end if little bit. But FedIoMT retains superior performance in vali-
25: end for dation accuracy in the global model along with another model
26: end for for handling different adversarial attacks. FedIoMT’s principal
27: end for
 contribution is in its implementation of the Krum aggregation
28: Output: Best hyperparameter set θ∗ = technique, which improves resilience to adversarial attacks
 arg maxθi ∈PGmax f (θi ) in federated learning. Krum identifies the most dependable
 gradient updates by assessing the distance between one client’s
 TABLE III gradient and those of others, excluding outliers. This guaran-
 B EST H YPERPARAMETERS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS
 tees that only reliable updates are compiled, notably reducing
 the effect of gradient manipulation attacks.

 C. Impact of Hyperparameters
 Hyperparameters in Table III vary among datasets after
 applying the GA design in our FedIoMT model. The learning
 rates range from 0.032 to 0.079; batch sizes are 16, 32, or
 64; epochs range from 35 to 60. Momentum values range
 between 0.522 and 0.746. Dropout rates vary from 0.194 to
score threshold 98. The best hyperparameter set θ ∗ is selected 0.312. Optimizers include SGD, Adam, and RMSprop with
as: fitness scores best for RT-IoT (0.954) and lowest for EHCL
 (0.936).
 θ ∗ = arg max f (θi ) (24)
 θi ∈PG
 D. Superiority of FL Methods for Detecting Attacks
 This GA-based hyperparameter optimization in the
 To validate the effectiveness of FedIoMT, we compare
FedIoMT framework effectively balances exploration and
 it with several existing FL algorithms shown in Table V.
exploitation, to achieve higher model performance with global
 The FedIoMT model significantly beats FedPer, FedProx, and
optima.
 FedAvg across all datasets, indicating a notable accuracy
 increase across all four datasets. For instance, FedIoMT’s
 VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT
 local final accuracy on Wustl-EHMS is 99.36%, exceeding
A. Experimental Setup FedPer by 0.48%, FedProx by 1.13%, and FedAvg by 0.91%.
 For global testing with our FedIoMT model with our Similar tendencies are observed in global situations, where
existing works, we compare with FedAvg [51]. FedPer [52], FedIoMT’s accuracy on Wustl-EHMS is 1.38% higher than
4516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR KANC ONV N ET, DNN, CNN, AND SVM M ODELS ACROSS FOUR DATASETS

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR F ED I O MT, F ED P ER , F ED P ROX , AND F EDAVG M ODELS ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR F ED I O MT, F ED P ER , F ED P ROX , F EDAVG , AND SVM M ODELS ON IID AND N ON -IID DATA ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

 TABLE VII
 F INAL ACCURACY C OMPARISON FOR C LIENTS W ITH AND W ITHOUT TOPSIS ON T HE W USTL -EHMS DATASET

FedPer, 2.10% higher than FedProx, and 1.76% higher than reduces to 97.90% but still leads performance rise by 1.40% to
FedAvg. This pattern of higher performance is consistent 3.35% over the other models. Overall, FedIoMT retains supeacross the EHCL, BlueTrack, and RT-IoT datasets, with rior performance, followed by FedPer, FedAvg, and FedProx
FedIoMT excelling in precision, F1, and recall metrics as well. in different scenarios of global and local data distributions.
Furthermore in Table VI, FedIoMT consistently surpasses We have further assessed the validation accuracy curves
FedPer, FedProx, FedAvg, and SVM across the Wustl-EHMS, across four datasets, using all FL-based models, including
EHCL, BlueTrack, and RT-IoT datasets on both IID and our FedIoMT architecture, as shown in Figure 11. FedIoMT
Non-IID data. On IID data, FedIoMT achieves the maximum displays strong validation, with accuracy starting to grow
accuracy of 99.38%, beating the other models by 0.50% considerably after 20 communication rounds. Additionally, the
to 1.96%. In Non-IID circumstances, FedIoMT’s accuracy validation loss curve demonstrates good performance for our
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4517

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF K RUM AND M ULTI -K RUM R ESULTS

 time, especially on the Wustl-EHMS dataset, where it is nearly
 1.7 times slower than FedIoMT. This illustrates FedIoMT’s
 efficiency in decreasing testing time across diverse datasets.

 E. Ablation Study
Fig. 8. Measuring Testing Times of four Benchmark IoMT Datasets of our The ablation studies performed on our proposed FedIoMT
Proposed FedIoMT Model.
 architecture indicate its robust performance and efficiency
 across major components.
 The first study shown in Table VII assesses the impact of
 adding the TOPSIS algorithm for client-level feature ranking.
 The results reveal consistent accuracy improvements across
 most clients, with gains ranging from +0.0003 to +0.0004.
 This emphasizes the effectiveness of TOPSIS in increasing
 model performance by prioritizing essential features during
 training.
 The second study displayed in Table VIII examines the
 Krum and Multi-Krum aggregation methods within the
 FedIoMT framework. While both approaches reach the same
 high-end accuracy of 0.9997, Multi-Krum far surpasses Krum
Fig. 9. Measuring FLOP Counts of Different Accelerators along with Edge in computing efficiency. Multi-Krum lowers the aggregation
Devices of our Proposed FedIoMT Model. time by 50% and the evaluation time by approximately
 30%, making it a scalable and low-latency alternative for
 real-time or resource-constrained applications.Therefore, these
 investigations provide the efficacy of the FedIoMT architecture
 in boosting both accuracy and efficiency, revealing its promise
 for secure and scalable federated learning.

 F. Advantage of KANConvNet
 We compare the performance of FedIoMT with different
 DL models to investigate the effectiveness of KANConvNet
 in Table IV. The performance measurements indicate that
 CNN regularly surpasses the other models in local settings,
 attaining the highest level of accuracy, reaching a peak
Fig. 10. Measuring Peak Memory Usage of Different Accelerators along of 99.58% on Wustl-EHMS. KANConvNet closely follows,
with Edge Devices of our Proposed FedIoMT Model. exhibiting a marginal drop of 0.14% to 0.46% compared to
 CNN, but generally surpassing the performance of DNN and
 SVM models. The DNN model has a strong performance on
suggested FedIoMT model, with a very low error rate, as the Wustl-EHMS dataset, achieving an accuracy of 99.28%.
represented in Figure 12. However, it falls slightly below the CNN model by approx-
 In Figure 15, t-SNE plots for four distinct datasets, each imately 0.30%. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) has
illustrating various network attack scenarios, to visualize the lowest local accuracy, reaching a maximum of 98.89%,
how feature vectors cluster in a two-dimensional space. The which is a drop of around 0.69% compared to the CNN.
FedIoMT model effectively captures low-dimensional data, During global testing scenarios, all models exhibit a decrease
maintaining critical information in the aggregated updates in accuracy. However, KANConvNet has a higher level of
from local client models. performance (97.90% on Wustl-EHMS) compared to DNN
 In terms of assessing the prediction testing time of all and SVM, which decrease to 96.67% and 96.51% respectively.
the models across the four datasets in Table VIII, FedIoMT These variances among datasets emphasize the durability of
consistently displays the shortest testing time, taking 3.10 to KANConvNet’s performance in both local and global scenar-
4.35 seconds, which is around 1.5 to 2.3 times faster than ios, while DNN and SVM lag in global generalization, notably
other models. In contrast, FedPer records the highest testing in the RT-IoT dataset. Furthermore, in 3D t-SNE visualization,
4518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 11. Global Validation Accuracy of different algorithms along with FedIoMT model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT Datasets.

 Fig. 14. 3D t-SNE visualization of KANConvNet model as local classifier
 along with other SOTA models.

Fig. 12. Global Validation Loss of different algorithms along with FedIoMT
model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT Datasets.

 Fig. 15. t-SNE plots of four datasets illustrating network attack scenarios,
 showing how the FedIoMT model preserves critical low-dimensional data in
 aggregated client updates (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-
 IoT datasets.

Fig. 13. Global Validation Accuracy of different algorithms along with
FedIoMT model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT G. Training Efficiency on Hardware Accelerators
Datasets after applying four attack types.
 The FLOP mainly counts comparison across different
 devices and models reveals notable variations in computational
 efficiency. Overall, FedIoMT consistently shows superior comthe KANConvNet model is shown independently and looks to putational efficiency across all devices, with value counts of
have a smoother accuracy curve than other models, indicating 0.24-0.29 in Table IX. In those diverse configuration devices,
that our KANConvNet model performs rather consistently the Raspberry Pi shows the largest peak memory utilization,
across communication rounds shown in Figure 14. up to 2.2 MB with FedPer, almost 1.8 times greater than the
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4519

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH AVAILABLE W ORKS the Kolmogorov-Arnold theorem proficiently supported specific functions like intrusion detection, its applicability to
 various IoMT applications, including predictive maintenance
 and real-time monitoring, required further evaluation. Future
 work aimed to optimize computational efficiency for lowpower consumer devices, enhance scalability, improve privacy
 protections, and refine dimensionality reduction techniques.
 Efforts to prevent overfitting and ensure seamless deployment
 across diverse IoMT devices were also essential.
GPU A100’s 1.5 MB. The TPU v2 has the lowest memory
use, nearly 2.9 times lower than the Raspberry Pi’s peak.
FedIoMT continuously utilizes the least RAM across all R EFERENCES
devices showcasing its efficiency shown in Table IX. [1] D. M. Mathkor et al., “Multirole of the Internet of Medical Things
 (IoMT) in biomedical systems for managing smart healthcare systems:
 An overview of current and future innovative trends,” J. Infect. Public
H. Discussion Health, vol. 17, pp. 559–572, Apr. 2024.
 [2] S. Velmurugan, G. Shanthi, L. Raja, and D. Subitha, “Threat analysis
 The performance of our proposed FedIoMT model is and security measures for the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): A
compared with other state-of-the-art methods in Table IX, study,” in Computational Intelligence and Blockchain in Biomedical
highlighting its superiority in both accuracy and recall. and Health Informatics. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2024,
 pp. 229–242.
FedIoMT has an accuracy of 99.43% and a recall of [3] K. K. Baseer et al., “Healthcare diagnostics with an adaptive deep
99.53%, outperforming the FedCNNMLP, FL-MGVN, and learning model integrated with the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
 for predicting heart disease,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 92,
Mamunur et al. models on both criteria. At the same time, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 105988.
Priyanka et al. et al. and Farhan et al. models depict superior [4] L. Lu, G. Hu, J. Liu, and B. Yang, “5G NB-IoT system integrated
performance in recall metrics than our FedIoMT model. with high-performance fiber sensor inspired by cirrus and spider structures,” Adv. Sci., vol. 11, no. 18, 2024, Art. no. 2309894.
However, these existing studies have the disadvantage of secur- [5] L. Iiyambo, G. Hancke, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “A survey on NB-IoT
ing efficient communication overhead throughout the detection random access: Approaches for uplink radio access network congestion
time of attack types. Furthermore, these works lack the management,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 95487–95506, 2024.
 [6] S. Ahmad, S. Mehfuz, S. Urooj, and N. Alsubaie, “Machine
issue of maintaining an accurate weights update mechanism learning-based intelligent security framework for secure cloud key
whereas our proposed FedIoMT architecture overcomes the management,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27, pp. 5953–5979, Feb. 2024.
issues of decentralized multi-center servers by using TOPSIS [7] B. Guembe, S. Misra, and A. Azeta, “Federated Bayesian optimization
 XGBoost model for cyberattack detection in Internet of Medical
similarity analysis to reduce data heterogeneity during local- Things,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 193, Nov. 2024,
to-global transmission. Furthermore, in the local model, our Art. no. 104964.
 [8] S. Nithya, S. Palanisamy, and T. Nivethitha, “Achieving secured medical
KANConvNet uses Kolmogorov activation functions at the network (SMN) through stateless mechanism and SkeyM in medicaledges rather than the neuron’s core, which may alter the Internet of Things (M-IoT),” J. Eng. Appl. Sci., vol. 71, no. 1, p. 128,
learning dynamics and improve the overall interpretability of 2024.
 [9] S. F. Ahmed, M. S. B. Alam, S. Afrin, S. J. Rafa, N. Rafa, and A.
the FedIoMT framework. H. Gandomi, “Insights into Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): Data
 fusion, security issues and potential solutions,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 102,
 Feb. 2024, Art. no. 102060.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [10] A. A. El-Saleh, A. M. Sheikh, M. A. M. Albreem, and M. S.
 Honnurvali, “The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): Opportunities and
 The IDS played a crucial role in securing IoMT devices challenges,” Wireless Netw., vol. 31, pp. 327–344, May 2024.
and networks within consumer electronics, addressing unique [11] C. Rupa et al., “IoMT privacy preservation: A hash-based DCIWT
 approach for detecting tampering in medical data,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
challenges and high risks. However, many existing methodolo- pp. 97298–97308, 2024.
gies that relied on machine learning (ML) and deep learning [12] Y. Zhang et al., “A cooperative vehicle-road system for anomaly
(DL) techniques were considered opaque by security analysts detection on vehicle tracks with augmented intelligence of things,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 22, pp. 35975–35988, Nov. 2024.
and engineers. The proposed FedIoMT framework addressed [13] I. A. Khan et al., “Fed-Inforce-Fusion: A federated reinforcement-based
data heterogeneity and model adaptation through multi-center fusion model for security and privacy protection of IoMT networks
clustering and meta-learning. The innovative KANConvNet against cyber-attacks,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 101, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 102002.
 [14] J. Areia, I. A. Bispo, L. Santos, and R. L. D. C. Costa, “IoMTmodel, based on the KAN architecture, enhanced scala- TrafficData: Dataset and tools for benchmarking intrusion detection in
bility, interpretability, and intrusion detection by capturing Internet of Medical Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 115370–115385,
spatial and hierarchical data. The FedIoMT system also 2024.
 [15] H. Halikias, “Business impacts of ransomware,” in Digital Shakedown:
improved security through a meta-learning phase and TOPSIS- The Complete Guide to Understanding and Combating Ransomware.
based model aggregation, while optimizing hyperparameters Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nat., 2024, pp. 25–47. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65438-1_3
using Genetic Algorithms. Despite its advantages, FedIoMT [16] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and resilient
faced challenges in managing severe heterogeneity in real- intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
world IoMT datasets, particularly when devices exhibited Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1342–1350, Feb. 2024.
 [17] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
significantly outlier data distributions. This issue reduced “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
performance, even with multi-center clusters and similarity network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
analysis. Additionally, the meta-learning step, while augment- Nov. 2023.
 [18] J. Kabdjou and N. Shinomiya, “Improving quality of service and HTTPS
ing model robustness, imposed computational burdens due to DDoS detection in MEC environment with a cyber deception-based
the need to evaluate inference times during training. Although architecture,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 23490–23503, 2024.
4520 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

[19] W. Alhakami, “Evaluating modern intrusion detection methods in the [42] A. Alazab, A. Khraisat, S. Singh, and T. Jan, “Enhancing privacyface of gen V multi-vector attacks with fuzzy AHP-TOPSIS,” Plos One, preserving intrusion detection through federated learning,” Electronics,
 vol. 19, no. 5, 2024, Art. no. e0302559. vol. 12, no. 16, p. 3382, 2023.
[20] M. Sajid et al., “Enhancing intrusion detection: A hybrid machine and [43] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R. Sabuj,
 deep learning approach,” J. Cloud Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 123, 2024. and M. Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach for improving
[21] A. V. Turukmane and R. Devendiran, “M-MultiSVM: An efficient intrusion detection in industrial Internet of Things networks,” Network,
 feature selection assisted network intrusion detection system using vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 158–179, 20234.
 machine learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103587. [44] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Cyber threat
[22] M. A. Talukder, S. Sharmin, M. A. Uddin, M. M. Islam, and S. intelligence sharing scheme based on federated learning for network
 Aryal, “MLSTL-WSN: Machine learning-based intrusion detection intrusion detection,” J. Netw. Syst. Manag., vol. 31, no. 1, p. 3, 2023.
 using SMOTETomek in WSNs,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3,
 [45] A. A. Hady, A. Ghubaish, T. Salman, D. Unal, and R. Jain, “Intrusion
 pp. 2139–2158, 2024.
 detection system for healthcare systems using medical and network data:
[23] P. Goswami, R. Hazra, M. Prokysek, K. Choi, and M. Eider, “A A comparison study,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 106576–106584, 2020.
 novel approach of efficient resource allocation in smart consumer
 electronics device network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, [46] M. Ahmed, S. Byreddy, A. Nutakki, L. F. Sikos, and P. Haskell-Dowland,
 no. 3, pp. 5895–5902, Aug. 2024. “ECU-IoHT: A dataset for analyzing cyberattacks in Internet of Health
[24] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 122, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 102621.
 forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for [47] D. Unal, 2021, “BlueTack,” Dataset, IEEE Dataport. [Online]. Available:
 consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2, https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/skhs-0b39
 pp. 4976–4987, May 2024. [48] B. S. Sharmila and R. Nagapadma, “Quantized autoencoder (QAE)
[25] H. Habibzadeh, B. H. Nussbaum, F. Anjomshoa, B. Kantarci, and T. intrusion detection system for anomaly detection in resource-constrained
 Soyata, “A survey on cybersecurity, data privacy, and policy issues in IoT devices using RT-IoT2022 dataset,” Cybersecurity, vol. 6, no. 1,
 cyber-physical system deployments in smart cities,” Sustain. Cities Soc., p. 41, 2023.
 vol. 50, Oct. 2019, Art. no. 101660. [49] A. Raza, S. Memon, M. A. Nizamani, and M. H. Shah, “Intrusion
[26] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas, detection system for smart industrial environments with ensemble feature
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized selection and deep convolutional neural networks,” Intell. Autom. Soft
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. Comput., vol. 39, no. 3, p. 545, 2024.
[27] X. Su and G. Zhang, “APFed: Adaptive personalized federated [50] F. O. Albasheer, R. R. Haibatti, M. Agarwal, and S. Y. Nam, “A
 learning for intrusion detection in maritime meteorological sensor novel IDS based on Jaya optimizer and smote-ENN for cyberattacks
 networks,” Digit. Commun. Netw., to be published. detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 101506–101527, 2024.
[28] S. Pandya et al., “Federated learning for smart cities: A comprehen-
 [51] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
 sive survey,” Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., vol. 55, Feb. 2023,
 “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
 Art. no. 102987.
 Learn. Syst., 2020, pp. 429–450.
[29] R. Arul, Y. D. Al-Otaibi, W. S. Alnumay, U. Tariq, U. Shoaib, and M. D.
 J. Piran, “Multi-modal secure healthcare data dissemination framework [52] M. G. Arivazhagan, V. Aggarwal, A. K. Singh, and S.
 using blockchain in IoMT,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 28, pp. 3–15, Choudhary, “Federated learning with personalization layers,” 2019,
 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-021-01527-2 arXiv:1912.00818.
[30] F. R. Mughal et al., “Resource management in multi-heterogeneous [53] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, and P. Leroux, “MLP4NIDS: An efficient MLPcluster networks using intelligent intra-clustered federated learn- based network intrusion detection for CICIDS2017 dataset,” in Proc. 2nd
 ing,” Comput. Commun., vol. 213, pp. 236–245, Jan. 2024. IFIP TC 6 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Netw. (MLN), 2019, pp. 240–254.
[31] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, [54] D. Jing and H.-B. Chen, “SVM based network intrusion detection for the
 “Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack UNSW-NB15 dataset,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. ASIC (ASICON),
 detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. 2019, pp. 1–4.
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024. [55] T. Sahraneshin, R. Malekhosseini, F. Rad, and S. H. Yaghoubyan,
[32] M. Guduri, C. Chakraborty, U. Maheswari, and M. Margala, “Securing communications between things against wormhole attacks
 “Blockchain-based federated learning technique for privacy preservation using TOPSIS decision-making and hash-based cryptography techniques
 and security of smart electronic health records,” IEEE Trans. Consum. in the IoT ecosystem,” Wireless Netw., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 969–983, 2023.
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2608–2617, Feb. 2024.
 [56] Z. Liu et al., “KAN: Kolmogorov-arnold networks,” 2025,
[33] N. Franzese et al., “Robust and actively secure serverless collaborative arXiv:2404.19756.
 learning,” in Proc. 37th Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 1–25.
 [57] G. Damaskinos, E. M. El-Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, A. Guirguis, and
[34] M. Hao, H. Li, G. Xu, H. Chen, and T. Zhang, “Efficient, private and
 S. Rouault, “AGGREGATHOR: Byzantine machine learning via robust
 robust federated learning,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
 gradient aggregation,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., 2019, pp. 81–106.
 Conf., 2021, pp. 45–60.
[35] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and D. [58] N. Hansen, “The CMA evolution strategy: A comparing review,” in
 Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated learning Towards a New Evolutionary Computation: Advances on Estimation of
 framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled IIoT,” IEEE Distribution Algorithms. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2006, pp. 75–102.
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866, Feb. 2024. [59] G. Baruch, M. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough:
[36] P. G. Shambharkar and N. Sharma, “Deep learning-empowered intrusion Circumventing defenses for distributed learning,” in Proc. 33rd Adv.
 detection framework for the Internet of Medical Things environ- Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–11.
 ment,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 66, pp. 6001–6050, Jun. 2024. [60] S. P. Karimireddy, L. He, and M. Jaggi, “Learning from history for
[37] M. A. Bouke, H. El Atigh, and A. Abdullah, “Towards Byzantine robust optimization,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 robust and efficient intrusion detection in IoMT: A deep 2021, pp. 5311–5319.
 learning approach addressing data leakage and enhancing model [61] L. Muñoz-González, K. T. Co, and E. C. Lupu, “Byzantine-robust
 generalizability,” Multimedia Tools Appl., pp. 1–20, Jul. 2024. [Online]. federated machine learning through adaptive model averaging,” 2019,
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-024-19916-z arXiv:1909.05125.
[38] N. Faruqui et al., “SafetyMed: A novel IoMT intrusion detection system
 [62] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
 using CNN-LSTM hybridization,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 17, p. 3541,
 attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. 25th Eur. Symp.
 2023.
 Res. Comput. Secur. Comput. Secur. (ESORICs), 2020, pp. 480–501.
[39] D. P. Anjelin and S. G. Kumar, “An effective classification using
 enhanced elephant herding optimization with convolution neural network [63] W. Liu et al., “Intrusion detection for maritime transportation systems
 for intrusion detection in IoMT architecture,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27, with batch federated aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 pp. 12341–12359, Jun. 2024. vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2503–2514, Feb. 2023.
[40] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A federated [64] D. Wu, Y. Deng, and M. Li, “FL-MGVN: Federated learning for
 learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for Internet of anomaly detection using mixed gaussian variational self-encoding
 Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103540. network,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 59, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 102839.
[41] B. Olanrewaju-George and B. Pranggono, “Federated learning-based [65] F. Ullah, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, C.-M. Chen, and S.
 intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things using unsupervised Kumari, “Semantic-based federated defense for distributed malicious
 and supervised deep learning models,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 3, attacks,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 49–58,
 Dec. 2025, Art. no. 100068. Mar. 2025.
FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS 4521

 Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam received the B.Sc. degree Md. Golam Rabiul Alam (Member, IEEE) received
 in computer science and engineering from BRAC the B.S. degree in computer science and engineer-
 University where he is currently pursuing the mas- ing, the M.S. degree in information technology
 ter’s degree and working as a Graduate Research and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
 Assistant. His academic pursuits are complemented from Kyung Hee University, South Korea, in 2017,
 by his active engagement in research. His research where he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the
 interests cover multiple fields, with a particular focus Computer Science and Engineering Department
 on multi-modal machine learning, computer vision, from March 2017 to February 2018. He is curand adversarial machine learning. rently a Professor with the Computer Science
 and Engineering Department, BRAC University,
 Bangladesh. His research interests include healthcare
 informatics, mobile cloud and Edge computing, ambient intelligence, and
 persuasive technology. He received several best paper awards from prestigious conferences. He is a member of IEEE I NDUSTRIAL E LECTRONICS
 S OCIETY, IEEE C ONSUMER T ECHNOLOGY S OCIETY, IEEE C OMPUTER
 S OCIETY, IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING S OCIETY, IEEE C OMPUTATIONAL
 I NTELLIGENCE S OCIETY, and IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S OCIETY.

 Siti Sarah Binti Maidin received the B.Sc.
 Amitabha Chakrabarty received the First M.Sc. degree in computer science from University Teknikal
 degree from the Department of Computer Science Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, the M.Sc. degree in
 and Engineering, University of Rajshahi, in 2004, information technology from University Teknologi
 the Second M.Sc. degree in telecommunication engi- MARA, Malaysia, and the Ph.D. degree in
 neering from Independent University, Bangladesh, information and communication technology from
 and the Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Malaysia. She is
 Engineering and Computing, Dublin City University, currently a Professor with the Department of
 Dublin, Ireland, in 2012. He is currently a Professor Data Science and Information Technology, INTI
 with the Department of Computer Science and International University, Malaysia, holding post as
 Engineering, BRAC University, Dhaka, Bangladesh. the Head of Programme and the Deputy Director.
 He is involved in active research having several She has supervised numerous undergraduate and postgraduates’ students. She
graduate and undergraduate research groups in different research projects. also has been appointed as the evaluator for the university level research
He has published research papers in various national and international grant and Malaysian government research grant. She is also has been
conferences, journals, and book chapters. His research interests include the appointed as auditor for Myra university ranking in Malaysia. In addition,
IoT, machine learning, deep learning, vision transformers, embedded systems, she is also involved in organizing local and international conferences. Her
and switching theory. He is serving as a TCP member in various international research interests include software engineering, educational technology and
journals and conferences. He is also serving as a Senior Judge in various data science. She serves as an Editor for J OURNAL OF I NNOVATION AND
national IT competitions. T ECHNOLOGY.