IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2514512

 A Time Series Self-Supervised Contrastive
Pretraining Method With Data Augmentation Using
 Discrepancy of Reconstruction Information Loss
 Zhen Zhang , Yongming Han , Member, IEEE, Bo Ma , and Zhiqiang Geng

 Abstract— Self-supervised pretraining has shown considerable modeling using massive amounts of data with labels has
advantages in multiple time series tasks. A widely used class of shown a promising progress [4]. However, in a real-world
methods is based on contrastive learning and a key problem industrial scenario, there are some problems using the above
is how to construct augmented samples. At present, explicit
augmentation approaches are the mainstream for constructing approach: 1) the data for a new industrial scenario is scarce and
positive pairs with similar features. However, explicitly aug- 2) labeling a large number of time series is difficult, and only
mented samples may deviate from the original data space and a few samples in real-world scenarios have been labeled [5].
have aliasing features. Therefore, this article designs an end-to- To solve the problem of scarcity of labeled samples,
end time series self-supervised contrastive pretraining network researchers introduced the self-supervised learning (SSL) [6],
with implicit data augmentation using discrepancy of reconstruction information loss (CLR-DRL). Specifically, augmented which extracts inherent representations in the data through
positive pairs with discrepancies and inherent features of the training on an upstream task without labeling samples, and
original series can be generated automatically using different uses them for target tasks. In recent years, self-supervised
autoencoders (AE) due to different information loss in their pretraining of time series using the contrastive learning framehidden spaces. Combined with the joint constraint, inherent fea- work with data augmentation has gained widespread attention
tures can be extracted and the aliasing impact existing in explicit
augmented approaches could be mitigated. Moreover, theoretical and achieved a promising progress. The basic principle is
analysis is provided using gradient flow calculation, which can that the sample representation is obtained through the conalso be confirmed by experiment analysis. Experimentally, the trastive constraint after generating two different augmented
CLR-DRL achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance com- samples. Chen et al. [7] proposed a simple contrastive learning
pared to current baselines on in- and cross-domain settings
 framework for visual representation (SimCLR), for the first
on nine real-world benchmarks for both time series anomaly
detection (AD) and classification tasks. An actual pipeline time showing that the combination of data augmentations
transportation status monitoring case is provided to verify the played a key role in representations by contrastive learning.
effectiveness. Subsequently, Ian Tang et al. [8] introduced the SimCLR
 Index Terms— Autoencoder (AE), data augmentation, indus- into the time series field and Eldele et al. [9] innovated the
trial process, self-supervised learning (SSL), time series. framework through cross-view forecasting tasks. In addition,
 the researchers further extended the modeling process by
 I. I NTRODUCTION fusing the frequency domain information. Zhang et al. [6]
 designed a time–frequency consistency (TF-C) module and
T IME series are widely existed in real-world scenarios,
 including human activity recognition (HAR) [1], industrial anomaly detection (AD) [2], and energy consumption
 data augmentation approaches for frequency domain data to
 extract the representation of time series by pulling closer
prediction [3]. The key to successfully handling these tasks the time- and frequency-domain representations of the hidden
is to achieve effective modeling of time series and to identify space.
inherent features implicit in data. In recent years, research Although the above methods have achieved good peron achieving high-precision deep learning-based time series formance in extracting time series representations, the data
 augmentation approaches they used are all explicit approaches,
 Received 14 August 2024; revised 21 November 2024; accepted 2 December such as random flipping, jittering, and scaling, which are also
2024. Date of publication 5 March 2025; date of current version 20 March
2025. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
 widely used in the image processing field. However, different
of China under Grant 62373035 and Grant 62203038. The Associate Editor from discrete image data, which tends to contain more explicit
coordinating the review process was Dr. Ferdinanda Ponci. (Corresponding and complete information, continuous time series data tends to
authors: Yongming Han; Zhiqiang Geng.)
 Zhen Zhang, Yongming Han, and Zhiqiang Geng are with the College
 contain more complex information. For example, as shown in
of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Fig. 1(a), a sample labeled cat can still be considered a cat after
Technology, Beijing 100029, China, and also with the Engineering Research being flipped. But for the time series shown in Fig. 1(b), after
Center of Intelligent Process System Engineering (PSE), Ministry of Education of China, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: zhang_zhen@buct.edu.cn;
 random flipping, a rising sample becomes a falling sample,
hanym@mail.buct.edu.cn; gengzhiqiang@mail.buct.edu.cn). which usually indicates two completely opposite working con-
 Bo Ma is with the College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, ditions in an actual industrial process. Therefore, augmenting
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail:
mabo@mail.buct.edu.cn).
 samples through explicit augmentation approaches may not
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3548177 be appropriate in time series tasks. Specifically, the possible
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 explicit augmented samples and extracts inherent representation.
 2) Technically, the CLR-DRL is a simple but effective
 method, which generates samples and extracts inherent representations by a joint constraint covering the
 reconstructed and contrastive loss. Theoretically, the
 effectiveness of the CL-DRL is verified by gradient flow
 calculation of the joint constraint.
 3) Experimentally, the CLR-DRL achieves state-of-the-art
 (SOTA) performance in two typical time series tasks
 with classification and AD, covering multiple domains
Fig. 1. Augmented samples by flipping operation of an (a) image and of experimental settings. And extensive analysis exper-
(b) industrial time series.
 iments verify the proposed method.
 Section II reviews the related work. Section III introduces
category aliasing of augmented samples has a large impact on the proposed CLR-DRL method. Section IV analyzes and
industrial time-series classification and AD tasks. discusses the performance of the CLR-DRL through extensive
 In addition to the contrastive learning, the autoencoder (AE) experiments. Section V verifies the application effect of the
is also an effective SSL method, which maps the times series CLR-DRL using an actual industrial case. Section VI draws
to a hidden space to generate the effective representation. The the conclusion of this article.
training process of the AE is to minimize the error between the
reconstructed and input time series. In this process, although II. R ELATED W ORKS
there is information loss in the extracted representation, the
reconstructed series can still be close to the original series [10]. A. Self-Supervised Contrastive Pretraining for Time Series
Moreover, for different AEs, different reconstructed series Currently, self-supervised pretraining has achieved great
can be obtained although the optimization objective is the success in the fields of computer vision [11] and natural
same, which suggests that the representation obtained by language processing [12]. Moreover, researchers have begun
the AE contains both the inherent feature and discrepant to study self-supervised pretraining methods for time series.
information. Therefore, it is natural to use the property of the Contrastive learning-based methods have made promising
AE that there is information loss in the reconstruction process progress, which realizes time series representation by clasto automatically generate augmentation samples required for sifying positive and negative samples, and one of the keys is
contrastive learning. how to construct high-quality positive and negative pairs [6].
 Inspired by the above insights, this article incorporates the Franceschi et al. [13] considered subseries close or not close
properties of the AE in the contrastive learning and proposes to the reference subseries as positive and negative samples,
a time series self-supervised contrastive pretraining method and used triplet loss for training to extract the representation.
with data augmentation using discrepancy of reconstruction Yue et al. [14] called the above idea subseries consistency,
information loss (CLR-DRL). Specifically, the CLR-DRL uti- and believed that it would cause the augmented samples to
lizes the discrepancies of the information loss in the hidden be susceptible to the “level shifts,” which could result in
space of different AEs to obtain reconstructed series with false positive pairs. To solve this problem, they proposed
discrepancies, and considers them as augmented samples the time series to vector method (TS2Vec), which utilized
needed for contrastive learning. Technically, the CLR-DRL context consistency to construct positive samples, arguing that
does not use explicit augmentation technologies, but directly only subseries with identical timestamps can be considered as
uses different AEs to obtain implicit augmented samples. Since positive pairs.
both augmented samples come from the reconstruction process Different from the above method of using subseries to
of the time series, the common features contained in the two achieve negative sampling, inspired by the SimCLR [7],
augmented samples can be regarded as inherent representa- Ian Tang et al. [8] regarded the samples augmented by diftions. The CLR-DRL uses the contrastive loss to constrain ferent explicit techniques in the entire series as positive
the representations extracted from the two augmented samples samples, and other time series in a small batch as negative
to obtain the inherent representation of time series. Benefit- samples. They designed eight explicit time series augmented
ing from the above design, the CLR-DRL can mitigate the approaches, including random noise addition, scaling, and
categories aliasing problem caused by explicit augmentation inverting. Recently, under the framework of the SimCLR,
approaches and obtain the inherent representation, making it many methods with good performance have been proposed.
achieving well performances in two target tasks with time Eldele et al. [9] designed a temporal and contextual contrastive
series classification and AD. module to implement time series modeling (TS-TCC) through
 Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows. cross-view prediction tasks, and achieved well performance in
 1) Inspired by the discrepancies of the information loss in the time series classification and cross-domain transfer tasks.
 the reconstruction process of different AEs, a novel time Furthermore, combining the frequency domain information of
 series self-supervised contrastive pretraining method is the time series, Yang and Hong [15] proposed the bilinear
 proposed, which uses carefully designed AEs to generate temporal–spectral fusion method (BTSF), which generated
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD 2514512

instance-level positive samples in the time domain by random mented samples can be regarded as the inherent feature of the
dropout and selected any one other series as a negative original series, which can be well extracted and characterized
sample. And when modeling, the time- and frequency-domain under the constraints of the contrastive loss.
features of the series were extracted through two encoders,
 III. M ETHOD
and fused through a carefully designed fusion algorithm.
 A. Problem Formulation
Similarly, Woo et al. [16] also performed data augmentation in the time domain using explicit approaches, and then Refer to the definition of transfer learning [22] to formumodeled the series by contrastive learning of disentangled late the problem. Given a source-domain dataset D Source =
seasonal-trend representations in time- and frequency-domain {xiSource |i = 1, 2, . . . , U } and a target-domain dataset D Target =
 Target
[contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend represen- {(xi , yi )|i = 1, 2, . . . , V }, D Source and D Target consists of
tations (CoST)]. However, although the BTSF and the CoST unlabeled and labeled time series, respectively. And for time
incorporate frequency domain information in the modeling series x ∈ RC×T in D Source and D Target , C and T refer to the
process, their data augmentation technologies are still oriented dimension and length of the time series, respectively. The label
to time domain representation. y in D Target is different according to target tasks. Specifically,
 In order to directly utilize frequency domain information, for the two application scenarios of classification and AD in
Zhang et al. [6] proposed the TF-C method, which directly this article, y can be defined as y ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Y }, where
implemented data augmentation on the frequency domain, and Y represents the number of categories in the classification
designed three types of frequency domain augmentation tech- scenario, and Y is 1 in the AD scenario, in which Y = 1 is
niques by artificially adding frequency domain perturbations. marked as an anomaly.
And the TF-C considered that the hidden representations in the The goal of self-supervised pretraining is that fine-tuning
time and frequency domain are close, so as to achieve a well parameters of the model Fpre (·, 2) on D Target containing V
representation. However, for the above contrastive learning samples to obtain the model Ftune (·, 8), where Fpre (·, 2) is the
methods, both time- and frequency-domain augmentations are pretrained model obtained on D Source containing U samples,
 Target Target
all implemented by explicit approaches, making the augmented and then obtaining the representation z i = Ftune (xi , 8)
samples potentially category aliasing, which will lead to the used for the target task, where V ≪ U . Among the parameters,
representation that is, difficult to characterize the inherent 2 and 8 are the parameters obtained through pretraining and
features of the series. fine-tuning, respectively. And for the model F(·), the process
 of 2 → 8 is fine-tuning.
B. Data Augmentation for Time Series B. Overall Architecture
 In current self-supervised contrastive pretraining methods, The overall architecture of the CLR-DRL is shown in
explicit augmentation methods are usually used to obtain Fig. 2. First, the CLR-DRL utilizes two different AEs to
the required augmented samples. For continuous time series generate two augmented series of the input series, and both
data, explicit augmentation methods usually include jittering, of which could contain the inherent feature of the input
scaling, inverting, reversing, shuffling, scrambling, and warp- series while differing under the reconstructed constraint. Then,
ing [17]. These methods are often randomly applied in time the CLR-DRL performs feature extraction on two augmented
series. In addition to explicit methods, some works used neural samples through a shared weight feature extraction module.
network methods to implicitly implement data augmenta- A joint constraint covering reconstruction and contrastive
tion [18]. Shi et al. [19] used a temporal generative adversarial loss is imposed on the augmented samples and affine results
network (GAN) with a gradient penalty to generate samples of the two features, which leads the sample augmentation
to solve the data imbalance problem. Li et al. [20] proposed a process and the representation extraction process to promote
bidirectional variational AE equipped with diffusion, denoise, each other and makes the extracted representation can reflect
and disentanglement for time series augmentation. the inherent feature of the input series. Specifically, two
 Compared with explicit augmentation methods, the method AEs and the feature extraction module of the CLR-DRL are
using neural networks for data augmentation can obtain richer carefully designed and implemented based on a graph neural
sample types [18], and the samples are more closely related to network (GNN), a fully connected neural network (FNN), and
the original sample due to the presence of a training process. a three-layer convolutional residual network (ResNet), which
Meanwhile, compared to the GAN and the diffusion methods are shown in Fig. 2(c)–(e), respectively. The above process is
that are more focused on generating new samples [21], the self-supervised contrastive pretraining of the CLR-DRL and is
reconstructed series obtained by the compression and recon- performed in the source domain as shown in Fig. 2(a). After
struction of the AE will be more closely related to the original that, the pretrained model will be fine-tuned with the target
time series. domain data to conduct target tasks. During the fine-tuning
 Based on the above review, the CLR-DLR naturally utilizes process as shown in Fig. 2(b), time series is input into the
AEs to generate augmented samples required for contrastive pretrained CRL-DRL to extract the representation, which is
learning. Specifically, since the contrastive learning method then fed into the target model to realize the target task.
requires pairs of augmented series, the CLR-DRL uses two
different AEs to generate the required samples. Meanwhile, C. Data Augmentation
since there are discrepancies in the samples reconstructed by Given a time series x, the contrastive learning method first
different AEs, the common feature contained in two aug- generates two augmented samples, xs and xw , through the
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 transmission so that it can only be propagated forward. Each
 element of A can be calculated by
 Ai, j = 1i≤ j (2)
 where 1i≤ j is an indicator function that equals to 1 when
 i ≤ j, and otherwise 0. Then, for each layer of the strong AE,
 the temporal feature is modeled through the message-passing
 mechanism of the GNN. And each layer is connected by
 the residual connection. For the nodes of each layer, the
 calculation process is as follows:
  
 X
 Hin = ReLUW1n · Hin−1 + W2n · A j,i · H jn−1  + Hin−1
 j∈N (i)

 (3)

Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the CLR-DRL. (a) Contrastive pretraining where W1 , W2 , and Hin denote the weight matrices and the
process of the CLR-DRL on the source domain. (b) Fine-tuning process of output of the node in the GNN layer, and j ∈ N (i) denotes
the CLR-DRL on the target domain. (c) Strong AE. (d) Weak AE. (e) Feature the neighbor nodes of the node i. Specifically, H 0 ∈ RC×T
extraction module.
 is the input time series x and Hi0 ∈ RC×1 is the vector of
 the node i. The dimension of the weight matrices W10 and
augmentation approach. Then, in a small batch, contrastive
 W20 is R Ds ×C , so the first layer will project the series to the
learning attempts to maximize the similarity between xs and
 space R Ds ×T and the reminding layers encode in this space.
xw from the same sample, while minimizing the similarity
 Therefore, when n > 1, W1n , and W2n belong to R Ds ×Ds and
between them and other samples. Therefore, two suitable aug-
 H n belongs to R Ds ×T .
mentation samples play an important role in the performance
 After n-layer stacking, the strong sample xs can be obtained
of contrastive learning.
 by an affine transformation of the encoded output
 The properties of the AE in terms of the information loss
and forcing the reconstructed series to tend toward the input xs = Ws1 · H n (4)
series provide ideas for data augmentation. Therefore, two
different AEs are used to obtain the augmented samples xs where Ws1 ∈ RC×Ds denotes the parameter matrix of the strong
and xw in the CLR-DRL. Specifically, the input time series AE.
are reconstructed by a strong and a weak AE with different The above process of augmenting samples can be formuarchitectures to generate strong and weak augmented samples. lated by
In particular, a simple FNN is used as the weak AE, while a xs = AEs (x, θ As ), xw = AEw (x, θ Aw ) (5)
GNN is utilized to carefully design a strong AE that is, more
suitable for temporal information. Following the convention in where AEs (·) and AEw (·) denote the strong and weak AE,
contrastive learning, the “strong” and “weak” are only used to respectively. θ As and θ Aw are the parameters of them. The L2
distinguish between two enhancement approaches and do not loss is imposed between the augmented samples and the input
indicate the reconstruction performance of the AE itself. time series to achieve the training of the AEs. Specifically, for
 1) Weak AE: The weak AE is a simple three-layer FNN as a time series x, the loss function of the sample augmentation
shown in Fig. 2(d) which contains an input layer, an output is
layer, and a hidden layer. Given a time series x ∈ RC×T , 1
it is first mapped to a space with Dw dimension (Dw ≪ T ) LossA = (∥xs − x∥2 + ∥xw − x∥2 ) (6)
 T
and then reconstructed to the original space. In the hidden
 where ∥·∥ denotes the norm.
layer, it is transformed nonlinearly using a linear rectification
function ReLU(·). So, the weak sample xw can be calculated
by D. Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning
 xw = ReLU(x · Ww1 ) · Ww2 (1) With the discrepancy in information loss between different
 AEs, the strong and weak samples are differentiated from
where Ww1 ∈ RT ×Dw and Ww2 ∈ R Dw ×T are the connection each other while containing the shared (inherent) feature. The
weight matrices between the input layer and the hidden layer, CLR-DRL extracts the inherent representation of the time
and the hidden layer and the output layer, respectively. series by capturing the shared features of the augmentation
 2) Strong AE: The strong AE is implemented by a unidi- samples through self-supervised comparative learning.
rectional GNN as shown in Fig. 2(c). Referring to the forward The features of the two augmented samples are extracted by
propagation approach of time series information, a forward- a ResNet with shared weights as the representations, which is
connected graph structure is constructed. Specifically, the calculated by
graph structure matrix A ∈ RT ×T is fixed as an upper
triangular matrix to constrain the direction of information z ∗ = F(x∗ , θ F ) (7)
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD 2514512

where F(·) is the representation extraction operation of the First, the objective function of the CLR-DRL is shown
ResNet and θ F denotes the shared parameters. The z ∗ ∈ in (12). Then, based on the current work [23], the contrast
R Dr ×1 = {z s , z w } is the representation vector of the samples loss constraint in (11) can be simplified as
x∗ = {xs , xw } and Dr denotes the dimension of z ∗ . For the X
 LossCsimple (xi ) = −S h is , h iw + S h i∗ , h i∗ .
  
F(·), the calculation of every residual block can be calculated (13)
 j
by h ∗ ∈D batch

 z ∗n = MaxPool BN Conv z ∗n−1 + z ∗n−1 For the two terms contained in (13), there is only a
 
 (8)
 difference in sign. The negative term means maximizing the
where MaxPool(·), BN(·), and Conv(·) denote the max pool- similarity within positive pairs, and the positive term means
ing operation, batch normalization operation, and convolution minimizing the similarity within negative pairs. Therefore,
operation, respectively. And when n = 1, z ∗0 = x∗ . The here only the gradient of the negative term is calculated and
representation z ∗ is obtained by flattening the z ∗n . Then, the analyzed, and the gradient of the positive term can be obtained
representations z s and z w are concatenated to obtain the by a similar approach. Ignoring the positive term in (13),
representation z of the input time series. For a sample x letting LossC = LossCsimple and substituting it into (12), the
 gradients of L with respect to the parameters θG , θ F , θ As , and
 z = concat(z s , z w )
 θ Aw can be calculated by the chain rule
 = [F(AEs (x, θ As ), θ F ); F(AEw (x, θ Aw ), θ F )] (9)
 ∂L ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w
where concat(·) denote the concatenation function. = +
 ∂θG ∂ S ∂h s ∂θG ∂ S ∂h w ∂θG
 Furthermore, the representation z ∗ is projected into the ∂LossC ∂h s ∂LossC ∂h w
contrastive loss space via a shared-weight projection head. =− hw − hs
 ∂S ∂θG ∂S ∂θ
Current research has shown that it is more beneficial to  G
 ∂LossC ∂h s ∂h w
 
perform contrastive loss calculations in this space [7]. This =− hw + hs (14)
calculation can be formulated by ∂S ∂θG ∂θG
 ∂L ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w
 h ∗ = G(z ∗ , θG ) = Wg2 · ReLU(BN(Wg1 · z ∗ )) = +
 (10) ∂θ F ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂θ F ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂θ F
 ∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s ∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w
where h ∗ is the projection of z ∗ , θG is the shared parameters =− hw − hs
of the projection head, and Wg1 and Wg2 are the weight ∂S ∂z s ∂θ F ∂S ∂z w ∂θ F
 ∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s ∂h w ∂z w
  
matrices of two linear transformations. In order to maximize =− hw + hs (15)
the similarity of positive pairs and minimize the similarity ∂S ∂z s ∂θ F ∂z w ∂θ F
of negative pairs, the normalized temperature-scaled cross- ∂L ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs ∂LossA ∂ xs
 = +
entropy loss (NT-Xent) [7] is used as the contrastive loss ∂θ As ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs ∂θ As ∂ xs ∂θ As
constrain. Specifically, the loss function of the sample xi in a ∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs ∂LossA ∂ xs
small batch can be defined as =− hw +
 ∂S ∂z s ∂ xs ∂θ As ∂ xs ∂θ As
 ∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs
 !
 exp S h is , h iw /τ
    
 xs − x
 LossC h s , h w = − log P
 i i
 
 = − hw + (16)
 ∂ S ∂z s ∂ xs T ∥xs − x∥2 ∂θ As
 h ∗ ∈D batch 1i̸= j exp S h s , h w /τ
  
 j
 i i
 ∂L ∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw ∂LossA ∂ xw
 (11) = +
 ∂θ Aw ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw ∂θ Aw ∂ xw ∂θ Aw
where S(·) and 1 denote the cosine similarity and the indicator ∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw ∂LossA ∂ xw
function, respectively. h is and h iw are the augmented samples of =− hs +
 j
 ∂S ∂z w ∂ xw ∂θ Aw ∂ xw ∂θ Aw
the sample xi , and the h ∗ represents other augmented samples 
 ∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w xw − x
 
 ∂ xw
in a small batch. And τ is a temporal parameter. = − hs + .
 ∂ S ∂z w ∂ xw T ∥xw − x∥2 ∂θ Aw
 In summary, the objective function of the CLR-DRL is
shown in the following equation: (17)

 L = LossA + LossC. (12) From (14) and (15), the gradient of the shared parameters
 θG and θ F includes the gradient of two branches of strong
 and weak augmented samples. Each of them has a strong
E. Effectiveness of the CLR-DRL connection with the projection term h ∗ of the other augmented
 The pretraining process includes the sample augmentation sample, since h ∗ serves as the weight coefficient of the other
and self-supervised contrastive learning processes. And the term multiplied directly on the gradient. Therefore, according
two processes are combined for simultaneous training, making to the purpose of pulling similar samples closer and the
the CLR-DRL as an end-to-end method, which is beneficial in updating process of the shared parameter θ F , the representation
fully utilizing the AE to generate augmentation samples while vector z ∗ of the augmented samples x∗ extracted by F(x∗ , θ F )
learning the inherent representation of the time series. In order gradually converges to their common representation, i.e., to the
to illustrate the effectiveness of the CLR-DRL in extracting the inherent representation of the input time series.
inherent representation of the input time series, it is analyzed Furthermore, from (16) and (17), it is known that in the endfrom the deduction of the gradient flow. to-end training process, in addition to the constraints of the
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

AE reconstruction process, the contrast loss term LossC will B. Baselines
impose an additional constraint on the augmentation process. The CLR-DRL is compared with eight competitive pretrain-
With this constraint, an augmented sample will be affected ing methods, including six contrastive pretraining methods
by the projection term of the representation vector of the including the TF-C [6], the CoST [16], the TS2Vec [14],
other sample, since h ∗ also serves as the weight coefficient of the Mixing-up [26], the TS-TCC [9], and the TS-TAC [27],
the gradient term. This will cause the common representation and two mask pretraining methods the TimeMAE [28] and
between the two augmented samples to gradually increase with the SimMTM [29]. Mask pretraining is another widely used
the training process, while gradually reducing the differential method, so here two new mask pretraining method is considrepresentation between the two samples. ered for comparison. Among the eight methods, the TF-C is
 The above analysis is also proven in this Section on ablation the previous SOTA contrastive pretraining method.
study and representation analysis using alignment and uniformity in Sections IV-F and IV-G, that is, the representation
of the positive pair shows well alignment and uniformity. C. Setup
Therefore, it is proved that the CLR-DRL can achieve good For the time series classification task, settings remained
extraction of the inherent representation of the input time consistent with the TF-C, which is followed by many followed
series. works. Specifically, the scenario Epilepsy → Epilepsy is set
 as an in-domain setting and for cross-domain settings, there
F. Working on Target Tasks are four scenarios including SleepEEG → Epilepsy, SleepEEG
 After pretraining, all parameters 2 = {θ As , θ Aw , θ F , θG } can → EMG, HAR → Gesture, and ECG → electromyography
be obtained. Among them, θG is only used to project the (EMG). The cross-entropy loss is used as a constraint on the
representation z ∗ into the contrastive loss space. Therefore, classification task to update parameters during fine-tuning.
the parameters of the pretrained model used to extract the For the AD task, the following in-domain scenarios are set
representation vector are 2 = {θ As , θ Aw , θ F }. Then, combined up: MSL-A-4 → All, SMAP-P-1 → All, and SMD-2-1 →
with the target task, the obtained pretrained model and the All, which means the pretraining is conducted on a certain
target model are combined into a complete model, which entity or telemetry channel, and fine-tuning as well as AD
is fine-tuned on the target domain to obtain the parameters are conducted on all entities and telemetry channels in the
8 = {φ As , φ Aw , φ F } as well as the parameter φT of the target same dataset. Under the cross-domain setting, the following
task model Ftarget . Therefore, given the input time series x, the scenarios are set up: MSL-A-4 → SMAP and SMAP-P-1 →
prediction result ŷ of the target task is MSL. In addition, the widely used AD approach is used, which
 is that a time series reconstruction model is modeled and AD
 ŷ = Ftarget (z, φT ) = Ftarget (Ftune (x, 8), φT ). (18) is achieved using the reconstruction error and a predefined
 threshold [24]. Regarding the selection of the predefined
 IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS ON B ENCHMARKS threshold, the best threshold is selected through grid search,
 In order to fully evaluate the CLR-DRL, experiments are and the best performance is reported for all experiments [30].
conducted on two typical time series tasks: classification and For all experimental settings, following the current pro-
AD. In an actual industrial, the number of labeled samples tocol [6], the target task model Ftarget is implemented
required for both tasks is often scarce. Furthermore, these two using a linear classifier. The experiment results are evaltasks are suitable choices in terms of validating the motivation uated using standard evaluation metrics including accuracy
of the proposed method and validating its improvement in (Acc = ((TP + TN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN))), precision
the class aliasing problem of augmented samples. For each (P = (TP/(TP + FP))), recall (R = (TP/(TP + FN))), and
task, experiments are performed in both in- and cross-domain F1 score (F1 = ((2 × P × R)/(P + R))), where TP and FP
settings, and results are reported in detail. denote correctly and incorrectly detected anomalies, respectively. And TN and FN denote correctly and incorrectly labeled
A. Benchmarks normal, respectively.
 The CLR-DRL is validated on nine real-world datasets of
two typical time series tasks and the details are shown in D. Implementation Details
Table I. Among them, the SleepEEG, the HAR, and the ECG The CLR-DRL, its variants, and all baselines are impleare only used as pretraining datasets and are not segmented. mented in PyTorch version 1.8.2 with CUDA 10.2. All
The remaining datasets are split into training, validation, experiments are conducted on a server with Intel1 Xeon1 Silver
and test sets following the current protocol. Specifically, for 4210 CPU at 2.20 GHz and a single NVIDIA TITAN V 12 GB
classification datasets, the settings remained consistent with GPU. Benefiting from the simplicity of the design of the CLRthe TF-C [6]. For the AD datasets, the settings of the server DRL, only four hyper-parameters need to be set, which are the
machine dataset (SMD) are consistent with the literature [24]. hidden dimensions Ds and Dw of the strong and weak AEs, the
The datasets [25] mars science laboratory (MSL) and soil encode layer n of the AEs and the temperature coefficient τ in
moisture active passive (SMAP) are 27 and 55 channels of the contrast loss. For all experimental scenarios and settings,
telemetry and command data of the two spacecraft, respec- the Ds , Dw , n, and τ are set to 16, half the sequence length
tively, in which only telemetry dimension data are considered,
that is, using them as univariate AD datasets. 1 Registered trademark.
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD 2514512

 TABLE I
 D ETAILS OF B ENCHMARKS

 TABLE II
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE (%) OF I N -D OMAIN AND C ROSS -D OMAIN S ETTINGS

(T /2), 2, and 0.2, respectively. In addition, for fairness, the 1) Classification: The classification performance for all
parameter settings of the three-layer ResNet are kept consistent settings is reported in Table II. Compared with all baselines,
with current work [6] to verify the effectiveness of the motiva- the CLR-DRL achieves the best performance on 22 out of
tion and architecture of the CLR-DRL. All models are trained 24 metrics. In particular, in all settings, the performance of the
using the Adam optimizer with the learning rate 2 × 10−3 , CLR-DRL exceeds that of the randomly initialized fine-tuned
L2 regularization penalty coefficient weight 3 × 10−3 and the model, indicating that the proposed model does not suffer from
exponential decay rates hyperparameters β1 and β2 for the a negative transfer phenomenon, further illustrating that the
moment estimates as 0.9 and 0.999. For the classification task, inherent representation learned by the CLR-DRL during the
pretraining iterations 100 times and fine-tuning 100 times. For pretraining is valuable for target tasks. Specifically, under an
the AD task, pretraining iterations 30 times and fine-tuning in-domain setting, compared with the previous SOTA method
30 times. The batch size of pretraining and fine-tuning for all with the SimMTM, the CLR-DRL achieves a performance
experiments are set to 128 and 60, respectively. The model and improvement of 1.76% on F1. From cross-domain settings
evaluation metrics corresponding to the best F1 are recorded results, even though there is a large domain gap between the
and reported. source and target dataset, the CLR-DRL still achieves well
 In addition, for fairness, a unified target task model Ftarget classification accuracy compared to baselines. Particularly,
is used for all experiments. Specifically, a two-layer FNN in the SleepEEG → EMG scenario, the CLR-DRL achieves an
is used to implement target tasks, in which the output of improvement of 21.31% on the F1 compared with the previous
the first layer is active by sigmoid function, and the second SOTA contrastive learning-based method TF-C. It can be
layer is the output layer. For classification and AD tasks, the found that when the series length and knowledge of the target
number of neurons in the first layer is 64 and 512, respectively. domain and the source domain are close, the CLR-DRL can
The number of neurons in the second layer is the number of obtain better classification performance. Specifically, in the
categories and the length of the input sequence, respectively. ECG → EMG scenario, the series lengths of two datasets
Furthermore, all baselines are implemented by their official are the same, and the CLR-DRL achieves completely accurate
code, and hyper-parameters are set as they recommended. classification performance.
 2) Anomaly Detection: The AD performance for all set-
E. Results and Discussion tings is reported in Table III. Compared with all baselines,
 This section reports the main comparison results of two the CLR-DRL achieves the best performance on 18 out of
tasks. Experiment results of fine-tuning parameters with ran- 20 metrics. Similar to the classification task, all metrics of
dom initialization (Random init.) directly on the target dataset the CLR-DRL outperform the Random init. In in-domain
without pretraining are also reported. settings, the CLR-DRL achieves significant improvements in
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 AD P ERFORMANCE (%) OF I N -D OMAIN AND C ROSS -D OMAIN S ETTINGS

 3) Summary: The F1 metrics of four scenarios in the
 in- and cross-domain settings are summarized in Fig. 3 and
 the visualization of the critical difference diagram based on
 the Wilcoxon pair-wised signed-rank test after rejecting the
 null hypothesis using the Friedman test of the metric F1 is
 shown in Fig. 4. In all these settings, the CLR-DRL exhibits
 good performance, which shows that previous methods cannot
 simultaneously handle classification and AD tasks in multiple
Fig. 3. Performance (F1 metric) in classification (↑) and AD (↑) tasks under settings, further highlighting the advantages of the CLR-DRL.
in-domain and cross-domain settings.
 All in all, the high performance in the in-domain setting
 demonstrates the positive effect of extracting time series inherent representation based on the CLR-DRL for target tasks.
 The high performance in cross-domain settings demonstrates
 its advantage in achieving high-quality target tasks through
 cross-domain transfer in scenarios where real-world labeled
 samples are scarce.

 F. Ablation Study
 The motivation of the CLR-DRL is investigated through
Fig. 4. Critical difference diagram (F1) of AD and classification tasks.
 three different ablations, and the high-quality inherent representation of the time series can be extracted by contrastive
 pretraining with sample augmentation from AE. Specifically,
both multivariate and univariate AD tasks compared with three widely used time series explicit augmentation approaches
previous SOTA results. On the F1 metric, the CLR-DRL including jittering, scaling, and permutation are used to replace
improved by 7.11% on MSL-A-4 → All, 5.58% on SMAP- the AE of the CLR-DRL to construct three variants W/o AEs
P-1 → All, and 3.98% on SMD-2-1 → All. In addition, (replace AEs ), W/o AEw (replace AEw ), and W/o AE (replace
the CLR-DRL also achieves significant improvements in the AEs , and AEw ). Ablation experiments are conducted on four
cross-domain transfer tasks: 3.99% on MSL-A-4 → SMAP scenarios including in- and cross-domain settings, and the best
and 8.91% on SMAP-P-1 → MSL. performance of the variants under three explicit augmentation
 From the methodological and technical perspective, the well approaches are reported in Fig. 5. In addition, Random init.
AD performance of the CLR-DRL can be attributed to the is also considered as a method of ablation and included for
following two reasons. First, the CLR-DRL does not use comparison.
an explicit augmentation approach. Instead, it uses the AEs It can be seen from the results that after replacing any AE
to automatically obtain augmented samples, which mitigates with explicit approach, the F1 will decline to varying degrees.
the impact of category aliasing on the performance of target This is because the correlation between the two augmented
tasks. Particularly, AD is sensitive to category aliasing and samples is weakened, which is detrimental to extracting the
sample changes, and the design of the CLR-DRL is more inherent representation of the series. This result further supsuitable for such a task. Second, the augmentation samples ports the theoretical analysis in Section III-E. Furthermore,
of the CLR-DRL are the series reconstructed by AEs, so the it is worth noting that after completely replacing the AE with
representation of the series extracted by the CLR-DRL is rel- an explicit augmented approach, negative transfer occurs in
atively suitable for the reconstruction task, which has inherent the in-domain setting. And for the SleepEEG → Epilepsy
advantages for the reconstruction error-based AD method used scenario, its performance remains consistent with Random
by the CLR-DRL. init., which shows that when AEs are not used to augment
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD 2514512

 Fig. 7. L2 distance distribution of aligned positive-pair representations. A low
 mean value indicates well alignment.

Fig. 5. Ablation results of the CLR-DRL in two tasks and two settings.

 Fig. 8. Average pairwise Gaussian potential of positive-pair representations.
 A low mean value indicates well uniformity.

 and uniformity of representation are used to analyze it.
 According to Wang and Isola [31], alignment means that
 the representations of positive pairs should be close to each
 other and therefore, invariant to noise. Uniformity means
 that the representation of all samples should be uniformly
Fig. 6. Performance comparison on fine-tuning with limited data in AD task distributed on the hypersphere, which allows it to retain
under in-domain setting. more data information. For a good representation, it should
 have both good alignment and uniformity, and they have a
samples, the variants are difficult to obtain effective domain direct relationship with the performance of target tasks. The
knowledge and extract representation through pretraining, and quantitative metrics proposed by Wang and Isola [31] are used
cannot provide a positive effect for target tasks. In addition, to evaluate the representation extracted by the CLR-DRL,
it is found that in four scenarios, removing strong AE will and quantitative results of alignment and uniformity in the
produce more performance degradation than removing weak SleepEEG → Epilepsy scenario are provided in Figs. 7 and 8.
AE, which shows that the reconstruction performance of the For alignment, compared with the TF-C and the variant
AE has an impact on the target task performance of the CLR- W/o AE, the CLR-DRL has the minimal mean L2 distance
DRL. This phenomenon will be discussed in Section IV-G. of the positive pair representation, which indicates that the
 The above results and analysis prove the correctness of the representation obtained by the CLR-DRL has good alignment.
motivation of the CLR-DRL. Meanwhile, although the representation of the TF-C is closer
 to the CLR-DRL in terms of the mean value (0.16 versus
G. Model Analysis 0.24), the representation distribution of the CLR-DRL is
 1) Fine-Tune With Limited Data: In real-world industrial more concentrated on short distances in terms of distance
scenarios, due to the scarcity of labeled samples, transfer- distribution. The variant W/o AE has a larger mean distance
ring pretrained models to limited data scenarios is a key of 0.44, which shows that generating positive pairs through
application. Particularly, for typical unsupervised AD tasks, AEs can lead to better alignment of the representation. For
monitoring newly used industrial devices is crucial. In order uniformity, the CLR-DRL obtained the minimal mean of the
to verify the performance of the CLR-DRL in fine-tuning average pairwise Gaussian potential among the three models
on limited data, experiments are conducted in three AD (0.59 versus 0.82 and 0.84), which shows that it achieves
scenarios. As shown in Fig. 6, in the univariate AD task, the better uniformity and retains the information of the data to
performance of the CLR-DRL has been significantly improved the greatest extent while extracting the inherent representation
compared with baselines under different amounts of data. And vector of the time series. Therefore, from the perspective of
the CLR-DRL only needs 10% of the data to obtain more representation analysis, it is clearly shown why the CLR-DRL
than 90% of F1. For multivariable detection tasks, although achieves advantages in target tasks. The small alignment
the CLR-DRL and baselines have similar performance under further verifies the conclusion in Section III-E that the two
10% of the data, as the ratio increases, the CLR-DRL shows augmented samples are closely related.
obviously rapid performance improvement. At a data ratio of 3) Efficiency Analysis: The number of parameters and the
25%, the CLR-DRL can achieve an AD performance of more floating point operations (FLOPs) [32] are used to evaluate
than 85% on F1, which fully validates the advantages of the the memory and computation cost of the CLR-DRL. Specif-
CLR-DRL. ically, the above metrics are calculated using the experiment
 2) Representation Analysis: In order to intuitively evaluate settings on the SMD dataset detailed in Sections IV-A and
the representation capabilities of the CLR-DRL, the alignment, IV-D, and results are shown in Fig. 9. A higher F1 score
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 9. Relationships between the AD performance (F1 ↑) and model
efficiency (FLOPs↓ or parameters↓).

 TABLE IV
 Fig. 10. PSM and experiment settings.
 PARAMETERS OF THE NAPHTHA AND LPG P IPELINES

 signal is segmented through a time window of length 16.
 Following the above operation, four consecutive hours of data
 are used to compose the PSM dataset. In particular, the naphtha
 TABLE V pipeline simulated leaks 11 times by opening valves during
 D ETAILS OF PSM DATASET this period.
 The PSM experiment is conducted on two pipelines with
 different working conditions as shown in Table IV. In experimental settings, the data collected from upstream of the
 two pipelines are used to pretrain the model and then are
 transferred to the naphtha pipeline to monitor. The tasks
 of transferring from one pipeline to another are considered
 as cross-domain setting and four scenarios containing inand cross-domain settings shown in Table V are set up as:
 RTU03 → RTU03, RTU03 → RTU04, RTU05 → RTU03,
 and RTU05 → RTU04. Among them, for typical AD tasks,
means a better AD performance, a lower FLOPs means the modeling is conducted on the data under normal working
less amount of computation required by the model (better conditions. For the classification task, two leaked data and a
computation efficiency) and fewer parameters means better small number of normal samples are used to form a fine-tuning
memory cost. It is notable that the CLR-DRL achieves the best dataset to fine-tune the pretrained model and test it on the
AD performance and the lowest memory cost. Although the remaining data. The implementation details are the same as
TF-C achieves the best computation efficiency, it cannot detect Section IV-D.
anomalies well. Instead, the CLR-DRL can take into account The experiment results of AD and classification tasks on the
both good computation efficiency (rank 2) and model perfor- PSM are shown in Tables VI and VII, respectively. It can be
mance. In addition, all models can predict a single sample in seen that the CLR-DRL exceeds the baselines in all settings.
less than 1 ms, which is fully sufficient for actual industrial Especially in scenario RTU03 → RTU04 of the AD task,
applications. Therefore, The CLR-DRL can achieve the target the CLR-DRL achieves completely accurate AD results and
task efficiently and quickly in a real-world application. an improvement of 6.64% (93.36 → 100.00) is achieved
 compared to the previous SOTA results. In addition, on the
 V. VALIDATION ON A R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO classification task, the CLR-DRL achieves significant improve-
 Pipeline transportation is a widely used transportation ments in four scenarios. Especially in the two cross-domain
approach for petrochemical materials and products, and plays scenarios, an improvement of more than 10% is achieved
an important role in a country’s petrochemical industry. How- (71.68 → 81.98 and 80.67 → 90.97).
ever, due to aging, corrosion, man-made damage, and other Furthermore, for actual application scenarios, the monfactors, pipeline leakage accidents occur frequently. Therefore, itoring experiments on newly used devices are simulated.
real-time and accurate pipeline status monitoring (PSM) is In cross-domain scenarios, the AD models are fine-tuned on
of great significance. For long-distance pipelines, pressure different proportions of data to monitor the pipeline. As shown
or acoustic wave detection instruments are usually installed in the results in Fig. 11, even if only 10% of the data is used
on upstream and downstream of the pipeline to collect the for fine-tuning, more than 85% of the monitoring performance
transportation signal, which is used to monitor the pipeline. can be achieved. And as data from new devices continues to
 In order to verify the effectiveness of the CLR-DRL in a increase, monitoring performance continues to improve. This
practical industrial application, monitoring on two pipelines shows that the CLR-DRL has a well transfer capability and can
of naphtha and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) under different play an important role in monitoring new devices in real-world
working conditions as shown in Fig. 10 is conducted. The data industrial scenarios.
are the upstream and downstream infrasound signals collected In summary, according to the actual application of the
by the remote terminal unit (RTU) through the infrasound CLR-DRL on PSM, the proposed method has practical
acoustic transducer. The signal is sampled at a frequency significance in ensuring the stable operation of the device and
of 50 Hz, for which a 1:10 extraction is conducted and the avoiding economic losses and personal injuries.
ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD 2514512

 TABLE VI
 AD P ERFORMANCE (%) ON PSM DATASET

 TABLE VII
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON PSM DATASET

 application effect of the CLR-DRL. Further analysis proves the
 correctness of the idea of the CLR-DRL.
 However, as a deep learning-based method, the CLR-DRL
 has poor interpretability, which is also significant in real-world
 applications. Therefore, in the future, we will conduct research
 on interpretable machine learning for time series. Meanwhile,
 we will focus on the correlation between mask modeling and
 contrastive modeling of time series and conduct research on
 robust series representation.
Fig. 11. Performance of the CLR-DRL fine-tuning with limited data in AD
task on PSM. R EFERENCES
 [1] A. Tank, I. Covert, N. Foti, A. Shojaie, and E. B. Fox, “Neural Granger
 causality,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8,
 VI. C ONCLUSION pp. 4267–4279, Aug. 2022.
 [2] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
 This article proposes a new contrastive pretraining method detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
with the CLR-DRL. In order to solve the problem of aug- Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
 [3] Z. Zhang, Y. Han, B. Ma, M. Liu, and Z. Geng, “Temporal chain network
mented samples category aliasing that exists in explicit data with intuitive attention mechanism for long-term series forecasting,”
augmentation approaches, the CLR-DRL uses two different IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
AEs to automatically generate augmented samples and obtain [4] X. Hu, T. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Noise adaptive filtering model
 integrating spatio-temporal feature for soft sensor,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
the positive and negative pairs required for contrastive learn- vol. 239, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 122453.
ing. In turn, the reconstruction discrepancies of different AEs [5] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li,
as well as the contrastive constraint are utilized to achieve the “Label-efficient time series representation learning: A review,” 2023,
extraction of inherent representation vectors of the time series, arXiv:2302.06433.
 [6] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Žitnik, “Self-supervised
which is explained by the theory analysis using gradient flow contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consiscalculation. Experiments on nine real-world benchmarks of tency,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2022,
two typical time series tasks show that the CLR-DRL out- pp. 3988–4003.
 [7] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
performs the current SOTA baselines on Acc and F1 metrics. framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
In addition, an actual PSM case is provided to verify the actual 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–23.
2514512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 [8] C. Ian Tang, I. Perez-Pozuelo, D. Spathis, and C. Mascolo, “Exploring [32] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
 contrastive learning in human activity recognition for healthcare,” 2020, convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference,” in Proc.
 arXiv:2011.11542. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2016, pp. 1–12.
 [9] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.
 (IJCAI), 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
[10] H. El-Fiqi, M. Wang, K. Kasmarik, A. Bezerianos, K. C. Tan,
 and H. A. Abbass, “Weighted gate layer autoencoders,” IEEE Trans.
 Cybern., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 7242–7253, Aug. 2022.
[11] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Zhen Zhang received the B.S. degree in
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988. measurement and control technology and
[12] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc. instrumentation and the M.S. degree in control
 NIPS, 2020, pp. 1877–1901. science and engineering from Beijing University
[13] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in
 representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural 2018 and 2021, respectively, where he is currently
 Inf. Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–23. pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science and
 engineering.
[14] Z. Yue et al., “Ts2vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” His research interests include time series anomaly
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp. 8980–8987. detection, forecasting, and industrial process
[15] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series representation learning monitoring.
 with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 25038–25054.
[16] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. C. H. Hoi, “CoST:
 Contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for
 time series forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 1–14.
[17] T. T. Um et al., “Data augmentation of wearable sensor data for Parkinson’s disease monitoring using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
 19th ACM Int. Conf. Multimodal Interact., Nov. 2017, pp. 216–220. Yongming Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
[18] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University of Chemsurvey,” in Proc. Thirtieth Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021, ical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2009 and 2014,
 pp. 4653–4660. respectively.
[19] Y. Shi, J. Li, H. Li, and B. Yang, “An imbalanced data augmentation He is currently a Professor with the College of
 and assessment method for industrial process fault classification with Information Science and Technology, Beijing Uniapplication in air compressors,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, versity of Chemical Technology. His current research
 pp. 1–10, 2023. interests include power system modeling, neural
 networks, intelligent computing, data mining, and
[20] Y. Li, X. Lu, Y. Wang, and D. Dou, “Generative time series forecasting
 intrusion detection.
 with diffusion, denoise, and disentanglement,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2023, pp. 23009–23022.
[21] L. Lin, Z. Li, R. Li, X. Li, and J. Gao, “Diffusion models for time series
 applications: A survey,” 2023, arXiv:2305.00624.
[22] P. Yan et al., “A comprehensive survey of deep transfer learning for
 anomaly detection in industrial time series: Methods, applications, and
 directions,” 2023, arXiv:2307.05638.
[23] F. Wang and H. Liu, “Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Bo Ma received the B.S. degree in mechatronic
 Jun. 2021, pp. 2495–2504. engineering from Taiyuan University of Technology,
[24] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Taiyuan, China, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural power engineering and engineering thermophysics
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data from Beijing University of Chemical Technology
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837. (BUCT), Beijing, China, in 2006.
[25] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söder- He is currently a Professor with the Diagnosis and
 ström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric Self-Recovery Engineering Research Center, BUCT.
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. His research interests include fault diagnosis, trans-
 Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395. fer learning, and health monitoring.
[26] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Ø. Mikalsen, and R. Jenssen,
 “Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-supervised representation learning
 for time series,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 155, pp. 54–61, Mar. 2022.
[27] Y. Wang et al., “Graph-aware contrasting for multivariate time-series
 classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38,
 no. 14, pp. 15725–15734.
[28] M. Cheng, Q. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Zhang, R. Zhang, and E. Chen,
 “TimeMAE: Self-supervised representations of time series with decou-
 Zhiqiang Geng received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
 pled masked autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2303.00320.
 degrees from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
[29] J. Dong, H. Wu, H. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Wang, and M. Long, “SimMTM: China, in 1997 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 A simple pre-training framework for masked time-series modeling,” in degree from the College of Information Science
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2023, pp. 29996–30025. and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
[30] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning Technology, Beijing, China, in 2005.
 graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly He is currently a Professor with the College
 detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, of Information Science and Technology, Beijing
 Jun. 2022. University of Chemical Technology. His research
[31] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning interests include neural networks, intelligent comthrough alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. 37th Int. puting, data mining, knowledge management, and
 Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, Jul. 2020, pp. 9929–9939. process modeling.