IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 5025713

 AADC-Net: A Multimodal Deep Learning
 Framework for Automatic Anomaly
 Detection in Real-Time Surveillance
 Duc Tri Phan , Member, IEEE, Vu Hoang Minh Doan , Jaeyeop Choi , Byeongil Lee ,
 and Junghwan Oh , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Automatic anomaly detection (AAD) has emerged Index Terms— Automatic anomaly detection (AAD), real-time
as an advanced vision-based measurement method with diverse surveillance, video anomaly detection (VAD), vision-based methapplications in healthcare and security. However, current AAD ods, vision-language model (VLM).
methods still face challenges related to data limitations and
labeled-data imbalances, which limit the accuracy and reliability
of AAD in real-life applications. Additionally, labeling and I. I NTRODUCTION
training large datasets for video anomaly detection (VAD) is
computationally demanding and time-consuming. To address
these challenges, this work introduces AADC-Net, a multimodal
deep neural network for automated abnormal event detection
 V IDEO anomaly detection (VAD) is a computational tool
 used to detect unusual or abnormal events within video
 sequences, contributing to automated monitoring systems [1].
and categorization. The key contributions of this research are These abnormal patterns could include unusual movements,
as follows: 1) AADC-Net leverages pretrained large language behaviors, or any irregular and unexpected activities [2]. More
models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) to mitigate
VAD dataset limitations and imbalances; 2) a pretrained object
 specifically, VAD aims to determine if each given video
detection model [DEtection TRansformer (DETR)] is integrated frame contains any anomalies [3]. In real life, monitoring
for visual feature extraction, eliminating the need for bounding abnormal activities manually is a challenging task because they
box supervision; 3) the experimental results demonstrate the rarely occur compared to normal ones. Therefore, developing
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance of the proposed AADC-Net automated VAD techniques is essential for minimizing unnecwith an area under the curve (AUC) of 83.2% and an average
 essary workload and increasing the efficiency of real-time
precision (AP) of 83.8% on the public UCF-Crime and XD-
Violence datasets, respectively; and 4) additionally, AADC-Net surveillance and security systems.
can be integrated into existing video surveillance systems, such VAD has been extensively studied and employed in
as those in smart gyms and healthcare facilities, to automat- real-world scenarios due to its practical benefits [4], [5],
ically detect anomalies in real time with minimal supervision, [6], [7]. In surveillance and security, VAD can help detect
enhancing security, monitoring, and reducing labor costs while intruders in restricted areas and identify suspicious activities
minimizing human error. In summary, our results demonstrate
that AADC-Net not only achieves high accuracy in anomaly in public places, such as violent or terrorist acts [8], [9], [10].
detection but also provides a practical solution for real-world In healthcare, it can monitor patients for abnormal movements
surveillance applications. or behaviors and detect falls or medical emergencies in patient
 care services, thereby reducing the workload of nurses and
 Received 30 December 2024; revised 17 February 2025; accepted doctors [11], [12]. VAD is also utilized in industrial and
25 February 2025. Date of publication 31 March 2025; date of current
version 16 April 2025. This work was supported by the National Research manufacturing settings for detecting equipment malfunctions
Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIT) and identifying safety violations [13], [14], [15], [16]. Curunder Grant 2022R1A5A8023404. The Associate Editor coordinating the rent research on VAD in smart gyms primarily focuses on
review process was Dr. Sudao He. (Duc Tri Phan and Vu Hoang Minh Doan
contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Byeongil Lee; monitoring workout routines, such as weight lifting, to ensure
Junghwan Oh.) proper form [17]. Despite its limitations in implementation
 Duc Tri Phan was with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Pukyong within workouts, VAD shows several promising applications
National University, Busan 48513, South Korea. He is now with the Early
Mental Potential and Wellbeing Research Centre (EMPOWER), Nanyang for enhancing personalized training and feedback, safety mon-
Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: ductri.phan@ itoring, and identifying abnormal activities.
ntu.edu.sg). Over the past few years, deep learning approaches have
 Vu Hoang Minh Doan and Jaeyeop Choi are with the Smart Gym-
Based Translational Research Center for Active Senior’s Healthcare, Pukyong
 been widely used for VAD applications. Convolutional neu-
National University, Busan 48513, South Korea (e-mail: doanvuhoangminh@ ral networks (CNNs) and long short-term memory networks
gmail.com; jaeyeopchoi@pknu.ac.kr). (LSTMs) excel in learning complex patterns and hierarchical
 Byeongil Lee is with the Digital Healthcare Research Center, Institute features from raw video data, making them ideal for detecting
of Information Technology and Convergence, Pukyong National University,
Busan 48513, South Korea (e-mail: bilee@pknu.ac.kr). anomalies [18], [19]. Their ability to describe strongly nonlin-
 Junghwan Oh is with Ohlabs Corporation, Busan 48513, South Korea, and ear spatial and temporal relationships without manual feature
also with Industry 4.0 Convergence Bionics Engineering and the Department engineering is a significant advantage, allowing them to adapt
of Biomedical Engineering, Pukyong National University, Busan 48513,
South Korea (e-mail: jungoh@pknu.ac.kr). to various scenarios [20]. However, their limitations include
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3551832 the requirement of large datasets for training and significant
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Prediction scores from baseline VAD models and video descriptions using VLM and LLM models are employed for workout categorization and
abnormal detection. On the score curve, the red dashed lines denote anomaly thresholds. The bottom shows the answers from our proposed video-LLM model
for the VAD video description.

computational resources [21]. They can be challenging to To address these challenges, we proposed a deep learning
interpret, often acting as black boxes without clear insight into model that integrates large language models (LLMs) and
how decisions are made [22]. Spatiotemporal feature-based vision-language models (VLMs) for VAD applications.
methods, such as dynamic texture models, treat videos as a LLMs and VLMs are renowned for their ability to prolinear dynamic system over time [23], [24]. These methods cess and comprehend complex data across a wide range
are well-known for detecting anomalies in dynamic scenes, of applications. LLMs provide transformative capabilities by
such as abnormal crowd activities [25]. However, dynamic enhancing how systems interact with video data in VAD [32].
texture models can only effectively handle videos with smooth VLMs enable a more comprehensive analysis of videos by
movements, are sensitive to noise, and require precise feature integrating visual data from video frames with contextual
extraction [26]. information from associated textual data [33]. This multi-
 Despite various meaningful and innovative studies on VAD, modal approach combines visual signals from video frames
several technical challenges remain in this field. with contextual information from textual data, enabling the
 detection of context-specific anomalies that might be missed
 1) The effectiveness of VAD is highly dependent by visual data alone. The large pretrained dataset of VLMs
 on the complexity of real-world scenes, such as effectively targets the data scarcity and imbalance challenges
 weather conditions, lighting variations, and background of VAD applications. The proposed unsupervised models
 activities [27], [28]. eliminate the need for time-consuming data labeling pro-
 2) Data scarcity is another challenge for VAD systems. cesses. LLMs and VLMs thus support more intuitive and
 Training data might not cover all possible abnormal effective anomaly detection by incorporating both visual and
 events in social behaviors, leading to potential mispre- textual data to analyze and respond to complex situations
 dictions by classical supervised models for detecting in real time. Furthermore, by incorporating advanced object
 anomalies [29]. detection models and the Top-K selection mechanism, the
 3) Moreover, the rarity of anomalies in daily life impact of environmental changes on detection performance is
 compared to normal activities causes an imbalance minimized.
 between positive and negative classes in the training In summary, we propose a multimodal network based on
 dataset, resulting in low precision for minority class LLM and VLM models for automatic abnormal event detection
 predictions [30]. and categorization. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our anomaly
 4) Besides that, the data collection and labeling process in detector aims to generate frame-level anomaly confidences,
 VAD is time-consuming, and deploying trained models categories, localization, and video descriptions with only
 for real-time video data prediction can be computation- video-level annotations provided. The main contributions and
 ally intensive [31]. advantages of the research are outlined as follows.
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

 1) We present a novel unsupervised framework, namely Li et al. [41] proposed a transformer-based multisequence
 AADC-Net, for abnormal event detection and catego- learning framework, while Huang et al. [42] introduced
 rization. The AADC-Net is based on LLM and VLM a transformer-based framework for temporal representation
 models to address the data limitations of VAD, result- aggregation. Fine-grained anomaly detection techniques have
 ing in enhanced accuracy for abnormal detection and emerged, distinguishing between various types of anomaclassification. lous frames [43], and multihead network models have been
 2) The pretrained object detection model [DEtection designed to disentangle anomaly representations, with each
 TRansformer (DETR)] was implemented for visual fea- component specializing in specific anomaly types [44].
 ture extraction and bounding box detection without
 supervision. Moreover, we employed a Top-K selection B. Video-Based Large Language Models
 mechanism for abnormal detection in video frames and
 LLMs are making a remarkable impact in the field of
 utilized the multi-instance learning (MIL)-Align mechavideo understanding [45]. VLLMs explore how LLMs can
 nism to extend our approach beyond binary classification
 tackle multimodal problems, where information comes in
 to handle multiple classes. We leveraged a pretrained
 various forms such as text, images, and video [45]. One
 LLM model to provide detailed video descriptions.
 key work is WebVid, a large dataset of short videos with
 3) The performance of our AADC-Net model was evaluated using two widely recognized metrics and compared corresponding text descriptions, introduced by Bain et al. [46].
 against current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Our Based on this dataset, Li et al. [47] improved image encoders
 model achieved an area under the curve (AUC) of 83.2% to enable large models to grasp the visual content within
 on the UCF-Crime dataset and an average precision (AP) videos. Su et al. [48] proposed multimodal encoders that
 of 83.8% on the XD-Violence dataset, demonstrating its allow models to handle multiple modalities. Zhang et al. [49]
 effective classification capabilities. took a different approach, focusing on training fundamen-
 4) Finally, we present a framework utilizing our AADC-Net tal models to comprehend both the visual and auditory
 model as a video processing node. This framework is aspects of videos. Ning et al. [50] proposed a benchmark
 applied to a smart gym surveillance system to demon- system called Video-Bench to evaluate the capabilities of
 strate the AADC-Net model’s applicability in real-world video-LLMs. Additionally, Wang et al. [51] introduced VidiL,
 scenarios. a new model for creating VLMs that can handle various
 The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II video-to-text tasks with minimal training data. For processprovides a review of related work on VAD, focusing on the ing long videos, Weng et al. [52] offer a novel approach
video-based VLM (VVLM) and video-based LLM (VLLM). called LongVLM. It breaks down long videos into smaller
Section III introduces the AADC network. Section IV presents segments, enabling the LLM to analyze the details of each
experiments, results, an ablation study on public benchmark part. Maaz et al. [53] introduced Video-ChatGPT, a converdatasets, and the deployment of AADC-Net. Finally, Section V sational AI that can understand and discuss video content.
concludes and discusses the study. Jin et al. [54] tackled the challenge of integrating image
 and video understanding into conversational LLMs with Chat-
 UniVi. This method utilizes a dynamic visual token system
 II. R ELATED W ORK and multiscale representation for efficient comprehension of
A. Video Anomaly Detection both broad concepts and fine-grained details within videos.
 VAD is a promising research area with various applications
in security, surveillance, and beyond [3], [6]. However, a major C. Video-Based Vision Language Models
challenge remains in the limited availability of anomalous data VVLMs have emerged as a trend in recent years [55]. This
and labels [30]. Recent reviews and surveys have highlighted technique focuses on learning the connection between visual
advancements in VAD methodologies, emphasizing the evo- information and language by pretraining models on large-scale
lution of techniques to address these challenges [34], [35], datasets [55]. One recent model attracting significant attention
[36]. Researchers have recently explored weakly supervised in the VAD applications is CLIP, a contrastive language-
VAD (WSVAD) techniques to overcome the limitations of image pretraining model [56]. CLIP4Clip by Luo et al. [57]
traditional VAD methods. These WSVAD methods leverage demonstrates its effectiveness in video-text retrieval. Several
videos with only normal or abnormal labels, relying on studies, including those by Wang et al. [58], Lin et al. [59],
weak annotations at the video level. Sultani et al. [1] first and Ni et al. [60], explore adopting CLIP for video recogniestablished a large benchmark and introduced a lightweight tion tasks. Lv et al. [37] built upon CLIP’s visual features
network utilizing MIL mechanisms. A higher order context to develop a new framework unbiased multiple instance
model combined with a margin-based MIL loss function learning (UMIL) for unbiased anomaly detection, leading
proposed by Lv et al. [37] has further improved anomaly to improved WSVAD performance. Joo et al. [61] propose
localization. Zhong et al. [38] employed graph convolu- using CLIP’s visual features to extract key representations
tional networks (GCNs) to capture frame-level similarities from videos. They then leverage temporal self-attention
and temporal relationships, while self-attention mechanisms (TSA) to analyze both short-term and long-term tempoutilized by Tian et al. [39] have demonstrated effectiveness ral dependencies and identify relevant video snippets. The
in modeling global temporal contexts. Zhang et al. [40] application of CLIP extends further to the more comexplored the completeness and uncertainty of pseudo-labels. plex tasks of video action localization, as demonstrated by
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Nag et al. [62] and Ju et al. [63]. Ju et al. [63] even is anomalous based on a broader understanding of normal
propose a foundational approach for efficiently adapting behavior patterns [51]. As a result, AADC-Net can detect
pretrained image-based CLIP models to general video under- subtle anomalies, such as unusual social interactions or constanding, highlighting its potential for broader video analysis textual inconsistencies, which are often missed by traditional
applications. approaches.
 Fig. 2 illustrates the AADC-Net framework for abnormal
D. Vision-Language Models in Anomaly Detection detection and categorization. Given a set of training videos V ,
 Recent advancements in VLMs have enhanced VAD by AADC-Net first processes each video v ∈ V by splitting
integrating visual and textual representations. Methods such it into f frames. These input frames f ∈ RC×H ×W , where
as CLIP-TSA [61] and UMIL-CLIP [37] utilize CLIP-based C represents the number of channels, H stands for the height
embeddings for weakly supervised anomaly detection, while of the input frame, and W denotes the width of the input frame,
approaches like Video-ChatGPT [53] and VidIL [51] employ are then fed into a DETR encoder to extract DETR features
LLM-guided reasoning for video understanding. Despite the (FDETR ) and perform novel bounding box detection. Subserecent success of VLM-based approaches, these existing quently, the input frames are cropped into smaller patches
methods often lack fine-grained frame-level supervision or (Pbbox ) based on the bounding box coordinates. These cropped
require extensive video-text annotations. Transformer-based patches are then processed by the CLIP image encoder 8CLIP-V
models such as UniVi [54] and LongVLM [52] further to obtain visual CLIP features (Fv ).
improve temporal anomaly detection but require extensive Next, the AADC-Net framework combines the DETR feacomputational resources. In contrast, AADC-Net introduces a tures with the visual CLIP features to obtain frame-level
novel multimodal fusion approach that integrates DETR-based features f c with dimensions n × c, where n represents the
object detection, CLIP features, and LLM-generated descrip- number of video frames and c is the feature dimension.
tions, enabling fine-grained anomaly categorization beyond This combined feature representation is then passed through
binary classification. Unlike existing methods, AADC-Net a multiscale temporal network (MTN) to effectively capture
utilizes LLMs for context-aware anomaly reasoning, reduc- temporal dependencies at different scales. The resulting muling false positives and enhancing interpretability. Its efficient tiscale visual features are fed into an anomaly predictor to
fusion mechanism ensures scalability, making it more suitable generate frame-level anomaly confidence scores. This pipeline
for real-time surveillance applications than resource-intensive is primarily used for the abnormal detection task.
transformer-based models. For workout categorization, the visual CLIP features are
 fused with the anomaly confidence features to create video-
 III. M ETHOD level features. AADC-Net then leverages the CLIP text
A. Problem Statement encoder to generate textual features. By calculating the align-
 The defined issue can be formally described as follows. ments between the video-level features and the textual features,
Given a collection of training videos V = {Vn , Va }, where the framework estimates the anomaly category. Additionally,
Vn = {vin |i = 1, . . . , Nn } represents the set of normal videos AADC-Net incorporates a pretrained LLM model to generate
and Nn is the total number of normal videos in the dataset. informative video descriptions.
 j
Similarly, Va = {va | j = 1, . . . , Ma } represents the set of
abnormal videos and Ma is the number of abnormal videos. C. Multiscale Temporal Network
For each video v ∈ Vn ∪ Va , it has a corresponding video-level
category label c, where c ∈ L nor ∪ L abn . Here, L nor represents While CLIP is trained on massive image–text pairs, its direct
the set of normal categories, and L abn is the set of abnormal application to videos presents challenges due to the tempocategories. Specifically, the model aims to predict an anomaly ral gap between the image and video domains. To address
confidence score for each frame and identify the anomaly this, we introduce the MTN, designed to effectively capture
category along with workout activities in the input videos. long-range and short-range temporal dependencies for VAD.
 MTN consists of two key components: 1) a three-layer
B. Overall Framework pyramid dilated convolution (PDC) block for multiresolution
 AADC-Net leverages the capabilities of a pretrained VLM feature extraction and 2) a TSA module for long-range temto excel at learning rich, high-dimensional representations of poral dependency modeling. The learned multiscale temporal
data [55]. The CLIP models are pretrained on vast multimodal features are then integrated with DETR and CLIP-extracted
datasets containing diverse visual and textual information, features, ensuring robust spatiotemporal anomaly detection.
enabling them to develop robust feature representations [56]. The PDC block employs dilated convolutions to capture
These representations are capable of capturing subtle patterns temporal variations at different scales, ensuring that both
that distinguish normal from anomalous instances, making short-term and long-term dependencies are considered.
them particularly effective for VAD tasks [62]. Furthermore, Given the feature f δ ∈ RT , the 1-D dilated convolution
 (λ)
traditional vision-based methods often rely on pixel-level operation with kernel W(κ,δ) ∈ RW is defined as follows: κ ∈
features or handcrafted rules, which struggle to capture the {1, . . . , D/4}, δ ∈ {1, . . . , D}, λ ∈ {PDC1 , PDC2 , PDC3 }, and
complex semantic context of events [61]. In contrast, AADC- W denotes the filter size
Net incorporates contextual learning from VLM, which allows D
 f k(λ) = W(λ) (λ)
 X
it to associate visual features with textual concepts. This (k,δ) ∗ f δ . (1)
integration enables the system to infer whether an activity d=1
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

Fig. 2. AADC-Net framework analyzes abnormal videos by identifying anomalies using DETR and CLIP features. It further categorizes workout types and
describes abnormal events through text generated by LLMs.

 Here, ∗ denotes the dilated convolution operator indexed Here, sθ (X ) denotes the function that combines the concateby λ. The term f k(λ) ∈ RT represents the output features nated outputs of the PDC and TSA modules (i.e., X̄ ) with the
obtained after applying the dilated convolution along the original input features X . F is the output of the function sθ ,
temporal dimension. The dilation factors that correspond to which includes both the MTN module’s processed features and
{PDC1 , PDC2 , PDC3 } are {1, 2, 4}. the original features.
 We modified the TSA block to analyze the video sequence In anomaly detection, we input F into a binary classialong the time dimension. This allows us to produce an fier comprising a feed-forward network (FFN) layer, a fully
attention map M ∈ RT ×T to capture long-range interactions connected (FC) layer, and a sigmoid activation function to
and relationships within the video sequence. The attention compute the anomaly confidence score Sa ∈ Rn×1
map is derived from a self-attention mechanism within the
TSA module. The TSA module starts by applying a 1 × 1 Sa = Sigmoid(FC(FFN(F) + F)). (3)
convolution to reduce the spatial dimension of X ∈ RT ×D to
X (c) ∈ RT ×D/4 , where X (c) = Conv1×1 (X ), with T being the
number of frames in the video sequence and D the feature D. Learnable Prompt
dimension. In standard VLMs like CLIP, text labels typically consist of
 Next, three distinct 1 × 1 convolutional layers are applied single words or short phrases (e.g., “treadmill workout,” “bike
to X (c) to generate X (c1) , X (c2) , and X (c3) ∈ RT ×D/4 , where workout,” and “bench press”). However, such labels often lack
X (ci) = Conv1×1 (X (c) ) for i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. An attention map the contextual depth needed to describe complex anomalous
is then constructed as M = (X (c1) )(X (c2) )T , which is used events in surveillance video data.
to produce X (c4) = Conv1×1 (M X (c3) ). A skip connection is To bridge this gap and enhance the transferability of
added after this final 1 × 1 convolutional layer, as follows: text embeddings, AADC-Net incorporates a learnable prompt
 mechanism that dynamically refines text embeddings by
 X (TSA) = X (c4) + X (c) . (2) adding adaptive context tokens.
 First, AADC-Net transforms the original text labels (e.g.,
The final output of the MTN is obtained by concatenat- “treadmill workout,” “bike workout,” and “bench press”) into
ing the outputs from both the PDC and MTN modules, class tokens using the CLIP tokenizer. This can be expressed as
resulting in X̄ = [X (λ) ]λ∈L ∈ RT ×D , where L = tinit = Tokenizer(Label), where Label denotes the discrete text
{PDC1 , PDC2 , PDC3 , TSA}. The final output of the MTN label. Second, a learnable prompt, denoted by {c1 , . . . , cm },
module, X̄ , is combined with the original input features is created. This prompt comprises m context tokens that pro-
(denoted as X ) via a skip connection to obtain F. This is vide additional context for the class token. In sentence token
done by formation, the class token t init is strategically placed in the
 middle of the prompt sequence, forming a complete sentence
 F = sθ (X ) = X̄ + X. token t p = {c1 , . . . , t init , . . . , cl }. This positioning aims to
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

leverage the surrounding context for a more comprehensive Here, X c ∈ Rdtxt represents the final fused features, where
representation. dtxt is the target dimensionality of the combined feature
 The sentence token t p is further enhanced by adding posi- vector, typically aligning with the text feature dimensionality
tional embeddings. These embeddings encode the order of in multimodal fusion tasks. The parameter δ refers to the
words within the sentence, providing crucial information for weights of the FC layer f FC .
the text encoder. Finally, the CLIP text encoder takes the The fused features X c are then used in subsequent downenriched sentence token t p as input and generates a more stream tasks, such as interaction recognition, activity detection,
robust text embedding t out ∈ Rd . and other multimodal recognition tasks that require both visual
 Traditional CLIP-based models use fixed text embeddings, and semantic understanding of the input scene. This fusion
which may struggle to distinguish between normal and anoma- process enables the system to harness the complementary
lous activities in complex video scenes. AADC-Net’s learnable strengths of both DETR’s spatial reasoning capabilities and
prompt mechanism enhances text embeddings by providing CLIP’s rich, semantic image understanding, making it highly
richer context, improving alignment with anomalies, bridging effective for tasks requiring both detailed visual information
the text-video domain gap, and reducing reliance on manually and semantic context.
labeled descriptions, enabling the model to learn anomalous
characteristics autonomously.
 F. Large Language Model
 This work explores the use of LLaMA, an LLM, for gen-
E. Detection Module
 erating video descriptions [65]. These descriptions typically
 DETR is an end-to-end object detector based on a trans- follow a question-and-answer format with a template structure.
former encoder–decoder architecture [64]. Unlike traditional Here is an example demonstrating how AADC-Net leverages
detection frameworks, DETR eliminates the need for anchor LLaMA to create video descriptions.
boxes and nonmaximum suppression. Instead, it directly pre- Question:
dicts the set of object-bounding boxes and class labels by ### Human:
utilizing a transformer-based model that processes the image
as a whole. The pretrained object detection network processes <Video> [Video Tokens]
the input image and generates a set of object queries corre- <Video> [Can you describe this video?]
sponding to potential objects in the image. A key advantage ### AADC-Net:
of DETR is its use of a bipartite matching algorithm that
associates the object queries with ground-truth objects during <Normal/Abnormal>
training. The query-based detection approach easily obtains <Workout /Abnormal Activities>
the features corresponding to each detected instance, enabling Answer:
efficient extraction of pairwise representations for interaction ### Assistant:
recognition.
 The detection process in the DETR framework begins by <Yes, the video shows normal activities at
passing the input image through the visual DETR encoder, the gym from 00:00 to 02:18 with
which serves as the backbone for extracting feature represen- participants in a dumbbell press session.>
tations. The encoder processes the input image and outputs two The question is first converted into textual embeddings
key types of features: bounding box features, b = (x, y, w, h), using a pretrained LLM. These textual embeddings are then
where (x, y) represent the center coordinates of the bounding combined with the features extracted by AADC-Net. This
box and (w, h) represent its width and height, as well as the combined representation provides LLaMA with a richer under-
DETR features FDETR . standing of the video content. LLaMA utilizes this combined
 Using the bounding box coordinates, we extract smaller input to generate a textual description as the answer. This
image patches, denoted as Pbbox . These image patches are then description conveys information about whether the video is
passed through a pretrained VLM CLIP to generate image normal or abnormal, the specific activities it showcases, and
embeddings, as shown in Fig. 2. their duration. By incorporating LLaMA, AADC-Net gains
 The list of image patches is denoted as L bbox , and the com- the ability to generate informative video descriptions that
putation for extracting the image embeddings is summarized complement its core functionalities of abnormal classification
as follows: and workout activity categorization.
 Fvis = CLIPimage (L bbox ).

Next, we fuse the extracted visual features Fvis with the DETR G. Objective Function
features. This is done by performing an elementwise addition For abnormal detection, we build upon prior VAD works
between the CLIP image features and the DETR embedding by employing a Top-K selection mechanism. This method
features. An FC layer, denoted by f FC , is applied to reduce the identifies the K frames with the highest anomaly scores in
dimension of the visual features to match the dimensionality both normal and abnormal videos. We then calculate the
of the DETR features, and the two are then fused average anomaly score for both sets, denoted by Anormal
 and Aabnormal , respectively. These averages are then fed
 X c = f FC (Fvis ; δ) + FDETR . into a sigmoid function σ to obtain video-level anomaly
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

predictions ŷ TABLE I
 F RAME -L EVEL AUC R ESULTS ON UCF-C RIME DATASET
 ŷ = σ Anormal − σ Aabnormal .
  
 (4)
 Finally, binary cross-entropy loss (Lbce ) is computed
between these predictions and the ground-truth labels (y) for
classification
 N
 1 X
 yi log ŷ i + (1 − yi ) log 1 − ŷ i
  
 Lbce = − (5)
 N i=1

where N represents the total number of videos.
 In regard to class-specific categorization, we propose the
MIL-Align mechanism to extend our approach beyond binary
classification to handle multiple classes. This method utilizes
aggregated video-level features (X v ) and textual category
embeddings (E c = {e1 , . . . , em }) to determine video-level
classification. For each video, we choose the Top-K similarities between the video features and category embeddings using
a distance metric. The average of these Top-K similarities One-Class Discriminative Subspaces, fully self-contained netrepresents the alignment score (si ) between the video and the work (FSCN) [69] using sparse coding networks for robust
ith class. This process results in a vector S = {s1 , . . . , sm }, feature learning, and dual memory units for weakly-supervised
where each element represents the similarity between the video anomaly detection (DMU) [70] integrating dual memory
and a specific class. units for uncertainty regulation. Graph temporal learning for
 Our goal is to maximize the similarity score between anomaly detection (GTL) [71] employs a generative Transthe video and its corresponding textual label (E y ∗ , where former model for long-range dependency modeling without
y ∗ denotes the ground-truth class) compared to other classes. labeled data. A diffusion-based feature prediction model
To accomplish this, the multiclass prediction (φi ) with respect future-prediction-based dual memory network (FPDM) [72]
to the ith class is first computed using a softmax function refines video representations to learn normal distributions.
 exp(γ ri ) Finally, vision-language and multimodal methods such as
 φi = Pn (6) CLIP-TSA [61] incorporate CLIP-assisted TSA for anomaly
 k=1 exp(γ r k ) detection, while consistency-based self-supervised learning
where γ represents the hyperparameter used for scaling. for temporal anomaly localization (CSL-TAL) [73] refines
Finally, the multiclass classification loss L nce is computed anomaly scores via self-supervised contrastive learning.
using cross-entropy
 m
 X IV. R ESULTS
 Lnce = − yi∗ log(φi ). (7) A. Comparison With SOTA Methods
 i=1
 This section presents frame-level AUC results on the UCF-
 During training, we combine both loss functions L bce , L nce Crime [74] and XD-Violence datasets [75]. The UCF-Crime
to optimize the overall model performance. The total loss dataset is a real-world surveillance video dataset with nearly
function (L) is simply the sum of these individual losses as 1900 video clips collected from various online sources,
follows: encompassing 13 different types of real-world anomalies
 alongside some normal videos. The XD-Violence dataset is
 L = Lbce + λLnce (8)
 a large-scale collection containing 2800 video clips that focus
where λ is a hyperparameter that controls the weight of the specifically on violent actions and violence-related scenarios.
classification loss. We introduced a new VAD dataset, AN-Workout, constructed
 specifically to capture abnormal actions within gym scenarios.
 AN-Workout comprises 830 real-world surveillance videos
H. Compared Methods from smart gyms, featuring 11 types of realistic anomalies,
 We compared our AADC-Net with various advanced VAD including actions like fighting, using a phone, smoking, talkapproaches for a comprehensive analysis. Supervised and ing, and drinking water. It also includes 14 normal workout
weakly supervised methods include Sultani et al. [1], which activities such as treadmill use, dumbbell press, and deadliftemploy MIL for anomaly detection, MIST [66] with multiple- ing. The results are detailed in Tables I and II, respectively.
instance self-training, and Bayesian network + spatial-visual The UCF-Crime dataset was initially designed for weakly
pattern (BN-SVP) [67] using submodular video partitioning supervised anomaly detection tasks. Our proposed AADC-Net
for anomaly localization. Graph-based and self-attention meth- method addresses this challenge and surpasses all unsuperods such as GCN [38] utilize GCNs for spatial–temporal vised and supervised methods on UCF-Crime. Specifically,
modeling, while RTFM [39] enhances anomaly detection AADC-Net achieves an improvement of 24.39% in AUC
through Robust Temporal Feature Magnitude learning. Con- compared to the unsupervised baselines (GODS and FSCN).
trastive and transformer-based approaches include genera- While AADC-Net demonstrates slight improvements across
tive one-shot detection of anomalies (GODS) [68] with all evaluation metrics when compared to existing VAD meth-
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE V
 F RAME -L EVEL AP R ESULTS ON XD-V IOLENCE DATASET A BLATION S TUDIES W ITH D IFFERENT D ESIGNED M ODULES
 ON UCF-C RIME FOR A BNORMAL D ETECTION

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDIES W ITH D IFFERENT D ESIGNED M ODULES
 ON XD-V IOLENCE FOR A BNORMAL D ETECTION

 TABLE III
 mAP U NDER IOU R ESULTS ON XD-V IOLENCE DATASET

 TABLE VII
 A BLATION S TUDIES W ITH D IFFERENT D ESIGNED M ODULES
 ON AN-W ORKOUT FOR A BNORMAL D ETECTION

 TABLE IV
 mAP U NDER IOU R ESULTS ON UCF-C RIME DATASET These results demonstrate AADC-Net’s effectiveness in
 handling the complexities of anomaly classification tasks.
 AADC-Net achieves superior performance in both anomaly
 detection and classification tasks, surpassing existing methods
 on the XD-Violence and UCF-Crime benchmark datasets.

 B. Ablation Studies
 1) Effectiveness of DETR Features: This section investigates the effectiveness of DERT features in improving
ods on both datasets, it surpasses them in achieving new anomaly detection performance. As detailed in Tables V–
SOTA performance. AADC-Net reaches 83.8% AP and 83.2% VII, DERT features consistently enhance detection across
AUC on the XD-Violence and UCF-Crime datasets, respec- all datasets, regardless of whether the multi-scale temporal
tively. Notably, AADC-Net outperforms the best competing network (MSTN) module is included in the model. The inclumethods, CLIP-TSA and DMU, by an increase of 2.1% and sion of DERT features leads to performance improvements.
1.7% in AP on XD-Violence. Similarly, it demonstrates better Compared to models without DERT features, we observe an
performance in AUC, achieving increases of 0.8% and 1.7% increase of 2.2% in AUC for the UCF-Crime dataset, 2.3% in
over CLIP-TSA and DMU on XD-Violence and UCF-Crime, AP for the XD-Violence dataset, and 3% in AUC and 2.3%
respectively. in AP for the AN-Workout dataset. Furthermore, incorporat-
 These results highlight the effectiveness of AADC-Net in ing DERT features within the visual CLIP features used by
frame-level anomaly detection and classification tasks on the AADC-Net leads to a consistent improvement in performance.
UCF-Crime and XD-Violence datasets. This integration strengthens the AADC-Net model’s overall
 Tables III and IV explore AADC-Net’s performance in anomaly detection capabilities.
anomaly classification tasks. Anomaly classification is more 2) Effectiveness of Multiscale Temporal Network: As dischallenging compared to anomaly detection. It requires not cussed earlier, the MSTN module is designed to capture
only the identification of anomalies but also their accurate temporal relationships within video data, thereby enhancing
categorization while maintaining continuity in the detected class-agnostic anomaly detection capabilities. To evaluate its
segments. This requirement for both detection and classifica- effectiveness, we conducted experiments and presented ablation introduces additional complexity. tion studies in Tables V–VII. The results demonstrate that
 Despite this challenge, AADC-Net surpasses even the incorporating the MSTN module improves performance across
SOTA’s previous works on both the XD-Violence and UCF- various datasets (UCF-Crime, XD-Violence, and AN-Workout)
Crime datasets. AADC-Net achieves an improvement of and evaluation metrics (AUC and AP). Without the temporal
23.8% and 113.6% in AP on XD-Violence compared to AVVD modeling offered by MSTN, the baseline model achieves only
and Sultani et al., respectively. This trend is consistent on 80.4% AP in the XD-Violence dataset and 86.2% AUC in
the UCF-Crime dataset, where AADC-Net outperforms AVVD UCF-Crime dataset. Incorporating the MSTN module results
and Sultani et al. by 11.4% and 112.5% in AP, respectively. in clear improvements: a 2.3% increase in AUC for UCF-
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

Fig. 3. Qualitative results of our AADC-Net model on the AN-Workout dataset. The blue curves represent the anomaly scores, while the red regions indicate
detected abnormal temporal events.

Crime, a 4.2% increase in AP for XD-Violence, and a 3.79% TABLE VIII
increase in AUC and a 3.94% increase in AP for AN-Workout. C ROSS -DATA R ESULTS ON UCF-C RIME AND XD-V IOLENCE
 Overall, the combination of DETR features and the MSTN
module boosts performance in terms of AP and AUC. This
improvement can be attributed to two key factors.
 1) DETR features capture object-level details and relationships within a frame, while the MSTN module
 focuses on capturing temporal information across video AP is 83.8%, and the AN-Workout AUC and AP reach 79.4%
 sequences. and 81.7%, respectively. Increasing K beyond 7 leads to
 2) By incorporating both DETR features and the MSTN marginal performance drops, likely due to the inclusion of less
 module, the model learns a more comprehensive feature relevant frames, which introduce noise. Conversely, selecting a
 representation for anomaly detection. This richer repre- lower K value may exclude important anomaly frames, leading
 sentation allows the model to make more distinctions to reduced alignment accuracy and potentially missing key
 between normal and abnormal events. discriminative features.
 3) Analysis of Cross-Dataset Ability: To assess the We tested γ values of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 to observe their
zero-shot learning capabilities of AADC-Net, we conducted effects on video-level predictions. The optimal performance
experiments using a cross-dataset setup. We trained the model was achieved at γ = 1.0, where all datasets reached their
on one dataset and evaluated its performance on another. peak performance metrics. Lower values (γ = 0.5) resulted
Specifically, we employed UCF-Crime and XD-Violence in smoother probability distributions, reducing prediction condatasets, which share some categories but originate from fidence and promoting more uniform probabilities across
entirely different sources. The evaluation results in Table VIII classes. This smoothness could encourage more generalization
reveal two key findings. but reduces the ability to distinguish between classes. Higher
 1) The model achieves better performance when trained on values (γ = 2.0) sharpened the distribution, increasing conall available data within the source dataset. fidence for top predictions but potentially causing numerical
 2) The AADC-Net model achieves competitive perfor- instability or overfitting by making the model overly confident
 mance even when evaluated on a dataset it was not in its predictions.
 trained on. This demonstrates the model’s ability to learn For this work, optimal results were observed with K = 5
 patterns from one dataset and effectively apply them to and γ = 1.0. This configuration ensures a balanced trade-off
 categorize events from a different source. among prediction confidence, computational efficiency, and
 4) Effectiveness of Hyperparameters K and γ : We con- model stability, providing effective performance for practical
ducted experiments by varying the K value among 3, 5, and 7, deployment.
evaluating its impact on performance metrics across the UCF-
Crime, XD-Violence, and AN-Workout datasets. The results in C. Qualitative Results
Table IX indicate that the model achieves the best performance Fig. 3 presents a qualitative visualization of the AADC-Net
at K = 5, where the UCF-Crime AUC is 88.2%, XD-Violence model’s performance on the AN-Workout dataset. The blue
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IX
 A NALYSIS OF H YPERPARAMETERS K AND γ ACROSS DATASETS

 Fig. 5. Confusion matrices of normal/abnormal categorization.

 various applications, including video summarization, activity
 understanding, and interactive human–computer dialogs.
 Fig. 5 presents confusion matrices for normal/abnormal
 event classification on the AN-Workout dataset. While AADC-
 Net’s overall performance is promising, as demonstrated
 in Section IV, these confusion matrices highlight some
 limitations in identifying certain anomaly categories. This
Fig. 4. Example of AADC-Net with video description. The orange boxes observation emphasizes the inherent challenges associated
are the questions from humans. The blue boxes are the answers from the with one-class versus one-class anomaly detection (OVVAD)
Video-LaMA and our AADC-Net. approaches. OVVAD models typically learn a representation
 of normal data and classify any significant deviation from this
curves represent the anomaly scores, with red regions indicat- norm as an anomaly. While this strategy can be effective for
ing detected abnormal temporal events. AADC-Net effectively general anomaly detection, it may struggle with accurately
identifies and classifies anomalies with high confidence while classifying specific types of anomalies, especially when norgenerating minimal false positives for normal events. Further- mal and abnormal events share some characteristics. Further
more, the distinction between normal and abnormal regions is investigation into these limitations and potential improvements
relatively clear. for fine-grained anomaly classification within AADC-Net is an
 Fig. 4 showcases an example of AADC-Net integrated with ongoing focus of our research efforts.
LLaMA for identifying normal and abnormal events alongside textual descriptions. This integration enhances AADC’s
capabilities, enabling a richer understanding of video con- D. Model Deployment
tent beyond anomaly detection and classification. AADC-Net We have deployed our AADC-Net in an automatic surveilleverages the pretrained LLaMA model to analyze video con- lance system for the smart gym application. The deployment
tent in conjunction with feature extraction from the anomaly framework is illustrated in Fig. 6. In this setup, a camera
detection and classification branches. This combined approach serves as the video source, streaming data through WebRTC
facilitates a better comprehension of the video. As illustrated clients to a Python-based WebRTC server that manages peerin Fig. 4, AADC-Net-LLaMA effectively detects anomalies to-peer connections. The video streams are processed by our
(e.g., “drinking water”) and precisely locates their occurrences AADC-Net model to detect anomalies. Detected anomalies are
(e.g., “from 00:15 to 00:40”). Additionally, it provides detailed logged with timestamps and detailed descriptions generated by
descriptions with durations. The integration of LLaMA enables our model. The entire system is integrated with a user-friendly
AADC-Net to generate informative video descriptions, com- Streamlit frontend, which provides a web-based interface for
plementing its core functionalities of anomaly classification real-time monitoring and interaction, ensuring efficient and
and workout activity categorization. This capability supports accurate anomaly detection for gym administrators.
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

 video frames with pretrained textual embeddings, the model
 learns robust, class-agnostic representations of anomalies.
 This research introduces AADC-Net, a novel multimodal
 deep neural framework that addresses the challenges of data
 scarcity, imbalance, and computational intensity inherent in
 video anomaly detection (VAD). By integrating pretrained
 VLMs and LLMs, AADC-Net leverages their rich, pretrained
 knowledge to extract meaningful feature representations,
 reducing reliance on extensively labeled VAD data. This
 integration of VLMs and LLMs enhances the model’s ability to
 discriminate between normal and anomalous events, improving both anomaly detection and categorization, especially in
 imbalanced datasets. Furthermore, AADC-Net incorporates the
 pretrained object detection model DETR to efficiently extract
 visual features without requiring manual bounding box annotations, making it robust in data-scarce scenarios. To refine
 anomaly detection, a Top-K selection mechanism identifies
 the most relevant video frames, while the MIL-Align mechanism enables multiclass anomaly categorization. Experimental
 results on public benchmarks (UCF-Crime and XD-Violence)
 and our AN-Workout dataset demonstrate AADC-Net’s superior performance compared to SOTA methods. The model
Fig. 6. Model deployment in an automatic surveillance system for smart generates frame-level anomaly confidences, categories, localgym applications. ization, and video descriptions with minimal supervision.
 One challenge is that the AADC-Net model is trained
 To assess the practical feasibility of AADC-Net, on datasets captured in controlled environments with fixed
we evaluated its inference speed, memory consumption, camera alignments, limiting its applicability in real-world sceand computational resource requirements on both GPU and narios with varying camera placements and angles. To address
CPU setups. On an NVIDIA RTX 3090 (24-GB VRAM, this, future work will focus on training and evaluating
CUDA 11.8), AADC-Net achieves 35 frames per second AADC-Net on datasets that include diverse camera angles,
(frames/s) in batch processing, making it suitable for lighting conditions, and occlusions. We will also investigate
real-time surveillance at 30 frames/s, with a processing time domain adaptation techniques and incorporate spatial attention
of approximately 28.6 ms per frame and a memory usage mechanisms to enhance the model’s robustness and real-time
of around 6-GB GPU memory, ensuring deployability on performance in real-world settings. Additionally, we will
consumer-grade GPUs. On a CPU setup (Intel Core i9- evaluate its performance using metrics like recall at low inter-
12900K, 16 cores, 24 threads, 32-MB L3 cache), the model section over union (IoU) thresholds and detection consistency
achieves 8 frames/s, which remains practical for offline batch across multiple views. In the long-term vision, the integration
analysis, with a processing time of approximately 125 ms per of vision-based methods into automatic anomaly detection
frame and a memory usage of around 14-GB RAM due to (AAD) has the potential to develop intelligent monitoring
the absence of GPU acceleration. These analyses demonstrate systems by increasing efficiency and reducing the burden
that AADC-Net is highly feasible for real-time anomaly on human operators. In summary, AADC-Net provides a
detection on GPU-powered systems and remains practical robust solution for overcoming the current challenges in VAD,
for offline analysis on high-performance CPUs, making it showcasing superior performance with promising applications
adaptable for surveillance and monitoring applications. in smart gym and healthcare monitoring in the future.
 R EFERENCES
 V. C ONCLUSION [1] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 One of the fundamental challenges in VAD is the scarcity Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
of labeled data, as anomalies are rare and labor-intensive to [2] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly
 analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data,
annotate in real-world scenarios. VLMs help mitigate this issue vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022.
by leveraging contrastive learning objectives, such as those [3] R. Nayak, U. C. Pati, and S. K. Das, “A comprehensive review on
used in CLIP. AADC-Net utilizes these objectives to discover deep learning-based methods for video anomaly detection,” Image Vis.
meaningful features without explicit supervision, reducing its Comput., vol. 106, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 104078.
 [4] U. A. Usmani, A. Happonen, and J. Watada, “A review of unsupervised
reliance on labeled training data. Additionally, in real-world machine learning frameworks for anomaly detection in industrial applidetection tasks, the number of normal samples far exceeds the cations,” in Proc. Sci. Inf. Conf. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022,
number of abnormal ones, leading to class imbalance issues pp. 158–189.
that can bias supervised learning approaches. Pretrained VLMs [5] X. Li, J. Jing, J. Bao, P. Lu, Y. Xie, and Y. An, “OTB-AAE: Semisupervised anomaly detection on industrial images based on adversarial
act as a regularization mechanism, preventing the model from autoencoder with output-turn-back structure,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
overfitting to the majority class (normal events). By aligning Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023.
5025713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 [6] Y. Cui, Z. Liu, and S. Lian, “A survey on unsupervised anomaly [30] B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “A survey of singledetection algorithms for industrial images,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, scene video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 pp. 55297–55315, 2023. vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2293–2312, May 2022.
 [7] A. Yang, X. Xu, Y. Wu, and H. Liu, “Reverse distillation for con- [31] H. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Ren, Y. Hu, and S. Bai, “SwiftNet: Real-time
 tinuous anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, video object segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 pp. 1–13, 2024. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 1296–1305.
 [8] H. Yao and X. Hu, “A survey of video violence detection,” Cyber-Phys. [32] H. Lv and Q. Sun, “Video anomaly detection and explanation via large
 Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–24, Jan. 2023. language models,” 2024, arXiv:2401.05702.
 [9] T. Saba, “Real time anomalies detection in crowd using convolu- [33] Z. Yang, J. Liu, and P. Wu, “Text prompt with normality guidance for
 tional long short-term memory network,” J. Inf. Sci., vol. 49, no. 5, weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 pp. 1145–1152, Oct. 2023. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18899–18908.
[10] K. Rezaee, S. M. Rezakhani, M. R. Khosravi, and M. K. Moghimi, [34] H.-T. Duong, V.-T. Le, and V. T. Hoang, “Deep learning-based anomaly
 “A survey on deep learning-based real-time crowd anomaly detection detection in video surveillance: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 11,
 for secure distributed video surveillance,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., p. 5024, May 2023.
 vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 135–151, Feb. 2024. [35] R. Raja, P. C. Sharma, M. R. Mahmood, and D. K. Saini, “Analysis
[11] M. Kavitha, P. V. V. S. Srinivas, P. S. L. Kalyampudi, and S. Srinivasulu, of anomaly detection in surveillance video: Recent trends and future
 “Machine learning techniques for anomaly detection in smart health- vision,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 82, no. 8, pp. 12635–12651,
 care,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inventive Res. Comput. Appl. (ICIRCA), Mar. 2023.
 Sep. 2021, pp. 1350–1356. [36] M. Baradaran and R. Bergevin, “A critical study on the recent deep
[12] Y. Yang, Y. Xian, Z. Fu, and S. M. Naqvi, “Video anomaly detection learning based semi-supervised video anomaly detection methods,”
 for surveillance based on effective frame area,” in Proc. IEEE 24th Int. Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 27761–27807, Aug. 2023.
 Conf. Inf. Fusion (FUSION), Nov. 2021, pp. 1–5.
 [37] H. Lv, Z. Yue, Q. Sun, B. Luo, Z. Cui, and H. Zhang, “Unbiased
[13] H. Yao et al., “Scalable industrial visual anomaly detection with partial multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detecsemantics aggregation vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., tion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 vol. 73, pp. 1–17, 2024. Jun. 2023, pp. 8022–8031.
[14] K. Xiao, J. Cao, Z. Zeng, and W.-K. Ling, “Graph-based active learning [38] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph
 with uncertainty and representativeness for industrial anomaly detec- convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023. for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[15] J. Zhu, P. Yan, J. Jiang, Y. Cui, and X. Xu, “Asymmetric teacher–student Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1237–1246.
 feature pyramid matching for industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 [39] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro,
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13, 2024.
 “Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal fea-
[16] M. Carratù et al., “A novel methodology for unsupervised anomaly ture magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 detection in industrial electrical systems,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4975–4986.
 vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
 [40] C. Zhang et al., “Exploiting completeness and uncertainty of pseudo
[17] M. S. Sapwan, Z. Ibrahim, Z. Mabni, and N. L. Adam, “Detection labels for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 and classification of weightlifting form anomalies using deep learning,” IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
 J. Positive School Psychol., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 8530–8537, 2022. pp. 16271–16280.
[18] Y. He, H. Yang, and Z. Yin, “Adaptive context-aware distillation
 [41] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with
 for industrial image anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 vol. 73, pp. 1–15, 2024.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp. 1395–1403.
[19] R. Sharma and A. Sungheetha, “An efficient dimension reduction based
 [42] C. Huang et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via
 fusion of CNN and SVM model for detection of abnormal incident in
 self-guided temporal discriminative transformer,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
 video surveillance,” J. Soft Comput. Paradigm, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 55–69,
 vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 3197–3210, May 2022.
 May 2021.
[20] S. Fadl, Q. Han, and Q. Li, “CNN spatiotemporal features and fusion for [43] P. Wu, X. Liu, and J. Liu, “Weakly supervised audio-visual viosurveillance video forgery detection,” Signal Process., Image Commun., lence detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1674–1685,
 vol. 90, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 116066. 2022.
[21] L. Alzubaidi et al., “Review of deep learning: Concepts, CNN archi- [44] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
 tectures, challenges, applications, future directions,” J. Big Data, vol. 8, Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 no. 1, pp. 1–74, Mar. 2021. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7388–7398.
[22] Y. Liang, S. Li, C. Yan, M. Li, and C. Jiang, “Explaining the black- [45] Y. Zhao, I. Misra, P. Krähenbühl, and R. Girdhar, “Learning video
 box model: A survey of local interpretation methods for deep neural representations from large language models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 419, pp. 168–182, Jan. 2021. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 6586–6597.
[23] P. Wu, W. Wang, F. Chang, C. Liu, and B. Wang, “DSS-Net: Dynamic [46] M. Bain, A. Nagrani, G. Varol, and A. Zisserman, “Frozen in time:
 self-supervised network for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. A joint video and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval,” in Proc.
 Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 1–13, 2023. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 1728–1738.
[24] M. Lovanshi and V. Tiwari, “Human skeleton pose and spatio-temporal [47] K. Li et al., “VideoChat: Chat-centric video understanding,” 2023,
 feature-based activity recognition using ST-GCN,” Multimedia Tools arXiv:2305.06355.
 Appl., vol. 83, no. 5, pp. 12705–12730, Jun. 2023. [48] Y. Su, T. Lan, H. Li, J. Xu, Y. Wang, and D. Cai, “PandaGPT: One
[25] M. George, B. R. Jose, and J. Mathew, “Abnormal activity detec- model to instruction-follow them all,” 2023, arXiv:2305.16355.
 tion using shear transformed spatio-temporal regions at the surveil- [49] H. Zhang, X. Li, and L. Bing, “Video-LLaMA: An instructionlance network edge,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 79, nos. 37–38, tuned audio-visual language model for video understanding,” 2023,
 pp. 27511–27532, Oct. 2020. arXiv:2306.02858.
[26] J. Wang, Y. Zhao, K. Zhang, Q. Wang, and X. Li, “Spatio-temporal [50] M. Ning et al., “Video-bench: A comprehensive benchmark and
 online matrix factorization for multi-scale moving objects detection,” toolkit for evaluating video-based large language models,” 2023,
 IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 743–757, arXiv:2311.16103.
 Feb. 2022. [51] Z. Wang et al., “Language models with image descriptors are strong
[27] M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun, “Deep multi-scale video few-shot video-language learners,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 prediction beyond mean square error,” 2015, arXiv:1511.05440. Syst., vol. 35, Jan. 2022, pp. 8483–8497.
[28] A. B. L. Larsen, S. K. Sønderby, H. Larochelle, and O. Winther, [52] Y. Weng, M. Han, H. He, X. Chang, and B. Zhuang, “LongVLM:
 “Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric,” in Proc. Efficient long video understanding via large language models,” 2024,
 33rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 48, Feb. 2016, pp. 1558–1566. arXiv:2404.03384.
[29] N. C. Tay, T. Connie, T. S. Ong, A. B. J. Teoh, and P. S. Teh, [53] M. Maaz, H. Rasheed, S. Khan, and F. Khan, “VideoGPT+: Integrating
 “A review of abnormal behavior detection in activities of daily living,” image and video encoders for enhanced video understanding,” 2024,
 IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 5069–5088, 2023. arXiv:2406.09418.
PHAN et al.: AADC-Net: A MULTIMODAL DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK FOR AAD IN REAL-TIME SURVEILLANCE 5025713

[54] P. Jin, R. Takanobu, W. Zhang, X. Cao, and L. Yuan, “Chat-UniVi: [77] G. Pang, C. Yan, C. Shen, A. Van Den Hengel, and X. Bai, “Self-
 Unified visual representation empowers large language models with trained deep ordinal regression for end-to-end video anomaly detection,”
 image and video understanding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 13700–13710. Jun. 2020, pp. 12173–12182.
[55] S. Uppal et al., “Multimodal research in vision and language: A review
 of current and emerging trends,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 77, pp. 149–171, Duc Tri Phan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 Jan. 2022. degree from the Mechanics Department, Back Khoa
[56] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, in 2017, and
 language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021, the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Biomedical
 pp. 8748–8763. Engineering Department, Pukyong National Uni-
[57] H. Luo et al., “CLIP4Clip: An empirical study of CLIP for end to versity, Busan, South Korea, in 2020 and 2023,
 end video clip retrieval and captioning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 508, respectively.
 pp. 293–304, Oct. 2022. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with
[58] J. Wang, H. Wang, J. Deng, W. Wu, and D. Zhang, “EfficientCLIP: Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His
 Efficient cross-modal pre-training by ensemble confident learning and research interests include smart healthcare and artilanguage modeling,” 2021, arXiv:2109.04699. ficial intelligence applications.
[59] Z. Lin et al., “Frozen clip models are efficient video learners,” in
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
 pp. 388–404. Vu Hoang Minh Doan received the B.S. degree
[60] B. Ni et al., “Expanding language-image pretrained models for general from the Mechatronics Engineering Department,
 video recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Back Khoa University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam,
 Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 1–18. in 2016, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
[61] H. K. Joo, K. Vo, K. Yamazaki, and N. Le, “CLIP-TSA: Clip- the Biomedical Engineering Department, Pukyassisted temporal self-attention for weakly-supervised video anomaly ong National University, Busan, South Korea, in
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2023, 2019 and 2022, respectively.
 pp. 3230–3234. He is currently a Research Professor with the
[62] S. Nag, X. Zhu, Y.-Z. Song, and T. Xiang, “Zero-shot temporal action Smart Gym-Based Translational Research Center
 detection via vision-language prompting,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. for Active Senior’s Healthcare, Pukyong National
 Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022, pp. 681–697. University. His research interests include artificial
[63] C. Ju, T. Han, K. Zheng, Y. Zhang, and W. Xie, “Prompt- intelligence applications in biomedical engineering and automation control
 ing visual-language models for efficient video understanding,” in systems.
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
 pp. 105–124.
 Jaeyeop Choi received the B.S. degree in biomedi-
[64] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and cal engineering and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
 S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in Pukyong National University, Busan, South Korea,
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, in 2017, 2019, and 2022, respectively.
 pp. 213–229. He is currently a Research Professor with the
[65] H. Touvron et al., “LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language Smart Gym-Based Translational Research Center
 models,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971. for Active Senior’s Healthcare, Pukyong National
[66] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance University. His research interests include scanself-training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ning acoustic microscopy and fabrication of high-
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, frequency transducers.
 pp. 14009–14018.
[67] H. Sapkota and Q. Yu, “Bayesian nonparametric submodular video
 partition for robust anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 3212–3221. Byeongil Lee received the master’s and
[68] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering, with
 subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. a specialization in medical image analysis, from
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210. Inje University, Gimhae, South Korea, in 1999 and
[69] P. Wu, J. Liu, M. Li, Y. Sun, and F. Shen, “Fast sparse coding networks 2004, respectively.
 for anomaly detection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 107, Jun. 2020, In 2005, he commenced his career at the
 Art. no. 107515. Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chonnam
[70] H. Zhou, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Dual memory units with uncertainty National University Hospital, Gwangju,
 regulation for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. South Korea. He expanded his research horizons
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 3769–3777. in 2011 by joining Korea Photonics Technology
 Institute, Gwangju, focusing on medical photonics.
[71] M. A. Hafeez, S. Javed, M. Madden, and I. Ullah, “Unsupervised end-to-
 His academic journey led him to Pukyong National University, Busan,
 end transformer based approach for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 South Korea, in 2021, where he currently holds a professorship with the
 38th Int. Conf. Image Vis. Comput. New Zealand (IVCNZ), Nov. 2023,
 Department of Smart Healthcare. His research interests are currently centered
 pp. 1–7.
 on medical photonics, molecular imaging, and the advancement of digital
[72] C. Yan, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Pang, and W. Wang, “Feature prediction healthcare systems.
 diffusion model for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 5527–5537.
[73] A. Panariello, A. Porrello, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Consistency- Junghwan Oh (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 based self-supervised learning for temporal anomaly localization,” in the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022, Pukyong National University, Busan, South Korea,
 pp. 338–349. in 1992, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomed-
[74] T. Yuan et al., “Towards surveillance video-and-language understanding: ical engineering from The University of Texas
 New dataset, baselines, and challenges,” 2023, arXiv:2309.13925. at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 2003 and 2007,
[75] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal respectively.
 violence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. He is currently a Professor with Industry 4.0 Con-
 Vis. (ECCV), Glasgow, U.K. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Aug. 2020, vergence Bionics Engineering, Department of
 pp. 322–339. Biomedical Engineering, Pukyong National Univer-
[76] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature sity. His research interests include the development
 discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., of ultrasonic-based diagnostic imaging modalities for biomedical engineering
 vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021. applications.