2602 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 Accurate and Interpretable Log-Based Fault
 Diagnosis Using Large Language Models
 Yongqian Sun , Member, IEEE, Shiyu Ma, Tong Xiao, Yongxin Zhao , Xuhui Cai, Wei Dong, Yue Shen ,
 Yao Zhao, Shenglin Zhang , Member, IEEE, Jing Han, and Dan Pei , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Log-based fault diagnosis is essential for ensuring I. INTRODUCTION
system reliability and resilience. However, current methods only
 N MODERN large-scale and complex online service sysprovide fault diagnosis results without explanations, which undermines their credibility. Large language models (LLMs) have
extensive pre-trained knowledge and show potential in log analysis,
 I tems, faults can disrupt interdependent services, significantly
 degrade system performance, and impact millions of users [1].
yet they cannot be directly applied to log-based fault diagnosis If these faults are not promptly mitigated, they can result in
due to limited specialized capabilities and domain-specific insights.
Furthermore, LLMs have limitations in context length and are
 severe consequences and substantial financial losses [2]. When
too diverse to select a suitable one. To address these issues, this a fault occurs, the system generates extensive logs containing
paper presents LogInsight, a framework that enables accurate and vital information about the underlying issue [3]. Operations and
interpretable log-based fault diagnosis using LLMs. We fine-tune a Maintenance (O&M) engineers analyze these logs to diagnose
medium-sized, open-source LLM to incorporate domain expertise the fault, a process that involves fault triage, which is indispensand leverage its interpretive capability. Additionally, we design a
Fault-Oriented Log Summary (FOLS) module to extract essenable for prioritizing remediation efforts and assigning the fault to
tial information from log sequences, mitigating LLMs’ context the appropriate team for resolution [4]. Effective fault diagnosis
length limitation. Extensive evaluations on two public datasets not only accelerates recovery times but also minimizes the risk of
and a real-world production dataset demonstrate LogInsight’s su- cascading failures [5]. Consequently, log-based fault diagnosis
periority over state-of-the-art methods in both performance and plays a critical role in ensuring the reliability and stability of
interpretability.
 online services [6].
 Index Terms—Log-based fault diagnosis, log analysis, large Manual log analysis is inherently time-consuming and laborlanguage models, interpretability. intensive, posing significant challenges for O&M engineers
 tasked with managing the massive and complex log data generated by large-scale systems [6]. To address these challenges,
 automated log-based fault diagnosis leveraging machine learning and deep learning algorithms has emerged as a promising
 Received 23 January 2025; revised 28 June 2025; accepted 4 August 2025. solution [7]. Despite significant advancements in this field [8],
Date of publication 15 August 2025; date of current version 9 October 2025. [9], [10], existing approaches often suffer from a critical limita-
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62272249 and Grant 62302244 and in part by the Fundamen- tion: poor interpretability. Most approaches focus on producing
tal Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant XXX-63253249. diagnostic results without providing clear explanations for these
(Corresponding author: Shenglin Zhang.) outcomes, which can hinder O&M engineers’ ability to trust and
 Yongqian Sun is with the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin
300350, China, and also with the Tianjin Key Laboratory of Software Experi- act on the recommendations effectively [11].
ence and Human Computer Interaction (TKL-SEHCI), Tianjin 300074, China Interpretable fault diagnosis goes beyond merely triaging
(e-mail: sunyongqian@nankai.edu.cn). faults; it provides the rationale behind the triage results, enabling
 Shiyu Ma and Yongxin Zhao are with the College of Software, Nankai
University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: mashiyu@mail.nankai.edu.cn; O&M engineers to quickly and accurately assign faults to the
zyx_nkcs@mail.nankai.edu.cn). appropriate teams while fostering a better understanding of the
 Tong Xiao and Dan Pei are with the Department of Computer Science, Ts- results and facilitating targeted mitigation measures. As illusinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: xiaotong@tsinghua.edu.cn;
peidan@tsinghua.edu.cn). trated in Fig. 1, the transition from traditional fault diagnosis to
 Xuhui Cai, Wei Dong, and Yue Shen are with China Mobile Communications interpretable methods fosters a more transparent and informed
Group Company Ltd., Beijing 100032, China (e-mail: caixuhui@chinamobile. approach, bolstering confidence in decision-making and enhanccom; dongweiwl@chinamobile.com; shenyue@chinamobile.com).
 Yao Zhao is with China Mobile Communications Group Jiangsu Company ing the overall reliability of fault management systems.
Ltd., Jiangsu 223600, China (e-mail: zhaoyao@js.chinamobile.com). Recently, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
 Shenglin Zhang is with the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin promising capabilities across various natural language process-
300350, China, also with the Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology
Application Innovation (HL-IT), Tianjin 300459, China, and also with the Key ing (NLP) tasks [12], [13]. Trained on vast datasets encompass-
Laboratory of Data and Intelligent System Security, Ministry of Education, ing code [14] and log data [15], LLMs have the potential to
300350, China (e-mail: zhangsl@nankai.edu.cn). provide a more comprehensive and context-aware understanding
 Jing Han is with ZTE Corporation, Shanghai 201203, China (e-mail:
han.jing28@zte.com.cn). of logs. Several studies have explored the application of
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2025.3599494 LLMs in log analysis [11], [16], [17]. However, leveraging

 1939-1374 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2603

Fig. 1. Comparison between traditional fault diagnosis and interpretable fault diagnosis.

LLMs for interpretable fault diagnosis faces the following particularly its ability to provide interpretable results while
challenges: achieving superior performance compared to existing state-
 1) LLMs’ lack of domain expertise: LLMs are not specifically of-the-art methods.
 trained for fault diagnosis and often lack the domainspecific skills and contextual understanding required to
 perform fault diagnosis effectively. Consequently, directly II. BACKGROUND
 applying LLMs to log-based fault diagnosis may result in A. Log-Based Fault Diagnosis
 poor performance.
 2) LLMs’ limitations in context length: Fault diagnosis typ- When a fault occurs in a system, O&M engineers are reically requires analyzing extensive logs, yet LLMs have sponsible for performing triage, diagnosing the root cause, and
 limited context length, making it impractical to input all promptly implementing mitigation measures. Fault diagnosis,
 logs at once. Although recent researche has focused on ex- which encompasses fault triage, generally involves analyzing
 tending the context length of LLMs [18], [19], challenges log data generated during the fault period—referred to as faultpersist due to the exponential increase in computational related log data—serving as the primary source of diagnostic
 demands and accuracy degradation [20]. information [3]. However, the sheer volume of this data can
 To address the above challenges, we propose LogInsight, a be overwhelming, making manual review both labor-intensive
framework for accurate and interpretable log-based fault diag- and time-consuming and often delaying responses to critical
nosis using LLMs. Specifically, we fine-tune a medium-sized, faults [6].
open-source LLM to incorporate domain-specific knowledge To reduce manual workload, O&M engineers often create
and design a Fault-Oriented Log Summary (FOLS) module to heuristic rules based on their experience to aid in log retrieval and
extract critical information from each log sequence, thereby fault identification. While useful, these heuristics have notable
mitigating LLMs’ inherent context-length limitations. We con- limitations. First, manually creating and updating rules is laborduct comprehensive evaluations on two public datasets and intensive, especially as system requirements and configurations
one production dataset. The results demonstrate that LogIn- evolve. Second, heuristic-based diagnosis is prone to errors,
sight achieves the highest average F1 score in fault diagno- leading to misdiagnoses and ineffective mitigation strategies [8].
sis, outperforming state-of-the-art baseline methods by 36.9%, As a result, automated log-based fault diagnosis using machine
12.8%, and 7.3%, respectively. Additionally, LogInsight en- learning and deep learning techniques has gained significant
hances interpretability by providing justifications for its diag- attention [3], [7], [8], [21].
nostic outcomes, supporting more informed decision-making
for O&M engineers. In summary, the main contributions of this
paper are as follows: B. Large Language Models
 r We propose a practical framework for log-based fault di- In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have transagnosis using LLMs that provides explanations for fault formed the field of natural language processing (NLP), drawing
 triage results. significant interest from researchers and practitioners. OpenAI’s
 r We design a Fault-Oriented Log Summary (FOLS) module introduction of GPT [22] demonstrated the potential of models
 to address LLMs’ context-length limitations, enabling the pre-trained on large datasets and fine-tuned for specific tasks,
 processing of large log volumes essential for fault diagno- paving the way for models like BERT [23], T5 [24], and
 sis. GPT-3 [25]. More recently, advancements such as ChatGPT
 r We conduct extensive evaluations on three real-world have broadened the application of LLMs, providing highly
 log datasets to validate the effectiveness of LogInsight, conversational interfaces with remarkable dialogue capabilities.
2604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

This trend has continued with OpenAI’s GPT-4 [26], Meta AI’s III. RELATED WORK
LLaMA [27], and Google’s PaLM [28].
 A. Log-Based Fault Diagnosis
 LLMs are predominantly built on the Transformer architecture [29] and are trained on extensive datasets us- With advances in machine learning and deep learning, numering self-supervised learning objectives. They generate text ous approaches have been developed for automating log-based
autoregressively—predicting one token at a time—until a fault diagnosis. These approaches can be categorized into three
sequence is complete [30]. At the core of the Transformer is main types:
the self-attention mechanism, which allows models to capture Machine Learning-Based Methods: This type of method typdependencies across sequences; however, its computational cost ically converts log events into vector representations for clusis high, with memory and processing requirements growing tering and classification. For example, LogCluster [7] employs
quadratically with input length. This constraint makes handling TF-IDF to represent log sequences as weighted vectors and
long text inputs challenging, as information relevance can dimin- utilizes hierarchical clustering, while Cloud19 [3] leverages
ish over extended contexts, leading to issues such as attention word2vec embeddings to capture semantic features and classify
dispersion. faults. However, both approaches are challenged by the presence
 Despite these challenges, LLMs’ extensive pre-training on of noise and redundant log data, which can impact diagnostic
datasets that include code and log data makes them promis- accuracy.
ing candidates for log-based fault diagnosis. Effectively ap- Deep Learning-Based Methods: More recent deep learningplying LLMs to these tasks has become a research priority, based methods have enhanced fault diagnosis capabilities, parwith fine-tuning task-specific datasets emerging as the dominant ticularly for complex log patterns. MoniLog [38], for instance,
approach. is a distributed, real-time anomaly detection framework for
 large-scale systems that monitors structured log streams to detect
 sequential and quantitative anomalies. It identifies faults within
C. Pre-Training & Fine-Tuning log sequences and categorizes anomalies based on severity.
 The introduction of BERT [23] marked a pivotal shift in Another example, SwissLog [39], combines semantic and tem-
NLP, establishing the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. poral embeddings to diagnose faults that involve changes in log
This paradigm involves first pre-training language models on sequence order or timing intervals. Nevertheless, both methods
large, diverse datasets to capture general linguistic and semantic may produce false positives or fail to detect critical issues when
patterns, then fine-tuning them on domain-specific data to meet log data is ambiguous or complex.
the specific needs of downstream tasks. While general-purpose Data Mining-Based Methods: Data mining-based methods
LLMs exhibit robust language understanding, they may under- enhance diagnostic detail by extracting richer information from
perform in specialized domains, where fine-tuning is essential logs. LogBASA [40] incorporates a pre-trained BERT model
for achieving optimal performance. to capture semantic relationships within log event sequences,
 Fine-tuning entails additional training of a pre-trained model using system behavior analysis to improve diagnostic efficiency
on domain-specific data, aligning the model more closely with in response to anomalies. LogKG [8] takes a different approach
the nuances of a specific application. There are two primary by constructing a knowledge graph of entities and relationships
approaches to fine-tuning large models: extracted from logs. This graph, combined with a fault-oriented
 r Full Parameter Fine-Tuning: This approach involves up- log representation module, leverages OPTICS clustering [41]
 dating all parameters of the pre-trained model with task- to analyze fault patterns and perform online fault diagnosis.
 specific data, allowing comprehensive adaptation to the While these methods perform well with specific log formats,
 new domain. While full parameter fine-tuning demands their applicability across varied log structures remains limited.
 substantial computational resources, it fully leverages the In summary, these methods have some unique advantages,
 model’s pre-trained features, enabling deep task-specific but they all share a common shortcoming: lacking the ability to
 customization. provide interpretable explanations for fault diagnosis results.
 r Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT): PEFT selectively updates a small subset of the model’s parameters
 or adds a small number of parameters, thereby reducing B. LLM-Based Log Analysis
 computational costs and training time. This is particu- The prevalence of LLMs has attracted considerable interest in
 larly useful when resources are constrained, and includes applying them in log analysis tasks, particularly in log parsing
 methods such as Prefix Tuning [31], Prompt Tuning [32], and log anomaly detection.
 Adapter Tuning [33], [34], [35], and LoRA [36], [37]. LLM-Based Log Parsing: Log parsing, the process of trans-
 By concentrating on updating specific components, PEFT forming raw logs into structured data, serves as the foundation of
 provides a resource-efficient method for model adaptation the typical log analysis workflow. Recent research has explored
 without sacrificing effectiveness. using LLMs to improve log parsing. For instance, DivLog [42]
 In summary, fine-tuning provides a critical mechanism for leverages the in-context learning (ICL) capability of LLMs,
adapting powerful language models to specialized domains, sig- using diverse log samples as guiding examples to achieve acnificantly enhancing their applicability and efficacy in practical, curate parsing across varied log formats. LILAC [43] enhances
domain-specific applications. parsing precision and efficiency by combining LLMs with an
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2605

Fig. 2. The overall framework of LogInsight.

Adaptive Parsing Cache, which stores refined templates for rapid raw log entries into structured log sequences; Fault-Oriented
retrieval and incorporates hierarchical candidate sampling to Log Summary (FOLS), which extracts key information from
further optimize ICL performance. log sequences; Knowledge Injection, which generates an
 LLM-Based Log Anomaly Detection: Detecting anomalies explanation for each fault summary using GPT-4, followed by
within logs is essential for fault identification and early warning. manual verification of the explanation; and Supervised Fine-
Recently, LLMs have emerged as valuable tools for enhancing tuning, which fine-tunes an LLM using an instruction dataset.
anomaly detection. For example, LogPrompt [11] employs a Next, we explain each component in detail.
prompting strategy tailored for log analysis, enabling zero-shot
parsing and anomaly detection without extensive model fine- A. Log Preprocessing
tuning. LogGPT [16], based on the ChatGPT framework, uses
 This component preprocesses log data for subsequent analythe interpretive capabilities of LLMs for anomaly detection,
 sis. Suppose a fault occurs at time t, we first collect raw logs
although it does not explicitly classify fault types. SeaLog [44]
 generated within the time frame [t − w : t] for this fault, where
utilizes a Trie-based Detection Agent for real-time anomaly
 w is determined according to the requirement of the application
detection, incorporating expert insights, including those inscenario. We then transform these raw logs into a log content
formed by LLMs, to enhance detection accuracy. RAGLog [45]
 sequence to facilitate analysis. Unlike traditional log analysis
combines a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) LLM with
 methods, LogInsight does not require log parsing, as it utilizes
a vector database, enabling effective handling of log volume,
 LLMs to understand the content of the raw logs.
variety, and velocity in anomaly detection scenarios.
 Fig. 3 illustrates the log preprocessing process, where reg-
 Additionally, there is research exploring the use of LLMs
 ular expressions are used to structure the raw logs and extract
for log generation. UniLog [46] serves as an automatic logging
 the Content field from each log entry, forming a sequence of
framework that exploits LLMs’ ICL abilities to autonomously
 log contents. This resulting sequence removes redundant and
generate logging statements, offering a versatile and minimally
 irrelevant fields from the original logs, providing more detailed
tuned solution that caters to diverse organizational and developer
 information than the log template sequences typically generated
logging needs.
 through log parsing.
 While these studies highlight the capabilities of LLMs in log
analysis tasks such as log parsing and log anomaly detection, the
 B. Fault-Oriented Log Summary
application of LLMs specifically for log-based fault diagnosis
remains underexplored. This gap highlights the need for ap- To address Challenge 2: LLMs’ limitations in context length,
proaches that address the distinct requirements of interpretable we design the Fault-Oriented Log Summary (FOLS) module.
fault diagnosis in log analysis. Through an extensive analysis of fault cases, we observed that
 logs generated during failure periods often contain a large
 amount of redundant and noisy information while the truly
 IV. APPROACH valuable diagnostic clues are sparse and rarely repeated. More-
 In this section, we introduce the details of LogInsight. Fig. 2 over, different types of faults are characterized by distinct log
shows the overall framework of LogInsight, which consists of patterns, making it challenging to identify key information using
four main components: Log Preprocessing, which organizes simple heuristics. These insights motivated the development of
2606 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 DBSCAN is a density-based spatial clustering algorithm that
 partitions regions with sufficient density into clusters, capable of
 discovering clusters of arbitrary shapes in a spatial database with
 noise. Compared to other popular clustering algorithms, such as
 k-means [49], DBSCAN does not require the number of clusters
 to be specified in advance and can effectively cluster dense
 datasets of varying shapes. DBSCAN has two key parameters:
 , which describes the maximum neighborhood distance for a
 point, and M inP ts, which indicates the minimum number of
 points required for a cluster. We set these values as recommended
 in [48].
 iii) Representative Log Content Selection: After clustering,
 the log contents within each cluster are similar, so analyzing
 a single log content from each cluster can reveal the overall
 pattern. Without loss of generality, we select the centroid of each
 cluster as its representative log content and discard the rest. For
 a cluster with n log contents, the centroid is the log content
 that has the minimum average distance to all others within the
Fig. 3. The workflow of log preprocessing. cluster, formulated as follows:
 n
 1
 centroid = arg min d (xi , xj ) , (2)
the FOLS module, which is specifically tailored to identify and xi ∈cluster n
 j=1
highlight meaningful and unique content within large, repetitive
datasets. where d(xi , xj ) is the Jaccard distance between log contents xi
 Given the substantial size of raw logs required for fault diag- and xj .
nosis and the context-length constraints of LLMs, FOLS aims to 2) TF-IDF-Based Content Ranking: Often, some logs unextract essential information while significantly reducing input related to the fault may appear multiple times. To mitigate this
length. As illustrated in Fig. 4, this approach makes the time issue, we propose a TF-IDF-based ranking algorithm to evaluate
and memory overhead of feeding logs into LLMs manageable. the importance of each log content and filter out the less signifi-
Specifically, FOLS employs two operations: Clustering-Based cant ones. TF-IDF [50] is a widely used weighting technique in
Content Aggregation to group similar log entries and reduce information retrieval and data mining [7], comprising two parts:
redundancy, and TF-IDF-Based Content Ranking to prioritize Term Frequency (TF) and Inverse Document Frequency (IDF).
log messages that are most informative for fault diagnosis. TF measures how frequently a term appears, while IDF reduces
 1) Clustering-Based Content Aggregation: The log data for a the weight of common terms, assigning them a smaller weight
fault case can exhibit complex correlations. To ensure the diver- inversely proportional to their frequency.
sity of summarized sequences and capture faults from different Specifically, for a given log content, we first tokenize it into
perspectives, we group related logs together by clustering. This a token list T = [t1 , t2 , . . . , tn ]. The TF of an arbitrary token
allows subsequent analysis to focus on a small subset of logs t is calculated as follows:
from each cluster rather than all logs. This operation consists of
 nt
three steps: TF (t) = , (3)
 i) Distance Measurement: Given N log contents to be clus- n
tered, we create an N × N distance matrix to record the distance where nt is the number of appearances of token t in T and n is
between each pair of log contents. We choose the Jaccard dis- the total number of tokens in T . The IDF is calculated as:
tance, which can measure syntactic-level similarity between two
log contents [47]. The Jaccard distance is defined based on the N
 IDF (t) = log , (4)
intersection and union of the token sets from two log contents, nt + 1
effectively capturing their overlap and diversity.
 Since each log content can be represented as a set of tokens, where N is the total number of faults and nt is the number of
the Jaccard distance between two log contents x and y is defined faults whose logs contain token t. After obtaining the TF and
as follows: IDF for each token, the score of a log content is calculated as:
 |X ∩ Y | 
 d(x, y) = 1 − , (1) score = TF (ti ) × IDF (ti ). (5)
 |X ∪ Y | i

where X and Y are the token sets of log content x and y, After ranking all log contents in descending order according to
respectively. It can be seen that the Jaccard distance is between their respective scores, those falling below a predefined thresh-
0 to 1. old are excluded. The remaining high-scoring log entries are
 ii) Clustering: After obtaining the distance matrix, we ap- retained as the fault summary and are then reordered to follow
ply the DBSCAN [48] algorithm to cluster all log contents. their original chronological order.
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2607

Fig. 4. The workflow of the FOLS module, where different shapes represent log contents of different types.

 This dataset comprises a series of triplets {xi , yi , Ii }, where xi
 represents the input sequence, yi denotes the output sequence,
 and Ii is the corresponding instruction.
 The primary objective of this process is to optimize an LLM
 (denoted as M ), enabling it to generate the output sequence by
 modeling the relationship yi = M (xi , Ii ). To facilitate this, we
 concatenate the instruction Ii and the input sequence xi before
 feeding them into model M . The fine-tuning process aims to
Fig. 5. Example structure of a data item in LFDInstruction.
 minimize the error between the model’s output and the actual
 diagnoses by minimizing a loss function L, defined as:
 N
C. Knowledge Injection 1 
 θ∗ = arg min L (Mθ (xi , Ii ), yi ) (6)
 To address Challenge 1: LLMs’ lack of domain expertise, we θ N i=1
introduce a knowledge injection step. General LLMs often lack where θ represents the model parameters, N is the number of
the specialized capabilities required for effective log-based fault training samples, and Mθ (xi , Ii ) denotes the model’s predicted
diagnosis. To address this gap, we inject domain knowledge into output given input xi and instruction Ii . Through iterative train-
LLMs through fine-tuning. The quality of the training data is a ing, we aim to find the optimal parameters θ∗ that minimize
crucial factor in determining the performance of LLMs [51]. To the average loss, thereby enhancing the model’s accuracy in
this end, we curated a high-quality dataset called LFDInstruc- generating the correct diagnosis.
tion, specifically designed for log-based fault diagnosis.
 We first enlisted O&M experts to collect log data for a
 V. EVALUATION
wide range of faults and then employed the Fault-Oriented Log
Summary (FOLS) module to generate concise summaries for In this section, we evaluate our approach, LogInsight, by
each fault. These summaries serve as inputs, while the correct addressing the following research questions:
fault diagnoses and detailed analyses act as outputs. These input- r RQ1: How effective is LogInsight in log-based fault diagoutput pairs, along with carefully crafted instructions, comprise nosis compared to state-of-the-art methods?
the LFDInstruction dataset. Fig. 5 illustrates the structure of a r RQ2: Can LogInsight meet the efficiency requirement for
data item in this dataset. online deployment?
 To streamline the dataset creation process and reduce manual r RQ3: How does the FOLS module affect the performance
labor, we initially utilized GPT-4 [26] to generate preliminary of LogInsight?
outputs. This generation process was carefully designed to en- r RQ4: Can LogInsight provide useful and comprehensible
sure that the content was both contextually relevant and diverse. explanations for the results?
However, recognizing the limitations of automated content gen- r RQ5: Is LogInsight compatible with different LLMs?
eration, we implemented a validation approach: expert reviewers
meticulously evaluate each output sequence. This manual review A. Datasets
process involves a comprehensive assessment of the fault anal- We conduct experiments using two public log datasets and
yses in relation to the corresponding logs, allowing experts to a production log dataset from China Mobile Communications
correct any inaccuracies or inconsistencies in the diagnoses. This Group Co., Ltd. (CMCC), a leading global Internet Service
combined strategy of automated generation followed by expert Provider (ISP). Table I summarizes key details of these three
validation not only reduces labor costs but also significantly datasets, including the number of log templates identified by the
enhances the overall quality of the data. Drain [52] algorithm.
 Dataset 1:1 This dataset consists of logs from servers
D. Supervised Fine-Tuning in real-world business environments, including server serial
 We employed LoRA [36] to conduct supervised fine-tuning.
As previously mentioned, for log-based fault diagnosis, we 1 Available at https://tianchi.aliyun.com/competition/entrance/531947/
developed the LFDInstruction dataset as our training corpus. information
2608 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE I
 DETAILS OF THE DATASETS FOR EVALUATION

 Fig. 6. The prompt used for log-based fault diagnosis.

numbers (SN), server models (SM), fault times, and associated F1), Macro-Averaged F1-score (Macro F1), and Weightedmessage information for each fault. There are a total of 2,671 Averaged F1-score (Weighted F1) [54].
fault cases, which are categorized into three types: Processor Macro F1 calculates the F1 score for each class and then
CPU Caterr, Memory Constraint Error, and Hardware Error. To averages these scores across all classes. This metric assigns equal
retrieve fault-related logs, we organized logs chronologically weight to each class, regardless of class size, providing insight
by timestamp and extracted logs in the 12 hours preceding each into performance across all classes. The formula is as follows:
fault occurrence.
 N
 Dataset 2: 2 Sourced from OpenStack, a widely adopted 1 
open-source cloud computing platform [53], this dataset in- Macro F1 = F1i (7)
 N i=1
cludes 1,461,006 log entries spanning 93 fault cases collected
over 24 days. The logs cover six fault types: AMQP Server Un- where N is the total number of classes.
reachable, MySQL Lost Connection, Computing Node Down, Micro F1 aggregates True Positives (TP), False Positives
Flavor Disk Too Small, Linuxbridge-agent Anomalies, and (FP), and False Negatives (FN) across all classes to calculate
Nova-conductor Lost Connection. overall precision and recall. This metric is particularly suitable
 Dataset 3: This dataset contains network device logs from for handling imbalanced class distributions, as it weights each
CMCC’s production environment, which supports 4 G/5 G core instance equally across classes. The formulas are as follows:
networks for a global user base. The dataset includes alarm logs 
 TP
collected from 322 switches over one year, totaling 178,773 log Precisionmicro =   (8)
 TP + FP
entries across nine fault types: Power Supply Fault, Fan Fault, 
Optics Module Fault, Port Flapping Fault, CRC Error, STP Fault, TP
 Recallmicro =   (9)
BFD Down, LACP Flapping, and OSPF Neighbor Flapping. TP + FN
 For each dataset, we randomly select 50 fault cases to con-
 2 · Precisionmicro · Recallmicro
struct the LFDInstruction dataset for fine-tuning, with the re- F1micro = (10)
maining cases for testing. We manually verify that the LFDIn- Precisionmicro + Recallmicro
struction dataset includes all fault types to ensure comprehensive Weighted F1, meanwhile, computes a weighted average of
coverage during fine-tuning. the F1 scores, factoring in the number of samples in each class.
 This approach gives greater influence to larger classes, ensuring
B. Baseline Methods that the metric reflects the overall distribution. The formula for
 Weighted F1 is:
 We select three state-of-the-art log-based fault diagnosis
methods as baselines: an unsupervised method, LogCluster [7], N
 
and two supervised methods, Cloud19 [3] and LogKG [8]. F1weighted = wi · F1i (11)
To ensure fairness, we set the hyperparameters according to i=1
the descriptions provided in the respective papers. Specifically, where wi is the proportion of samples in class i.
LogCluster utilizes a hierarchical clustering algorithm with a
distance threshold of 0.5. For LogKG, we set the FOLR model D. Implementation Details
threshold to 0.5, and configure the OPTICS clustering algorithm
with a minimum of 10 samples per cluster. All experiments are conducted on an Ubuntu 18.04 LTS server
 To further demonstrate the importance and advantage of fine- with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6430 CPUs, each offering 64
tuning, we compared LogInsight with GPT-4 using the same cores and 128 threads, and two NVIDIA A800-80 GB GPUs. In
prompt, as illustrated in Fig. 6 selecting the base model, we evaluated several options. Given
 the constraints of memory and time, we chose four open-
C. Evaluation Metrics source LLMs, each with approximately 7 billion parameters, as
 candidates: Mistral-7B, Qwen1.5-7B-Chat, LLaMA2-7B, and
 Fault diagnosis can be framed as a multi-class classification Gemma-7B. As shown in Table II, Mistral-7B demonstrated
problem. To evaluate the effectiveness of LogInsight, we employ superior performance compared to the other models, leading
the following three metrics: Micro-Averaged F1-score (Micro us to select Mistral-7B as our base model.
 For supervised fine-tuning, we configure the learning rate
 2 Avaialable at https://github.com/SycIsDD/LogKG to 10−4 , the weight decay to 0.1, the batch size to 16, and
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2609

 TABLE II
 EVALUATION OF BASE MODEL

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN LOGINSIGHT AND THE BASELINES

the maximum token limit to 4096. We utilize LoRA [36] for 2) RQ2: Can LogInsight Meet the Efficiency Requirement for
parameter-efficient fine-tuning, setting the rank to 8 and the Online Deployment?
alpha parameter to 32, with a dropout rate of 0.05 to prevent To evaluate the efficiency of LogInsight, we measure the
overfitting. time required to diagnose each fault case and calculate the
 average diagnosis time on each dataset. The results are shown
 in Table IV, from which we can see that LogInsight takes 2.7 s,
E. Results and Analysis 8.5 s, and 2.8 s on average to diagnose a fault in the three datasets,
 1) RQ1: How Effective is LogInsight in Log-Based Fault respectively.
Diagnosis Compared to State-of-the-Art Methods? LogInsight is built upon LLMs, which inherently involve
 Table III presents the overall performance comparison on the substantial computational overhead during both training and
three datasets, showing that LogInsight consistently outperforms inference due to their massive parameter sizes and comall baseline methods across all evaluation metrics. plex architectures. As a result, the time cost for model in-
 Specifically, LogInsight achieves Weighted F1 scores of ference is generally higher than that of traditional baseline
0.883, 0.997, and 0.997 on the three datasets, representing im- methods. Despite this, our results demonstrate that LogInprovements of 36.9%, 12.8%, and 7.3% over the best-performing sight can still complete fault diagnosis within an average of
baseline method, respectively. The performance gains are es- 8.5 seconds per case, which is well within the acceptable
pecially pronounced on Dataset 1, likely due to the dataset’s range for real-time online deployment scenarios. This efficomplex fault patterns, which challenge traditional methods. ciency is sufficient to significantly reduce the manual diagnosis
In contrast, the simpler log patterns in Datasets 2 and 3 allow workload while meeting the latency requirements of practical
all methods to triage faults accurately, albeit LogInsight still applications.
demonstrates superior performance. 3) RQ3: How Does the FOLS module Affect the Performance
 Additionally, we observe that baseline methods consistently of LogInsight?
produce lower Macro F1 scores compared to their Micro and We further investigate the effect of the Fault-Oriented Log
Weighted F1 scores, suggesting they struggle to handle imbal- Summary (FOLS) module on LogInsight’s performance. To this
anced fault types effectively. LogInsight, however, maintains end, we remove the FOLS module and feed the log content
high stability across all metrics, demonstrating adaptability to sequences directly into the fine-tuned LLM, constrained by a
varying data distributions. This advantage stems from LogIn- maximum token limit of 8192 to include as much log data as
sight’s utilization of an LLM, which effectively captures the possible.
semantic content of log data, thereby facilitating more accurate Additionally, to evaluate the effectiveness of clustering in imfault triage. In contrast, traditional methods cannot fully exploit proving log summarization, we create several variants by replacthe rich semantic information inherent in log messages. ing the DBSCAN algorithm in the Clustering-Based Content
 Furthermore, when compared to GPT-4, LogInsight demon- Aggregation module with different clustering and log parsing
strates superior performance across all datasets. This improve- techniques. These include K-means [49], Hierarchical Agglomment is attributed to the model’s fine-tuning with domain- erative Clustering (HAC) [55], Drain [52], and two LLM-based
specific data, which enhances its diagnostic performance and parsing methods, DivLog [42] and LILAC [43].
enables it to outperform general-purpose LLMs in specialized Table V reveals a marked decrease in LogInsight’s diagfault diagnosis tasks. nostic performance when the FOLS module is removed. This
2610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE IV
 EFFICIENCY COMPARISON BETWEEN LOGINSIGHT AND THE BASELINES

 TABLE V
 ABLATION STUDY OF THE FOLS MODULE

Fig. 7. The performance of LogInsight with different LLMs as base models.

decline can be attributed to two primary factors: (i) the raw log To evaluate the interpretability of LogInsight’s outputs, we
sequences contain redundancy and noise, leading to reduced enlisted O&M experts from CMCC to assesses the quality of
information entropy; and (ii) the LLM’s input token limits explanations generated for 200 randomly selected fault cases
necessitate truncating log data, which risks omitting critical from Dataset 3. Fig. 8 shows the diagnostic results for two
information. representative fault cases.
 Furthermore, the results show that clustering methods gen- Following the evaluation methodology employed by Logerally outperform log parsing methods in terms of accuracy. Prompt [11], we assess LogInsight’s explanations along two
This is primarily due to the inherent parsing errors in these primary dimensions:
methods, which negatively impact downstream processing. The r Usefulness: Reviewers were asked to evaluate the extent
use of placeholders (e.g., ”∗”) in parsed content can mislead the to which the explanations were detailed, specific, relevant,
LLM during fault analysis, thereby compromising diagnostic logically sound, and practical for actual fault diagnosis.
performance. r Readability: Reviewers were asked to assess how easily
 In general, the findings underscore the importance of the a reader could understand the provided text. A text was
FOLS module in improving the robustness and effectiveness considered readable if it was grammatically correct, meanof LogInsight, particularly in managing the complexities and ingful, and professional.
nuances of log data. For each evaluation dimension, we use a Likert scale ranging
 4) RQ4: Can LogInsight Provide Useful and Comprehensi- from one to five, with Table VI providing the detailed criteria
ble Explanations for the Results? for each level. The scoring system is as follows: 1 - Not Inter-
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2611

Fig. 8. Two fault cases from Dataset 3.

 TABLE VI
 HUMAN SCORING CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING THE INTERPRETABILITY OF LOGINSIGHT

pretable, 2 - Low Interpretability, 3 - Moderate Interpretability, TABLE VII
 INTERPRETABILITY OF LOGINSIGHT RATED BY EXPERTS
4 - High Interpretability, and 5 - Very High Interpretability.
 Each reviewer independently evaluated all 200 modelgenerated explanations, assigning scores for both usefulness
and readability by referencing the original log context from
the corresponding failure incident and adhering to predefined
criteria.
 Two key metrics are reported: (1) Mean: the mean score assigned by reviewers across all samples; (2) High Interpretability
Percentage (HIP): the proportion of samples receiving a score
of four or higher.
 The evaluation results are listed in Table VII. In terms of
usefulness, the average score is 3.80, with a HIP of 75.7% . significant potential for assisting O&M engineers in validating
This indicates that a majority of the explanations provided by fault diagnosis results and guiding subsequent analyses.
LogInsight are effective in justifying the diagnosis and aiding en- 5) RQ5: Is LogInsight Compatible with Different LLMs?
gineers in their analysis. Regarding readability, the average score To ensure the long-term effectiveness of LogInsight, it is
is 4.04, with a HIP of 86.7%, demonstrating that the explanations essential to evaluate its compatibility with various LLM arare grammatically correct and highly comprehensible. These re- chitectures and versions. To this end, we test several opensults suggest that the explanations generated by LogInsight hold source models, including Qwen1.5-7B-Chat, LLaMA2-7B, and
2612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Gemma-7B, as replacements for the original base model used TABLE VIII
 LOG LENGTH STATISTICS FOR EACH FAULT CASE
in LogInsight.
 As illustrated in Fig. 7, LogInsight achieves the highest
performance when utilizing its original base model. However,
it demonstrates comparable results with the alternative LLMs
tested, reflecting its adaptability across diverse architectures.
This compatibility highlights LogInsight’s flexibility and robustness, ensuring it can maintain satisfactory performance regardless of the underlying LLM used.

 systems, as exceeding the token limit can lead to incomplete or
 VI. CASE STUDY truncated analysis and loss of critical diagnostic information.
 To ensure the case study is representative, we randomly select To address this, effective log summarization is essential. Our
two fault cases from the dataset and use them, as shown in Fig. 8, FOLS module is specifically designed to extract and condense
to illustrate the workflow of LogInsight. the most informative log content, ensuring robust and efficient
 Case 1. Port Flapping Fault: For this case, 796 log entries fault diagnosis even when log sequences are exceptionally long.
were retrieved from the 10-minute period leading up to the fault Advantages of Fine-Tuning: To justify our choice of a fineevent. The log entries were then preprocessed into a log content tune based approach, we compared prompt-based, RAG-based,
sequence, filtering out irrelevant data using regular expressions, and fine-tuned LogInsight. For the prompt-based method, we
after which the FOLS module extracted critical fault-related used the same prompts on the base LLM without fine-tuning. For
information. Using Clustering-Based Content Aggregation, the RAG, we retrieved the top 5 similar historical cases using Senentries were reduced to 29 distinct logs. TF-IDF-Based Content tenceTransformer [56] and cosine similarity, and provided them
Ranking further refined this set, eliminating 11 entries less im- as in-context examples to the LLM. As shown in Table IX, the
portant and resulting in a distilled summary of 18 key log entries, fine-tuned method significantly outperforms both alternatives.
with notable entries including “Port Down” and “LACP”. Fine-tuning enables the LLM to internalize domain-specific
 This summarized information was then combined with crafted knowledge and follow task instructions more accurately, resultinstruction and input into the fine-tuned LLM. As shown in ing in higher-quality and more structured outputs. In contrast, the
the upper part of Fig. 8, LogInsight accurately diagnosed the base LLM (with or without RAG) often fails to follow instrucfault, identifying the root cause as port-down events triggered tions, generates irrelevant or unstructured content, and struggles
by Loss of Signal (LOS) alarms and state changes in LACP and to produce outputs in the required format. This demonstrates
Smartgroup. that, for specialized tasks like log fault diagnosis, fine-tuning is
 Case 2. Power Supply Fault: In this case, 365 log entries essential for reliable and actionable results.
related to the power supply issue were gathered. Following
preprocessing and summarization by the FOLS module, a fault
summary containing 23 significant log entries was created. B. Threats to Validity
 Based on this summary, LogInsight accurately identified the Two potential threats may affect the validity of LogInsight:
fault type, as depicted in the lower part of Fig. 8. The output Requirement for Labeled Data: LogInsight requires labeled
described power anomalies and voltage irregularities, offering fault cases for fine-tuning, which may raise concerns regarding
O&M engineers detailed and actionable information about the the cost and feasibility of data annotation. However, our empirifault. cal results demonstrate that effective fine-tuning can be achieved
 Overall, these case studies demonstrate the fault summariza- with a relatively small number of labeled instances, provided
tion capabilities of the FOLS module and highlight LogInsight’s that all major fault types are represented. In our experiments,
effectiveness in providing interpretable fault diagnosis results, only 50 labeled fault cases per dataset were used, with labels
which can significantly enhance operational decision-making. provided by experienced operations engineers. For these experts,
 categorizing faults is a routine task, and the labeling effort is
 VII. DISCUSSION minimal. Thus, while the need for labeled data is a limitation,
 the burden of data collection and annotation is relatively low,
A. Lessons Learned
 making the approach practical for real-world deployment.
 LLM Context Limitations: To assess the impact of LLM Manual Effort: To clarify the effort required for explanation
context length constraints, we analyzed the log lengths in our generation, LogInsight first uses GPT-4 to automatically generdatasets. As shown in Table VIII, we report the average and max- ate candidate explanations, which are then reviewed by experts
imum number of log entries, as well as the average log length per for accuracy. This process significantly reduces the manual
fault case. While the average log length is moderate for Dataset workload, as experts are not required to craft explanations from
1 and Dataset 3, the maximum log length in many cases far scratch but merely assess and confirm the generated outputs.
exceeds the LLM’s context window of 4096 tokens. In fact, for In our experience, two engineers were able to review 50 cases
the majority of fault cases, the raw log data cannot fit within the in about one hour. Moreover, this review process is a one-time
model’s input limit. This is a common challenge for LLM-based effort associated with model training rather than an ongoing
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2613

 TABLE IX
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF FINE-TUNING, PROMPT-BASED, AND RAG METHODS

requirement. As a result, the overall annotation burden is limited to extract essential information from log sequences, effectively
and practical for real-world deployment and future scaling. addressing LLMs’ limitations in handling long input contexts,
 and thereby enhancing processing efficiency for long texts. Our
C. Limitations extensive experiments on two public datasets and one production
 dataset validate LogInsight’s accuracy and interpretability.
 Based on the experimental results, we identify two key limitations of LogInsight and try to suggest possible solutions: REFERENCES
 Challenges of Similar Log Patterns: Some misclassified cases
arise from unclear boundaries between certain fault types. For [1] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
 quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
example, in Dataset 3, which consists of network device log Intell., 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
data, “Port Failure” and “LACP Flapping” often exhibit highly [2] A. Mahimkar, C. E. de Andrade, R. Sinha, and G. Rana, “A comsimilar log patterns. This similarity occurs because a port failure position framework for change management,” in Proc. 2021 ACM
 SIGCOMM Conf., New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2021, pp. 788–806,
can also lead to LACP instability, resulting in overlapping log doi:10.1145/3452296.3472901.
features for both fault types. Consequently, the model struggles [3] Y. Yuan, W. Shi, B. Liang, and B. Qin, “An approach to cloud execution
to accurately differentiate between these types using log data failure diagnosis based on exception logs in OpenStack,” in Proc. IEEE
 Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., 2019, pp. 124–131.
alone. To address this limitation, future work could explore [4] J. Chen et al., “An empirical investigation of incident triage for online
the integration of additional data modalities, such as system service systems,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.:
performance metrics or call traces, to provide richer contextual Softw. Eng. Pract., 2019, pp. 111–120.
 [5] J. Chen et al., “Continuous incident triage for large-scale online service
information. systems,” in Proc. 34th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng., 2020,
 Challenges with Unknown Fault Types: In the current imple- pp. 364–375, doi:10.1109/ASE.2019.00042.
mentation of LogInsight, the large language model (LLM) is [6] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
 automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
guided by a prompt that explicitly enumerates all known fault vol. 54, no. 6, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 130, doi:10.1145/3460345.
types for a given use case, enabling it to classify faults with [7] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based
high accuracy.However, in real-world industrial environments, problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
 Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, 2016, pp. 102–111.
previously unseen or unknown fault types frequently emerge. [8] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge graph,”
To mitigate this issue, the prompt includes instructions for the IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507, Sep./Oct. 2023.
LLM to classify any unrecognized fault as an “unknown type.” [9] C. Zhao et al., “Robust multimodal failure detection for microservice systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Despite these precautions, our experimental findings reveal that Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2023, pp. 5639–5649,
the model often misclassifies unknown faults as one of the doi:10.1145/3580305.3599902.
predefined types, rather than correctly identifying them as un- [10] S. Zhang et al., “No more data silos: Unified microservice failure diagnosis
 with temporal knowledge graph,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 17,
known. This limitation underscores the challenge of deploying no. 06, pp. 4013–4026, Nov./Dec. 2024, doi:10.1109/TSC.2024.3489444.
LogInsightin dynamic environments where new fault types may [11] Y. Liu, S. Tao, W. Meng, F. Yao, X. Zhao, and H. Yang, “LogPrompt:
appear over time. To enhance the robustness of the system, future Prompt engineering towards zero-shot and interpretable log analysis,” in
 Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, 2024, pp. 364–365,
research will investigate alternative fine-tuning strategies. For doi:10.1145/3639478.3643108.
instance, incorporating external knowledge bases or leveraging [12] S. Frieder et al., “Mathematical capabilities of ChatGPT,” in Proc. Adv.
self-supervised learning approaches, rather than relying solely Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 27699–27744.
 [13] W. Jiao, W. Wang, J.-T. Huang, X. Wang, and Z. Tu, “Is ChatGPT a good
on prompt engineering, may help the model more effectively translator? A preliminary study,” 2023, arXiv:2301.08745.
recognize and handle unknown fault types. This could reduce [14] Y. Peng, C. Wang, W. Wang, C. Gao, and M. R. Lyu, “Generative type
its dependence on predefined types and improve adaptability in inference for python,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng.,
 2023, pp. 988–999.
evolving industrial settings. [15] Y. Li et al., “Exploring the effectiveness of LLMs in automated logging
 generation: An empirical study,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 50, no. 12.
 [16] J. Qi et al., “LogGPT: Exploring ChatGPT for log-based anomaly detec-
 VIII. CONCLUSION tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. Data Sci.
 Syst. Smart City Dependability Sensor Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl., 2023,
 In this paper, we present LogInsight, a novel framework pp. 273–280.
utilizing LLMs for effective and interpretable log-based fault [17] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “LLMParser:
diagnosis. Through fine-tuning a medium-sized, open-source An exploratory study on using large language models for log parsing,” in
 Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
LLM, we integrated domain-specific knowledge. Additionally, [18] M. Poli et al., “Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional language
we designed a Fault-Oriented Log Summary (FOLS) module models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 28043–28078.
2614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

[19] O. Rubin and J. Berant, “Retrieval-pretrained transformer: Long-range [47] D. Lin, R. Raghu, V. Ramamurthy, J. Yu, R. Radhakrishnan, and J.
 language modeling with self-retrieval,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Fernandez, “Unveiling clusters of events for alert and incident management
 vol. 12, pp. 1197–1213, Sep. 2024. in large-scale enterprise it,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
[20] N. F. Liu et al., “Lost in the middle: How language models use long Discov. Data Mining, 2014, pp. 1630–1639.
 contexts,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 12, pp. 157–173, 2024. [48] M. Ester et al., “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large
[21] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Discov. Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231.
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1253–1263. [49] J. MacQueen et al., “Some methods for classification and analysis of
[22] A. Radford et al., “Improving language understanding by generative pre- multivariate observations,” in Proc. 5th Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist.
 training,” OpenAI, 2018. Probab., Oakland, CA, USA, 1967, pp. 281–297.
[23] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training [50] H. Schütze, C. D. Manning, and P. Raghavan, Introduction to Information
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, Retrieval, vol. 39. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
 arXiv:1810.04805. [51] L. Zheng et al., “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot
[24] C. Raffel et al., “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified arena,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 46595–46623.
 text-to-text transformer,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–67, [52] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 2020. approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv.
[25] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc. Adv. (ICWS), 2017, pp. 33–40.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 1877–1901. [53] T. Rosado and J. Bernardino, “An overview of openstack architecture,” in
[26] J. Achiam et al., “GPT-4 Technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774. Proc. Int. Database Eng. Appl. Symp., 2014, pp. 366–367.
[27] H. Touvron et al., “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language mod- [54] M. Sokolova and G. Lapalme, “A systematic analysis of performance
 els,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971. measures for classification tasks,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 45, no. 4,
[28] A. Chowdhery et al., “PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways,” pp. 427–437, 2009.
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 24, no. 240, pp. 1–113, 2023. [55] O. Maimon and L. Rokach, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
[29] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Handbook. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005.
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010. [56] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings
[30] A. Radford et al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” using siamese bert-networks,” 2019, arXiv:1908.10084.
 OpenAI Blog, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[31] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts
 for generation,” in Proc. 59th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics
 11th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process., Aug. 2021, pp. 4582–4597.
 [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.353/
[32] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale for parameterefficient prompt tuning,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Nov. 2021, pp. 3045–3059. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.
 Yongqian Sun (Member, IEEE) received the BS deorg/2021.emnlp-main.243/
 gree in statistical specialty from Northwestern Poly-
[33] T. Lei et al., “Conditional adapters: Parameter-efficient transfer learning
 technical University, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the
 with fast inference,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 PhD degree in computer science from the Depart-
 2024, pp. 8152–8172.
 ment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
[34] H. Zhao, J. Fu, and Z. He, “Prototype-based hyperadapter for sample-
 University, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
 efficient multi-task tuning,” 2023, arXiv:2310.11670.
 an associate professor with the College of Software,
[35] Y. Wang et al., “AdaMix: Mixture-of-adaptations for parameter-efficient
 Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His research intermodel tuning,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Abu
 ests include AIOps and service computing.
 Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: ACL, Dec. 2022, pp. 5744–5760. [Online].
 Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.388/
[36] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRa: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
 2021, arXiv:2106.09685.
[37] V. Fomenko, H. Yu, J. Lee, S. Hsieh, and W. Chen, “A note on LoRa,”
 2024, arXiv:2404.05086.
[38] A. Vervaet, “MoniLog: An automated log-based anomaly detection system
 for cloud computing infrastructures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng.,
 2021, pp. 2739–2743.
[39] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified
 deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc.
 Shiyu Ma received the BS and MS degrees in
 IEEE Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 92–103.
 software engineering from the College of Software,
[40] L. Liao, K. Zhu, J. Luo, J. Cai, and G. Costa, “LogBASA: Log anomaly
 Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2022 and 2025,
 detection based on system behavior analysis and global semantic awarerespectively. Her research interests include failure
 ness,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 2023, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 3777826,
 diagnosis and root-cause localization.
 doi:10.1155/2023/3777826.
[41] M. Ankerst, M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, and J. Sander, “OPTICS:
 Ordering points to identify the clustering structure,” in Proc. 1999 ACM
 SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1999,
 pp. 49–60, doi:10.1145/304182.304187.
[42] J. Xu, R. Yang, Y. Huo, C. Zhang, and P. He, “DivLog: Log parsing
 with prompt enhanced in-context learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int.
 Conf. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2024, pp. 2457–2468,
 doi:10.1145/3597503.3639155.
[43] Z. Jiang et al., “LILAC: Log parsing using LLMs with adaptive parsing Tong Xiao received the BS degree in software engicache,” Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 137–160, Jul. 2024. neering from the North University of China, Taiyuan,
[44] J. Liu et al., “Scalable and adaptive log-based anomaly detection with China, the MS degree in computer science from the
 expert in the loop,” 2023, arXiv:2306.05032. National University of Defense Technology, Chang-
[45] J. Pan, W. S. Liang, and Y. Yidi, “RAGLog: Log Anomaly Detection sha, China, and the PhD degree in computer science
 using Retrieval Augmented Generation,” 2024 IEEE World Forum on from Hunan University, Changsha, China. He is cur-
 Pub. Saf. Technol. (WFPST), Herndon, VA, USA, pp. 169–174 2024, rently a postdoctoral fellow with the Department of
 doi:10.1109/WFPST58552.2024.00034. Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Uni-
[46] J. Xu et al., “UniLog: Automatic logging via LLM and in-context learning,” versity, Beijing, China. His research interests include
 in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, USA: automated log analysis, AIOps, data mining, and deep
 ACM, 2024, Art. no. 14, doi:10.1145/3597503.3623326. learning.
SUN et al.: ACCURATE AND INTERPRETABLE LOG-BASED FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 2615

 Yongxin Zhao received the BS and MS degrees in Yao Zhao received the BS degree in information
 software engineering from the College of Software, management and information systems from the Nan-
 Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2021 and 2024, jing University of Information Science and Technolrespectively. She is currently working toward the PhD ogy, Nanjing, China, in 2015, and the MS degree
 degree with the College of Software, Nankai Uni- in agricultural informatization from the College of
 versity, Tianjin, China. Her research interests include Basic and Information Engineering, Yunnan Agrifailure detection and diagnosis. cultural University, Kunming, China, in 2017. He is
 currently with Network Department, China Mobile
 Communications Group Jiangsu Company, Ltd. His
 research interests focus on the application of artificial
 intelligence in the telecommunications field.

 Shenglin Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the BS
 Xuhui Cai received the Master of Science degree
 degree in network engineering from the School of
 in computer and communications from the Beijing
 Computer Science and Technology, Xidian Univer-
 University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 1991. He is currently the manager sity, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in
 computer science from the Department of Computer
 with Network Department, China Mobile Communi-
 Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beications Group. He has extensive experience in cloud
 jing, China, in 2017. He is currently an associate
 platform maintenance.
 professor with the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His research interests include
 failure detection, diagnosis, and prediction for service
 management. He is also a member of the IEEE.

 Jing Han received the master’s degree from the
 Wei Dong received the Master of Science degree Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
 in control engineering from the Beijing Institute of Nanjing, China. Since 2000, she has been with ZTE
 Technology, Beijing, China, in 2017. He is currently Corporation. From 2000 to 2016, she was engaged
 the project manager with Network Department, China in 3G/4G key technologies, and has been a technical
 Mobile Communications Group. He has extensive director responsible for the intelligent operation of
 experience in cloud platform maintenance. cloud platforms and wireless networks since 2016.
 Her research interests include machine learning, data
 mining, and signal processing.

 Dan Pei (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE
 and MS degrees in computer science from the De-
 Yue Shen received the Master of Science degree in partment of Computer Science and Technology, Tscomputer science and technology from the Beijing inghua University, Beijing, China, in 1997 and 2000,
 University of Posts and Telecommunications, Bei- respectively, and the PhD degree in computer science
 jing, China, in 2021. She is currently the project from the Computer Science Department, University
 manager with Network Department, China Mobile of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in
 Communications Group. She has extensive experi- 2005. He is currently an associate professor with the
 ence in cloud platform maintenance. Her research Department of Computer Science and Technology,
 interests include cloud computing, virtualization, and Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His research
 algorithm design. interests include network and service management.
 He is a senior member of the IEEE and ACM.