IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025 8939

 AD-NEv: A Scalable Multilevel Neuroevolution
 Framework for Multivariate Anomaly Detection
 Marcin Pietroń , Dominik Żurek , Kamil Faber , and Roberto Corizzo , Member, IEEE
 Abstract— Anomaly detection tools and methods present a Fi ith solution.
key capability in modern cyberphysical and failure prediction F[i]ic Input channels of ith layer.
systems. Despite the fast-paced development in deep learning
architectures for anomaly detection, model optimization for a
 F[i]oc Output channels of ith layer.
given dataset is a cumbersome and time-consuming process. F[i] K 1-D filter size of ith layer.
Neuroevolution could be an effective and efficient solution to this F[i] P Padding value of ith layer.
problem, as a fully automated search method for learning optimal F[i]cB Number of channels in batch norm of
neural networks, supporting both gradient and nongradient fine- ith layer.
tuning. However, existing methods mostly focus on optimizing
model architectures without taking into account feature sub-
 PG i Population of models specific for
spaces and model weights. In this work, we propose anomaly subspace G i .
detection neuroevolution (AD-NEv)—a scalable multilevel opti- δ(F, G(X )) Loss function.
mized neuroevolution framework for multivariate time-series 1(F, G) Fitness function.
anomaly detection. The method represents a novel approach d(Fi , F j ) Distance between models Fi and F j .
to synergically: 1) optimize feature subspaces for an ensemble
model based on the bagging technique; 2) optimize the model
 L Fi Layers of model Fi .
architecture of single anomaly detection models; and 3) per- L max Max number of layer in Fi .
form nongradient fine-tuning of network weights. An extensive cmax Max difference between out and in channels.
experimental evaluation on widely adopted multivariate anomaly γ (l) Number of channels in layer l.
detection benchmark datasets shows that the models extracted FG′ i (x) Model classifying input as normal or
by AD-NEv outperform well-known deep learning architectures
for anomaly detection. Moreover, results show that AD-NEv can anomaly.
perform the whole process efficiently, presenting high scalability Fe (x) Ensemble classification model.
when multiple graphics processing units (GPUs) are available. θ Weight in neural network.
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, autoencoders, neural archi- pc Crossover probability.
tecture search, neuroevolution. pm Mutation probability.
 τ Mutation power.
 N OMENCLATURE
 N Number of samples in the original training dataset.
 M Number of sensors. I. I NTRODUCTION
 σ Reduction rate.
 X
 x
 Original training dataset.
 Data point from X .
 M ODERN cyberphysical and failure prediction systems
 involve sophisticated equipment that records multivariate time-series data from several up to thousands of features.
 Xr Reduced training dataset. Such systems need to be continuously monitored to prevent
 xrt Data point from X r . expensive failures. In anomaly detection, it is common to have
 lw Window size. abundant availability of normal data deriving from sensor mon-
 P Population in a genetic algorithm. itoring and scarcity of labeled anomalies. For this reason, most
 Ng Iterations (generations) in a genetic process. anomaly detection works focus on semi-supervised learning
 Np Size of a population. settings, where model training is conducted exclusively using
 pm Probability of mutation. normal data [1], as well as unsupervised learning settings,
 Gi ith subspace. where training data are mostly normal but may contain a
 Si ith solution. small number of unknown anomalies. Among recent works
 on semi-supervised and unsupervised multivariate time-series
 Manuscript received 15 September 2022; revised 5 October 2023 and 6 May anomaly detection, deep learning-based methods achieve the
2024; accepted 29 July 2024. Date of publication 14 August 2024; date of
current version 5 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the PLGrid best results on well-known benchmarks [2], [3], [4], [5], [6],
Infrastructure, in part by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education [7], [8], [9].
allocated to the AGH University, and in part by Program “Excellence Within deep learning methods, a wide spectrum of
Initiative—Research University” for AGH University. (Corresponding author:
Marcin Pietroń.)
 autoencoder-based approaches were designed to deal with
 Marcin Pietroń, Dominik Żurek, and Kamil Faber are with the Faculty the anomaly detection problem [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].
of Computer Science, AGH University of Krakow, 30-059 Kraków, Poland The most efficient are those based on convolutional, fully
(e-mail: pietron@agh.edu.pl). connected, and long short-term memory (LSTM) layers, or a
 Roberto Corizzo is with the Department of Computer Science, American
University, Washington, DC 20016 USA. combination of them in single model. Alternative methods
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3439404 are based on adversarial techniques [6] as well as variational
 © 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
8940 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

autoencoders (VAEs) [15], [16]. Other recent and very 4) Automatic induction of a regularized ensemble model
promising trends include autoencoders based on graph neural with a low number of submodels, which further
networks [17], [18], [19], generative adversarial networks improves anomaly detection performance.
(GAN)-based architectures [3], supervised classification mod- 5) An extensive evaluation with benchmark datasets that
els [20], ensemble autoencoders [21], and autoencoders with are widely adopted for multivariate anomaly detection.
attention [22]. This article is organized as follows. Section II describes
 In this article, one important problem is the identification of related works. Section III presents the proposed neuroevolution
a suitable and optimized architecture for a given dataset, in a approach in detail. Section IV describes and discusses our
fully automated way. Neuroevolution is a form of artificial experiments. Section V summarizes the key results obtained
intelligence that uses evolutionary approaches to find optimal in our study. Section VI focuses on our ablation study. Finally,
neural networks. The most popular forms of neuroevolution Section VII concludes this article and outlines directions for
algorithms include NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies future work.
(NEAT) [23], HyperNEAT [24], and coDeepNEAT [25], which
aim to optimize parameters, model architectures, or both. II. R ELATED W ORKS
However, despite its potential, neuroevolution approaches have In this section, we analyze the anomaly detection methods
been focused on the optimization of model architectures for multivariate time-series data, as well as neuroevolution
without taking into account the joint optimization of model methods that are most relevant for our research scope.
architectures with feature subspaces and model weights. Recent surveys on general anomaly detection [27], deep
 In this article, we aim to fill this gap proposing anomaly learning-based anomaly detection [1], [28], [29], [30], [31],
detection neuroevolution (AD-NEv), a multilevel neuroevo- and unsupervised time-series anomaly detection [32] present
lution approach that aims to identify robust and optimized techniques relevant to unsupervised and semi-supervised mulautoencoder architectures for anomaly detection. Inspired by tivariate time-series anomaly detection. Autoencoder-based
the framework formulated in [26], loosely based on the methods include fully connected autoencoder (FC AE), unsucoDeepNEAT algorithm, our novel approach involves the pervised anomaly detection (USAD) [6], and univariate fully
simultaneous evolution of two populations: models and sub- connected autoencoder (UAE) [21]. These methods have
spaces. The former contains neural network architectures that become prominent in a number of real-world applications,
evolve during the neuroevolution process. The latter consists such as cybersecurity [10], [11], energy [12], physics [13],
of subspaces, which define subsets of input features. After and medical imaging [14].
the neuroevolution process, the framework sets up a bag- LSTM-based methods include National Aeronautics and
ging technique-based ensemble model from single optimized Space Administration (NASA)-LSTM [20], LSTM-AE [21]
architectures. A distinctive feature of our proposed approach (which is based on [2]), and LSTM-VAE [33]. CNNstands in the optimization of a single model for each subspace, based methods include temporal convolutional AE (TCN
overcoming the limitation of a single suboptimal solution AE) [34]. GAN-based methods include one-class adverfor all subspaces. Subsequently, a fully scalable nongradient sarial nets (OCAN) [9] and BeatGAN [3]. Graph neufine-tuning process is performed to iteratively select the best ral network-based approaches include [17]. Finally, hybrid
solutions and generate model populations. In addition, fine- approaches include Multi-Scale Convolutional Recurrent
tuning is performed on the evolved ensemble model. Another Encoder-Decoder (MSCRED) [35], deep autoencoding Gaskey novelty of our proposed approach stands in the fully sian mixture model (DAGMM) [36], and OmniAnomaly [5].
automated nature of the optimization process, encompass- Regarding autoencoder-based approaches, the FC AE model
ing subspace evolution, model evolution, and fine-tuning. introduced in [21] is similar to UAE, but it involves a single
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this research direction model over all the features, where the input sample is a vector
has never been explored before in the context of anomaly resulting from the concatenation of time steps observed for
detection tasks. Our extensive experimental evaluation shows all sensors. The USAD model is an autoencoder with an
that our proposed multilevel neuroevolution approach yields additional discriminator model and loss extensions to boost the
deep ensembles of autoencoder models that outperform state- final scores. Garg et al. [21] present comparative studies on
of-the-art methods without requiring any predefined scoring multivariate anomaly detection models. They describe UAE as
function. a model consisting of multiple autoencoders, each connected
 The main contributions of our work can be summarized in by its input to a separate feature. Each encoder is a multilayer
the following. perceptron with a number of nodes corresponding to the
 1) A novel multilevel neuroevolution approach with a sepa- number of time steps (window size) and a reduced number
 rate population of models for each subspace of features, of dimensions in the latent space by a factor of 2. The
 which can be evolved independently, leading to a better decoder is a mirror image of the encoder with tanh activation.
 adaptation of specific models to each subspace. The resulting ensemble model outperforms many other deep
 2) A novel selection process for models evolution based on learning architectures.
 an adapted distance measure for deep autoencoders that The attention mechanism for anomaly detection is exploited
 promotes model diversity. in PAFormer [22], where attention weights are used to learn
 3) A fast nongradient-based fine-tuning approach for the the global–local distributional differences for each data point,
 evolved model architecture, leveraging adaptations of enabling to discriminate anomalies.
 neural network weights in the evolution process, which Focusing on LSTM-based approaches, NASA-LSTM is a
 improves results achieved by the previous levels. two-layer LSTM model that uses predictability modeling,
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8941

i.e., forecasting for anomaly detection [20]. The LSTM-AE representations with key techniques, such as stochastic variable
presented in [21] consists of single-LSTM layer for each connection and planar normalizing flow. Then, it reconstructs
encoder and decoder. LSTM-VAE [15] models the data gen- input data and uses the reconstruction probabilities to detererating process from the latent space to the observed space mine anomalies.
using variational techniques. One common drawback of these methods is that they do not
 A VAE-based method with evolutionary features is proposed perform automatic model optimization, and therefore require
in [16]. However, unlike our proposed framework, the method a significant manual effort to identify and tune the right
neither consider weights mutation in the model nor subspace architecture for the right domain and dataset. This limitation
evolution. The model is evolved only for one specialized ECG may be solved by neuroevolution approaches, which have been
dataset. recently used in many machine learning tasks for improving
 The CNN-based approach of TCN AE described in [21] the accuracy of deep learning models and finding optimal
is an architecture in which the encoder is built from a stack network topologies [37], [38], [39], [40].
of temporal convolution (TCN) [34] residual blocks. In the Miikkulainen et al. [25] show that a two-level neuroevoludecoder, convolutions in the TCN residual blocks are replaced tion strategy scheme can outperform human-designed models
with transpose convolutions. The study shows that the scoring in some specific tasks, e.g., language modeling and image
function has a significant impact on the pointwise F1-score. classification. This strategy is based on the co-deep NEAT
 GAN-based methods include OCAN [9], an end-to-end one- algorithm with two optimization levels: single sub-block opticlass classification method in which the generator is trained mization and composition of sub-blocks to form a whole
to produce examples that are complimentary to normal data network. In [40], a novel deep reinforcement learning-based
patterns, which is used to train a discriminator for anomaly framework is proposed for electrocardiogram time-series sigdetection using the GAN framework. BeatGAN [3] uses a gen- nal. The framework is optimized by neuroevolution algorithm.
erative adversarial network framework where reconstructions Jiau and Huang [39] present the framework of the selfproduced by the generator are regularized by the discriminator organizing map-based neuroevolution solver by which the
instead of fixed reconstruction loss functions. self-organizing maps (SOMs)-like network represents the
 Graph-based models also represents a viable and powerful abstract carpool service problem. The SOM network is trained
alternative for anomaly detection with time-series data. The by using neural learning and evolutionary mechanism. In [38],
dense graph neural network approach presented in [17] models the novel neuroevolution approach is described. The algorithm
the anomaly detection problem as a graph neural network, is incorporated with powerful representation which unifies
where each node represents a single feature, and edges most of the neural networks into one representation and with
allow to represent data exchanged between different nodes. new diversity preserving method called spectrum diversity.
The graph-based modeling capabilities represent a distinctive The combination of spectrum diversity with a unified neuron
trait of this method and were shown to yield a significant representation enables the algorithm to either outperform or
performance boost other state-of-the-art methods with very have similar performance with NEAT on five classes of
well-known multivariate time-series datasets. problems tested. Ablation tests show the importance of new
 Zheng et al. [18] adopts a graph neural network to encode added features in the unified neuron representation. In [41],
spatial information from complex pairwise dependencies a novel neuroevolutionary method for optimization the archibetween variables, and a module with dilated convolutional tecture and hyperparameters of convolutional autoencoders.
functions allows to capture temporal dependencies. A similar The hypervolume indicator in the context of neural architecchallenge is addressed in [19], where a cross-time spatial graph ture search is introduced. Results show that images can be
network with fuzzy embedding is proposed to disentangle compressed by a factor of more than 10, while still retaining
latent and mixing temporal states and learn cross-time spatial enough information. In [42], it is shown that genetic algorithm
dependencies. could evolve autoencoders that can reproduce the data better
 Hybrid methods such as MSCRED [35] learn to reconstruct than the manually created autoencoders with more hidden
signature matrices, i.e., matrices representing cross correlation units. The experiments were performed on the MNIST dataset.
relationships between channels constructed by pairwise inner The first approach of a co-evolutionary neuroevolution-based
product of the channels. It is efficient in the case of long-term multivariate anomaly detection system is presented in [26].
anomalies that are significantly out of the normal data distri- However, one substantial limitation is that the optimization of
bution. Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model (GMM) subspaces and models occurs separately, so that one model
[36] uses a deep autoencoder to generate a low-dimensional is optimized for all subspaces. This characteristic limits the
representation and reconstruction error for each input data capability of the neuroevolution process to optimize the model
point. The output of the autoencoder is further fed into a for each specific subspace, forcing the model to compro-
GMM. DAGMM jointly optimizes the parameters of the deep mise in order to handle all subspaces simultaneously, and
autoencoder and the mixture model in an end-to-end fashion. potentially resulting in a loss of anomaly detection accuracy.
The joint optimization balances autoencoding reconstruction Moreover, the proposed method does not provide fine-tuning
and density estimation of latent representation. The proposed capabilities, which would provide the opportunity to further
regularization helps the autoencoder escape from less attrac- optimize the model and improve anomaly detection perfortive local optima and further reduce reconstruction errors. mance. Fine-tuning is a quite popular technique for improving
OmniAnomaly [5] is a stochastic recurrent neural network for the accuracy of the pretrained models. The most popular techmultivariate time series. Its main idea is to capture the normal nique is gradient-based fine-tuning [43], [44]. The nongradient
patterns of multivariate time series by learning their robust approach is quite rare but can yield significant improvements
8942 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 1. AD-NEv framework architecture. Time-series data are used to train and evaluate a set of models during neuroevolution through different levels. The
framework returns an optimized ensemble model that can be used for inference.

as shown in [45]. The presented method improves the accuracy X in a new representation with reduced dimensionality—latent
of pretrained quantized models. variables Z. The decoder learns how to reconstruct the latent
 One common drawback of existing neuroevolution methods variables Z back to their original shape. The model is trained
is that they typically optimize model architectures or model to minimize the reconstruction loss, which corresponds to
weights in isolation. Moreover, the majority of approaches that minimizing the difference between the decoder’s output and
optimize model weights focus on shallow neural networks. the original input data. It can be expressed as follows:
Finally, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no
 L(X, X̂ ) = ||X − AE(X )||2 (1)
neuroevolution approach that jointly optimizes feature spaces,
model architecture, and model weights. where
 AE(X ) = D(Z ), Z = E(X ). (2)
 III. M ETHOD
 The autoencoder in our method can consist of various
 In this section, we describe AD-NEv, a scalable mullayers, e.g., fully connected layers and convolutional layers.
tilevel neuroevolution framework that jointly addresses the
 Several variants of autoencoder architecture exist, including
aforementioned limitations of anomaly detection and neuroevolution methods. The starting point of the framework is adversarial autoencoder (AAE) [46]), VAE [47]), or denoising
data preparation—which consists of downsampling training autoencoder (DAE) [48]) but the general idea of reconstruction
data used in the following evolution levels, and splitting it into loss minimization is similar in all cases, (1). When dealing
overlapping windows, which reduces the computational cost of with time-series data, the error is predicted at each time point
the following steps. The next step is finding the optimal par- (norm between input and multivariate reconstructed vector),
tition of input features into subspaces, leading to an effective as in the following equation:
matching between features and models, as well as a reduced Ert = ||X t − AE(xt )||2 . (3)
number of models in the final ensemble. After that, model
evolution is performed for each subspace. At the next level,
 B. Data Reduction
the best model for each subspace extracted from the previous
level is fine-tuned using the nongradient genetic optimiza- The algorithm starts by reducing the training data for the
tion method. Subsequently, the ensemble model combines all evolution process. Specifically, a consecutive number of data
fine-tuned models evaluating them using a voting mechanism. points σ are aggregated by averaging values for each feature,
A visual representation of the framework architecture is shown leading to a coarser time granularity. As a result, we are
in Fig. 1. In the following, we describe all levels in detail in able to provide a fast evolution while retaining the most
Sections III-A–III-G. important information. The original training dataset X contains
 N samples, and each sample contains data from M features,
 as shown in the following equations:
A. Autoencoders
 AD-NEv leverages a deep neural network architecture con- X = {xt , t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N } (4)
sisting of autoencoders as base models for the neuroevolution xt = {xti , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M}}. (5)
process. Autoencoders are unsupervised learning models that The reduced dataset is annotated as X r , whereas σ is the
learn a compressed representation of raw input data, which reduction ratio parameter
is then used to accurately reconstruct inputs. They consist  
of two parts: an encoder E and a decoder D. The encoder N
 X r = xrt , t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , . (6)
learns how to efficiently compress and encode the input data σ
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8943

 Single data points from X r are obtained according to the Algorithm 1 General Genetic Algorithm Workflow
following equation, where med is the median function: Result: PNg – Final population
 xrt = med({xt∗σ , xt∗σ +1 , . . . , x(t+1)∗σ }). (7) Input: N g – Number of iterations
 Input: N p – Size of the given population
 Although the averaging step may lead to information loss, Input: pm – Probability of mutation
our experiments with and without this step highlighted that 1 i ← 1;
the ranking of models remains fundamentally unaltered, while 2 Generate initial population P0 ;
a significant increase in the efficiency of the model selection 3 while i ≤ N g do
step can be obtained. Moreover, it should be noted that, in the 4 Create offspring (crossover) for subspaces (Alg. 2) or
proposed approach, averaging is just used as a reference to model (Alg. 7);
compare model efficiency. The final model architecture is 5 Mutate offspring for subspaces (Alg. 3, 4, 5) or
trained using the whole training dataset in its original gran- model (Alg. 6);
ularity. We have done tests and compared the ranking of the 6 Compute fitness (loss) of all solutions (Alg. 8) ;
models after training on the reduced dataset and nonreduced. 7 Select best solutions for a new population Pi using
The final best architecture in all cases achieved the best fitness and distance as in Eq. 14;
F1-score in both cases. 8 i ← i + 1;
 During this step, data points are also grouped into over-
 9 return Final population PN g
lapping windows used in the following steps. The rationale
is based on the fact that working with time-series data,
an aggregated context can be more beneficial for the algorithm
than a single data point. The window size lw can change during Algorithm 2 Subspaces Crossover Algorithm
the evolution process since it is one of the parameters subject Result: S ′ — solution created by crossover
to mutation. Input: S1 —parent solution with K subspaces
 Input: S2 —parent solution with K subspaces
C. General Evolution Algorithm ′
 1 S = {};
 In our multilevel neuroevolution framework, we apply a 2 for i ∈ [0, 1, . . . , K ] do
genetic algorithm in three levels: subspaces, models, and 3 g1 = S1i ; // Subspace from S1
nongradient fine-tuning. The genetic process starts with the 4 g2 = S2i ; // Subspace from S2
generation of the initial population P0 . Each population con- 5 gmin = min (min (g1 ), min (g2 ));
tains N p solutions. After that, the single iteration is repeated 6 gmax = max (max (g1 ), max (g2 ));
N g times. Each iteration starts with creating offspring from 7 γ = randint (gmin , gmax ) ; // Split point
the parents by the crossover operator. Next, the mutation 8 g ′ = {};
operator mutates each solution from the offspring with the 9 for κ ∈ g1 do
probability pm . The genetic process is formally described in 10 if κ < γ then
Algorithm 1. Genetic operators such as crossover and mutation 11 g ′ ← g ′ ∪ κ;
are different for subspaces (see Algorithms 2–5) and models 12 for κ ∈ g2 do
(see Algorithms 6 and 7). The models’ fine-tuning has a 13 if κ > γ then
unique selection and mutation process (see Algorithm 9). 14 g ′ ← g ′ ∪ κ;
Nevertheless, the structure of the genetic algorithm is the same 15 S′ ← S′ ∪ g′ ;
for all levels. Details about each specific step of the process 16 return S
 ′
for all levels are provided later on in this article.
 Subsequently, the fitness of each solution is calculated.
In our approach, the generation process works on the model
architecture in the evolution of a single model, on subspaces in The partition S of input features contains K subspaces.
the subspace optimization, and on weight values during fine- There is no restriction on the frequency of the presence for a
tuning. The combination of these three levels in our framework single input feature in subspaces, which means that it can be
allows us to explore and exploit a larger search space during used in zero, one, or more subspaces. Our method leverages
model optimization. A single genetic iteration finishes with the the genetic algorithm to find the optimal partition of the
selection of solutions that form a new population. The result input features into subspaces. A single gene provides inforof the genetic process is the final population PNg . mation about a given feature being present in a subspace G.
 To perform subspace evolution we adopt the genetic operators
D. Subspaces Evolution defined in [26]: crossover (Algorithm 2), moving mutation
 The goal of this level of the algorithm is to find an optimal (Algorithm 3), vanishing mutation (Algorithm 4), and adding
partitioning of input features into subspaces. We define a mutation (Algorithm 5).
subspace G i as a subset of the input features that is specific To improve the convergence speed of the genetic algorithm,
for each dataset, as shown in the following equation: we form the initial population based on the correlation between
 features, instead of using a randomly generated population.
 G i (X ) ⊆ {X 0 , X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X M } (8)
 Features are clustered performing agglomerative clustering
where X i denotes data from the ith input feature. with a degree of randomness to achieve a diverse population.
8944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 Algorithm 3 Subspaces Moving Mutation Algorithm 5 Subspaces Adding Feature Mutation
 Result: S ′ — solution created by mutation Result: S ′ — solution created by mutation
 Input: S—solution containing K subspaces Input: S—solution containing K subspaces
 Input: Pm —probability of a mutation Input: F— set of all features
 1 S ← {S0 , S1 , . . . , S K }, where Si = Si ;
 ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′
1 S ←∅ ;
2 for i ∈ [0, 1, . . . , K ] do 2 for κ ∈ F do
3 sample r from N (0, 1); 3 / S then
 if κ ∈
4 if r < Pm then 4 for Si ∈ S do
5 sample κ from Si ; // Feature to move 5 sample r from N (0, 1);
6 j = (i + 1) mod K ; // id of the next 6 if r > K1 then
 subspace in solution 7 Si′ ← Si′ ∪ κ;
7 S ′j ← S j ∪ κ; 8 return S
 ′

8 S ′ ← S ′ ∪ S ′j
9 return S
 j
 Performing D(E(F2 (G i ))), we obtain the reconstructed
 subspace—G ri .
 Algorithm 4 Subspaces Vanishing Mutation
 Each population PG i is evolved independently from the
 Result: S ′ — solution created by mutation others in order to find the best solution for each subspace G i
 Input: S—solution containing K subspaces by means of a genetic algorithm. The genetic operators follow
 ′
 1 S ←∅ ; the specifications in [26] and include crossover and mutation
 2 for Si ∈ S do of the following parameters: number of layers, number of
 3 Si′ = Si ; input and output channels for each layer i (F[i]ic , F[i]oc ),
 4 for κ ∈ Si do ( and window size (lw ) (Algorithms 6 and 7).1
 P 1, if κ ∈ Si If a mutation of the number of layers takes place, the L F
 5 Cκ = Si ∈S ; parameter is modified by removing the last 3l layers in the
 0, otherwise j j
 6 sample r from N (0, 1); encoder ( f θ E , f θ E , . . .) (lines 10–12, Algorithm 6) and the
 N N −1
 j j
 7 if r > C1κ then first 3l layers in the decoder ( f θ D , f θ D , . . .) or adding new
 N N −1
 8 Si′ ← Si′ \ {κ} ; j
 ones to the end of the encoder after the f θ E layer, and to the
 9 S ← S ∪ Si′ ;
 ′ ′
 j
 N

10 return S
 ′ decoder before f θ D (lines 14–17, Algorithm 6). The mutation
 N
 of the output channels in the specific layer is described in
 lines 3–7, Algorithm 6, and the window size mutation is
 presented between lines 18 and 20, Algorithm 6. In the case
This process has the effect of recursively merging pairs of of a crossover, the chosen lth layer of the encoder f θlE and the
clusters leveraging the linkage distance [49]. In our approach, decoder f θlD are exchanged between two child models F1′ and
we leverage correlations between features as an intuitive F2′ in a subgroup population (lines 4–8, Algorithm 7). The
and automatic way to estimate their similarity and drive the next option of crossover is to exchange the length between
clustering process. the two parent autoencoders (lines 10–18, Algorithm 7).
 A key aspect of our method is that it does not require the
 selection of a single value for the mutation stage. To simplify
E. Models Evolution this task, users can provide a range to define the search
 This level follows subspace evolution, and its aim is to find space for the mutation stage, delegating the responsibility
optimal models that can be later parts of the ensemble model. of choosing a proper window size value to the framework,
Models for each subspace are evaluated independently, since a reducing the user’s margin for error.
model that is optimal for one subspace may not be efficient in As the loss function δ for model F and subspace G on
another subspace. Therefore, we create and evaluate a single dataset X , we use the mean squared error defined as follows:
population of models for each subspace. We denote PG i as a
 1 X
population of models specific for subspace G i δ(F, G(X )) = (F(x) − x)2 . (12)
 n o |G(X )| x∈G(X )
 j
 PG i = F2 (G i ), j = 0, . . . , N P . (9)
 The genetic algorithm needs to calculate the fitness 1 for
 Each model is represented by an encoder and a decoder, each single model F and subspace G. To achieve this goal,
as in the following equations, where the layers in encoder and the methods relies on a windowed training dataset X which is
decoder appear in the reversed order split into consecutive parts according to the timestamp of data
      points: a training part X t (80%) and validation part X v (20%).
 j j j j
 z = E F2 E (G i ) = f θ E f θ E , . . . , f θ E (G i ) (10)
 1 Without loss of generality, Algorithms 6 and 7 operate on any layer of
   N N −1
   0 
 j j j j
 G ri = D F2 D (z) = f θ D , . . . , f θ D f θ D (z) . (11) the neural network. For conciseness, we do not report the processing of the
 0 N −1 N encoder and decoder parts of the model.
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8945

 Algorithm 6 Single Model Mutation as the weighted loss from the validation datasets. The value
 Input: F - a model is negated because the goal of the genetic algorithm is to
 Input: wmax - maximum window size, L max - maximum maximize the fitness, whereas we want to minimize loss
 number of conv layers values. The whole calculation is expressed in the following
 ′
 1 F ← copy(F);
 equation:
 2 sample m from {0, 1, 2} ; // mutation types |X t | ∗ δ(F, G(X t )) + |X v | ∗ δ(F, G(X v ))
 1(F, G) = − .
 3 if m = 0 then |X t | + |X v |
 // mutate the number of channels in (13)
 a layer Our method introduces a novel selection process in the
 4 sample l from {0, . . . , L F − 1}; evolution of the models. Its goal is to avoid convergence to a
 5 c′ = randint (F[l]ic , F[l + 1]ic ); local optimum by keeping diversity in the models’ population.
 6 F ′ [l]oc ← c′ ; To achieve this goal, we modify the selection process. Instead
 7 F ′ [l + 1]ic ← c′ ; of choosing only the best models in each generation, we also
 8 if m = 1 then keep a few of the most different models. We calculate the
 // reduce the length of the model distance d F between models Fi and F j . The value is based on
 9 sample l from {0, . . . , L max }; the models’ hyperparameters, such as the number of layers
10 if l < L F then L and the number of channels γ in the convolutional or
11 for k ∈ [l + 1, . . . , L F ] do fully connected layer. The distance calculation is performed
12 F ′ [k] ← ∅ ; as follows:
 else
 X abs(γ (la ) − γ (lb ))
13 d F (Fi , F j ) = L Fi − L F j +
14 for k ∈ [L F , . . . , l − 1] do l ,l ∈L ,L
 min(γ (la ), γ (lb ))
 a b Fi Fj
15 c′ = randint (F[k]oc , F[k]oc + cmax ); (14)
16 F ′ [k + 1]ic ← F[k]oc ; where abs denotes the absolute value.
17 F ′ [k + 1]oc ← c′ ;
18 if m = 2 then Algorithm 8 Model Fitness Calculation
 // mutate window size Result: Fitness value for solution S
19 sample w from {1, . . . , wmax }; Input: S - solution containing K subspaces
20 F ′ [0]ic ← w; Input: X t - train dataset
 ′
21 return F
 Input: X v - validation dataset
 Algorithm 7 Models Crossover Input: Nep - number of epochs to train while calculating
 fitness
 Input: F1 , F2
 1 L←0 ;
 1 F1 ← copy(F1 );
 ′
 2 for Si ∈ S do
 2 F2 ← copy(F2 );
 ′
 3 F = train_model (X t , Si , Nep );
 3 sample m from {0, 1} ; // type of crossover
 4 Lt = δ(F, Si (X t )) ; // Rec. loss (Eq. 12)
 4 if m = 0 ; // exchange the layers
 5 Lv = δ(F, Si (X v )) ;
 5 then
 6 L X = |X t|X t|
 ∗ Lt + |X t|X v|
 ∗ Lv ;
 6 sample l from {0, 1, . . . , min (L F1 , L F2 )} ; LX
 |+|X v | |+|X v |
 7 F1′ [l] ← F2 [l]; 7 L Si = |Si | ;
 8 F2′ [l] ← F1 [l]; 8 L = L + L Si
 9 if m = 1 ; // exchange the lengths of 9 return −L
 models
10 then
 F. Nongradient Fine-Tuning
11 if L F1 > L F2 then
12 F1′ [L F2 − 1]oc ← F2 [L F2 − 1]oc ; Changing the weights values of pretrained models with
13 for k ∈ [L F2 , . . . , L F1 ] do gradient-based methods can result in suboptimal models that
14 F1′ [k] ← F2 [k]; could be further optimized. This phenomenon was noticed
15 F2′ [k] ← ∅ ; and presented in [45], which shows that performing nongra-
16 else dient fine-tuning after gradient-based optimization can yield
17 F2′ [L F1 − 1]oc ← F1 [L F1 − 1]oc ; more accurate models. Inspired by this work, we perform
18 for k ∈ [L F1 , . . . , L F2 ] do nongradient fine-tuning on the best models extracted from
19 F2′ [k] ← F1 [k]; the previous level. As the optimization step, we choose the
20 F1′ [k] ← ∅ ; evolutionary approach in which the genetic operators modify
21 return F1 , F2
 ′ ′ weights values to improve the performance of the models. The
 mutation operator modifies the chosen weights by the mutation
 power τ with mutation probability pm as in
During the evolution, the model is trained on the training part θ ′ = θ ∗ (1 ± pm ∗ τ ) (15)
X t . After each evolution iteration, we calculate the fitness where θ is a single weight.
8946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 Algorithm 9 Fine-Tuning the following equation:
 Result: R - A set of fine-tuned models Layers(Fi ) q
 X
 Input: F - The best model from previous level dθ (Fi , F j ) = |θ Fik − θ F jk |2 . (16)
 Input: N P - Size of fine-tuning population in every k=0
 generation The distance represents the difference between the values
 Input: N g - Number of generations in the fine-tuning of the weights of the two models. The process of selecting
 Input: pm - Mutation probability the most diverse model aims at achieving the exploration of a
 Input: τ - Mutation power larger space of models, while avoiding getting stuck in a local
1 R ←∅ ; minima.
2 g ←0 ; // Generation number The fine-tuning process does not involve the crossover
3 Fg ← F ; operation, since its adoption would provide the same effect
4 while g < N g do as a very high value of the pm parameter. In that case, model
5 Pg ← {F2′1 , F2′2 , . . . , F2′N } where θ ′ is created by weights would likely drift to a wrong direction in a single
 P
 mutating weights from Fg using eq. 15 with pm and iteration, leading to a drastic loss in model’s accuracy (as
 τ; further showcased in Section VI-B).
6 Fg ← arg min F P(Fi ) ;
 Fi ∈Pg
7 if F P(Fg ) = 0∨ G. Ensemble Model
8 ∀k∈[g−5,g−4,...,g−1] F P(Fk ) = F P(Fg ) ; // is The outcome of the previous steps can be summarized as
 stagnated follows.
9 then 1) An optimized partition of input features into subspaces:
10 R ← R ∪ Fg ; {G i , i ∈ {0, . . . , K }}.
11 Fg ← arg max d F (F, F ′ ) ; // d F (·, ·) from 2) An optimized and fine-tuned model for each subspace
 F ′ ∈P G i : {FG i , i ∈ {0, . . . , K }}.
 eq. 16 Our next goal is to build an ensemble model that is capable of
12 g ← g+1 classifying input data as normal or as an anomaly. To accom-
13 return R plish this goal, we add a threshold to each model to return a
 binary prediction: either 0 (normal) or 1 (anomaly). Therefore,
 for each subspace G i , we create a model FG′ i that compares
 the output of FG i to the threshold ηi , specifically defined for
 During the fine-tuning process formalized in Algorithm 9, each model
the algorithm randomly mutates a percentage of the weights2 (
 0, FG i (x) < ηi
(line 5, Algorithm 9). The fitness for each solution is calculated FG i (x) =
 ′
 (17)
in the population as the number of false positives (FPs) (line 6, 1, FG i (x) ≥ ηi .
Algorithm 9). During the fine-tuning process, a sample is As a result of this process, we compose base models into the
marked as an anomaly (FP) if its reconstruction error is higher ensemble model Fe adopting a crisp voting strategy
than the average value of all reconstruction errors, multiplied
 K
 
by a constant factor that determines the allowed deviation from X
 FG′ i (x) = 0
 
the mean. The best solutions are selected to be included in the
 
 
 
  0,
new population (lines 6–11, Algorithm 9). In the following Fe (x) = i=0
 K (18)
iteration, a complete new set of models is generated based on 
  X
 FG i (x) > 0.
 ′
  1,
 
 
the best models selected from the previous iteration.
 i=0
 If a fitness value of zero FPs is achieved (line 7,
 Fe (x) ⇐⇒ (FG 1 (x G 1 ), FG 2 (x G 2 ), . . . , FG K (x G K )). (19)
Algorithm 9), or when a model does not further improve for
a given number of iterations, i.e., stagnation condition (line 8, This voting mechanism was empirically determined and
Algorithm 9), no further improvement is possible. We recall selected since it gives better results than standard approaches
that this assumption holds since model training takes place in such as majority voting. As a result, the ensemble model Fe
a semi-supervised setting, in which training data contains no can classify input data as normal or an anomaly based on the
anomalies. If zero FPs are achieved or the stagnation condition output of single models.
occurs, the best model is removed from the population and is
used for the inference phase, during which it is evaluated on IV. E XPERIMENTS
testing data. Our experiments focus on multivariate anomaly detection
 In all cases, after removing the best model, another model with time-series data, which represents a challenging task that
is selected (line 11, Algorithm 9) and further improved in is crucially important in many real-life applications.
the following iterations. The new model is selected based More specifically, our experiments aim to address the folon the highest distance from the best model, as shown in lowing research questions.
 1) RQ1: Does AD-NEv yield a higher anomaly detec-
 2 To change weights, the plus/minus sign is randomly chosen with a tion performance than state-of-the-art anomaly detection
probability of 50%. methods for multivariate time series?
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8947

 2) RQ2: Are all modeling levels in AD-NEv contributing TABLE I
 to the achievement of the final anomaly detection per- S TATISTICS OF THE U SED DATASETS
 formance of the method?
 3) RQ3: Does AD-NEv model training present a reasonable
 time complexity in terms of execution time for all its
 levels (training, subspaces, models, and fine-tuning)?
 4) RQ4: Does the AD-NEv framework present satisfactory
 speedup values, allowing to efficiently scale model optimization when using multiple general purpose graphics
 processing units (GPGPU)? observed anomaly are used for model training, and all data
 5) RQ5: Does AD-NEv present a stable and efficient model points between 3 days before and 2 days after the first observed
 evolution and fine-tuning convergence process consid- anomaly are used for model evaluation. We concatenate data
 ering different values for the population size, τ , and from these subsets for the evolution of subspaces and models.
 mutation probability parameters? Following this idea, to better fit specific data characteristics of
 To answer these questions, we perform a set of quantitative entities, we build subspaces separately for each entity, and then
and qualitative experiments that assess the performance of train and fine-tune separate models. The final result is obtained
AD-NEv from different perspectives. In the following sub- by concatenating results from each entity. During prediction
sections, we describe the evaluation protocol followed in our time, we choose the model corresponding to the particular
study, the datasets analyzed, the metrics used to assess the entity of the source that generated the data instance.
anomaly detection performance, as well as competitor methods
considered and their configuration. Results are discussed in
 B. Metrics
Section V.
 The F1-score is a standard metric for anomaly detection
A. Datasets tasks, as it is more resistant to class imbalance than other
 We selected relevant time-series datasets, including the metrics such as accuracy (which yield high values when the
Secure Water Treatment (SWAT) Dataset (SWAT) [50], the normal class in testing data is larger than the anomaly class).
Water Distribution (WADI) dataset [51], the Mars Science We adopt F1 as a pointwise metric, i.e., we evaluate every data
Laboratory (MSL) Rover dataset, and the Soil Moisture Active point independently. While sequence-based evaluation (point-
Passive (SMAP) Satellite dataset [20]. All datasets either adjusted F1) also represents a feasible choice, and it is largely
involve data gathered in real environments (MSL and SMAP) adopted in the literature, it usually results in higher values
or carefully prepared testbeds reflecting existing systems for performance metrics (since predictions of anomalies in a
(SWAT and WADI). The datasets contain anomalies resulting sequence are considered correct if at least one anomaly in
from either device malfunctions or external malicious activity. the sequence is identified correctly), without providing precise
The anomalies were labeled by the domain experts who information about how well the algorithm can decide whether
created the datasets. It is noteworthy that the chosen datasets a single data point is an anomaly [52].
are popular benchmarks used in many recent studies.3
 For all datasets, we leveraged splits provided by the authors V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
of each dataset, which properly considers the continuity of A. Anomaly Detection Performance
time-series data. Training data contains clean conditions of Table II presents the results for AD-NEv in comparison to
the process without anomalies, whereas testing data contains the results of well-known anomaly detection methods. Some
both normal data and anomalies (class 0: normal/benign and models are evaluated using an optimized Gauss-D scoring
class 1: anomaly). function [21], which features a data transformation step on
 Accordingly, we adopt a semi-supervised anomaly detection previously observed data points, aiming at increasing F1 valsetting, where normal/benign data are exclusively used for ues. However, in our experiments, this scoring function did
model training (one-class learning). As a result, our models are not provide significant improvements to the model’s accuracy
exclusively trained on normal data, without anomalies. Both and was therefore discarded in the final experiments. For the
training and testing data are processed in windows, according largest dataset (WADI), AD-NEv outperforms the second-best
to the value of window size (in channels in the Conv1D layer) method [graph neural network (GNN)] by 0.05, whereas F1
chosen during model optimization. Statistics about datasets of the third-best model (LSTM-VAE) is significantly lower,
characteristics are shown in Table I. with a margin of 0.12. Most of the other methods obtain
 While the SWAT and WADI datasets contain one continuous even worse results. The differences are less impressive with
data stream (SWAT: 11 days of continuous operation: 7 days the SWAT dataset, where AD-NEv outperforms GNN and
under normal operation and four days with attack scenarios— USAD by a value of 0.01 and 0.02, respectively. The smaller
WADI: 16 days of continuous operation: 14 days under normal difference is probably related to the fact that SWAT is smaller
operation and 2 days with attack scenarios), SMAP and MSL and less complex than WADI, which results in methods being
are more complex, and they are split into smaller subsets called more aligned in terms of predictive performance. In the case
entities. All data samples between 5 and 3 days before the first of MSL, all the best models provide results that are very
 3 See supplementary material in our external appendix: https://github.com/ close to each other. However, AD-NEv improves the results
neuroevolution-agh/AD-NEv. of NASA-LSTM and TCN AE by 0.02. However, AD-NEv
8948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
P OINTWISE F1 S CORE . *—M ODELS W ERE E VALUATED U SING G AUSS -D S TATISTICAL A NALYSIS W ITH W ILCOXON S IGNED R ANK T ESTS
 S CORING F UNCTION ; T HE B EST R ESULT FOR E VERY C OMPARING A LL PAIRWISE C OMBINATIONS OF M ETHODS .
 DATASET I S IN B OLD B OLD : C OMPARISON I S S TATISTICALLY
 S IGNIFICANT ( p-VALUE < 0.01)

 TABLE IV
provides a radical improvement with the SMAP dataset, where A BLATION S TUDY S HOWING P OINTWISE F1 S CORE U SING A
it outperforms the second-best model (NASA-LSTM) by 0.18. BASELINE M ODEL W ITH BASIC S UBSPACE AND M ODEL
 Overall, it is noteworthy that the models extracted by E VOLUTION AND W ITHOUT F INE -T UNING (A), U SING
 AD-NE V W ITH E NHANCED S UBSPACE AND M ODEL
AD-NEv achieve the best results across all datasets when E VOLUTION (B), AND W ITH THE F ULL V ERSION
compared with all the other methods. For some datasets, OF AD-NE V T HAT I NCLUDES F INE -T UNING (C).
the difference is very significant, while for others it is rel- T HE B EST R ESULT FOR E ACH DATASET
 I S R EPORTED IN B OLD
atively smaller. However, the other methods considered in
our experiments usually achieve high results with only a
few of the analyzed datasets. For example, NASA-LSTM is
the second-best method for MSL and SMAP datasets, but
it does not handle SWAT and WADI very well (in which
F1 is 0.13 and 0.20, respectively). The opposite situation is
in the case of GNN. It is the second-best model on WADI
and SWAT but is significantly worse on SMAP and MSL the independent population for each subspace, improve the
datasets. The reason behind this fact is that in the SMAP results with all datasets (RQ2). Fine-tuning also positively
and MSL datasets, there is a small number of dominant impacts all datasets: SWAT by 0.01, WADI by 0.03, MSL
sensors (most of them have constant values and can be treated by 0.07, and SMAP by 0.10. The gains are lower for SWAT
as noise signals). It shows that AD-NEv subspace evolution and WADI, as the results for these datasets are already higher.
can be the crucial stage that helps to overcome this specific Those results confirm the positive contributions introduced by
time-series multisensor data problem. On the other hand, AD- the new components proposed in this article, and highlight that
NEv showcases the capability to adjust the evolving model nongradient fine-tuning can be an efficient method to boost the
to specific dataset requirements thanks to the neuroevolution anomaly detection performance of pretrained models.
approach. This result can be clearly observed by looking
at the mean value of F1 across all datasets in Table II.
To validate the statistical significance of our results, we apply C. Time Complexity
Wilcoxon signed rank tests to all pairwise combinations of The framework was implemented with Python and
methods across multiple executions with all datasets. Results PyTorch.4 All presented calculations were executed leveraging
in Table III highlight that our method significantly outperforms Nvidia Tesla V100-SXM2-32 GB graphics processing units
all considered baslines (RQ1). (GPUs). Since AD-NEv supports parallel model optimization,
 experiments were performed using a pool of eight GPGPUs
 (each subspace/model was processed on a separate GPGPU).
B. Ablation Study: Detection Performance
 We provide the values of the parameters of the neuroevo-
 Table IV presents results for an ablation study consisting of lution process for each level in Tables V and VI. We also
three models: 1) a baseline model [26]; 2) after our subspaces present the execution times in Fig. 2. It is important to
and models evolution; and 3) after the fine-tuning level. note that SMAP and MSL datasets are processed in full,
This table reveals the improvements introduced by our newly without downsampling, since most features are binary, and
introduced approaches for subspaces optimization, model evo- this operation would result in information loss. Considering all
lution, and fine-tuning. Comparing the results from [26] with datasets, the evolution of the subspace level took a minimum
the results following our improvements in subspaces and of 0.8 and a maximum of 18 h. The best results in terms
model evolution, we see improvements in terms of F1 on of accuracy were achieved with a value of the maximum
SWAT by 0.01, WADI by 0.05, MSL by 0.05, and SMAP by
0.15. These results show that the introduced novelties, such as 4 https://github.com/neuroevolution-agh/AD-NEv
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8949

 TABLE V
 H YPERPARAMETERS OF THE G ENETIC P ROCESS D URING E ACH L EVEL

 TABLE VI
 OTHER H YPERPARAMETERS OF THE N EUROEVOLUTION P ROCESS

 Fig. 3. Scalability results showing speedup (left) and scaleup (right) factors
 for both model evolution and fine-tuning levels with an increasing number of
 GPUs and population size (for scaleup only) on the x-axis.

 be trained and evaluated independently on a separate GPGPU.
 Results in Fig. 3 show that a speedup of up to 4× can be
 obtained for the fine-tuning level and up to 5× for the model
 evolution level.5 The results also highlight that the model
 evolution level of the AD-NEv framework exhibits a linear
 speedup with an increasing number of GPUs. The fine-tuning
 process also benefits from the execution on multiple GPUs,
 achieving comparable performances with respect to the model
 evolution level. Fig. 3 also shows results in terms of scaleup,
 where problem complexity (population size) and computational resources (GPUs) increase at the same time, i.e., from
 a population size of 4 with one GPU, to a population size of
 32 with eight GPUs. Results show a remarkable performance
 which positions very close to the ideal curve, i.e., a constant
 scaleup of 1 across all configurations. Both speedup and
 scaleup results support our assumption that multiple GPGPUs
 can significantly reduce the execution time of the AD-NEv
 framework, effectively distributing the training and evaluation
Fig. 2. Execution times in hours using eight GPGPUs with all datasets of multiple models on different GPUs, thus resulting in a
(SWAT, WADI, MSL, and SMAP). significant speedup. Overall, the AD-NEv framework can be
 effectively scaled, supporting the efficient optimization of a
 large number of models (RQ4).
number of possible subspaces (parameter K of the evolution The models extracted after the neuroevolution process differ
process) set to 5. The rationale for this choice was to find depending on the specific dataset and subspace. We present the
the highest number yielding a reasonable execution time. complete architecture of the best model for the best subspace
We experimentally observed that a higher value for K exceeds in every dataset in the supplementary material. The final
the time limits of the evolution process (>140 h). Considering models for the SWAT and WADI datasets consist of three
all datasets, the model evolution process took a minimum of 2 convolutional layers in the encoder and the decoder parts of the
and a maximum of 62 h. Fine-tuning was on average more model. However, the SWAT model presents a higher number
time-consuming, taking between 12 and 50 h. It is noteworthy of channels. The models for MSL and SMAP consist of six
that model training and fine-tuning were performed separately convolutional layers in the encoder and decoder. After the first
for each entity in the SMAP and MSL datasets. Therefore, two levels of the framework and before fine-tuning, the final
the whole neuroevolution process, including the final training training was run with 120 epochs in the case of the WADI
and evaluation, lasted the following execution times: SWAT— dataset, 90 epochs for SWAT, and 250 for SMAP and MSL.
74 h; WADI—131.8 h; MSL—18.8 h; and SMAP—58.2 h. It is noteworthy that the presented AD-NEv framework
Overall, all the executions for each single dataset required requires a smaller number of computational units that the stateless than 132 h, which we consider to be a reasonable time of-the-art ensemble method in [21], which achieves the best
frame considering the size of the datasets and the satisfactory anomaly detection performance on multivariate time-series
accuracy achieved by the resulting models (RQ3). benchmarks. While the model in [21] requires a number of
 submodels equal to the number of features, S = M, AD-NEv
D. Scalability produces an ensemble model with K submodels working on
 K subspaces, K ll M. The complexity and memory reduction
 One aspect worth discussion is the scalability of the proposed method. It is noteworthy that the execution time can be 5 The hyperparameter values specification for the scalability experiment are
easily reduced by adding more GPGPUs, since each model can reported in Tables V and VI.
8950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE VII
 F1 S CORE ON WADI AND SWAT DATASETS A FTER E VOLUTION M ODEL
 P ROCESS D EPENDING ON P OPULATION S IZE

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION S TUDY: F INAL W INDOW S IZE (B EST-S ELECTED M ODEL )
 AND W INDOW S IZE E VOLUTION AT D IFFERENT
 L ANDMARKS (M IN –M AX R ANGE )

Fig. 4. Convergence plot for the WADI dataset during the model’s evolution
for population size 24. The diversity in the selection process introduced by
the distance function improves not only convergence but also F1 score on the
test dataset (F1 0.59 in comparison to 0.55 without distance function).
 and SWAT on the test dataset, with different values of the
 population size parameter. As expected, the most effective
 models were extracted with the highest value for this parameter
of our solution is ≃(K /M). (The impact of the input size is (24), showing the contribution of a large population of models
negligible.) during the evolution process. The largest population size was
 set to 24. Regarding the evolution of the window size param-
 VI. A BLATION S TUDY eter, we present a convergence and ablation study showing the
 This section presents the impact of neuroevolution parame- ranges of values and the final window size for the best-selected
ters on the model’s accuracy. A detailed analysis of the most model in Table VIII. Our experiments were conducted with
complex dataset (WADI) is presented in the following, focus- a simple selection of window sizes in a range of [1–12].
ing on a selection of relevant model parameters. Regarding We observe that the behavior of the algorithm is rather stable,
the SMAP and MSL datasets, a separate model was generated converging to window size values that lie in a subrange of
and tuned for each entity (see Section IV-A). For this reason, the initially defined search space. Additional ablation studies
we do not present partial results for those datasets. It should include layer size during evolution (see Table IX), and the
be noted that, for all datasets, the behavior is consistent with number of layers of the best selected model (see Table X).
that observed with WADI. For the number of output channels, we defined our search
 space in the range [16–6144]. We observe that the last encoder
 layer size lies in a range between 205 and 1041. Interestingly,
A. Convergence of the Model Evolution Process a smaller capacity is used in SWAT and WADI datasets,
 Fig. 4 presents the fitness on the validation dataset (not when compared with the MSL and SMAP datasets. We also
containing anomalies) of the best model in each iteration observe that, as the iterations increase, the model converges
during model evolution process for version: 1) with the dis- to smaller subranges of layer size, confirming the stability of
tance function for model evolution d F (Fi , F j ) introduced in the algorithm and the proper selection of the initial search
Section III-E—blue and 2) without the distance function— space. The same phenomenon is observed for the number of
orange. The distance function aims at achieving model layers in the final encoder, as shown in Table X. The filter size
diversity during the model evolution process. It could be range used in our experiments is defined as: [1–7]. For the
observed that, in the scenario where the distance function is sake of brevity, we omit showing the full model architecture.
adopted, the value of the loss function was persisting on the More detailed model specifications are provided in an external
same level over the first eight iterations. During the following appendix for the interested reader.6
eight iterations, the fitness value was improved twice. Finally,
the model with the lowest value of loss function was evaluated B. Convergence of the Nongradient Fine-Tuning Process
on the test dataset achieving F1 score equal to 0.59. In the case Results in Table XI show the average convergence and the
of the scenario without diversity introduced by the distance F1 obtained on the WADI dataset using different configurafunction, the stagnation was persistent over ten iterations, and tions for N p , pm , and τ parameters. Results show that with an
it improved only once in the following iterations. Moreover, increasing value of the population size, the algorithm required
in this case, the loss value was always higher than the sce- a reduced number of iterations to achieve a zero value of FP
nario with distance function. The best model evolved without (eight iterations on average for N P = 8 and 4.92 on average
distance function achieved the final F1 score of 0.54. We can iterations for N P = 24). Moreover, a higher number of N P
clearly see that introducing the distance function d F (Fi , F j ) also translates to an improved anomaly detection performance,
ensuring diversity to the population during evolution improved resulting in an increased F1 value.
not only the convergence but also the anomaly detection
performance (RQ5). Table VII presents F1 scores for WADI 6 https://github.com/neuroevolution-agh/AD-NEv
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8951

 TABLE IX
A BLATION S TUDY: F INAL L AYERS C HANNELS FOR THE B EST-S ELECTED M ODEL ( LEFT ) AND M IN –M AX R ANGE OF O UTPUT C HANNELS D URING
 E VOLUTION AT D IFFERENT I TERATIONS (R IGHT ). T HE F INAL M ODELS A RE R EPRESENTED BY THE S EQUENCE OF
 I NPUT AND O UTPUT D EPTHS OF THE E NCODER L AYERS

 TABLE X
A BLATION S TUDY: F INAL N UMBER OF L AYERS (B EST-S ELECTED M ODEL )
 AND E VOLUTION AT D IFFERENT L ANDMARKS (M IN –M AX R ANGE )

 TABLE XI
F INE -T UNING C ONVERGENCE (N UMBER OF I TERATIONS ) AND F1
 O BTAINED W ITH VARYING VALUES OF N P , pm , AND τ

 Fig. 5(a) represents a detailed example for row 3 in Table XI
(best configuration), showing the values of the fitness function.
The best F1 score observed is 0.62. Decreasing the population
size from 24 to 16 leads to a minor decrease of the highest
F1 performance (0.61). Decreasing the population size to
8 leads to another slight decrease in F1 (0.60), as shown
in Fig. 5(b). Increasing the value of mutation power from
τ = (1/256) to τ = (1/128) as shown in Fig. 5(c) leads to
a minimal drop in F1 performance drop (0.59). Additional
experiments reveal that increasing the mutation probability
from 0.02 to 0.05 leads to a more significant drop in F1 (0.53).
 Another perspective of results in Table XI is how fast
the model was able to converge with different values of the
mutation power τ . Results (rows 3–5) shows that the optimal
model was obtained faster when this parameter had a higher
value (1/128), but it does not have an impact on the final
F1 score. Moreover, using a large value for τ allows the
process to converge faster. It is worth noting that reducing Fig. 5. Fine-tuning convergence in terms of a different number of FPs for
the value of the τ parameter to τ = (1/512) allowed us to the best-generated model in each iteration. The experiments were conducted
obtain the same F1 score as τ = (1/128) but the algorithm on the WADI dataset with 64 iterations and different configurations for
 population size (N p ), mutation power (τ ), and mutation probability ( pm ).
required a higher number of iterations to converge. We argue (a) N p = 24, τ = (1/256), and pm = 0.02. (b) N p = 8, τ = (1/256), and
that generating a compact set of models may be preferred over pm = 0.02. (c) N p = 24, τ = (1/128), and pm = 0.02. We also report the
a large number of models to reduce the time impact of model F1 performance for each converged fine-tuned model.
evaluation on testing data.
 Finally, one interesting aspect worth analysis is how increasing the value of mutation probability pm from 2% ( pm = 0.02) which is worse than the base F1 value of 0.59. Comparing
to 5% ( pm = 0.05) resulted in a decrease of efficiency for the rows 3 and 5, it could be observed that when too many
algorithm. In this case, the best achieved F1 score was 0.53, weights are modified during a single iteration, the convergence
8952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

process is slower. Overall, the convergence process for the [9] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets
fine-tuning level is stable and efficient with respect to selected for fraud detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2019, vol. 33,
 no. 1, pp. 1286–1293.
ranges of values of population size, τ , and mutation probability [10] H. Torabi, S. L. Mirtaheri, and S. Greco, “Practical autoencoder based
parameters (RQ5). anomaly detection by using vector reconstruction error,” Cybersecurity,
 vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2023.
 VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK [11] K. Faber, R. Corizzo, B. Sniezynski, and N. Japkowicz, “VLAD: Taskagnostic VAE-based lifelong anomaly detection,” Neural Netw., vol. 165,
 In this article, we proposed AD-NEv—a novel multilevel pp. 248–273, Aug. 2023.
framework for evolving ensemble deep learning autoencoder [12] R. Corizzo, M. Ceci, G. Pio, P. Mignone, and N. Japkowicz, “Spatiallyarchitectures for multivariate anomaly detection. Its novelty aware autoencoders for detecting contextual anomalies in geo-distributed
 data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Discovery Sci. Halifax, NS, Canada: Springer,
consists of an efficient multilevel optimization that includes the 2021, pp. 461–471.
evolution of input features subspaces, the model architecture [13] T. Finke, M. Krämer, A. Morandini, A. Mück, and I. Oleksiyuk,
for each subspace, and non-gradient fine-tuning. To further “Autoencoders for unsupervised anomaly detection in high energy
boost the anomaly detection performance, AD-NEv builds an physics,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2021, no. 6, pp. 1–32, Jun. 2021.
 [14] N. Shvetsova, B. Bakker, I. Fedulova, H. Schulz, and D. V. Dylov,
ensemble model with voting to combine the outputs of single “Anomaly detection in medical imaging with deep perceptual autoenoptimized models. We show that each introduced optimization coders,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 118571–118583, 2021.
component contributes to the achievement of the final model [15] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
accuracy. An extensive experimental evaluation results show robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
that the final ensemble model outperforms state-of-the-art [16] A. J. Hashim, M. A. Balafar, J. Tanha, and A. Baradarani, “AEVAE:
anomaly detection models for multivariate time-series data, Adaptive evolutionary autoencoder for anomaly detection in time series,”
while presenting a reasonable execution time, even with large IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Dec. 6, 2023, doi:
datasets. AD-NEv’s execution can be seamlessly scaled up by 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3337243.
 [17] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
adding computational resources. Directions for future work in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Int. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
include the integration of the framework with redefined genetic pp. 4027–4035.
operators for graph neural networks. Another possibility worth [18] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
investigating is the introduction of modified operators that Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 14, 2023, doi:
enhance neural network architectures, such as different types 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667.
of layers in a model or adding dense connections to each layer. [19] K. Zhu, P. Song, and C. Zhao, “Fuzzy state-driven cross-time spatial
Finally, we will further explore possible data distillation strate- dependence learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 8, 2024, doi:
gies to further reduce training data and reduce the execution 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3371109.
time of the evolution level. [20] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
 The authors also acknowledge the support of the Polish [21] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval-
Ministry of Education and Science assigned to AGH Univer- uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
sity of Krakow, Kraków, Poland. Jun. 2022.
 [22] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly
 R EFERENCES detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Dec. 11, 2023, doi:
 [1] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep learning
 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3337876.
 for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
 pp. 1–38, Mar. 2019. [23] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolving neural networks through
 augmenting topologies,” Evol. Comput., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 99–127,
 [2] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
 Jun. 2002.
 G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
 [24] K. O. Stanley, D. B. D’Ambrosio, and J. Gauci, “A hypercube-based
 detection,” CoRR, pp. 1–5, Jul. 2016.
 encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks,” Artif. Life, vol. 15,
 [3] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
 no. 2, pp. 185–212, Apr. 2009.
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc.
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439. [25] R. Miikkulainen et al., “Evolving deep neural networks,” CoRR,
 vol. abs/1703.00548, pp. 1–8, Mar. 2017.
 [4] Y. Zhang, Z. Y. Dong, W. Kong, and K. Meng, “A composite anomaly
 detection system for data-driven power plant condition monitoring,” [26] K. Faber, M. Pietron, and D. Zurek, “Ensemble neuroevolution-based
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4390–4402, Jul. 2020. approach for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” Entropy,
 [5] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly vol. 23, no. 11, p. 1466, Nov. 2021.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [27] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [28] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
 [6] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” [29] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
 New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
 pp. 3395–3404, doi: 10.1145/3394486.3403392. [30] M. Landauer, S. Onder, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “Deep learning
 [7] S. Tariq et al., “Detecting anomalies in space using multivariate con- for anomaly detection in log data: A survey,” Mach. Learn. Appl.,
 volutional LSTM with mixtures of probabilistic PCA,” in Proc. 25th vol. 12, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 100470.
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, [31] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
 pp. 2123–2133. “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Com-
 [8] A. Tuor, S. Kaplan, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and S. Robinson, put. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, 2021.
 “Deep learning for unsupervised insider threat detection in structured [32] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
 cybersecurity data streams,” in Proc. Workshops 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 Intell., 2017, pp. 1–9. vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2022.
PIETROŃ et al.: AD-NEv: A SCALABLE MULTILEVEL NEUROEVOLUTION FRAMEWORK 8953

[33] R.-Q. Chen, G.-H. Shi, W.-L. Zhao, and C.-H. Liang, “A joint model for Marcin Pietroń received the Ph.D. degree in com-
 IT operation series prediction and anomaly detection,” Neurocomputing, puter science from the AGH University of Krakow,
 vol. 448, pp. 130–139, Aug. 2021. Kraków, Poland, in 2014.
[34] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, AGH University of Krakow. He works as an AI
 arXiv:1803.01271. Scientific Consultant for many high-tech companies.
[35] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly He has authored about 80 research articles. He was
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI involved as a reviewer for several international jour-
 Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416. nals and conferences. His research concentrates on
[36] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- artificial intelligence and parallel computing.
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–19.
[37] E. Galván and P. Mooney, “Neuroevolution in deep neural networks:
 Current trends and future challenges,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2,
 no. 6, pp. 476–493, Dec. 2021.
[38] D. V. Vargas and J. Murata, “Spectrum-diverse neuroevolution with
 unified neural models,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28,
 no. 8, pp. 1759–1773, Aug. 2017.
[39] M.-K. Jiau and S.-C. Huang, “Self-organizing neuroevolution for solving Dominik Żurek received the Ph.D. degree from
 carpool service problem with dynamic capacity to alternate matches,” the AGH University of Krakow, Kraków, Poland,
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1048–1060, in 2021.
 Apr. 2019. He is currently a Research Specialist at the
[40] Y. Huang, G. G. Yen, and V. S. Tseng, “Snippet policy network v2: AGH University of Krakow. He cooperates with
 Knee-guided neuroevolution for multi-lead ECG early classification,” many companies as an AI expert. His research
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2167–2181, interests include deep learning, computational intel-
 Feb. 2024. ligence, and general purpose graphics processing
[41] D. Dimanov, E. Balaguer-Ballester, C. Singleton, and S. Rostami, units (GPGPU) programming.
 “MONCAE: Multi-objective neuroevolution of convolutional autoencoders,” in Proc. ICLR, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[42] H. Okada, “Neuroevolution of autoencoders by genetic algorithm,” Int.
 J. Sci. Eng. Invest., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 127–131, 2017.
[43] Y. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Gao, R. Wang, and H. Huang, “TopicBERT: A topicenhanced neural language model fine-tuned for sentiment classification,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Aug. 6, 2021, doi:
 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3094987. Kamil Faber received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
[44] Y. Ro, J. Choi, B. Heo, and J. Y. Choi, “Rollback ensemble with from the AGH University of Krakow, Kraków,
 multiple local minima in fine-tuning deep learning networks,” IEEE Poland, in 2018 and 2019, respectively, where he
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 3, 2021, doi: is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer
 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3059669. science.
[45] M. Nagel, R. A. Amjad, M. van Baalen, C. Louizos, and T. Blankevoort, He was a Research Intern and later a Research
 “Up or down? Adaptive rounding for post-training quantization,” in Assistant in a DARPA-funded Project at
 Proc. ICML, 2020, pp. 7197–7206. American University, Washington, DC, USA,
[46] A. Makhzani, J. Shlens, N. Jaitly, I. Goodfellow, and B. Frey, “Adversar- from 2021 to 2022. His research interests cover
 ial autoencoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2016, pp. 1–10. lifelong learning, anomaly detection, and machine
[47] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- learning applications in cybersecurity.
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
 Web Conf. World Wide Web, 2018, pp. 187–196.
[48] Y. Bengio, L. Yao, G. Alain, and P. Vincent, “Generalized denoising
 auto-encoders as generative models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., vol. 26, 2013, pp. 1–9.
[49] M. R. Ackermann, J. Blömer, D. Kuntze, and C. Sohler, “Analysis of
 agglomerative clustering,” Algorithmica, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 184–215, Roberto Corizzo (Member, IEEE) received the
 2014. Ph.D. degree from the University of Bari Aldo Moro,
[50] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed Bari, Italy, in 2018.
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber- He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
 Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36. Department of Computer Science, American Uni-
[51] C. Ahmed, V. Palleti, and A. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution versity, Washington, DC, USA. He has co-authored
 testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in over 60 articles, including 20 publications in journals
 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., Apr. 2017, such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL
 pp. 25–28. I NFORMATICS, Neural Networks, and Machine
[52] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous Learning. He was involved in the scientific comevaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf., 2022, mittee of international conferences and served as a
 pp. 7194–7201. reviewer for several international journals.