IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025 8331

 Adaptive Memory Broad Learning System
 for Unsupervised Time Series
 Anomaly Detection
 Zhijie Zhong , Zhiwen Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Ziwei Fan , C. L. Philip Chen , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Kaixiang Yang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Time series anomaly detection is the process of threshold, it indicates an abnormality, prompting corrective
identifying anomalies within time series data. The primary actions. The escalating complexity of modern machine systems
challenge of this task lies in the necessity for the model to com- has led to a rapid increase in generated data, rendering
prehend the characteristics of time-independent and abnormal
data patterns. In this study, a novel algorithm called adaptive traditional anomaly detection systems unreliable and labormemory broad learning system (AdaMemBLS) is proposed for intensive [6]. Consequently, there is a growing need for
time series anomaly detection. This algorithm leverages the rapid automated anomaly detection systems.
inference capabilities of the broad learning algorithm and the Anomaly detection for multivariate time series has
memory bank’s capacity to differentiate between normal and been extensively researched. Traditional methods include
abnormal data. Furthermore, an incremental algorithm based
on multiple data augmentation techniques is introduced and prediction-based autoregressive integrated moving average
applied to multiple ensemble learners, thereby enhancing the (ARIMA), distance-based methods such as k-nearest neighbor
model’s effectiveness in learning the characteristics of time series (KNN) and principal component analysis (PCA), and
data. To bolster the model’s anomaly detection capabilities, classification-based methods like one-class support vector
a more diverse ensemble approach and a discriminative anomaly machine (OCSVM) and support vector data description
score are recommended. Extensive experiments conducted on
various real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed (SVDD). However, the complexity of contemporary systems
method exhibits superior inference speed and more accurate poses challenges for the timely and cost-effective implementaanomaly detection compared to the existing competitors. tion of these methods. The continuous growth in data volume
A detailed experimental investigation is presented to elucidate the and dimensionality further complicates their optimization for
effectiveness of the proposed method and the underlying reasons high-dimensional data, presenting a primary challenge for
for its efficacy.
 traditional approaches. In recent years, unsupervised anomaly
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, broad learning, ensemble detection methods have been proposed, often relying on
learning, memory bank, time series.
 learning the correlation of time series data and the low-
 I. I NTRODUCTION dimensional features of the data, garnering significant attention
 in the research community [7].
T IME series anomaly detection is a critical task that has
 garnered significant attention from both academia and
industry [1]. Time series data is ubiquitous in various domains
 Deep learning algorithms for learning features from time
 series data often employ recurrent neural network (RNN) or
 its variants such as gated recurrent unit (GRU) and long shortsuch as server runtime data, real-time data from information
 term memory (LSTM). However, these models are associated
technology (IT) systems, and health monitoring data [2], [3],
 with drawbacks such as slow training speed and challenges in
[4], [5]. In system monitoring, experts establish anomaly
 scaling model complexity. Autoencoder (AE)-based methods,
score evaluation and anomaly evaluation thresholds for system
 such as LSTM-ED [8] and DeepAnT [9], are trained using
runtimes. When the anomaly score surpasses the established
 normal data for detection purposes. However, these methods
 Manuscript received 20 February 2023; revised 17 December do not account for the potential presence of abnormal data
2023 and 13 March 2024; accepted 11 June 2024. Date of publication within the training dataset, leading to a potential overfitting
26 June 2024; date of current version 5 May 2025. This work was
supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant issue. Some deep learning approaches have incorporated
2023YFA1011601; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation the generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture for
of China under Grant 62106224 and Grant U21A20478; in part by the anomaly detection. However, the training of these methods
Major Key Project of PCL, China, under Grant PCL2023AS7-1; and
in part by the Guangzhou Science and Technology Plan Project under is often unstable and challenging. In contrast, USAD [10]
Grant 2024A04J3749. (Corresponding author: Kaixiang Yang.) and FGANomaly [11] construct a model directly from the
 Zhijie Zhong, Zhiwen Yu, C. L. Philip Chen, and Kaixiang Yang are with perspective of data feature modeling and employ a more
the School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University
of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510650, China, and also with advanced adversarial training network structure to mitigate
the Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518066, China (e-mail: the occurrence of the aforementioned issues. Nonetheless, the
zhwyu@scut.edu.cn; yangkx@scut.edu.cn). training time for these methods is typically relatively lengthy.
 Ziwei Fan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510650, China. The memory module has found extensive application
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3415621 in natural language processing [12], [13]. Its fundamental
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
8332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

structure includes a query and multiple memory units. The II. R ELATED W ORK
query operation involves computing the similarity between
the query and the memory units to obtain the query score, A. Time Series Anomaly Detection Approaches
while the read operation retrieves the query result based on Unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly detection is
this score. This capability compensates for the limitations of a highly challenging task due to the lack of labels, rendering
models such as RNN, which are constrained by sequence many supervised methods ineffective [7].
length and unable to effectively learn information from 1) Traditional Approaches: Traditional anomaly detection
excessively long sequences. Owing to the potent recording methods, such as ARIMA, utilize historical data to predict
capability of the memory module, it has been utilized in future data and compare the difference between predicted
diverse domains, including image anomaly detection [14], and actual values to identify anomalies. Other traditional
video object detection [15], and video anomaly detection [16]. methods, such as KNN and PCA, are based on distance
 In the realm of broad learning, the BLS has proven effective metrics. For instance, KNN calculates the distance of k data
in areas such as image recognition [17], [18], language samples around a data sample as an abnormal criterion, while
processing [19], and biology [20]. BLS is particularly noted PCA computes the distance between the sample and the
for its rapid training speed and strong generalization ability. feature vector of the data as an abnormal score. However,
Time series forecasting methods, such as those in [21] these traditional methods are limited in their ability to model
and [22], have leveraged BLS for tasks like forecasting chaotic temporal information, leading to suboptimal performance in
time series. However, these methods, particularly [21], are anomaly detection.
more complex than the original BLS, and [22] employs 2) Deep Learning Model: Deep learning algorithms
backpropagation training, not utilizing BLS’s rapid training have been employed for anomaly detection, with LSTMspeed. These aspects pose challenges in applying BLS to time ED [8] utilizing LSTM’s temporal feature learning and
series anomaly detection. In this context, three challenges are AE’s reconstruction ability for improved generalization.
evident: 1) applying BLS to learn features from time series DAGMM [24] combines deep autoencoders with Gaussian
data is challenging; 2) detecting anomalous patterns within mixture models, utilizing end-to-end training. SISVAE [25]
time series data is complex; and 3) the intricate nature of introduces a variational smoothness regularizer for robust
time series data complicates the enhancement of BLS with anomaly identification. LSTM-OC [26] integrates LSTM and
incremental algorithms. OC-SVM for learning temporal features and anomaly scoring.
 We propose a BLS framework that matches traditional Notably, these methods may require lengthy training periods
techniques in training speed but rivals or surpasses deep and could underperform in large-scale datasets.
learning in performance. Prior work has not fully addressed 3) Generative Adversarial-Based Model: Some models
enhancing BLS’s information retention, crucial for anomaly integrate GAN concepts with AEs to enhance anomaly
detection. Therefore, we introduce the adaptive memory broad detection capabilities. USAD [10] employs GAN with
learning system (AdaMemBLS), initially adopting a broad dual AE structures for efficient feature representation.
learning framework and integrating a memory module [23] FGANomaly [11] introduces a filter GAN structure and
to learn normal patterns in time series data. This integration a novel AE for adversarial training, along with dynamic
is supplemented with advanced data augmentation techniques weighted reconstruction loss, aiding smoother model training.
and a streamlined broad learning incremental algorithm. It is noteworthy that these approaches often demand extended
Furthermore, to address single model limitations and enhance training times for optimal convergence.
local abnormal data learning, we implement an advanced
adaptive ensemble algorithm.
 The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. B. BLS and Incremental Learning
 1) The advanced memory module is integrated with the BLS is a three-layer, flat-structured network characterized
 broad learning algorithm to establish the foundational by feature nodes, enhancement nodes, and an output layer [27].
 memory BLS (MemBLS) model. With random initialization, the feature and enhancement nodes
 2) A more streamlined and efficient incremental learning remain unchanged, with only the output layer parameters
 algorithm, based on newly designed data augmentation requiring updates via the pseudo inverse. Su et al. [22]
 methods, is proposed to enhance the performance of developed a multihead attention BLS for chaotic time series
 MemBLS. prediction. However, this method employs backpropagation
 3) A novel AdaMemBLS is developed based on the for updates, not fully exploiting BLS’s inherent advantages.
 proposed global MemBLS and local sliced MemBLS. Xu et al. [21] integrated RNN with BLS to create RBLS,
 The structure of this article is as follows: Section II reviews surpassing deep learning models in chaotic time series
related literature on anomaly detection, BLS, and memory prediction. However, this integration complicates training and
banks. Section III introduces basic definitions and an overview reduces the original BLS’s training speed. BLS includes
of our framework. Section IV details the proposed method. three incremental learning algorithms [27], each designed to
Section V presents comparative experiments and analyses increase the number of feature or enhancement nodes, thereby
against state-of-the-art (SOTA) anomaly detection algorithms. improving model generalization. Yet, these algorithms might
Finally, Section VI concludes the study. not be optimally suited for time series data.
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8333

Fig. 1. Proposed AdaMemBLS for unsupervised time series anomaly detection.

C. Memory Module Definition 3 (Data Preprocess): In the domain of time
 The memory module, used for memorizing prototype series data, significant scale differences often exist between
features, is prevalent in deep learning applications such data points. To address this, preprocessing methods such as
as video anomaly detection and time series anomaly MinMax and Z -scale are commonly employed, as evidenced
detection [16], [28], [29], [30]. Lv et al. [16] introduced a in numerous studies. In our experiments, all datasets are
memory-based prototype learning approach with an attention preprocessed using the MinMax method. This approach
mechanism for unsupervised anomaly detection. Sun et al. [15] is formulated as X = (X − min(X ))/(max(X ) − min(X )),
proposed a multilevel aggregation structure with a lightweight effectively normalizing the data.
memory bank for video object detection. In anomaly detection,
memory integration helps record various patterns of normal B. Framework
data, thus improving BLS’s ability to distinguish between
 In this article, we introduce a novel AdaMemBLS algorithm
normal and abnormal data.
 for unsupervised time series anomaly detection. The novel
 III. P RELIMINARIES AND F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW BLS, featuring a special cascade, serves as our fundamental
 AE network, representing an enhancement over the original
 In this section, we present fundamental definitions and BLS. Its key advantages include rapid processing speed and
provide an overview of our proposed framework. robust generalization ability. Our algorithm comprises four
 key components, as illustrated in Fig. 1: 1) global MemBLS
A. Problem Statement (GMemBLS) module; 2) new incremental optimization
 Definition 1 (Multivariate Time Series): A multivariate algorithm; 3) local sliced MemBLS module (LMemBLS); and
time series is defined as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ], where 4) adaptive ensemble mechanism.
X ∈ RT ×V . Here, T denotes the length of the sequences, The AdaMemBLS algorithm is implemented through a
and xi represents the sample at a single time point, with a series of steps: first, a GMemBLS is trained end-to-end
dimensionality of V . The corresponding labels are represented to establish an initialized network. Subsequently, the time
by Y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yt ]. In this notation, yi = 0 signifies a series data is sliced multiple times to construct LMemBLS.
normal time point, whereas yi = 1 indicates an anomalous Following this, the GMemBLS and LMemBLS undergo
time point. For a given X , the algorithm is required to optimization using a new incremental algorithm, thereby
produce the predicted label. enhancing the learning capabilities of both the BLS and
 Definition 2 (Time Window): Assuming that the length of memory module. Finally, the adaptive ensemble mechanism
the time window is denoted by L, and the data is advanced is employed to dynamically fuse the output of the GMemBLS
by S steps each time, the original data X can be expressed with the outputs of multiple LMemBLS, culminating in the
as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x N ], where N = ((T − L)/S). Here, N final output of AdaMemBLS.
represents the number of time windows, and X is an element Further details regarding the AdaMemBLS algorithm are
of R N ×L×V . expounded upon in subsequent proposed approach sections.
8334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 The process for computing the output of a single feature node
 is delineated subsequently. The computation of the output for
 a single feature node is described as follows:

  W f j + β f j ),  where j = 1
 ξ(X
 (
 j
 Fi = j−1 j j
 ξ Fi Wcfi + βcf j , where j = 2, 3, . . . , Ncf
 (1)
 where W fi and β fi are the weight and bias of the ith group
 of feature node. The activation function is denoted by ξ , and
 Ncf represents the number of cascade feature layers. To obtain
 the collective output of the feature nodes, we concatenate
 them, resulting in F = [F1 , F2 , . . . , Fm ], where m represents
 the number of feature node groups. Following the approach
 of [32], cascade feature layers are integrated with the original
 feature layer to generate features more suited to time series
 data. The parameter for the jth cascade layer of the ith
 j
Fig. 2. Structural diagram of MemBLS.
 feature node is represented as Wcfi , where j = 0 indicates
 a noncascaded feature node. These cascaded layers can be
 practically implemented in multiple stacks.
 IV. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
 Additionally, the sparse AE (SAE), as referenced in [33],
 This section elaborates on the architecture of the AdaMem- is employed to extract features that are both more sparse and
BLS, which integrates a GMemBLS and multiple LMemBLS representative.
for learning global and local time series features. These models The computation of a single enhancement node can be
are then combined through an adaptive ensemble mechanism articulated through the following formula:
to produce the final output. The learning process of MemBLS
  We j + βe j ),  where j = 1
 ξ(X
 (
is detailed in Algorithm 1. j
 Ei = j−1
 ξ E i Wcej i + βcej j , where j = 2, 3, . . . , Nce
A. GMemBLS
 (2)
 The presence of anomalous data within training sets often
challenges algorithms [10]. To counter this, GMemBLS where Wei and βei are the weight and bias of the ith
employs memory to record normal data patterns, thus group of enhancement node. The collective output of the
enhancing the reconstruction error for abnormal data in the test enhancement nodes is obtained by concatenation, yielding
set and aiding in anomaly detection. However, the application E = [E 1 , E 2 , . . . , E n ], where n denotes the number of
of broad learning to time series anomaly detection, and the enhancement node groups. The process of constructing an
integration of memory modules within it, remains largely enhancement node is analogous to that of a feature node.
unexplored. To minimize the mutual information between features
 This section outlines the construction of MemBLS and derived from the enhancement nodes, Schmidt orthogonalexplains the integration of the memory module with BLS. ization is employed to constrain these nodes. Therefore, the
In practice, MemBLS utilizes all available data for training and constraint E i E j = I is incorporated into (2).
is thus termed GMemBLS, differentiating it from LMemBLS. Subsequently, concatenating the outputs of the feature and
 1) MemBLS AE: The MemBLS encoder includes feature enhancement layers is straightforward, resulting in the output
and enhancement nodes from the BLS, known as the BLS- of the BLS-encoder, SBLS = [F|E], where [·|·] represents
encoder. The decoder part consists of the BLS output the concatenation operator (this description corresponds to
layer, the BLS-decoder, with the memory module integrated lines 1–11 of Algorithm 1).
between these two components. The BLS-encoder is utilized The MemBLS framework seamlessly integrates a memory
for representing temporal features, while the BLS-decoder module, enabling it to memorize normal data patterns within
analyzes anomalies. Both are indispensable components in the hidden layer
the process. After initialization, the feature and enhancement
 U = f Mem (SBLS ) (3)
nodes of the BLS-encoder remain fixed, while the BLSdecoder, a simple linear network, has parameters represented where f Mem is the read function of memory module, and U
by Wd . is the feature read from it. The functioning of the memory
 Considering input data X , where X ∈ R N ×L×V with N , module is elucidated in the subsequent section (this pertains
L, and V being the number of time windows, length of each to lines 12 and 13 of Algorithm 1).
time window, and number of feature channels, respectively, The BLS-decoder of MemBLS processes U to generate its
X is first reshaped into a 2-D form, transforming from output
R N ×L×V to R N ×L·V . The BLS-encoder then uses its feature
and enhancement nodes to calculate the latent layer’s output. OMemBLS = U Wd (4)
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8335

where U represents the final output of the BLS-encoder, where s j represents a query item from SBLS and mi signifies
obtained by combining SBLS with SMem (see Section IV-A2), the ith item of memory units.
and Wd is the weight of the BLS-decoder (this represents the During the training phase, MemBLS utilizes both the output
explanation of line 15 of Algorithm 1). The final loss function of the memory module and the output of the BLS-encoder
of MemBLS is expressed as follows: for data reconstruction. This process enables MemBLS to
 capture and retain the features of normal data. In the testing
 L MemBLS = ∥X − U Wd ∥22 + λ∥Wd ∥22 (5) phase, MemBLS requires reading from all memory units
where λ is a hyperparameter employed for regularizing the to reconstruct data. This approach leverages the expression
scale of Wd , the BLS-decoder’s weight. It is important to note patterns of normal data previously recorded in the memory
that MemBLS does not utilize backpropagation for updating module.
the output of the memory module and BLS. Instead, the value b) Update: The Update and Read processes of the memof Wd is determined by taking the partial derivative of (5) ory module exhibit some similarities, notably in the
and employing the pseudo-inverse method, as illustrated in requirement to calculate the memory score. However, the
Line 15 of Algorithm 1 Update process involves selecting a subset of memory units
 that most closely resemble the query data SBLS , based on
 Wd = (U ⊤ U + λI)−1 U ⊤ X. (6) their memory scores. For the records most relevant to the
 query data, Fig. 2 distinguishes these memory units using two
 Fig. 2 illustrates the structure of MemBLS. In this different colors. The indices of these subsets can be expressed
representation, the cascading feature operations within the as follows:
feature nodes are denoted by pink arrows, while the
cascade enhancement operations in the enhancement nodes are Wpos = argmax j∈M (W̃ j ) (10)
highlighted by blue arrows.
 where W̃ retains the same definition as earlier, representing
 2) Memory Module: The traditional AE may overly
 the normalized memory score matrix.
effectively reconstruct abnormal inputs, leading to suboptimal
 Subsequently, the memory module updates all units using
performance in anomaly detection, as highlighted in [29].
 an exponential moving weighted method, aligning with the
To mitigate this issue, a memory module is integrated into
 incremental algorithm proposed in the subsequent section. The
MemBLS, designed to capture and retain normal data patterns.
 update of each unit is defined as follows:
The incorporation of a memory module plays a pivotal X p
role in facilitating the comprehensive learning from normal mi = (1 − β) · mi + β p
 W̃ ′norm · SBLS (11)
samples within the model, a critical component in the domain p∈Wpos
of anomaly detection. This module consists of M memory ′p p
units, each representing prototype features in a d-dimensional where W̃ norm is a subset of W̃ norm , and the coefficient β
space, which corresponds to the output dimension of the smooths the update of new and historical memory units. The
BLS-encoder. The memory module operates primarily in two memory units M are normalized using the L2 norm to facilitate
modes: Read and Update. the learning of sparse features by the memory module. The
 ′p
 The output from the BLS-encoder, denoted as SBLS where normalization of W̃ norm is computed based on the subset of
SBLS ∈ R N ×d , acts as the input to the memory module. all query units’ scores and their maximum value, as shown in
In this context, N indicates the size of the data, and d is the following equation”
 p
the dimensionality of the BLS-encoder’s output. The aim is W̃ norm
to enable the memory module to learn features dependent
 p
 W̃ ′norm = p . (12)
 max p∈Wpos W̃ norm
on time. Following this, the module merges the output from p
the BLS-encoder with its output, transitioning from R N ×d to W̃ norm is computed by applying the softmax function to the
R N ×2d . second dimension of the memory score, as defined in the
 a) Read: The output of the memory module, denoted as following equation:
SMem , is computed as follows. Subsequently, the input for the
  
 p
 exp W j
BLS-decoder is obtained by utilizing U = [SBLS |SMem ] p
 W̃ norm, j = P M . (13)
 p
 i exp Wi
 SMem = W̃ M ⊤ (7)
 This update operation is employed in both the training and
where W̃ represents the normalized memory score matrix. This testing phases of MemBLS, facilitating the learning of normal
matrix is derived based on the output of the BLS-encoder and data patterns by the memory. Despite the potential presence
the memory units, as detailed in the following equation: of abnormal data in the test set, the similarity between such
 exp(W j ) abnormal data and the memory units is typically low, thereby
 W̃ j = P M . (8) exerting minimal impact on the memory update process.
 i exp(Wi ) c) Adaptive score: The computation of the adaptive score
The memory score is computed using cosine similarity for ensemble and anomaly detection in MemBLS is bifurcated
 into the feature reconstruction score and the diversity score.
 s j · mi⊤
 W (s j , mi ) = (9) Analogous to the Update and Read processes, it is necessary to
 ∥s j ∥∥mi ∥ initially calculate the standardized memory score. The feature
8336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

reconstruction score is determined by computing the memory Applying these methods generates new training data,
units most similar to the query s j , with s j ∈ SBLS . enabling the memory module to capture more robust features.
 The feature reconstruction score is formulated as follows: However, when considering previous incremental algorithms
 |SBLS | |W pos |
 for BLS-encoder, which involve expanding feature and
 enhancement nodes, two issues arise: 1) potential model
 X X
 Sfeature = ∥s j − m p ∥22 (14)
 j p
 expansion, leading to slower inference and 2) additional feature channels possibly rendering the existing memory module
where |·| is the number of rows of the matrix. incompatible. Therefore, a novel incremental optimization
 To account for a broader range of memory units and enhance technique for MemBLS is necessary.
the memory’s capacity to detect anomalies, a diversity score is Assuming Wd′ is the original BLS-decoder parameter, the
incorporated into the anomaly score. It is calculated as follows: updated output layer parameter Wd is defined as follows:
 |SBLS | |W pos | |Wdiv |
 X X X Wd = (1 − αinc )Wd′ + αinc Wcur (17)
 ∥s j − m p ∥22 − ∥s j − md ∥22
  
 Sdiversity = (15)
 j p d
 where Wcur is the parameter calculated for the current
where Wdiv is derived using the topk function augmented data, still utilizing the pseudo-inverse method as
 per (6). This incremental optimization algorithm is simple
 Wdiv = topkd∈M (W̃ d ), k = 2. (16) yet effective, allowing adaptation to different augmented data
Here, the memory computes d sets of query items similar without modifying the network structure.
to the memory units, excluding the second most similar
group (k = 2).
 C. Adaptive MemBLS
 Both feature reconstruction and diversity scores are
integrated into the final anomaly score computation, thereby Section IV-A describes the implementation of GMemBLS
enhancing the model’s ability to comprehensively identify for processing all time series data. However, relying solely on a
abnormal data. single GMemBLS confines the detection process to capturing
 only global temporal information. To facilitate local feature
 learning and minimize computational complexity, we employ
B. Incremental Optimization multiple distinct MemBLS instances, each dedicated to
 MemBLS, which employs pseudo inverse for simultaneous learning local features of the temporal data and optimizing
parameter updating and allows only a single complete training the use of the memory module’s records.
phase for the memory module, diverges notably from typical 1) Local Sliced MemBLS: Inspired by the concept of a
deep learning models that often require multiple epochs for time series multiresolution decoder [35], we propose the
optimization. While the original BLS includes at least three LMemBLS approach for efficient processing of time series
incremental learning algorithms, their direct application to data. This method is designed to learn local temporal
MemBLS is challenged by the following: 1) an inability to features more effectively while requiring less training time
update the memory module; 2) inefficient generation of diverse and conserving computational and storage resources. Each
base models for integration; and 3) potential enlargement LMemBLS, characterized by smaller parameters and a subset
of the final model size and decreased inference speed with of the time series data, is tailored for this purpose.
large volumes of time series data. To overcome these issues The LMemBLS strategy is both simple and effective.
and improve MemBLS’s performance, we propose a new By segmenting the input time series data and allocating it
incremental optimization algorithm. among various MemBLS units, LMemBLS rapidly acquires
 Inspired by data augmentation techniques in deep learning local temporal features. This technique not only reduces the
for image data [34], our model’s incremental optimization learning duration for each LMemBLS but also offers a diverse
incorporates five time series data augmentation strategies. array of base models for the AdaMemBLS. Additionally,
 1) Noise: Adapting the concept of adding noise in image training on smaller datasets results in a reduced parameter
 augmentation, Gaussian noise is introduced to the time size for each LMemBLS unit. The parameters for the output
 series data to enhance the model’s robustness. layer of each LMemBLS slice are calculated as follows:
 2) Modify: A specific noise type where selected data points
 ⊤
 −1 ⊤
 are forcibly changed to predetermined values (0 and 1 in Wlocali = Ulocal Ulocali + λI Ulocal X slicei
 i i
 our algorithm). N
 3) Scale: Similar to image zooming, this alters the data’s X slicei = [xi·k , xi·k+1 , . . . , xi·k+k−1 ], k= (18)
 NLMB
 scale. Our model randomly applies four scales: (0.2, 0.5,
 0.9, 1.5), enabling the learning of features at different where k = (N /NLMB ). Here, X slicei represents the dataset of
 scales. the ith slice, Wlocali is the parameter of the BLS-decoder for the
 4) Reverse: This inverts the time series data along the time ith LMemBLS, Ulocali denotes the hidden layer feature formed
 dimension, resulting in a reversed temporal direction. by combining the memory and BLS-encoder features of the
 5) Negate: A special scaling form that allows learning of ith LMemBLS, and NLMB indicates the number of LMemBLS
 features resembling a mirror flip. units.
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8337

Algorithm 1 Learning Process of MemBLS
Input: The time series data, X, X ∈ R N ×L·V ; Memory size of MemBLS; Regularization parameter, λ;
Output: The data O Mem B L S reconstructed by MemBLS;
 1: Randomly generate the parameters of m groups of feature node and cascade feature nodes of the feature layer;
 2: for i in 1, . . . , m do
 3: Calculate the output of the feature node using (1);
 4: end for
 5: Connect the feature nodes F = [F1 , F2 , . . . , Fm ];
 6: Randomly generate the parameters of n groups of enhancement nodes and cascade enhancement nodes of the enhancement
 layer;
 7: for j in 1, . . . , n do
 8: Use (2) to calculate the output of the enhancement node;
 9: end for
10: Connect the enhancement nodes E = [E 1 , E 2 , . . . , E n ];
11: Combine F and E to get the input of memory module, S B L S = [F|E];
12: Use (11) and corresponding (10) and (12) to update memory and calculate the intermediate process of the update process;

13: To get the output U and the intermediate process of the calculation and read process, use (7) and the
 corresponding (8) and (9);
14: Feed U to BLS-decoder and calculate the BLS-decoder weight Wd by (6);
15: Obtain the reconstruct O Mem B L S by (4);
16: return O Mem B L S ;

 2) Adaptive Ensemble Mechanism: In anomaly detec- Ultimately, the final output of AdaMemBLS is derived as
tion, effectively utilizing both the global information from follows:
GMemBLS and the local information from LMemBLS
necessitates a sophisticated mechanism for information OAdaMemBLS = OGMB · AdaW0
 N
aggregation. Furthermore, fully leveraging both global and X LMB

local information is also a key component in anomaly + (OLMBi · AdaWi ) (20)
detection. i=1

 Both GMemBLS and LMemBLS possess their independent where GMB and LMB represent GMemBLS and LMemBLS,
memory modules, which adeptly describe normal data pat- respectively.
terns. Hence, when integrating multiple LMemBLS units, the
performance of their memory modules should be thoroughly
 D. Training and Inference
considered. It is hypothesized that a higher quality memory
module is more proficient in distinguishing between normal 1) Training: The training process of AdaMemBLS can
and abnormal data. Thus, the more pronounced the variance be approached from two perspectives. For the overall
in the memory module’s response to different data, the more AdaMemBLS training, it involves training one GMemBLS
significant its contribution should be considered. Conversely, and several LMemBLS units, followed by incremental learning
if the memory module’s output features remain uniform across using data augmented from AdaMemBLS. Subsequently, the
varying input data, it can be classified as exhibiting lazy weights of each model are adaptively computed and integrated.
memory behavior. To quantify this variance, methodologies From the perspective of an individual MemBLS, the process
such as JS divergence, KL divergence, or Wasserstein entails initial training of the memory module, followed by
distance [36] can be utilized. training the BLS autoencoder.
 Nonetheless, to expedite the weight computation, the The detailed training procedure of AdaMemBLS is outlined
adaptive ensemble mechanism employs the following formula in Algorithm 2.
to calculate weights: 2) Inference: In autoencoder-based algorithms, it is generally assumed that the training dataset comprises only normal
 exp(vi ) samples, while the test set includes abnormal samples [30],
AdaWi = P NLMB [37]. AdaMemBLS refines the anomaly score expression by
 j exp(v j )
 combining memory-based and reconstruction scores. Initially,
 vi = max Sfeat
 i i i i
 .
    
 − min Sfeat · max Sdiv − min Sdiv the final output of AdaMemBLS is computed using (20).
 (19) In the inference phase, the focus of AdaMemBLS is
 accentuated on distinguishing between abnormal and normal
 i i
Here, for i = 0, Sfeat and Sdiv denote the feature reconstruction samples. The feature reconstruction score during testing
score and feature diversity score of GMemBLS. For i > 0, is considered more indicative of the discrepancy between
these scores correspond to the ith LMemBLS. these two categories, partially substituting for the diversity
8338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Algorithm 2 Training Process of AdaMemBLS TABLE I
Input: The time series data, X, X ∈ R N ×L·V ; Memory DATASETS D ETAIL
 size of all MemBLS; The number of LMemBLS, N L M B ;
 GMemBLS and each LMemBL regularization parameters,
 λg and {λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λ N L M B ; A list of Augmentation
 function, [Aug1 , Aug2 , . . . , Augn ];
Output: The data O Ada Mem B L S reconstructed by AdaMem-
 BLS;
 1: To train GMemBLS, send X and λg to the Algorithm 1;
 2: for i in 1, . . . , N L M B do
 3: Divide X equally into N L M B slices to get X slicei dataset, comprising 26 dimensions, was internally collected
 4: Send X slicei and λi to the Algorithm 1 to train the ith from various application server nodes at eBay. The secure
 LMemBLS; water treatment (SWAT) dataset is derived from 51 sensors
 5: end for of a critical infrastructure system operating continuously.
 6: for Aug in [Aug1 , Aug2 , . . . , Augn ] do Additionally, the server machine dataset (SMD) is a recent
 7: Calculate augmented X ′ = Aug(X ) and feed it to train dataset spanning five weeks, obtained and shared by a
 GMemBLS and all LMemBLS via (17) and (11); prominent Internet corporation [11]. To enable a more effective
 8: end for comparison of different algorithms, subsets SMD-1-2, SMD-
 9: Calculate the adaptive weight of each MemBLS via (19) 1-6, SMD-2-9, and SMD-3-4 are selected, given their varied
 and obtain the output of AdaMemBLS via (20); anomaly rates in the test set. The statistical details of these
10: return O Ada Mem B L S datasets are presented in Table I.

 A. Baselines, Metrics, and Setups
score. Consequently, the diversity score is utilized solely for 1) Baselines: AdaMemBLS will be compared with the
calculating the weights of individual submodels during the following algorithms: Classic methods: PCA and LOF;
training phase. The anomaly score’s second component for Reconstruction-based methods: AE, TCN-ED, LSTM-ED,
AdaMemBLS is calculated as follows: MSCRED [39], Omni [40], UAE [41], and SISVAE [25];
 AdaMemBLS
 Sfeat GMB
 = Sfeat · AdaW0 Clustering-based methods: DAGMM [24] and LSTM-
 N LMB   OC [26]; and GAN-based methods: FGANomaly [11] and
 USAD [10].
 X LMBi
 + Sfeat · AdaWi (21)
 i=1 2) Metrics: Anomaly detection is often viewed as an
 imbalanced classification problem. Thus, precision (P), recall
where Sfeat signifies the feature reconstruction score, and
 (R), and F1 score (F1), commonly used in anomaly detection,
AdaWi denotes the adaptive weight of each submodel,
 are adopted as evaluation metrics [10], [11], [42]. Given
as per (19).
 the variations in detection due to different thresholds [25],
 The mean squared error (MSE) score and the feature reconwe compute the area under the receiver operating characteristic
struction score together constitute AdaMemBLS’s anomaly
 curve (AUROC), the area under the precision–recall curve
score
 (AUPRC), and the best F1 score. As Li et al. [25] discusses,
 C
 X 2 AUPRC is preferred over AUROC for its better discriminative
 AS = c
 X c − OAdaMemBLS ability; thus, this article primarily focuses on the best F1
 c=1
 and AUPRC scores. Considering that anomalies in real-
 C
 X
 AdaMemBLS
  world scenarios often manifest as time-continuous segment
 + MinMax Sfeat (22)
 anomalies (event anomalies) [43], point adjustment, widely
 c=1
 used in prior studies [10], [11], [40], [41], is also employed
where C indicates the feature channel of the time series data. in our methodology for practical applicability.
To thoroughly account for scale differences across various 3) Implementation Details: PCA and LOF are implemented
 AdaMemBLSf
features, Sfeat is first normalized using MinMax before using well-developed scikit-learn code. AE, TCN-ED, and
being incorporated into the final anomaly score computation. LSTM-ED are built in PyTorch. The DAGMM1 code
 is sourced from GitHub, as are FGANomaly,2 USAD,3
 V. E XPERIMENTS MSCRED, Omni, and UAE, following their respective
 In all our investigations, we utilized eight datasets. The Mars literatures. LSTM-OC and SISVAE are replicated from their
Science Laboratory (MSL) rover dataset and the soil moisture papers. All tests are conducted on a computer with an Intel
active passive (SMAP) satellite dataset can be obtained from Core i7-8700K CPU, NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080ti graphics
the GitHub repository [38]. MSL and SMAP datasets were card, 16 GB RAM, and Ubuntu 5.4.0, using PyTorch [44].
acquired from NASA, and anomalies in the testing subsets 1 https://github.com/danieltan07/dagmm
are expert-labeled. Each dataset has been partitioned into 2 https://github.com/sxxmason/FGANomaly

training and testing subsets. The pooled server metrics (PSM) 3 https://github.com/manigalati/usad
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8339

Fig. 3. Sensitivity of the proposed MemBLS with respect to parameter variations on the MSL dataset is illustrated. In each subfigure, the x-axis represents
different parameters, while the y-axis corresponds to the F1, precision, and recall scores. Notably, the x-axis of the third subfigure employs a logarithmic
scale with base 2. (a) Window size. (b) Memory size. (c) Output regularization. (d) Output incremental αinc . (e) Memory’s beta β.

B. Effect of Parameters numbers) in terms of AUPRC in six datasets. Quantitatively,
 This section explores the impact of various parameters and AdaMemBLS shows a significant improvement over existing
factors on the performance of single MemBLS, using the MSL SOTA models. Compared to the FGANormal (GAN-based),
dataset (Fig. 3). AdaMemBLS exhibits an overall relative increase of 4.57%
 First, the effect of time window length is analyzed in F1 and 2.98% in AUPRC. Against the top-performing
[Fig. 3(a)]. The optimal performance is observed with a time reconstruction-based model (SISVAE), AdaMemBLS achieves
window of 3, indicating that MemBLS requires a smaller time an improvement of 7.78% in F1 and 1.97% in AUPRC.
window compared to general deep learning methods, likely In comparison to the best clustering-based model (LSTM-OC),
due to its utilization of both global and local information. AdaMemBLS records a notable relative increment of 12.77%
 Second, the influence of memory capacity is examined in F1 and 10.85% in AUPRC. Finally, compared to the classic
[Fig. 3(b)]. Optimal performance is noted when the model model PCA, there is an impressive overall relative increase of
has 50–100 memory units. Insufficient memory impacts 20.92% in F1 and 17.15% in AUPRC.
performance negatively, while excessive memory may lead PCA and LOF, the least effective algorithms in our study,
to recording too much abnormal data, hindering anomaly highlight the limitations of classifying data in raw space
detection. for anomaly detection. In contrast, AdaMemBLS, through
 Third, the output layer regularization coefficient in the BLS- its BLS-encoder and memory module, maps data to a highdecoder is investigated, with coefficients ranging from 2−10 dimensional space, effectively learning normal data features
to 22 . MemBLS shows relative insensitivity to this parameter, unattainable by traditional methods. Moreover, PCA and LOF
though certain coefficients perform better for the MSL dataset, are constrained by kernel function or density distribution selecsuch as 2−7 and 2−3 [Fig. 3(c)]. tion, often requiring excessive prior knowledge. AdaMemBLS,
 Then, the incremental learning coefficient αinc of the with its randomly initialized, expressively connected (cascade
BLS-decoder, crucial for controlling the incremental learning of feature and enhancement nodes) BLS-encoder, overcomes
algorithm, is considered. An αinc of 0.5 typically yields the tuning difficulties, and achieves better performance than
highest F1 score. Lowering this factor increases the model’s classic algorithms.
precision but may lead to more false positives. Thus, αinc can Reconstruction-based unsupervised anomaly detection techserve as a safety factor for machine runtime monitoring, with niques like AE, TCN-ED, LSTM-ED, and MSCRED, though
a smaller value indicating a higher detection rate. capable of effectively reconstructing anomalous data, do not
 Finally, the memory’s coefficient, β, is used to smooth excel in anomaly identification due to their exceptional
historical data in memory. As shown in Fig. 3(e), when reconstruction abilities. Their dependency on time window
β ≤ 0.1, the memory has difficulty in improving model transformation affects their capacity to capture temporal inforperformance. On the other hand, when β ≥ 0.7, the model mation, altering anomaly detection outcomes. AdaMemBLS
converges well, with lower feature reconstruction scores and reduces this dependency, allowing more representative feature
higher F1 scores. Therefore, we set the default value of this learning of normal data. Omni performs well on smaller
coefficient to 0.9. datasets but struggles with larger ones like SMAP, PSM, and
 SWAT, likely due to the VAE module’s inability to learn
 long feature dependencies. SISVAE faces similar challenges
C. Comparisons and Analysis with large-scale datasets due to strict smoothing constraints.
 The performance metrics, including F1, precision, recall, UAE, while generally effective, shows limitations in SWAT,
AUROC, and AUPRC, of our proposed AdaMemBLS possibly due to its constrained cross-variable modeling
algorithm and other baselines are presented for eight datasets capability.
in Table I. F1 and AUPRC scores are selected as primary AdaMemBLS consistently excels across all datasets, indicomparison metrics due to their effectiveness in distinguishing cating its proficiency in handling various scales and efficiently
between different algorithms [25]. Table II displays the learning both global and local data features. GAN-based
performance of various algorithms. The bolded numbers models like FGANomaly and USAD show varied adaptability,
indicate that the algorithm achieved the highest score, while with FGANomaly performing better across multiple datasets.
underlined numbers denote the second-highest score. USAD’s inconsistent performance is likely due to the
 The AdaMemBLS algorithm demonstrates superior per- network’s simplicity. UASD and FGANormaly underperform
formance across seven datasets, achieving the highest F1 on the SMAP dataset compared to AdaMemBLS, potentially
scores (bolded numbers) and ranking second-best (underlined due to the adversarial objective functions not enhancing model
8340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISONS OF F 1, R, P, AUROC, AND AUPRC OF O URS AND OTHER BASELINES W ITH P OINT A DJUSTMENT ON E IGHT DATASETS

convergence. In contrast, our objective function exhibits more TABLE III
favorable convergence properties. A BLATION R ESULTS ON S IX DATASETS

D. Ablation Study
 In this section, we examine the influence of the memory
module, data augmentation module, and the AdaMemBLS
components. Experiments are conducted using six datasets,
with the results presented in Table III. Here, “Mem” represents
the Memory module, “Aug” indicates data augmentation, and
“Mul” denotes the utilization of multiple local MemBLS.
 The baseline BLS, devoid of any enhancements, exhibits
the lowest performance. However, incorporating either Mem
or Aug independently results in significant improvements. The MemBLS increases diversity, it does not fully leverage the
combination of BLS with both memory and augmentation additional information. This underscores the significance of the
(BLS + Aug + Mem) outperforms the individual additions of adaptive ensemble mechanism in AdaMemBLS. In conclusion,
BLS + Aug and BLS + Mem. This enhanced performance is AdaMemBLS surpasses all other variant algorithms, affirming
attributed to the BLS-encoder’s static nature postinitialization, the superior efficacy of our proposed design.
with only the memory module undergoing updates. Direct
application of augmented data to MemBLS is suboptimal, E. Detailed Analysis
highlighting that a solely global MemBLS is insufficient 1) Visualization Analysis:
for effective anomaly detection. The introduction of multiple a) Adaptive anomaly score: Fig. 4(a) and (b) illustrates
local sliced MemBLS (BLS + Mul + Mem) to extract local the performance of the AdaMemBLS algorithm on the
temporal features further enhances performance over BLS + SMD-1-6 dataset, depicting point anomalies and segment
Mem and standalone BLS, with improvements in F1 scores anomalies commonly encountered in time series anomaly
observed in five out of six datasets, barring SMD-1-6. monitoring. The first five rows in each figure represent the first
 AdaMemBLS, which integrates multiple local MemBLS five metrics of the SMD-1-6 dataset. The sixth row displays
with an adaptive ensemble mechanism into BLS + Aug + the anomaly score and threshold (denoted by a black dashed
Mem, outshines BLS + Aug + Mem due to its effective line) of AdaMemBLS. The seventh and eighth rows indicate
extraction and fusion of local features. This indicates that the model’s anomaly detection results and the actual labels,
augmenting BLS + Mul + Mem with incremental learning respectively.
enhances performance. In certain cases, both BLS + Aug + In Fig. 4(a), AdaMemBLS assigns high anomaly scores
Mem and BLS + Ada + Mem exhibit lower AUPRCs to points in the [600, 700] range, while some points in the
compared to BLS, BLS + Mem, and BLS + Aug, [200, 300] range receive lower scores, potentially serving as
suggesting that while adding augmented data or multiple local system alerts for monitoring experts.
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8341

Fig. 4. Visual representation of anomaly detection conducted on the SMD-1-6 dataset. (a) Point anomaly. (b) Segment anomaly.

Fig. 5. Visualization of the memory module, as applied to the SMD-1-6 dataset, is presented. (a) Sequence length = 5. (b) Sequence length = 10.

 Fig. 4(b) shows AdaMemBLS detecting multiple anomalies 2) Augmentation Analysis: To investigate the impact of varwithin a prolonged anomalous interval, providing repeated ious augmentation functions on AdaMemBLS, we conducted
alerts. experiments using two distinct augmentation techniques,
 Overall, the adaptive anomaly score of AdaMemBLS applied sequentially prior to the data’s introduction into
effectively distinguishes abnormal data from normal data. the model for incremental learning. Fig. 6 illustrates
 b) Memory record: This section conducts a visual AdaMemBLS’s adaptability to different augmented data types.
analysis of the memory in AdaMemBLS, exploring the The F1 scores, represented in percentiles, are indicated
features it learns. Fig. 5 contains two subfigures illustrating within the squares: higher scores are shown in brighter blue,
the normal data patterns in the time series data recorded while lower scores are depicted in darker black. The operation
by the memory module for time windows of 5 and 10. listed on the left denotes the first batch of data processed and
Each row (labeled m 0 , m 1 , . . . , m 4 ) corresponds to the fed into the model, while the operation on the top represents
temporal information recorded by different memory units the second batch.
(M0 , M1 , . . . , M4 ) for each metric of the SMD-1-6 dataset. Key observations include that the model consistently
 Fig. 5(a) and (b) displays the features recorded by performs better when the same augmentation function is used
AdaMemBLS with sequence lengths of 5 and 10, respectively. in both the first and second processing stages. However, the
 The first row’s images capture the time series characteristics results vary when different functions are used successively
of different memory units at metric m 0 , typically representing a for incremental learning. For instance, model performance
pattern of an initial rise followed by a fall or a small increase declines when the reverse, modify, or noise operations precede
then decrease. The most distinctive feature, as observed in the scale or negate operations. This can be attributed to
m 4 of Fig. 4(a), is characterized by a sharp rise and fall or the model’s inability to cope with such augmented data
a quick drop followed by a rapid increase. This pattern is without undergoing multiple rounds of incremental learning.
evident in the final line of Fig. 5, where M3 and M4 record Conversely, prioritizing scale and negate operations for initial
such information. These results demonstrate AdaMemBLS’s incremental learning generally yields better outcomes, likely
robust capability to record normal features. because scaling provides a simpler and more stabilizing
8342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 time consumption and incurs a higher time cost compared to
 earlier reconstruction-based deep learning methods. The use
 of an RNN model as its encoder and decoder contributes to
 FGANormaly having one of the longest inference times among
 the baselines.
 4) Complexity Analysis: In this section, we analyze the
 computational complexity of MemBLS and AdaMemBLS.
 Assuming the data is X, X ∈ R N ×L×V , the primary
 computational burden for MemBLS lies in generating feature
 and enhancement nodes, and performing the Update and Read
 operations of the memory module, along with the pseudoinverse computation.
 a) MemBLS complexity analysis: For a straightforward
Fig. 6. Impact of various data augmentation techniques on the algorithm is analysis, we consider n1 and d1 as the number and dimension
analyzed using the SMD-1-6 dataset. of feature nodes, and n2 and d2 as those for enhancement
 nodes. The computational complexity of generating feature
 nodes is denoted as T F = O(N · L · V · n1 · d1), while
 for enhancement nodes, it is T E = O(N · n1 · d1 · n2 · d2).
 The overall complexity for node generation, combining both
 feature and enhancement nodes, can be expressed as follows:

 TFE = T F + T E
 = O(N · L · V · n1 · d1) + O(N · n1 · d1 · n2 · d2)
 = O(N · max{L · V, n2 · d2} · n1 · d1). (23)

 The computational complexity of the memory module’s
 Read and Update operations in MemBLS is analyzed as
 follows. We begin with the assumption that the memory
 module consists of M memory cells, each with d dimensions,
 and that its input, SBLS , is of the same dimension. Focusing on
Fig. 7. Training and testing times of our algorithm, compared with other the Read operation, the primary computational tasks involve
algorithms on the MSL dataset.
 calculating the memory score and generating the memory
 module output SMem . The complexity of this operation can
method of augmentation. Therefore, an optimal approach be expressed as follows:
involves initially employing different scaling methods for the
model’s incremental learning, followed by the integration of TRead = Tscore + Toutput
other augmentation functions. Such a strategy enhances the = O(N · d · M) + O(N · M · d)
performance of AdaMemBLS, making it more effective and = O(N · M · d). (24)
adaptable to varying data scenarios.
 3) Time Cost: In this section, Fig. 7 presents a comparison The computational complexity of the Update operation in
of the training and testing times required by various algorithms MemBLS primarily involves calculating the memory score and
to achieve optimal performance. “Our5” and “Our10” denote updating the memory units. This complexity is delineated as
AdaMemBLS configurations with 5 and 10 local MemBLS follows:
units, respectively. Our algorithm demonstrates faster training
 TUpdate = Tscore + Tupdate
times compared to other nonclassic baselines and outperforms
most baselines in testing time, with the exception of PCA = O(N · d · M) + M · O(M · log M)
and USAD. Compared to deep learning methods, the training = O(N · M · d) (25)
speed of “Our5” has been improved by at least 58.44×, and
even up to 221.7× faster than FGANormaly. The testing speed where Tupdate includes the execution of the topk(·) operation
has been enhanced by at least 2.21×, and can be as much as on each memory unit mi to determine the subset of queries
27.39× faster than UAE. associated with that memory unit.
 This efficiency stems from the BLS approach, which Finally, for the computation of the pseudo inverse of
utilizes pseudo inverse for weight updates during training, SMemBLS in MemBLS, as per (6), the computational complexity
thereby simplifying the process and ensuring fast execution is detailed as follows:
while maintaining performance on par with deep learning
 TW = O(max{N , 2d} · min{N , 2d}2 )
approaches.
 FGANormaly, while exhibiting commendable performance, = O(N · (2d)2 )
does not significantly deviate from other methods in terms of = O(N · d 2 ). (26)
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8343

Hence, the overall time complexity of MemBLS can be invariably be identified. To ensure convergence, it is merely
approximated as required to ascertain that Upos > Uneg .
 In the iterative process, the (i + 1)th iteration of U can be
 TMemBLS = TFE + TRead + TUpdate + TW represented as Ui+1 = [SBLS |SMem ], that is,
 = O(N · max{L · V, n2 · d2} · n1 · d1) T
 Mi+1 .
   
 Ui+1 = SBLS | softmax SBLS Mi+1 (33)
 + O(N · M · d) + O(N · d 2 ). (27)
 When optimization has not started, the similarity between
In scenarios where d ≫ M, this complexity simplifies to SBLS,pos and SBLS,neg with M is close, as follows:
TMemBLS = O(N · d 2 ), providing a comprehensive view of
the computational demands of the MemBLS system. 0
 SBLS,pos 0
 M0T ≃ SBLS,neg M0T . (34)
 b) AdaMemBLS complexity analysis: Algorithm 2 details
 According to (11), optimization increases the similarity
the AdaMemBLS workflow, whose main computational
 between M and SBLS,pos by using only positive samples during
complexity is akin to the sum of that for a global MemBLS
 the update process, as follows:
and NLMB LMemBLS. In this approach, the original data X is
divided into NLMB consecutive segments, X slicei , each segment i+1
 SBLS,pos T
 Mi+1 >= SBLS,pos
 i
 MiT . (35)
being processed by the corresponding ith LMemBLS. For
the calculation of the LMemBLS’s computational complexity, Upon integrating (34) with (35), it can be deduced that
we substitute N in TMemBLS with k = (N /NLMB ). i+1
 SBLS,pos T
 Mi+1 > SBLS,pos
 0
 M0T ≃ SBLS,neg
 0
 M0T
 The computational complexity of AdaMemBLS can be
expressed as follows:
 i+1
 SBLS,neg T
 Mi+1 <= SBLS,neg
 i
 MiT ≃ SBLS,neg
 0
 M0T . (36)

 TAdaMemBLS = TGMemBLS + NLMB · TLMemBLS The second line in the equation indicates that the similarity
 between SBLS,neg and M is decreasing or approaching
 = O(N · d 2 ) + NLMB · O(k · d 2 ) closeness, as the update is only based on positive samples.
 = O(2 · N · d 2 ). (28) Drawing upon this equation alongside (33), the update
 mechanisms for Upos and Uneg can be elucidated
Consequently, the computational complexity of AdaMemBLS
 T
   
is approximately twice that of MemBLS. This factor makes Ui+1,pos = SBLS,pos | softmax SBLS,pos Mi+1 Mi+1
AdaMemBLS highly efficient, considering the additional  T
 Ui+1,neg = SBLS,neg | softmax SBLS,neg Mi+1
 
 Mi+1 .
 
 (37)
functionalities and improved performance it offers.
 5) Optimal Convergence Analysis: Assuming that the Integrating the previously mentioned equation with the
dataset predominantly contains normal (positive) samples, optimization process equation, (36), it can be established that
represented as X pos , and a minimal number of anomalous Ui+1,pos > Ui+1,neg .
(negative) samples, symbolized as X neg , the objective in Thus far, evidence has been presented to support the
anomaly detection is to refine the methodology such that the proposed methodology’s optimal convergence performance.
anomaly scores for negative samples exceed those of positive When memory updates are performed in the correct direction,
samples. This approach indicates that the model is converging the method is observed to converge to an optimal state. This
toward an optimal trajectory. Hence, it should eventually observation is consistent with the insights from the “Effect
satisfy of Parameters” section, which emphasizes the importance of
 maintaining a memory coefficient greater than zero to achieve
 ASpos >= ASneg . (29) the desired results. Nonetheless, given practical convergence
By applying (22) and streamlining the description, a simplified constraints such as smoothness, a coefficient value of greater
representation of (29) can be achieved than or equal to 0.7 is considered adequate. This threshold
 allows for a balance between the rate of convergence and
 ∥Upos Wd − X ∥22 <= ∥Uneg Wd − X ∥22 . (30) the model’s generalization ability, ensuring both efficiency and
 effectiveness in the optimization process.
Given that the majority of the dataset comprises positive
samples, it is sufficient to concentrate on deriving an
approximate solution, which is articulated as follows: VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this study, we introduce a novel anomaly detection
 ∥Upos Wd − X pos ∥22 <= ∥Uneg Wd − X pos ∥22 . (31) algorithm, AdaMemBLS, which integrates broad learning
 and memory bank to effectively discern abnormal data
Furthermore, according to the notion of information loss [45],
 patterns. To enhance the model’s ability to learn time
it is plausible to hypothesize the presence of
 series characteristics, a novel broad learning incremental
 Upos Wd < X pos algorithm, coupled with data augmentation, is incorporated
 Uneg Wd < X pos . (32) into AdaMemBLS to bolster its performance and robustness.
 Additionally, a more diverse ensemble algorithm and a
Furthermore, given that Wd is determined through the discriminative anomaly evaluation score are employed in
application of the pseudo inverse and the solution process AdaMemBLS for anomaly detection. Extensive empirical
entails convex optimization [27], the optimal Wd can studies on various real-world datasets demonstrate that
8344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

AdaMemBLS outperforms SOTA methods while reducing [20] X.-N. Fan and S.-W. Zhang, “LPI-BLS: Predicting lncRNA–protein
training and testing time costs. interactions with a broad learning system-based stacked ensemble
 classifier,” Neurocomputing, vol. 370, pp. 88–93, Dec. 2019.
 In the future, we shall migrate AdaMemBLS to unsuper- [21] M. Xu, M. Han, C. L. P. Chen, and T. Qiu, “Recurrent broad learning
vised anomaly detection in images and videos, further optimize systems for time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 4,
the network structure, and pursue the theoretical analysis of pp. 1405–1417, Apr. 2020.
 [22] L. Su, L. Xiong, and J. Yang, “Multi-Attn BLS: Multi-head attention
our method. mechanism with broad learning system for chaotic time series
 R EFERENCES prediction,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 132, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109831.
 [23] J. Weston, S. Chopra, and A. Bordes, “Memory networks,” 2014,
 [1] G. Li, Z. Yu, K. Yang, M. Lin, and C. L. P. Chen, “Exploring
 arXiv:1410.3916.
 feature selection with limited labels: A comprehensive survey of semi-
 [24] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for
 supervised and unsupervised approaches,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 Eng., pp. 1–20, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3397878.
 2018, pp. 1–19.
 [2] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), [25] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time
 Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850. series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191,
 [3] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, Y. Yang, W. Wang, and K. Yang, “PatchAD: A
 Mar. 2021.
 lightweight patch-based MLP-mixer for time series anomaly detection,”
 [26] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with
 2024, arXiv:2401.09793.
 LSTM neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 [4] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, X. Xi, Y. Xu, J. Chen, and K. Yang, “SimAD: A
 vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available:
 simple dissimilarity-based approach for time series anomaly detection,”
 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8836638
 2024, arXiv:2405.11238.
 [5] W. Chen, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. L. P. Chen, “A survey on [27] C. L. P. Chen and Z. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective
 imbalanced learning: Latest research, applications and future directions,” and efficient incremental learning system without the need for deep
 Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1–51, May 2024. architecture,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1,
 pp. 10–24, Jan. 2018.
 [6] Y. Fu and F. Xue, “MAD: Self-supervised masked anomaly detection
 task for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. [28] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
 (IJCNN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–8. detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
 [7] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
 detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE [29] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021. augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 [8] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
 pp. 1705–1714.
 G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
 detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148. [30] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
 [9] M. Munir, S. A. Siddiqui, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed, “DeepAnT: A deep networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly
 learning approach for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,” detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–
 IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 1991–2005, 2019. 12080, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3139916.
[10] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [31] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
 pp. 3395–3404. [32] C. L. P. Chen, Z. Liu, and S. Feng, “Universal approximation
[11] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “AN-based capability of broad learning system and its structural variations,” IEEE
 anomaly detection for multivariate time series using polluted training Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1191–1204,
 set,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219, Apr. 2019.
 2021. [33] B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field, “Sparse coding with an overcomplete
[12] C. Fan, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Zhang, and H. Huang, basis set: A strategy employed by v1?” Vis. Res., vol. 37, no. 23,
 “Heterogeneous memory enhanced multimodal attention model for video pp. 3311–3325, Dec. 1997.
 question answering,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [34] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1999–2007. unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
[13] A. Kumar et al., “Ask me anything: Dynamic memory networks for no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022.
 natural language processing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., [35] L. Shen, Z. Yu, Q. Ma, and J. T. Kwok, “Time series anomaly detection
 2016, pp. 1378–1387. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings. with multiresolution ensemble decoding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 mlr.press/v48/kumar16.html Intell., vol. 35, 2021, pp. 9567–9575.
[14] Z. Zhong, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. L. Philip Chen, “Towards [36] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative
 efficient anomaly detection using memory broad learning system,” in adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
 Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Control Sci. Syst. Eng. (ICCSSE), Jun. 2023, pp. 214–223.
 pp. 252–257. [37] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and
[15] G. Sun, Y. Hua, G. Hu, and N. Robertson, “MAMBA: Multi-level K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using
 aggregation via memory bank for video object detection,” in Proc. AAAI generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
 Conf. Artif. Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2620–2627. Dec. 2020, pp. 33–43.
[16] H. Lv, C. Chen, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Learning [38] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 normal dynamics in videos with meta prototype network,” in Proc. T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 pp. 15420–15429. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[17] L. Yang, S. Song, and C. L. P. Chen, “Transductive transfer learning [39] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 based on broad learning system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
 Cybern. (SMC), Oct. 2018, pp. 912–917. Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[18] R. Xie, C.-M. Vong, C. L. P. Chen, and S. Wang, “Dynamic network [40] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 structure: Doubly stacking broad learning systems with residuals and detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 simpler linear model transmission,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 Intell., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1378–1395, Dec. 2022. Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[19] J. Du, C.-M. Vong, and C. L. P. Chen, “Novel efficient RNN and LSTM- [41] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An
 like architectures: Recurrent and gated broad learning systems and their evaluation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time
 applications for text classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 3, series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
 pp. 1586–1597, Mar. 2021. pp. 2508–2517, Jun. 2022.
ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 8345

[42] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and I. Flint, “Generic and scalable framework C. L. Philip Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S.
 for automated time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 21th ACM degree in electrical engineering from the University
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2015, of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1985, and the
 pp. 1939–1947. Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Purdue
[43] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 1988.
 on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., He is the Chair Professor and the Dean of the
 vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021. School of Computer Science and Engineering, South
[44] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
 learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019. Being a Program Evaluator of the Accreditation
[45] Y. Yu et al., “White-box transformers via sparse rate reduction,” in Proc. Board of Engineering and Technology Education
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2024. (ABET) in USA, for computer engineering, electrical engineering, and software engineering programs, he successfully architects
 the University of Macau’s Engineering and Computer Science programs
 receiving accreditations from Washington/Seoul Accord through Hong Kong
 Zhijie Zhong received the B.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Engineers (HKIE), which is considered as his utmost contribution
 Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2022. in engineering/computer science education for Macau as the former Dean of
 He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with South the Faculty of Science and Technology. His current research interests include
 China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. cybernetics, systems, and computational intelligence.
 His research interests include data mining, Dr. Chen is a fellow of AAAS, IAPR, CAA, and HKIE, and a member
 machine learning, time series analysis, anomaly of the Academia Europaea (AE), the European Academy of Sciences and
 detection, and large language model (LLM). Arts (EASA), and the International Academy of Systems and Cybernetics
 Science (IASCYS). He received IEEE Norbert Wiener Award in 2018 for
 his contribution in systems and cybernetics, and machine learnings. He is
 also a highly cited researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019.
 He was a recipient of the 2016 Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineers
 Award from his alma mater, Purdue University, in 1988. He was the Chair
 of TC 9.1 Economic and Business Systems of International Federation of
 Zhiwen Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Automatic Control from 2015 to 2017 and currently is a Vice President of
 Ph.D. degree from the City University of Hong Chinese Association of Automation (CAA). He was the IEEE Systems, Man,
 Kong, Hong Kong, in 2008. and Cybernetics Society President from 2012 to 2013, the Editor-in-Chief
 He is a Professor with the School of Computer for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS :
 Science and Engineering, South China University of S YSTEMS from 2014 to 2019, and currently, he is the Editor-in-Chief for the
 Technology, Guangzhou, China. He has authored or IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, and an Associate Editor of IEEE
 coauthored more than 150 refereed journal articles T RANSACTIONS ON A RTIFICIAL I NTELLIGENCE and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 and international conference papers, including 50 ON F UZZY S YSTEMS .
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS papers.
 Dr. Yu is an Associate Editor of IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND Kaixiang Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS. degree from the University of Electronic Science and
 Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2012, the
 M.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology,
 Harbin, China, in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree from
 Ziwei Fan received the B.S. degree in natural scithe School of Computer Science and Engineering,
 ences from the University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
 South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
 U.K., in 2011. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 China, in 2020.
 degree with the School of Computer Science and
 He has been a Research Engineer with the 7th
 Engineering, South China University of Technology,
 Research Institute, China Electronics Technology
 Guangzhou, China.
 Group Corporation, Guangzhou, from 2015 to 2017,
 Her research interests include machine learning
 and has been a Postdoctoral Researcher with Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
 and AI-based imaging diagnosis.
 China, from 2020 to 2021. He is now with the School of Computer Science
 and Engineering, South China University of Technology. His research interests
 include pattern recognition, machine learning, and industrial data intelligence.