IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025 7051

 ADPS: Asymmetric Distillation Postsegmentation
 for Image Anomaly Detection
 Peng Xing , Hao Tang , Jinhui Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zechao Li , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Knowledge distillation-based anomaly detection sample modeling poses a great challenge to detect and segment
(KDAD) methods rely on the teacher–student paradigm to anomalies.
detect and segment anomalous regions by contrasting the unique Substantial advancements in AD have occurred in recent
features extracted by both networks. However, existing KDAD
methods suffer from two main limitations: 1) the student network years, with reconstruction-based methods dominating the landcan effortlessly replicate the teacher network’s representations scape [10], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]. The methodology
and 2) the features of the teacher network serve solely as a behind these approaches is based on training an autoencoder
“reference standard” and are not fully leveraged. Toward this under a self-supervised paradigm to ensure that out-ofend, we depart from the established paradigm and instead distribution anomalous images are reconstructed with notable
propose an innovative approach called asymmetric distillation
postsegmentation (ADPS). Our ADPS employs an asymmetric errors. The anomalies can then be spotted by assessing the
distillation paradigm that takes distinct forms of the same image difference between the reconstructed and original image at a
as the input of the teacher–student networks, driving the student high resolution. Innovations such as the self-supervised tasks
network to learn discriminating representations for anomalous proposed by Fei et al. [10], focusing on rotation and color
regions. Meanwhile, a customized Weight Mask Block (WMB) prediction, and by Salehi et al. [23], utilizing image patch sortis proposed to generate a coarse anomaly localization mask that
transfers the distilled knowledge acquired from the asymmetric ing, have significantly bolstered the efficacy of this approach.
paradigm to the teacher network. Equipped with WMB, the Meanwhile, MemAE [21] undermines the generalization abilproposed postsegmentation module (PSM) can effectively detect ity of the autoencoder by introducing a memory module that
and segment abnormal regions with fine structures and clear enables the recovery of images solely via the stored features.
boundaries. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed These techniques aspire to inflate the reconstruction error of
ADPS outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in detecting
and segmenting anomalies. Surprisingly, ADPS significantly the anomalous images by increasing the image reconstruction
improves average precision (AP) metric by 9% and 20% on complexity, thereby proving an effective tool to detect out-ofthe MVTec anomaly detection (AD) and KolektorSDD2 datasets, distribution data “unseen” by the model.
respectively. Recent studies have shown that knowledge distillation-based
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection (AD), asymmetric distil- anomaly detection (KDAD) methods are promising [4], [12],
lation, postsegmentation module (PSM), weight mask block [13], [26], [27], [28], which enable the student network to
(WMB). learn the consistent representation from the teacher network
 for normal images. Subsequently, the difference in knowledge
 I. I NTRODUCTION representation between the teacher network and the student
 network is utilized as an AD way, that is, the difference
A NOMALY detection (AD) strives to identify abnormal
 images and segment the anomalous regions [1], [2], [3],
[4], [5], [6]. Its broad applications span from industrial defect
 between the features extracted by the teacher–student networks. In the conventional symmetric distillation paradigm,
 the teacher network’s features are simply used as a “reference
detection [4], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] and medical
 standard” and the regions in which the features extracted
image diagnosis [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] to the emerging
 by the student network do not match them are identified
domain of autonomous driving [19], [20]. However, the task
 as anomalies, as shown in Fig. 1(a). However, existing
of AD is fundamentally different from general classification
 advanced methods, such as MKDAD [12] and STPM [29],
or segmentation tasks, as anomalies are hard to define and
 limit themselves by not delving into the rich knowledge
impossible to categorize exhaustively. Therefore, AD models
 inherent in the pretrained teacher network. Furthermore, they
are trained with normal images. Relying only on normal
 stick to a symmetric distillation paradigm which often leads
 Manuscript received 13 July 2023; revised 8 January 2024; accepted to over-simulation in the student network, that is, the student
15 April 2024. Date of publication 29 April 2024; date of current version model will extract similar representations to the teacher model
7 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural when confronted with anomalous regions, thereby impeding its
Science Foundation of China under Grant U20B2064 and Grant U21B2043.
(Corresponding author: Zechao Li.) ability to generate differentiated representations for anomalous
 The authors are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, regions. By observing the results of the symmetric distillation
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China models as shown in Fig. 2, we experimentally find that
(e-mail: xingp_ng@njust.edu.cn; tanghao0918@njust.edu.cn; jinhuitang@
njust.edu.cn; zechao.li@njust.edu.cn). the features generated by the anomaly regions only have
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3390806 slight differences compared to those generated by the normal
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7052 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 anomalous samples (see Fig. 2). Meanwhile, smaller local
 patches can induce the distillation model to focus on identifying minor anomalies within a local region. As a result,
 the distilled knowledge obtained by asymmetric distillation
 possesses a more powerful anomaly discrimination ability.
 Based on the characteristics of the asymmetric distillation
 paradigm, a customized WMB is proposed to transfer the
 distilled knowledge to the teacher network, exploiting feature
 correlations to generate a coarse localization mask. This is
 expected to improve the discriminability of the teacher model
 to identify abnormal regions. Contemplating that distilled
 knowledge may contribute to reducing spurious error and predicting fine anomalies, we develop a novel PSM that implicitly
Fig. 1. Schematic of (a) conventional distillation-based symmetric paradigm
and (b) proposed asymmetric paradigm.
 injects the distilled knowledge into the decoding process
 to further explore normal/abnormal distributions and obtain
 high-confidence segmentation results with clear boundaries.
 Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our ADPS, which outperforms the
 recent state-of-the-art methods on both the challenging MVTec
 AD dataset [4] and KolektorSDD2 [30], achieving more than
 9% and 20% improvement, respectively, in terms of the AP
 metric for anomaly segmentation. The main contributions of
 this work are summarized as follows.
 1) We propose a novel ADPS method, that is, ADPS,
 which establishes an efficient asymmetric knowledge
 distillation paradigm to boost the performance of image
 AD.
Fig. 2. Visualization of the feature differences extracted by different
teacher–student distillation structures. (a) Comparison of using symmetric
 2) We carefully design the WMB and PSM to incorporate
or asymmetric distillation paradigm in the proposed ADPS. (b) Comparison distilled knowledge and improve the representation of
of ADPS with two representative distillation-based methods: MKDAD [12] discriminative features for the abnormal region.
and RD [13]. The color of the legend indicates the magnitude of the feature
differences in the teacher–student model. Closer to the “Small” side indicates
 3) Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
smaller feature differences. On the contrary, closer to the “Large” side ADPS achieves competitive results on three challengindicates large feature differences. ing datasets, particularly in solving AD and anomaly
 segmentation simultaneously.
 The remainder of this article is arranged as follows.
regions, this is particularly problematic when the anomalous Section II provides a comprehensive discussion about the
regions are similar to the normal regions. literature directly associated with our work. The technical
 To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel details of the proposed ADPS are presented in Section III.
asymmetric distillation postsegmentation (ADPS) method, Section IV reports experimental results, ablation studies, and
namely ADPS, for image AD, which departs from the com- comprehensive analysis. Ultimately, we summarize our findmon symmetric distillation paradigm by proposing instead ings and suggestions for future research in Section V.
to establish a novel asymmetric distillation paradigm. It is
inspired by the prior reconstruction-based autoencoder that
utilizes asymmetry to augment the complexity of the student II. R ELATED W ORK
network’s alignment with the teacher network. As illustrated
 A. Autoencoder-Based AD
in Fig. 1(b), ADPS assembles a teacher–student network with
a Weight Mask Block (WMB) and a postsegmentation module Autoencoder-based methods are a widely used approach for
(PSM). AD, commonly employing different self-supervised pretext
 First, the proposed asymmetric distillation paradigm is tasks for training and identifying anomalies by measuring
applied by ADPS to the teacher–student networks, allowing the pixel-level difference between the original input and the
the same layer of both networks to process diverse forms reconstructed output of the model [20], [31]. Examples of such
of the same data. Specifically, the holistic image is assigned methods include AE-SSIM [31], MemAE [21], MGNAD [22],
to the teacher network while the student network is given and DAAD [32], which mainly employ image reconstruction
nonoverlapping patches. The insight behind the employed techniques. Other approaches proposed by Li et al. [33] and
asymmetric inputs is that the student network is encour- Zavrtanik et al. [34] utilize image inpainting techniques to
aged to explore unique expressive abilities different from complete the content within missing masks, assuming that
the teacher network, thus enabling the teacher–student net- the model cannot infer anomalous content. However, due
works to generate more differentiated features when meeting to the strong ability of potent pixel-level reconstruction,
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7053

these autoencoder-based models sometimes lead to well- the distribution. Rudolph et al. [53] and Roth et al. [54], for
reconstructed anomalies, which is referred to as the “identity example, utilize normalizing flow to model the relationship
shortcut” [35]. To prevent the recovery of abnormal images, between the original and normal feature distributions. Recent
some studies [21], [22], [32], [36], [37] introduce mem- studies [55], [56] similarly seek to model the distribution
ory modules that store normal features. Meanwhile, other relationship between patches. Notably, the method presented
methods [10], [23] introduce more complex self-supervised in [56] introduces visual rotation invariant features and graph
tasks, such as coloring and rotation prediction, to detect networks. Despite these advancements, a significant challenge
unseen anomalies that cannot be easily recovered. Despite remains: these methods have not yet delivered effective results
their strengths, autoencoder-based approaches often struggle in anomaly segmentation.
with anomaly segmentation due to high reconstruction errors
in normal regions [35], [38].
 D. Knowledge Distillation-Based AD
B. Generative Model-Based AD Knowledge distillation-based methods leverage discrep-
 To overcome the limitations of autoencoder-based methods, ancies in the expressive abilities of the teacher–student
research has explored generative model-based approaches, networks, thereby enabling them to extract differential features
such as GAN [39]), as demonstrated in previous works [40], when encountering abnormalities. The pioneering work of U-
[41]. In these methods, anomalies are identified if the gener- Std [26] employed a knowledge distillation model for AD.
ated sample significantly differs from the input sample [20], MKDAD [12] was subsequently introduced to address a flaw
[40]. AnoGAN [40] is one such method that employs noise in U-Std, namely that it only leverages the output of the final
to generate a target image and then compares the differences layer. Wang et al. [29] proposed the student–teacher feature
between the original and the generated image. However, pyramid matching (STPM), implementing the multiscale feaduring the inference phase, this model suffers from a sig- ture map approach, which differs from MKDAD by utilizing
nificant drawback involving computationally expensive and the discrepancy between multifeature maps to derive localizatime-consuming parameter updating processes. To overcome tion maps instead of the gradient of the loss function. However,
this issue, EffGAN [42] introduced an encoder that con- models with symmetric paradigms or similar structures are
strains the input noise to its output, successfully alleviating unable to extract differentiated features. RD [13] employs a
the time-constraint issue. Further refinements in this direc- pretrained model as an encoder, enabling the student decoder
tion led to GANomaly [41] and f-AnoGAN [14], which to align with the encoder. However, it merely employs the
improved the generator’s ability to impose constraints on spa- output of the teacher network as a “reference standard” without
tial feature reconstruction. In parallel, DefGAN [43] improved further exploiting the strong characteristics of the teacher.
the discriminator segment by integrating multiple discrim- Additionally, while RD predominantly excels in detecting
inators. Recently, Hou et al. [32] introduced an additional anomalies, it falls short in accurately segmenting anomalous
discriminator to distinguish the generated image from the regions. To address these limitations, ADPS introduces the
original one, enhancing the quality of generation. While asymmetric distillation paradigm. This paradigm enhances
these developments signify substantial progress, they fail to symmetric distillation paradigms to concentrate on fine anomaeffectively handle anomalous samples with minuscule anomaly lies and simultaneously employs Weighted Mask Block and
regions. PSM to amalgamate distilled knowledge with pretrained prior
 knowledge. This enables a more nuanced exploration of nor-
C. Deep Feature Modeling-Based AD mal and anomalous feature distributions, which is crucial for
 accurately segmenting fine anomalous regions.
 Another distinctive approach to detecting anomalies
involves deep feature modeling-based methods, which assume
the existence of a gap between normal and abnormal distri- III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
butions. These methods begin by constructing a feature space
specifically for normal images and then determine whether an As illustrated in Fig. 3, this article proposes a novel
image is abnormal by evaluating spatial boundaries [9], [44], method called ADPS, which includes an asymmetric distil-
[45], [46], [47], [48]. Among these methods, SPADE [48] lation paradigm, a WMB and a PSM specialized for AD. The
stands out by deploying a pretrained WideResNet50 [49] to asymmetric distillation paradigm devises inputs with asymextract patch features. The presence of anomalies is established metry that are utilized to enhance the representation ability
by determining whether the tested patch contains k adjacent gap of the teacher–student networks, thereby generating more
normal patches. PaDiM [9] builds on this method by further discriminative differential features to anomalous regions. The
refining the process. It utilizes a pretrained model for feature distilled knowledge is further exploited by WMB and injected
extraction and models normality at each location using a into the features extracted from the pretrained teacher network.
multivariate Gaussian distribution [50], [51]. Further efforts PSM accepts features of the teacher network consisting of
have been made to explore the interrelationships within the prior knowledge and distilled knowledge as input and utilizes
data. For instance, Liu et al. [52] proposed a method that the segmentation module to learn the distribution of normal
models the relationship between a data point and its neigh- features. The detailed architecture of our ADPS is described as
bors. Other approaches have attempted to implicitly model follows.
7054 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed ADPS framework. The asymmetric distillation paradigm uses asymmetric data (e.g., I /I S and Ti /Si′ ) to stimulate S
in learning effective discriminative representations. WMB generates a coarse localization mask to transfer distilled knowledge to the teacher model with a
powerful representation capability, leading to the feature Ci . Based on WMB, PSM explicitly learns normal and anomaly feature distribution in Ci with a
segmentation module to precisely segment finer anomaly regions. In fact, ADPS applied asymmetric inputs to the input layers, Stage 1 and Stage 2 of the
student model.

A. Asymmetric Distillation Paradigm Our ADPS proposes a straightforward yet effective approach
 In the field of AD, knowledge distillation has been lever- for generating distinct but semantically identical data by
aged to exploit the differential knowledge representation splitting original images. To implement this approach, a given
abilities possessed by the teacher and student networks to normal image I ∈ R H ×W ×C , is split into nonoverlapj 2 j
accurately identify anomalous regions from extracted fea- ping local patches, I S = {I S1 , . . . , I S , . . . , I Sk }, where I S ∈
 (H/k)×(W/k)×C 2
tures. However, a crucial drawback of conventional distillation R , and k denotes the number of 2-D patches.
frameworks, such as the symmetric distillation paradigm In the teacher network, I serves as the direct input, and feature
depicted in Fig. 2(a), is that the teacher–student network Ti is obtained by a pretrained encoder in stage i. The use of
becomes insensitive to disparities in the representation of the original image as input in the teacher model assures that
anomalous regions. This insensitivity stems from the fact Ti does not lose any information about the original image.
that the teacher and student networks tend to learn analo- Meanwhile, in the student network, I S is utilized as a series
gous representations of anomalous regions. Thus, to address of inputs. In fact, this takes k 2 forward processes, and in
these concerns, a feasible solution is to widen the discrep- each forward a patch j of (H/k) × (W/k) × C is fed into
 j
ancy in the representational abilities of the teacher–student the student network to extract Si . During k 2 times forward,
networks. we can obtain I in the feature representation of the student
 j 2
 The representational abilities of a model are inherently network, that is, Si′ = {Si1 , . . . , Si , . . . , Sik }. During the
linked to its inputs. Therefore, modifying different inputs for parameter update, the extracted Si′ is subsequently reshaped
teacher–student networks can obtain different knowledge rep- into Si based on the original position correspondence, and
resentation capabilities. We propose an asymmetric distillation Si is calculated as the loss by distillation loss with Ti .
paradigm, wherein we construct semantically equivalent, yet The approach, named asymmetric distillation paradigm, could
structurally different inputs for the teacher–student networks. theoretically extend to feature distillation in every intermediate
The disparity in format aims to probe their expressiveness layer by simply splitting features extracted by the intermediate
while simultaneously escalating the difficulty of alignment layer.
between the student and teacher networks for unfamiliar Since the student network receives a patch of
anomalous regions. As a result, the preservation of the same (H/k) × (W/k) × C as the input, it will pay more attention
semantic guarantees that, through training, the student network to local regions and detect tiny anomalies. Additionally,
learns the same features as the teacher network for normal the asymmetry between local and global receptive fields
samples. Another key factor is that the local features obtained can exacerbate the complexity of feature alignment in
by the student network are affected only by their own patches teacher–student networks. The different inputs allow the
and do not stray from anomalous feature vectors in remote student network to acquire unique data representation
parts. abilities. Therefore, the distilled knowledge of the asymmetric
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7055

distillation paradigm presents higher discrimination efficiency Algorithm 1 Framework of the Proposed ADPS
between normal and abnormal patterns. Input: Pretrained Teacher model T , student model S, test
 image set U , Postsegmentation model PS.
B. Weight Mask Block Output: Each image’s anomaly map M and its anomaly score
 Sc.
 Given that prior knowledge in the pretrained teacher
 1: for I ∈ U do
network is acquired from an upstream task, such as image clas-
 2: I S ← Split (I ) ▷ Split into nonoverlapping patches
sification, it lacks discriminability for normal and abnormal
 3: Ti ← T . f or war d(I )
patterns. To further utilize the pretrained a priori knowledge
 4: Si ← S. f or war d(I S )
for AD, the proposed WMB transfers distilled knowledge to
 5: for i ∈ [1, n] do ▷ n represents the number of layers
the teacher network. Formally, “distilled knowledge” refers to
 6: Wi ← Ti , Si are calculated according to (1)
the rough localization information of the anomalous region
 7: Ci ← Ti , Wi are calculated according to (2)
obtained through the asymmetric distillation model. Specifi-
 8: end for
cally, features extracted from the teacher and student networks
 9: M ← PS. f or war d([C1 , . . . , Cn ])
in the asymmetric distillation paradigm are utilized to generate
 10: Sc ← max(G(M)) ▷ G(·) is Gaussian function.
a coarse localization mask (i.e., distilled knowledge, as men-
 11: end for
tioned above). We then take a weighted approach to explicitly
transfer the distilled knowledge to Ti .
 An overview of our approach is presented in Fig. 3, where
WMB takes Ti and Si as inputs that belong to Rh×w×c . The develop the PSM to identify the normal and abnormal districorrelation of Ti and Si is utilized to generate the coarse bution from Ci . PSM seeks to segment the abnormal regions
localization mask, with the cosine similarity function being with high accuracy and clear boundaries. Specifically, PSM
used for this purpose. Specifically, the similarity between x employs the multiple UpBlock layers of UNet [57] as the
and y positions in the feature map is defined as backbone. To fully exploit the features extracted from each
 x,y x,y layer of the pretrained teacher model, we use the weighted
 x,y Ti · Si multiscale feature map C = {C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn } as the input.
 Wi = x,y x,y (1)
 Ti × Si Here, n represents the number of multiscale layers. We present
 x,y x,y UpBlock i as an example to illustrate the upsampling process.
where Ti ∈ R1×1×c and Si ∈ R1×1×c . The similar-
 In UpBlock layer i of PSM, the output Pi−1 of UpBlock
ity of each position is then evaluated to form the matrix
 x,y i − 1 is fed as the input
Wi = {Wi |x ∈ [1, h], y ∈ [1, w]}. Since the anomalous features in two networks are inclined to be unaligned,
 Pim = TrConvi (Pi−1 ) (3)
1 − Wi represents the coarse localization of the anomalous
regions and servers as an abnormal coarse localization mask. where TrConvi (·) denotes the 2× transposed convolution, and
Finally, utilizing explicit weighting, WMB transfers the coarse Pim is the output of the transposed convolution. Subsequently,
localization information related to anomalies obtained from Pim and Ci are concatenated together along the channel dimendistilled knowledge to Ti , with this process being expressed sion
as
 Ci = (1 − Wi ) · Ti (2) Pic = cat(Pim , Ci ) (4)

where Ci denotes the outputs generated by WMB. The where cat(·) denotes the concatenation of two feature maps
weighted approach is more suitable for the ADPS than the fea- along the channel dimension. Finally, we obtain the output Pi
ture fusion approach, as described in the ablation experiment of UpBlock i via the convolution layer
(Ref. Section IV-D). Therefore, Ci contains rich knowledge
 Pi+1 = σ (BNi1 (Convi1 σ BNi2 Convi2 Pic
 
obtained through the pretrained model’s prior knowledge while (5)
simultaneously providing the ability to roughly discriminate
between abnormal and normal regions based on distilled where Convi1 (·) and Convi2 (·) indicates two 3 × 3 convolution
knowledge. layers with stride 1 in UpBlock i layer, BNi1 (·) and BNi2 (·)
 denotes two batch normalization layers, σ (·) denotes the ReLU
 activation function. Finally, the output Pn is convolved by
C. Postsegmentation Module
 3 × 3 convolution layer to obtain the segmentation mask M
 Traditional KDAD methods often infer the difference with the size of H × W
obtained from the distillation model as the result of anomaly
segmentation. This results in two drawbacks: one is that M = Softmax(Conv f (Pn )) (6)
the features extracted from the pretrained network are only
used as a “reference standard” and not explored further for where Softmax(·) denotes the Softmax function and Conv f (·)
their potential, and another is that the segmentation results represents 3 × 3 convolution layer.
obtained yield low resolution with low accuracy. To solve these In Algorithm 1, we show each step of the ADPS framework.
drawbacks simply and effectively, we leverage the advantages With ADPS, we can infer the anomaly score and anomaly
of Ci , which retains both prior and distilled knowledge, and segmentation map of the image to be tested.
7056 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

D. Loss Function 2) Implementation Details: The input image resolution is
 fixed at 256 × 256, while k is set to 8. In the training phase,
 To train ADPS, this work follows the DRAEM [58] to
 the learning rate is set to 0.0001 and the batch size is set
generate simulated anomaly samples. Additionally, distillation
 to 32. The network is trained for 300 epochs by the Adam
loss and focal loss [59] are introduced as part of the loss
 optimizer [65], with a learning rate decay at epochs 240 and
function. The distillation loss, defined as follows, is used in
 270 with a decay rate of 0.2. We set the value of λ to 1.
the model training
 3) Baseline Approaches: We compare our ADPS against
 n   several baselines, including: U-Std [26], MKDAD [12],
 X Ti · Si Ti · Si
Ld = (1 − Y ) · 1 − +Y · MF [61], RD [13], DAAD+ [32], RIAD [34], Cutpaste [62],
 ∥Ti ∥ × ∥Si ∥ ∥Ti ∥ × ∥Si ∥
 i=1 DRAEM [58], DRAEM + SSPCAB [66], AnoSeg [63],
 (7) SGSF [67], SPADE [48], Patchcore [54], PaDim [9],
 MAD [60], and Semi-orthogonal [68]. Among these, SPADE,
where Y denotes the ground-truth (GT) label of training PaDim, Semi-orthogonal, Patchcore, and RD utilize WideRessamples such that Y = {yu,v ∈ {0, 1}|u ∈ [1, h], v ∈ [1, w]}. Net50 [49] as the backbone, while MF introduces a
Indeed, L D essentially expects the teacher–student model to Transformer-based structure. DRAEM, DRAEM + SSPCAB,
output features close to each other when fed normal samples Cutpaste, and our ADPS introduce simulated anomalous samand away from each other when fed forged anomaly samples. ples.
Furthermore, the proposed approach utilizes the focal loss Ls
 4) Evaluation Metrics: As per previous studies [9], [13],
[59] defined as follows:
 [69], commonly used evaluation metrics for anomaly classification tasks is the area under the receiver-operating
 −(1 − pi, j )τ log( pi, j ), yi, j = 1
 (
 Ls = (8) characteristic (AUROC), and for anomaly segmentation tasks
 − pi,τ j log(1 − pi, j ), yi, j = 0 are per-region-overlap (PRO) and AUROC. However, these
 metrics inadequately reflect the actual segmentation perforwhere pi, j denotes the probability of the abnormality in the
 mance when dealing with small anomalous regions due to
coordinate (i, j) of M. To incorporate the distillation loss Ld
 the overwhelming number of normal pixels. Toward this
and segmentation loss Ls in the training process of ADPS, the
 end, Tao et al. [69] introduce a more convincing metric,
overall loss L is defines as follows:
 average precision (AP), to reflect the performance of the
 L = Ld + λLs (9) proposed method for pixel-level segmentation. In this work,
 the performance of anomaly classification is evaluated using
where λ is set to control the importance of the two losses. AUROC cla , while anomaly segmentation performance is measured using AUROC seg , PROseg , and AP seg collectively.
 Notable, on account of the significantly lower number of
 IV. E XPERIMENTS abnormal pixels than normal ones, AP seg better indicates the
A. Experimental Settings segmentation accuracy.

 1) Datasets: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed ADPS, we conducted experiments on three datasets: B. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
MVTec AD [4], KolektorSDD [64], and KolektorSDD2 [30]. 1) MVTec AD: Table I illustrates the anomaly classification
 1) The MVTec AD [4] dataset consists of 15 classes of results obtained on the MVTec AD dataset. ADPS achieves
 high-resolution images derived from actual industrial very competitive anomaly classification results, with 100%
 scenarios, subdivided into five categories of texture classification accuracy achieved across four categories. Sigimages (referred to as “Texture”) and ten categories of nificantly, ADPS shows notable performance improvement
 object images (referred to as “Object”). The training in several categories, outperforming the methods employing
 dataset contains only normal images, while the testing WideResNet-50 with improved accuracy by approximately
 dataset includes a variety of anomaly patterns, such as 3%–10%. These results demonstrate that ADPS makes full
 scratches, defects, and so on. This dataset presents a use of the pretrained model’s knowledge to achieve efficonsiderable challenge due to the subtle anomalies and cient anomaly classification. In comparison to Cutpaste [62],
 high-resolution nature. which further introduces simulated anomalous samples, ADPS
 2) The KolektorSDD [64] dataset consists of 399 images, obtains a superior performance gain of 2.7%. Thus, the strateach with dimensions of 500 × 1250. These images egy of leveraging asymmetric distillation to achieve coarse
 were acquired under controlled conditions in a localization and fine segmentation of anomalies proves more
 real-world industrial setting. effective than training the classifier directly. Overall, the
 3) The KolektorSDD2 [30] is a comprehensive surface experimental results highlight that ADPS, integrating distilled
 defect detection dataset containing over 3000 images, and prior knowledge, provides a more accurate normal image
 with each having a size of approximately 230 × 630. distribution and delivers powerful anomaly classification capa-
 This dataset exposes a range of defect types commonly bility.
 found in the industry, including scratches, dots, and In addition to anomaly classification, we demonstrate the
 surface defects. anomaly segmentation performance of ADPS and compare it
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7057

 TABLE I
 A NOMALY C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF AUROC CLA (%) ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

 TABLE II
A NOMALY S EGMENTATION R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF AUROC SEG , PRO SEG , AND AP SEG (%) ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE P ROPOSED ADPS
 O UTPERFORMS R ECENT M ETHODS BY N EARLY 10% IN T ERMS OF AP SEG . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD .
 PA D IM∗ D ENOTES A NOTHER R ESULT F ROM [9] W ITH R ES N ET-18 AS THE BACKBONE

to current state-of-the-art methods. The evaluation is based Compared to recent distillation methods, the superior perforon three key metrics on the MVTec AD dataset, with mance of ADPS is attributed to its asymmetric distillation
the results presented in Table II. Our approach, ADPS, paradigm, which shows effectiveness in handling anomaoutperforms knowledge distillation-based methods such as lous images. The representations extracted from the student
U-Std and MKDAD by 5%–10% on AUROC seg and 3% network of input local images are harder to match with
on PROseg . It also exceeds U-Std by 32% on AP seg , those of the teacher network of input global images. This
demonstrating its excellent anomaly segmentation capability. leads to better detection of intricate anomalous regions,
7058 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 4. Anomaly segmentation results on the MVTec AD dataset. Compared with RD [13], ADPS achieves high-confidence segmentation results in both
anomalous and normal regions with different categories. (a)–(d) represent the horizontal coordinates and (1)–(3) represent the vertical coordinates in Fig. 4.
In total, 12 examples are listed to compare the proposed ADPS with RD.

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE L ATEST U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR THE KOLEKTOR SDD
 A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS AND S UPERVISED A NOMALY AND KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASETS
 D ETECTION M ETHODS ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET

resulting in a significant improvement in segmentation
precision. ADPS. ADPS utilizes the segmentation module to improve
 Meanwhile, ADPS significantly outperforms Patchcore [54] its segmentation accuracy by exploiting coarse localization
in its ability to localize anomalies at the pixel level, for features from the distilled knowledge. Conversely, RD approxexample, the APseg metric outperforms it by 16%. This is imates the location of anomalous regions but is accompanied
due to the powerful anomaly segmentation capability of the by significant noise. c1, d2, and d3 demonstrate the high
ADPS PSB after obtaining distillation knowledge. Second, resemblance between anomalous and normal regions, which
Patchcore takes more time in inference because it computes poses challenges to the efficient segmentation of current
anomaly scores based on the similarity measure between an AD methods. However, the exceptional ability of ADPS in
image’s patch features and each stored memory bank item. anomaly segmentation stands out.
ADPS also surpasses DRAEM, DRAEM + SSPCAB, and In addition, we compare the proposed ADPS with recent
Cutpaste methods that rely on forged anomalous samples, even state-of-the-art unsupervised and fully supervised AD meththough DRAEM (including combined SSPCAB) have larger ods. The comparison results are demonstrated in Table III.
parameters of networks, achieving an impressive AP seg of Compared with the state-of-the-art unsupervised methods,
77.4%. In particular, DRAEM similarly uses a segmentation the proposed ADPS is more challenging to localize the
module, while ADPS significantly outperforms its anomaly anomalies, especially in the metric AP seg , which reaches
segmentation capability. The competitive results of ADPS are the highest 77.4%. Compared to the AD method RN [7]
attributed to its integration of two fundamental components: based on the knowledge distillation method, ADPS exceeds
harnessing the feature representation capabilities inherent in 17% on the AP seg metric. Compared to the fully supervised
the teacher network and using distilled knowledge to obtain a method DRA [72], the proposed ADPS leads in all aspects.
coarse localization of anomalous regions followed by precise Undeniably, ADPS still has room for improvement for the
anomaly segmentation. state-of-the-art fully supervised method PRN [73]. However,
 Fig. 4 shows the visualization image of anomaly seg- the anomaly segmentation aspect also achieves a performance
mentation on the MVTec AD dataset. a1–a3 demonstrate that wants to be close. The above experimental results demonthe anomalous region segmentation capability of RD and strate the advancement of ADPS.
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7059

Fig. 5. Anomaly segmentation results on the KolektorSDD2 dataset.
 Fig. 7. Visualization images using symmetric distillation (k = 1) and
 asymmetric distillation methods (k = 8).

 C. Effectiveness of Asymmetric Distillation Paradigm
 1) Asymmetric Inputs: We first conduct experiments on
 the MVTec AD dataset to validate the influence of various
 inputs on the asymmetric distillation paradigm. When k = 1,
 ADPS adopts the symmetric distillation paradigm. In the cases
 where k belongs to {2, 4, 8, 16}, ADPS utilizes the asymmetric
 distillation paradigm by dividing the input into k × k patches
 at the input layer, respectively. The experimental results are
 illustrated in Fig. 6. The supremacy of the asymmetric distillation paradigm is visibly established, particularly in terms of
 AP seg . Moreover, the optimal performance is achieved when
 k = 4 or 8. The division into patches facilitates the focused
Fig. 6. Performance of asymmetric distillation paradigm (k = 2, 4, 8, 16)
and symmetric distillation paradigm (k = 1).
 attention of the student network on specific regions, enabling
 ADPS to recognize anomalous pixels that closely resemble
 normal ones. However, excessive division (when k = 16) can
 cause a loss of crucial original structural information leading
 2) KolektorSDD&KolektorSDD2: To further demonstrate to a decrease in performance. We visualize the anomaly
the effectiveness of ADPS, we conduct anomaly classification segmentation results for the symmetric distillation paradigm
and anomaly segmentation experiments on two additional and the asymmetric distillation paradigm shown in Fig. 7.
benchmark datasets (i.e., KolektorSDD and KolektorSDD2). It is observed that the student network with an asymmetric
The results, presented in Table IV, show that ADPS achieves input can better capture the anomalous features of tiny regions
state-of-the-art performance on both datasets. Notably, for the with detailed boundaries. In scenarios like the ‘Grid’ category,
KolektorSDD2 dataset, ADPS achieves an AP seg of 72.5%, the sequential learning of local images allows the student
which is a substantial improvement of 20% and 21% over network to concentrate more intensely on local details, thereby
the performance of DRAEM and SGSF, respectively. It is facilitating a more accurate localization map for “foreign
worth mentioning that both DRAEM and SGSF employ forged objects.”
anomaly samples and segmentation frameworks. This signifi- 2) Asymmetric Layers: In addition to introducing the asymcant performance advantage can be attributed to the thorough metric inputs, ADPS introduces the asymmetric distillation
exploration of the potential of pretrained models by ADPS for paradigm at various feature levels in different stages. Taking
AD tasks. To achieve accurate anomaly segmentation, distilled WideResNet-50 as the backbone of the teacher network as
knowledge, and prior knowledge are utilized to generate an example, we introduce the asymmetric distillation strategy
coarse localization information, which is further utilized by in Stage 1 and Stage 2, building upon the asymmetric input
the segmentation module. The results of anomaly segmentation layer. The AD results are shown in Table V. The introducare shown in Fig. 5. Exemplary segmentation of anomaly tion of asymmetric distillation at the shallow layer (stage 1)
contours and normal regions, along with high-confidence improves the AD performance for texture images, although its
segmentation results, is achieved by ADPS, outperforming effect on the “Object” type is not substantial. However, the
RD in this regard. Furthermore, by uniformly calibrating the performance drops significantly upon further adoption at the
segmentation threshold at 0.5 across all categories, ADPS deep layers (stage 2). This may occur due to the low resolution
obtains precise anomaly segmentation maps. of segmented features in the deeper layers, which disrupts
7060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 TABLE V
 R ESULTS OF I NTRODUCING A SYMMETRIC K NOWLEDGE PARADIGM FOR D IFFERENT S TAGES W ITH k = 4. “S TAGE i ” I NDICATES T HAT AT S TAGE i

the original nearest-neighbor relationships within the image.
Consequently, the destruction of structural information impairs
the effectiveness of distillation in providing coarse localization
information, thereby influencing the detection capability of
ADPS.

D. Effect of Weight Mask Block on ADPS
 We investigate three ways for combining distilled knowledge and pretrained knowledge to obtain Ci , as illustrated in
Fig. 8. Fig. 8. Illustration of the different ways to transfer distilled knowledge to Ti .
 1) Method (1): This method involves utilizing the differences in features between the teacher network and the
 student network as Ci , which is then directly input into segmentation performance than MSE loss. Interestingly, for
 PSM. “textured” images, using MSE loss proves to be more effective.
 2) Method (2): The features extracted from the student In this article, ADPS uses the experimental setup of the second
 network and the teacher network are combined directly, row, that is, it uses the cosine similarity loss and computes Wi
 where a 3 × 3 convolution is employed to achieve by cosine similarity.
 dimensional reduction and fusion for obtaining Ci .
 3) WMB: The distilled knowledge Wi is leveraged in E. Ablation Study on the Framework of ADPS
 WMB to re-weight the original pretrained representations, resulting in Ci . To investigate each component of the proposed ADPS
The experimental results corresponding to the three ways are framework, we compare ADPS with its variants on the
shown in Table VI. Comparing Method (1) and Method (2) MVTec-AD dataset.
reveals that the AD capability of Method (1) significantly 1) W/O. PW: The proposed ADPS without PSM and WMB.
surpasses that of Method (2). This observation demonstrates 2) W/O. T: The proposed ADPS without the teacher netthat explicitly incorporating coarse localization information work, that is, direct training the student model and PSM.
outperforms direct feature fusion. Accordingly, we designed 3) W/O. S: The proposed ADPS removes the student neta more effective weighted method called WMB. WMB inte- work and directly uses a pretrained teacher network.
grates not only the coarse localization information Wi , but In this setting, only the parameters of the PSB can be
also the multiscale contextual information extracted from learned.
the pretrained teacher network Ti . WMB exhibits superior We show the variant models and their results in Table VIII.
performance compared to Method (1), establishing it as the Based on the experimental results, the following conclusions
suitable module within the ADPS framework. Despite the can be made.
simplicity of this weighted approach, it provides a solution 1) Pretrained Knowledge is Essential for the Teacher Netfor fusing distilled knowledge and pretrained prior knowledge work: The comparison results from W/O. T and W/O. S show a
for high-performance AD. Its advantage lies in ingeniously significant drop in AD and anomaly segmentation performance
integrating distilled knowledge and pretrained knowledge, for multiple categories. Especially, the anomaly segmentation
thereby enabling PSM to derive fused features optimized for performance decreases by 10% for AP seg . The experimental
AD. results confirm the effectiveness of prior knowledge from the
 In addition, we investigated the effect of different distillation pretrained model for AD and emphasize the need for further
losses on ADPS performance in WMB. We compare the cosine exploration. Using only the teacher network is intuitively more
similarity (Cosine) loss with the mean squared error (MSE) effective than using only the student network, as the pretrained
loss. In Table VII, we show four setups, where the column model provides a powerful feature representation for the PSB.
‘Wi ’ contains the two ways to compute Wi . The experimental Another possible explanation is that after fixing the image
results are shown in Table VII. When using both MSE and encoder (teacher model), the PSM module is more capable
Cosine similarity losses, the AD performance is reduced. of being trained more efficiently [74], yielding more accurate
Employing the Cosine loss yields better AD and anomaly segmentation results.
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7061

 TABLE VI
 A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT T-S F EATURE F USION M ETHODS ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET.
 WMB ACHIEVES THE B EST P ERFORMANCE . “ ” I NDICATES S UBOPTIMAL R ESULTS

 TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE S ELECTION OF D IFFERENT K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION L OSS F UNCTIONS AND D IFFERENT G ENERATION M ETHODS OF Wi

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE OF F OUR S TRUCTURES ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. ADPS I S THE B EST IN T ERMS OF
 A NOMALY C LASSIFICATION AND A NOMALY S EGMENTATION P ERFORMANCE

 2) Exploitation Potential of the Teacher Network Is Significant: Comparing with ADPS, W/O. PW shows a decrease
of 7% in AUROC cla and 20% in AP seg , highlighting the
effectiveness and potential of the PSM and WMB modules
in utilizing the features extracted by the teacher network.
While the teacher network only serves as an extractor of
reference features without leveraging its powerful feature
representation capability, introducing WMB to utilize distilled
knowledge and PSM to fully exploit the features extracted
by the teacher model enhances the AD capability. Table VI Fig. 9. Anomaly heatmaps for four structures. ADPS captures more tiny
also demonstrates the significant impact of different methods anomaly regions with clearer and more detailed decision boundaries. (a) and
 (b) represent two cases of ablation studies in ADPS.
that employ pretrained knowledge and distilled knowledge on
AD. The proposed WMB may not be the optimal scheme, and
future research could explore methods that combine teacher 3) Asymmetric Distillation and WMB Contribute to the
networks and distillation strategies to further enhance AD Performance of ADPS: Comparing W/O. S with ADPS,
ability. it can be observed that distilled knowledge obtained through
7062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

asymmetric distillation significantly improves the performance the application of ADPS in additional industrial contexts,
of ADPS. However, without the WMB, the distilled knowledge potentially broadening its scope and impact.
cannot be effectively transferred to the teacher network. The
corresponding results demonstrate that fully integrating pretrained prior knowledge and distilled knowledge is effective in R EFERENCES
improving the performance of AD. The insight behind this is [1] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and
that prior knowledge provides powerful feature representation, M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and
while distilled knowledge enhances the discrimination between out-of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” 2021,
 arXiv:2110.14051.
anomalies and normal instances. [2] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 a) Feature visualization: We present visualizations in anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
Fig. 9, which includes two examples that compare anomaly pp. 1–38, 2021.
 [3] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
segmentation results. Fig. 9(a) and (b) illustrates the boundary anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
between normal and abnormal features learned by W/O. S is IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
not accurate. Additionally, W/O. PW shows the inability to Oct. 2022.
derive the decision boundary between abnormal and normal [4] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec
 AD—A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly
from low-resolution feature maps, which leads to inefficient detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
detection results. The limitations of W/O. S in capturing (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
differences in small anomalous regions are attributed to the [5] T. Xiang et al., “SQUID: Deep feature in-painting for unsupervised
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
lack of an asymmetrical distillation model that focuses on local Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 23890–23901.
regions. On the other hand, Fig. 9 demonstrates that AP seg is [6] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
more indicative of the performance of anomalous segmentation for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
(e.g., although the segmentation results of W/O. PS have many
 [7] Z. Gu et al., “Remembering normality: Memory-guided knowledge
errors, AUROC seg still maintains a high performance). distillation for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 b) Discussion: Undoubtedly, the PSM plays a vital role, Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16401–16409.
particularly in the anomaly segmentation capability of ADPS. [8] D. Carrera, F. Manganini, G. Boracchi, and E. Lanzarone, “Defect
 detection in SEM images of nanofibrous materials,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
It further confirms our hypothesis that solely relying on acquir- Informat., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 551–561, Apr. 2017.
ing high-precision segmentation maps from low-resolution [9] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch disfeature map differences is extremely challenging. Conse- tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
quently, solving the anomaly segmentation challenge may have in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
 [10] F. Ye, C. Huang, J. Cao, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Attribute
to rely on high-resolution images. Additionally, the approach restoration framework for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
employed by ADPS to exploit the features extracted by the vol. 24, pp. 116–127, 2022.
pretrained model is straightforward. We believe that more [11] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet:
 Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE
effective distilled knowledge can be obtained by leveraging Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 1907–1916.
the discrepancy between the learning capabilities of the teacher [12] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
network and the student network. “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 pp. 14902–14912.
 V. C ONCLUSION [13] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 In this article, we presented a novel knowledge distillation- one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
based framework, ADPS, to alleviate the main problems of
 [14] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and
existing KDAD methods for image AD. Our proposed ADPS U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection
framework establishes an asymmetric distillation paradigm with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54,
with asymmetric data streams to mitigate the problem of pp. 30–44, May 2019.
 [15] C. Baur, B. Wiestler, S. Albarqouni, and N. Navab, “Deep autoenthe student network over-approximating the feature output of coding models for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain
the teacher network when anomalous images are input. The MR images,” in Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, 2018,
asymmetric distillation paradigm further utilizes local patches pp. 161–169.
as inputs to facilitate the student model’s ability to capture [16] F. E. Fernandes and G. G. Yen, “Automatic searching and pruning of
 deep neural networks for medical imaging diagnostic,” IEEE Trans.
local details. Additionally, customized WMB and PSM were Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 5664–5674, Dec. 2021.
developed to fully incorporate the distilled posterior knowl- [17] A. F. Mejia, M. B. Nebel, A. Eloyan, B. Caffo, and M. A. Lindquist,
edge and pretrained prior knowledge to produce high-quality “PCA leverage: Outlier detection for high-dimensional functional magnetic resonance imaging data,” Biostatistics, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 521–536,
segmentation maps with fine structures and clear boundaries. Jul. 2017.
Extensive experiments on three benchmarks demonstrate that [18] S. Venkataramanan, K.-C. Peng, R. V. Singh, and A. Mahalanobis,
our ADPS framework performs favorably against state-of-the- “Attention guided anomaly localization in images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 Comput. Vis., Nov. 2020, pp. 485–503.
art methods. Importantly, our simple framework is modular, [19] T. Vojir, T. Šipka, R. Aljundi, N. Chumerin, D. O. Reino, and J. Matas,
promising to serve as a strong baseline for future efficient “Road anomaly detection by partial image reconstruction with segmen-
KDAD research. tation coupling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Oct. 2021, pp. 15651–15660.
 Despite these advancements, ADPS’s reliance on simulated
 [20] D. Bogdoll, M. Nitsche, and J. M. Zollner, “Anomaly detection in
anomalous samples remains a limitation. Moving forward, our autonomous driving: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
research will focus on reducing this dependency and exploring Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 4488–4499.
XING et al.: ADPS: ASYMMETRIC DISTILLATION POSTSEGMENTATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 7063

[21] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- [46] R. Chalapathy, A. K. Menon, and S. Chawla, “Anomaly detection using
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” one-class neural networks,” 2018, arXiv:1802.06360.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, [47] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
 pp. 1705–1714. detection and segmentation,” in Proc. ACCV, Jun. 2020, pp. 375–390.
[22] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality [48] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381. [49] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” in Proc.
[23] M. Salehi, A. Eftekhar, N. Sadjadi, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee, Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2016, pp. 87.1–87.12. [Online]. Available:
 “Puzzle-AE: Novelty detection in images through solving puzzles,” https://bmva-archive.org.uk/bmvc/2016/papers/paper087/index.html
 2020, arXiv:2008.12959. [50] C. B. Do, “The multivariate Gaussian distribution,” Sect. Notes, Lect.
[24] D. Li, Q. Tao, J. Liu, and H. Wang, “Center-aware adversarial autoen- Mach. Learn., vol. 229, pp. 1–10, Oct. 2008.
 coder for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., [51] G. G. Hazel, “Multivariate Gaussian MRF for multispectral scene
 vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2480–2493, Jun. 2022. segmentation and anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
[25] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature Sens., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1199–1211, May 2000.
 encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” [52] H. Liu, X. Xu, E. Li, S. Zhang, and X. Li, “Anomaly detection
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, with representative neighbors,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 Jun. 2022. vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2831–2841, Jun. 2023.
[26] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed [53] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
 students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192. pp. 1829–1838.
[27] B. Qian, Y. Wang, H. Yin, R. Hong, and M. Wang, “Switchable [54] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
 online knowledge distillation,” in Proc. ECCV, vol. 13671, Oct. 2022, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 pp. 449–466. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
[28] Z. Li, H. Tang, Z. Peng, G.-J. Qi, and J. Tang, “Knowledge-guided pp. 14298–14308.
 semantic transfer network for few-shot image recognition,” IEEE Trans. [55] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., pp. 1–15, Feb. 2023. via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[29] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student–teacher feature [56] G. Xie, J. Wang, J. Liu, F. Zheng, and Y. Jin, “Pushing the limits
 pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257. of fewshot anomaly detection in industry vision: Graphcore,” 2023,
[30] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surface- arXiv:2301.12082.
 defect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput. [57] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional net-
 Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459. works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Med.
[31] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improv- Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2015, pp. 234–241.
 ing unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity [58] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminato autoencoders,” 2018, arXiv:1807.02011. tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
[32] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou, “Divide- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
 and-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised anomaly pp. 8330–8339.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), [59] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 Oct. 2021, pp. 8791–8800. dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
[33] Z. Li et al., “Superpixel masking and inpainting for self-supervised Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2020, pp. 1–12. [60] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of
[34] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021, 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733.
 Art. no. 107706. [61] J.-C. Wu, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Learning unsupervised
[35] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in metaformer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 4571–4584. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Oct. 2021, pp. 4369–4378.
[36] T. Wang, X. Xu, F. Shen, and Y. Yang, “A cognitive memory-augmented [62] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfnetwork for visual anomaly detection,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
 vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1296–1307, Jul. 2021. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
[37] H. Tang, C. Yuan, Z. Li, and J. Tang, “Learning attention-guided pyra- pp. 9664–9674.
 midal features for few-shot fine-grained recognition,” Pattern Recognit., [63] J. Song, K. Kong, Y.-I. Park, S.-G. Kim, and S.-J. Kang, “AnoSeg:
 vol. 130, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108792. Anomaly segmentation network using self-supervised learning,” 2021,
[38] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition memory bank arXiv:2110.03396.
 module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., [64] D. Tabernik, S. Šela, J. Skvarč, and D. Skočaj, “Segmentation-based
 vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Jan. 2023. deep-learning approach for surface-defect detection,” J. Intell. Manuf.,
[39] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 27th Int. vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 759–776, Mar. 2020.
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2014, pp. 2672–2680. [65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
[40] T. Schlegl, P. Seebóck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and in Proc. ICLR, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds., 2015.
 G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial [66] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Med. Imag., May 2017, pp. 146–157. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
[41] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly: [67] P. Xing, Y. Sun, D. Zeng, and Z. Li, “Normal image guided segmentation
 Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. framework for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
 Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2018, pp. 622–637. Syst. Video Technol., pp. 1–14, Oct. 2023.
[42] H. Zenati, C. S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and V. R. Chandrasekhar, [68] J.-H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, S. Yi, and T. Lee, “Semi-orthogonal
 “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” 2018, arXiv:1802.06222. embedding for efficient unsupervised anomaly segmentation,” 2021,
[43] D. Zhang, S. Gao, L. Yu, G. Kang, X. Wei, and D. Zhan, “DefGAN: arXiv:2105.14737.
 Defect detection GANs with latent space pitting for high-speed railway [69] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for
 insulator,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–10, 2021. unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE
[44] Y. Chen, X. S. Zhou, and T. S. Huang, “One-class SVM for learning in Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022.
 image retrieval,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process., vol. 1, Oct. 2001, [70] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
 pp. 34–37. Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
[45] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
7064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

[71] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided Jinhui Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,” B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in
 Jun. 2023, pp. 24490–24499. 2003 and 2008, respectively.
[72] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans: He is currently a Professor with Nanjing Univer-
 Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. sity of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7388–7398. He has authored or coauthored more than 200 arti-
[73] H. Zhang, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Prototypical cles in top-tier journals and conferences. His
 residual networks for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. research interests include multimedia analysis and
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, computer vision.
 pp. 16281–16291. Dr. Tang was a recipient of the Best Paper Awards
[74] M. Qu et al., “SiRi: A simple selective retraining mechanism for from ACM MM 2007 and ACM MM Asia 2020, the Best Paper Runner-Up
 transformer-based visual grounding,” in Proc. ECCV, in Lecture Notes in ACM MM 2015. He has served as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANS -
 in Computer Science, vol. 13695, S. Avidan, G. J. Brostow, M. Cissé, ACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS),
 G. M. Farinella, and T. Hassner, Eds., 2022, pp. 546–562. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE),
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA (TMM), and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY (TCSVT). He is a
 Fellow of IAPR.

 Peng Xing is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
 Nanjing, China.
 His current research interests include anomaly
 detection and unsupervised deep learning.

 Zechao Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.E. degree from the University of Science and
 Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2008, and the
 Hao Tang received the B.E. degree from Harbin Ph.D. degree from the National Laboratory of Pat-
 Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2018. tern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2013.
 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nan- He is currently a Professor with Nanjing Univerjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, sity of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
 China. His research interests include big media analysis,
 His current research interests include fine-grained computer vision, and so on.
 image analysis, data-efficient learning, and multi- Dr. Li was a recipient of the best paper award in
 modal learning. ACM Multimedia Asia 2020, and the best student paper award in ICIMCS
 2018. He serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS).