IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025 2471

 Adversarial Transformer-Based Anomaly
 Detection for Multivariate Time Series
 Xinying Yu , Kejun Zhang , Yaqi Liu , Bing Zou , Jun Wang, Wenbin Wang, and Rong Qian

 Abstract—Anomaly detection in multivariate time series of a system that is outside of its local or global norm [3]. The
is crucial to monitor system status, such as fault detection anomalous data can affect the correctness of IoT application
in industrial systems. However, detecting anomalies in mul- decisions, reduce the quality of IoT services, and cause ecotivariate time series is challenging due to few labels, complex spatiotemporal correlations, and ultrafast detecting nomic losses. Therefore, it becomes a material issue to detect
demands. Existing anomaly detection methods rarely ad- anomalous data for core tasks in IoT.
dress these challenges simultaneously. Herein, we design Anomaly detection usually involves the identification of novel
an adversarial transformers-based unsupervised anomaly or unexpected observations or sequences within the captured
detection model (ATUAD). In ATUAD, a Transformer-based data. Unfortunately, anomaly detection in multivariate timeencoder–decoder is constructed to learn sequence features, and adversarial training is adopted to amplify series data is more arduous because of the complex spatiotemmild anomalies and enhance the robustness. Besides, we poral correlations and ultrafast detection demands. Moreover,
propose a peak-over-threshold-based dynamic threshold there is no shortage of mild anomalies close to normality in
mechanism to improve the anomaly detection performance multivariate time series with few or no labels, which complicates
of ATUAD by automatically determining the threshold. In anomaly detection. Therefore, it is paramount to investigate
addition, we provide an anomaly explanation method to
help ATUAD pinpoint root causes for anomalies. Compar- unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series.
ison experiments, ablation studies, and overhead analysis To detect anomalies in multivariate time series, numerous
on public datasets show that ATUAD can outperform the deep learning-based unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms
state-of-the-art baseline methods. have been proposed [4]. The most representative deep learning
 Index Terms—Adversarial training, anomaly detection, methods include convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5],
multivariate time series, self-attention, transformer. [6], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [7], and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8], [9]. Researchers often subtly
 I. INTRODUCTION combine CNNs and RNNs to construct more effective anomaly
 HE proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) devices leads detection models. However, recurrent models, such as LSTMs,
T to a large amount of real-time data with more complexity
generated across cyber-physical systems [1]. This kind of data
 are known to be computationally expensive, and CNNs fail to
 capture long-distance features, which are unsuitable for environconsists of several variables (or features), which change over ments requiring high computational efficiency (e.g., IoT) [10].
time and are known as multivariate time-series data. IoT ap- GAN-based anomaly detection methods train both generators
plications, such as smart factories or supply chain systems [2], and discriminators in an adversarial manner and use the trained
typically adopt multivariate time series to monitor system sta- discriminators as anomaly detectors. Regrettably, GAN is prone
tus. However, harsh natural environments, sensors’ hardware to problems, such as pattern collapse and nonconvergence during
problems, or network attacks may result in anomalous data. A the training process [11].
general definition of an anomaly within the context of IoT is the Recent studies have shown the powerful capacity of Transmeasurable consequences of an unexpected change in the state formers to enhance sequence modeling and decrease computational overheads [12]. The Transformer is a network architecture
 eschewing recurrence and convolutions and instead depending
 Received 16 November 2023; revised 26 March 2024 and 3 Septem- solely on attention mechanisms [13]. Besides, the Transformer
ber 2024; accepted 9 November 2024. Date of publication 13 December can process long sequences in parallel, and its accuracy and
2024; date of current version 5 March 2025. This work was supported
in part by BUPT Excellent Ph.D. Students Foundation under Grant training time are almost unaffected by the sequence length [14].
CX2023221 and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the However, using only the simple Transformer-based encoder–
Central Universities under Grant 3282023012 and Grant 3282023033. decoder model leans toward neglecting anomalies if they are
Paper no. TII-23-4563. (Corresponding author: Kejun Zhang.)
 Xinying Yu, Kejun Zhang, and Wenbin Wang are with the School of Cy- relatively verge on normality. The adversarial training of GAN
berspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, can magnify the reconstruction error of anomalous data, helping
Beijing 102206, China (e-mail: xinying_334@bupt.edu.cn; nybsftbk@ the Transformer model to identify mild anomalies while gaining
126.com; lalalaouye@163.com).
 Yaqi Liu, Bing Zou, Jun Wang, and Rong Qian are with the Depart- stability. Thus, we jointly consider Transformer and adversarment of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Electronic Science and Technol- ial training to implement anomaly detection and diagnosis for
ogy Institute, Beijing 100070, China (e-mail: liuyaqi@besti.edu.cn; bing- multivariate time series.
bingliang@126.com; william_jun576@163.com; rqian@besti.edu.cn).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3507211

 1941-0050 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 In this article, an adversarial transformer-based unsupervised which effectively help system operators perform timely system
anomaly detection model (ATUAD) is developed to deal with diagnosis and repair. However, the model uses a given anomaly
the complex spatiotemporal correlations and mild anomalies threshold for detection, which makes the model less applicable
undetected issues in multivariate time series and fast detection and less general. Su et al. [16] proposed OmniAnomaly, a
demands in modern applications. Specifically, we construct stochastic recurrent neural network for multivariate time series
a Transformer-based encoder–decoder architecture associated anomaly detection. OmniAnomaly learns a robust representation
with an adversarial training framework to capture long-distance of data using techniques, such as stochastic variable connection
contextual information while alleviating the omission of mild and planar normalizing flow, and identifies anomalies based on
anomalies. Further, we propose a peak-over-threshold (POT) reconstruction probabilities. The method achieves remarkable
method-based dynamic threshold (PDT) mechanism and intro- anomaly detection performance and anomaly interpretation acduce it into ATUAD to determine the threshold for detecting curacy, but at the cost of high training time. MAD-GAN [17] is
anomalies. Then, we conduct an anomaly explanation on the an unsupervised multivariate anomaly detection method based
detected anomalous windows to help pinpoint anomaly root on generative adversarial networks. The generators and discrimcauses. By performing extensive experiments, we corroborate inators of GANs use LSTM to capture the temporal correlation in
that ATUAD outperforms most baselines under diversified met- time series distributions. However, the model is computationally
rics. The main contributions are as follows. expensive and cannot effectively model large sequences.
 1) A novel ATUAD is proposed for multivariate time series. Subsequently, research scholars have increasingly empha-
 Specifically, in our ATUAD, a shared encoder-different sized the inference efficiency of anomaly detection methods.
 decoder branch is elaborately designed in a transformer Zong et al. [18] proposed DAGMM, an unsupervised anomaly
 style to form two transformer blocks. ATUAD executes detection model combining a deep autoencoder and a Gaussian
 reconstruction training by minimizing the reconstruction mixture model. The deep autoencoder compresses the data
 errors. points into a low-dimensional representation and inputs the
 2) An adversarial training is designed by integrating with Gaussian mixture model to evaluate the density of the represenour carefully devised transformer blocks. ATUAD exe- tation. However, the model targets multivariate variables rather
 cutes adversarial training across two transformer blocks, than multivariate time series, ignoring the inherent time depenand one block maximizes reconstruction errors while the dence of the time series. Audibert et al. [11] proposed USAD, a
 other minimizes ones. The adversely trained transformer multivariate time series unsupervised anomaly detection method
 networks oblige ATUAD to improve detecting accuracy based on autoencoder and adversarial training. USAD processes
 while gaining stability. sequence data through an autoencoder with two decoders and an
 3) A PDT is proposed to choose the threshold. PDT improves adversarial training framework, and determines anomalies based
 the streaming POT (SPOT) and learns a global threshold on reconstruction errors. Compared with prior art, USAD can
 from the anomaly scores to detect anomalous windows, significantly reduce training time. However, both the encoder
 which supplies the benefit of being able to update the and decoder in the model use fully connected neural networks,
 threshold automatically. Further, an anomaly explanation which sometimes cannot extract sequence features effectively.
 method is provided to help ATUAD pinpoint anomaly root The transformer architecture is favored by more and more
 causes. Extensive experiments on public datasets verify researchers, which provides a new direction for time sethe effectiveness of ATUAD in detecting performance and ries anomaly detection. Chen et al. [10] proposed GTA, a
 training efficiency. Transformer-based framework for anomaly detection that uses
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II the introduced connection learning policy to automatically learn
overviews the works related to the anomaly detection of mul- sensor dependencies. Also, an influence propagation graph contivariate time series. Section III constructs the ATUAD and volution is applied to simulate the information flow among the
elaborates on the process of anomaly inference. Section IV sensors in the graph. They claimed that the inference speed of the
analyzes the experimental results of ATUAD and the baseline multibranch attention technique is improved without sacrificing
methods. Finally, Section V concludes this article. model performance. Tuli et al. [14] proposed Transformerbased anomaly detection and diagnosis (TranAD). TranAD uses
 the attention-based Transformer encoder–decoder framework,
 II. RELATED WORK focuses score-based self-adjustment, and adversarial training
 Deep learning methods have a strong ability to handle non- to reconstruct time-series data, achieving superior detection
linearity in temporal correlation and have achieved remarkable performance and training efficiency on multiple datasets. Xu
results in many time-series anomaly detection methods. et al. [19] proposed TGAN-AD, a transformer-based GAN
 In pursuit of higher detection accuracy, many time se- method for anomaly detection, whose generator aids in extractries anomaly detection efforts have applied recurrent neural ing contextual features of time-series data, and discriminator
networks. Zhang et al. [15] proposed MSCRED, which employs assists in determining abnormal data. They measure the anomaa multiscale convolutional encoder–decoder and a temporal lies by calculating both the reconstruction loss of the generator
attention-based convLSTM for anomaly detection and diagnosis and the discrimination loss of the discriminator. Li et al. [20]
in multivariate time series. MSCRED achieves anomaly detect- proposed a dilated convolutional transformer-based GAN (DCTing, anomaly root identifying, and anomaly severity reflecting, GAN) to solve the problems of time series anomaly detection.
YU et al.: ADVERSARIAL TRANSFORMER-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 2473

Fig. 1. Data formulation of the multivariate time series.

DCT-GAN utilizes several generators and a single discriminator
to alleviate the mode collapse problem. Each generator consists
of a dilated convolutional neural network and a Transformer
block to obtain fine-grained and coarse-grained information
about the time series. The experiments on the NAB dataset show
that DCT-GAN is more accurate and stable than most other
methods. Despite their effectiveness, they are few to consider
the temporal dependency, mild abnormalities, and inference
efficiency, simultaneously. Therefore, we propose ATUAD to
cope with the above problems and improve the precision and
efficiency of anomaly detection with low computational cost.

 III. ATUAD MODEL
A. Problem Statement
 Fig. 2. Overall architecture of ATUAD. In the visualization of ATUAD’s
 In this article, the training data (i.e., multivariate time series) architecture with one encoder layer and two decoder layers, three com-
X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN } ∈ Rk×N are composed of the measure- ponents form two transformer blocks by sharing the same Encoder. The
ment data of k sensors over N consecutive timestamps. As encoder encodes the concatenation of the input window and the position
 encoding and projects it to a latent variable, which then undergoes two
shown in Fig. 1, the observation xt ∈ Rk at any timestamp t decoders to generate reconstructions. The two transformer blocks are
is a k-dimensional vector representing the measurement data of trained in an adversarial way, where Transformer1 seeks to fool Transk sensors, and xit denotes the value of the ith sensor Si at the former2, and Transformer2 aims to distinguish the input reconstructed
 by Transformer1 from the real data.
timestamp t. Particularly, the univariate time series X ∈ Rk×N
(k = 1) is a special case in the multivariate setting, where xt
is a scalar. Similar to previous unsupervised anomaly detec- Anomaly diagnosis: Given the above detection results y =
tion works, this article only models sequence on normal data {y1 , . . ., yT̂ }, recognize the sensors most likely responsible for
(without anomalies) and detects anomalies on test data (with the anomalies within the anomalous window Ŵt .
anomalies). To model the dependence between the observation
xt and the historical ones, we consider a slide time window Wt =
{xt−L+1 , . . ., xt } of length L, both for training and testing. In- B. Overall Architecture of ATUAD
stead of using the original multivariate time series X, a sequence Transformer is a popular deep learning model that has been
of windows W = {W1 , . . ., WT } serves as the model’s input. widely used in natural language processing and sequence mod-
We utilize the replication padding [19] to maintain each window eling tasks due to the superior capability of multihead attention
length as L, i.e., Wt = {x1 , . . ., xt , . . ., xt } when t < L. Our mechanism in long-distance dependencies capturing. Fig. 2
model takes as inputs Wtrain = {W1 , . . ., WT } for training and shows the architecture of the neural network used in our model.
Ŵtest = {Ŵ1 , . . ., ŴT̂ } for testing and assigns a binary label for For simplicity, we use E, D1 , D2 , and W to symbolize the
each testing window Ŵt to indicate an anomaly or not based on Encoder, Decoder1, Decoder2, and Wt , separately. The model’s
the global threshold and the window’s anomaly score. We now specifics are implemented below.
formalize the two problems of anomaly detection and diagnosis. ATUAD design: The classical transformer-based encoder–
 Anomaly detection: Given testing data Ŵtest = {Ŵ1 , . . ., decoder model is designed to excel at reconstructing normal
ŴT̂ }, predict binary labels y = {y1 , . . ., yT̂ }, where yt ∈ {0, 1} data while failing to do so for anomalous data that deviates from
indicates whether the window Ŵt at timestamp t is anomalous the learned distribution, thus detecting anomalous data based on
(yt = 1) or not (yt = 0). the noticeable deviations. However, if the anomalous data are
2474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

relatively close to normality, the transformer-based encoder– (Encoder+Decoder2), while Transformer2 learns to distinguish
decoder model tends to miss the anomalous data. Therefore, the whether the data is from the input window W or Transformer1’s
model should be able to recognize whether the input data does reconstruction.
not contain anomalies before conducting a good reconstruction. Phase 1—Reconstruction training: The intent of phase 1 is
Given that GAN models perform well in the characterization to generate an approximate reconstruction of the input window
tasks of determining whether the input data is abnormal, we by training two transformer blocks. The reconstruction error of
introduce a GAN-like style adversarial training method in the each block is defined as the L2 norm of input window W and
transformer-based encoder–decoder model to detect anomalies. reconstruction Qi
 As portrayed in Fig. 2, we concatenate position encoding with
a training window to obtain the input I for the transformer en- L1 = W − Q1 2 (8)
coder, which projects I into an attention matrix Z. Next, the two L2 = W − Q2 2 . (9)
transformer decoders reconstruct the input using the attention
matrix separately. The specific operations of the transformer Phase 2—Adversarial training: In the second phase, the transencoder are as follows: former encoder recompresses the reconstruction generated by
 Transformer1, and then the recompressed result will be decoded
 I = W ⊕ PE (1) again by Decoder2. In this phase, the objective of Transformer1
 I1 = LayerNorm(I + MultiHeadAtt(I, I, I)) (2) is to fool Transformer2 by minimizing the deviation between
 the input window W and the reconstruction Q3 . The objective
 Z = LayerNorm(I1 + Feedforword(I1 )) (3) of Transformer2 is to distinguish W from Q1 by maximizing
where P E, ⊕, and + denote position encoding, concatenation the difference between W and Q3 . It is worth noting that
operation, and matrix addition, separately. MultiHeadAtt() de- Transformer2 of our model does not strictly play the role of
notes the multihead self-attention mechanism, Feedforword() the discriminator of GAN. The output of Transformer2 in Phase
represents the fully connected feedforward network, and 2 is not a scalar but a reconstruction of the result generated from
LayerNorm() denotes the residual connection and layer normal- Transformer1 in Phase 1. The training goals of the model in
ization operations. The transformer encoder generates attention phase 2 are as follows:
weights by processing all dimensions of the time window in L1 = + W − Q3 2 (10)
parallel to capture the temporal trends in the input sequence,
which significantly improves the model’s training time. The L2 = − W − Q3 2 . (11)
attention matrix output from the encoder is used as the key Two phases training: The objective function of each transformer
and value of the encoder–decoder attention layer in transformer block contains two components, the reconstruction loss and the
decoders, thus assisting the decoders to focus on the sequence’s adversarial loss. Transformer1 minimizes the reconstruction erappropriate position. The specific operations of the transformer ror between the input window W and the reconstruction Q1 and
decoders are as follows: minimizes the adversarial error between W and Q3 . Similar to
 I2 = Mask(MultiHeadAtt(I, I, I)) (4) Transformer1, Transformer2 minimizes the reconstruction error
 between the input window W and the reconstruction Q2 , while
 I3 = LayerNorm(I2 + I) (5) maximizing the adversarial error between W and Q3 . Unlike
 I4 = LayerNorm(I3 + EncDecAtt(I3 , Z, Z)) (6) GANs training the discriminator while fixing the generator, we
 use an evolutionary scheme for each transformer block that
 Qi = Sigmoid(Feedforword(I4 )). (7) combines the reconstruction loss and the adversarial loss to train
For time-series data, the decoder’s output at timestamp t should two blocks simultaneously
depend only on the outputs before t, but not on the data at future  
 1 1
timestamps. Therefore, the multihead attention mechanism in L1 = W − Q1 2 + 1 − W − Q3 2 (12)
 n n
the decoders uses a sequence mask to hide the data at subsequent  
positions. Sigmoid function is used to normalize the recon- 1 1
 L2 = W − Q2 2 − 1 − W − Q3 2 (13)
structions to match the preprocessed input window. Eventually, n n
the ATUAD model generates two reconstruction windows Qi
 where n denotes the training epoch. Algorithm 1 summarizes the
(i ∈ {1, 2}) using the input window W .
 complete training process of the ATUAD model. The proportion
 of reconstruction loss and adversarial loss in the objective func-
C. Two-Phase Adversarial Training
 tion varies with the training epoch. Initially, the weight of the
 The model’s training consists of two phases: the recon- reconstruction loss is high, which ensures stable training when
struction training and the adversarial training. First, the two the outputs of the decoders are poor reconstructions of the input
transformer blocks are trained to learn to reconstruct the nor- windows. With poor reconstructions, the model training of the
mal data as much as possible. Second, the two transformer second phase would be unreliable. To this end, the weight of
blocks are trained in an adversarial way. Specifically, Trans- the adversarial loss is low in the inception to avoid destabilizformer1 (Encoder+Decoder1) refeeds the reconstruction Q1 ing model training. As the reconstructions approach the input
from phase 1 into the model, attempting to deceive Transformer2 windows, the adversarial loss weight increases gradually. The
YU et al.: ADVERSARIAL TRANSFORMER-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 2475

 Algorithm 1: Training Algorithm of ATUAD. Algorithm 2: Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT).
 Input: Training epochs N ; Sequence of training procedure POT(X1 , . . ., Xn ; q)
 windows Wtrain = {W1 , . . ., WT } θ ← SetInitialThreshold(X1 , . . ., Xn )
 Output: The trained model ATUAD Yθ ← {Xi − θ|Xi > θ} // Yθ is a set of peaks
 E, D1 , D2 ← Initialize weights γ̂, σ̂ ← Grimshaw(Yθ )
 n←1 zq ← CalcThreshold(q, γ̂, σ̂, n, Nθ , θ)
 do return zq , θ
 for t = 1 to T do end procedure
 Zt ← E(Wt ); Q1 ← D1 (Zt )
 Q2 ← D2 (Zt ); Q3 ← D2 (E(Q1 ))
 L1 ← n1 Wt − Q1 2 + (1 − n1 )Wt − Q3 2 Algorithm 3: POT-Based Dynamic Threshold Mechanism.
 L2 ← n1 Wt − Q2 2 − (1 − n1 )Wt − Q3 2 procedure PDT(X1 , . . ., Xn , Xn+1 , . . ., Xm ; q)
 E, D1 , D2 ← Update weights using L1 , L2 Yθ ← ∅; TH ← ∅
 end for zq , θ ← P OT (X1 , . . ., Xn ; q)
 n←n+1 u←n
 while n < N for n < i ≤ m do
 if Xi > θ then
 Y i ← Xi − θ
adversarial training of the transformer-based encoder–decoder Add Yi in Yθ
architecture enables ATUAD to learn how to magnify the re- Nθ ← Nθ + 1
construction error of input windows with anomalies and tend u←u+1
to achieve stability compared to GAN architectures, helping to γ̂, σ̂ ← Grimshaw(Yθ )
reduce the risks of overfitting and nonconvergence. zq ← CalcThreshold(q, γ̂, σ̂, u, Nθ , θ)
 else
 u←u+1
D. POT-Based Dynamic Threshold Mechanism end if
 Extreme value theory (EVT) is a statistical theory whose Add zq in TH
objective is to discover the laws of extreme events (e.g., the end for
law of daily temperature maxima) [21]. Such laws of extreme T h ← CalcAverage(TH)
events are also called Extreme Value Distributions. For most return T h
distributions, the probability decreases as the event approaches end procedure
an extreme value, i.e., P (X > x) → 0 as x increases. The function F (x) = P (X > x) designates the “tail” of the probability
distribution of X. It is possible to evaluate the probability of a Xi − θ, where Xi > θ. Algorithm 2 summarizes the POT appotential extreme event by fitting the extreme value distribution proach to determine the threshold zq .
to the tail of the input distribution. In particular, given a probabil- SPOT [21] is a streaming anomaly detection method that
ity q, we can calculate a threshold zq such that P (X > zq ) < q. applies the POT model and dynamic thresholds to detect anoma-
 One way to fit the tail of the distribution is the peak-over- lies in streaming data (Xi )i>0 . The threshold updates of SPOT
threshold (POT) approach, also called the second theorem in only deal with the peak cases without considering the anomaly
EVT [21]. The basic idea of POT is to fit the tail of the probability cases. The small peak set will make the model more variable
distribution using the generalized Pareto distribution (GPD), as (high variance). Inspired by the dynamic updating of thresholds
shown in the following: in SPOT, we develop a PDT, which omits the anomaly detec-
  − γ1 tion process in SPOT and brings the anomaly cases into the
 γx scope of threshold updates to obtain a precise threshold that
 F θ (x) = P (X − θ > x|X > θ) ∼ 1+ . (14)
 σ(θ) could effectively distinguish the actual anomalies from benign
 samples. Initially, we conduct the POT approach on the first n
Equation (14) shows that the excess over an initial threshold θ, observations to reach initial thresholds zq and θ. Then, we update
written as X − θ, satisfies the GPD with a shape parameter γ zq based on the magnitude between the next observed values and
and a scale parameter σ. After obtaining estimates γ̂ and σ̂ by θ. If a value exceeds θ, we will include the corresponding peak
maximum likelihood estimate and Grimshaw method [22], the in the peak set and update zq . Finally, we add all the thresholds
threshold zq can be calculated through the following equation: zq to the threshold set and treat the mean as the global threshold.
    Algorithm 3 describes the PDT mechanism.
 −γ̂
 σ̂ qn
 zq ≃ θ + −1 (15)
 γ̂ Nθ
 E. Anomaly Inference
where the risk value q is the given probability. n denotes the Anomaly detection: The preprocessed test data are fed into
number of observations X1 , . . ., Xn . Nθ is the number of peaks the trained ATUAD model for anomaly detection. The anomaly
2476 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

detection process also executes two phases and finally obtains Algorithm 4: Detection Algorithm of ATUAD.
a pair of outputs (Q̂1 , Q̂3 ). As a new testing window (say Ŵt ) Input: The trained model; risk value q; Sequence of
arrives, the model calculates its anomaly score as follows: training windows Wtrain = {W1 , . . ., WT }; Sequence
 1 1 of testing windows Ŵtest = {Ŵ1 , . . ., ŴT̂ }
 ŝt = Ŵt − Q̂1 2 + Ŵt − Q̂3 2 (16)
 2 2 Output: Labels y = {y1 , . . ., yT̂ }
 for t = 1 to T do
where ŝt ∈ RL×k contains the anomaly score of each dimension
 Q1 ← D1 (E(Wt )); Q3 ← D2 (E(Q1 ))
at each timestamp in the test window. We use the proposed
 st ← 21 Wt − Q1 2 + 21 Wt − Q3 2
PDT mechanism to learn the global threshold Th of the anomaly
 end for
scores
 for t = 1 to T̂ do
 Th = PDT(s1 , . . ., sT , ŝ1 , . . ., ŝT̂ ; q) (17) Q̂1 ← D1 (E(Ŵt )); Q̂3 ← D2 (E(Q̂1 ))
 ŝt ← 21 Ŵt − Q̂1 2 + 21 Ŵt − Q̂3 2
where {s1 , . . ., sT } is the set of anomaly scores of the training
 end for
windows, which is used in the POT step in Algorithm 3 to obtain
 T h ← P DT (s1 , . . ., sT , ŝ1 , . . ., ŝT̂ ; q)
the initial threshold zq . ŝ1 , . . ., ŝT̂ is the set of anomaly scores of
the testing windows, which is used to obtain the global threshold for t = 1 to T̂ do
T h in Algorithm 3. Since the POT algorithm requires the first if ŝt > T h then
input to be a univariate sequence, we transform st (t = 1, . . ., T ) yt ← 1; ΔŴ ← Ŵt − Q̂3 
or ŝt (t = 1, . . ., T̂ ) into a scalar representing the mean of the for i = 1 to k do
anomaly scores of the tth time window. If the score of the test thi ← P OT (ΔŴ i , q)
window Ŵt is higher than the global threshold, the window will if ΔŴli > thi then
be declared as anomalous, i.e., yt = 1. sensor i is abnormal at time l
 Anomaly diagnosis: To pinpoint the specific sensors leading end for
to anomalies, we calculate the residual matrix of the abnormal else
testing window and its reconstruction window yt ← 0
 end for
 ΔŴ = Ŵt − Q̂3 . (18) return y = {y1 , . . ., yT̂ }
For each dimension ΔŴ i = {ΔŴ1i , . . ., ΔŴLi } (ΔŴ i ∈
RL , i = 1, . . ., k) in the residual matrix, the local threshold is TABLE I
 DATASET INFORMATION
calculated by using the POT algorithm
 thi = POT(ΔŴ i , q). (19)
It indicates that the sensor i has caused abnormal data at timestamp l if there is a difference ΔŴli in ΔŴ i higher than the
local threshold thi . A longer sequence of consecutive scores in
ΔŴ i higher than the local threshold indicates a longer anomaly
duration and a higher anomaly severity level. Algorithm 4
summarizes the anomaly detection and diagnosis process of the set the window size to ten frames with a batch size of 128. The
ATUAD model. number of heads in multihead attention is consistent with the
 dimensionality of the dataset. We utilize the dropout strategy
 IV. EXPERIMENTS to prevent overfitting with a dropout rate of 0.1. In addition, we
A. Experimental Setup train the models using the AdamW optimizer with a corresponding learning rate for each dataset. Compared with Adam, the
 Datasets: The datasets adopted in the experiment include
 weight decay of AdamW achieves decoupling and better results.
MIT-BIH Supraventricular Arrhythmia Dataset (MBA) [24],
 Table II shows the hyperparameters used in our ATUAD model.
Soil Moisture Active Passive Dataset (SMAP) [25], Secure Wa-
 Table III gives the hyperparameters of baselines used in our
ter Treatment Dataset (SWaT) [27], Water Distribution Dataset
 experiment.
(WADI) [28], Mars Science Laboratory Dataset (MSL) [26],
and Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [16], which are commonly
 B. Performance Analysis
used in multivariate anomaly detection. I summarizes the characteristics of each dataset. We abandon Yahoo and Numenta Anomaly detection results comparing with baselines: To
datasets due to the flaws, such as mislabeled ground truth and demonstrate the anomaly detection performance, we comrun-to-failure bias reported in [23]. pared our model with six state-of-the-art methods, namely,
 Training setting: We train all models employing PyTorch- MSCRED [15], OmniAnomaly [16], DAGMM [18], MAD-
1.8.0 on a Ubuntu 18.04 system with configuration RTX 4090 GAN [17], USAD [11], and TranAD [14]. Table IV shows the
GPU. Our model has one transformer encoder layer and two results of all models on six datasets. From Table IV, we can
transformer decoder layers. For time series reconstructing, we conclude that, except for the SWaT dataset, our ATUAD achieves
YU et al.: ADVERSARIAL TRANSFORMER-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 2477

 TABLE II MSCRED [15] and OmniAnomaly [16] take as input the
 HYPERPARAMETERS OF OUR MODEL
 observation sequences and consider LSTM or GRU recurrent
 neural networks to capture the temporal information in the
 sequential observations, achieving high F1 scores on MBA and
 MSL. However, such methods identify anomalies merely by
 reconstructing, thus failing to detect slight outliers closer to normal data in datasets like SMD. Our ATUAD utilizes adversarial
 training to boost the deviation and has a high detection sensitivity
 for anomalous data with mild anomalies.
 MAD-GAN [17] adopts adversarial training to reconstruct the
 original time series, so it performs better than MSCRED on the
 SMD dataset with mild anomalies. Nevertheless, MAD-GAN
 also uses RNNs as the basic framework, which restricts the
 modeling capability over the long-term sequence. Our ATUAD
 applies the powerful multihead attention mechanism to learn
 the sequence features in a parallel fashion, achieving swift calculation efficiency and the capability of capturing long-distance
 context information.
 USAD [11] uses an autoencoder framework with an adversarial style to achieve 94.95% and 94.47% F1 scores on SMD and
 MBA, respectively, but performs mediocrely on other datasets,
 especially on the high-dimensional and unbalanced datasets,
 such as WADI. This is because USAD simply uses linear
 transformations to encode and decode the data, which speeds
 up the training but neglects the temporal correlation within the
 multivariate time-series data.
 TranAD [14] extracts multimodal features leveraging fo-
Fig. 3. Average performance of all models. cus score-based self-conditioning and gains stability using
 adversarial training. It outperforms other models on SWaT and
 SMD. However, the F1 score of TranAD on the WADI dataset
 is 49.51%, which is lower than the F1 score of 59.16% achieved
better F1 scores than other methods across all datasets. USAD by our ATUAD. This improvement can be attributed to the
realizes the best F1 score on the SWaT dataset, and the F1 score input window and adversarial training. The input windows fed
of our model is close to that of USAD. Furthermore, the perfor- into ATUAD contain richer temporal information than that of
mance of our ATUAD is improved on most datasets, especially TranAD, facilitating the learning of time series features. Specifon the WADI dataset, with an improvement of approximately ically, ATUAD takes as input the data of a complete batch of time
9% and 10% in P and F 1 compared to the optimal baseline, windows to its decoders for aiding temporal attention, while just
respectively. Fig. 3 portrays the average performance of all one local contextual window is fed into the TranAD’s Window
models on six datasets. As shown in Fig. 3, the average precision Encoder. In addition, ATUAD conducts adversarial training
(P ∗ ) and the average F1 score (F 1∗ ) of our ATUAD exceed using the reconstruction of the input directly instead of a sparse
those of other models. Specifically, our ATUAD achieves an focus score matrix used in TranAD. Therefore, our ATUAD
improvement of up to 2.47% in P ∗ and 2.19% in F 1∗ compared has an advantage in obtaining the temporal trend of long-term
to the optimal baseline, but the average recall (R∗ ) is 1.23% sequences and achieves better results even on high-dimensional
lower than that of DAGMM. and unbalanced datasets.
 DAGMM [18] reaches high performance on short datasets like Root cause identification results: To further analyze the ef-
MBA and SMAP. However, DAGMM performs poorly on large fectiveness of ATUAD, Fig. 4 presents a case study of anomaly
sequence datasets, such as WADI, since it ignores the inherent diagnosis in the SMD dataset. In Fig. 4(a), the red dashed
temporal dependence in multivariate time series. The temporal line represents the global threshold, and the areas highlighted
dependence is paramount for the time-series data since the by blue rectangles portray the anomalous fragments in SMD.
observations are dependent. Therefore, the temporal information ATUAD declares the sequences with anomaly scores exceeding
in historical data is essential for reconstructing or predicting the the threshold as abnormal sequences. As depicted in Fig. 4(a),
time series. In our ATUAD, the multivariate time-series data are multitudinous abnormal sequences in the SMD testing dataset
transformed into a sequence of windows to hold the temporal have scores higher than the threshold, which indicates that
information. Furthermore, ATUAD uses transformer blocks as ATUAD can pinpoint the actual positives with false positives
the feature extractor to model the serial data. Consequently, AT- that are not excessive.
UAD performs well on the longer sequence of high-dimensional The purple matrix in Fig. 4(b) represents the residual matrix
datasets. between the input sequence and the reconstructed sequence.
2478 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE III
 HYPERPARAMETERS OF BASELINES

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ALL MODELS

 The red rectangle represents the abnormal events detected by
 the model. Anomalous events refer to which indicators or
 dimensions of the detected entity are abnormal in which period.
 The longer red rectangle represents the longer duration of the
 abnormality of this indicator, which means higher severity level
 of the anomaly. In Fig. 4(b), the indicator d1 in the first residual
 matrix is abnormal at more than 30 consecutive timestamps.
 It is more likely to occur as a seriously anomalous event. The
 operator can quickly troubleshoot and fix the root cause of the
 abnormality based on this information.
 In the first anomaly area of the SMD testing dataset, the true
 anomaly root causes include seven dimensions of 1, 9, 10, and
 12–15, while the anomaly root causes detected by ATUAD are
 d1, d9, d10, d12–d15, and d23 dimensions. In the last anomaly
 region, the actual anomaly root causes contain four dimensions
 of 9, 13, 14, and 15, while the anomaly root causes detected by
 ATUAD are d9, d11, d12, d13, d14, d15, and d23 dimensions.
 This case indicates that ATUAD can pinpoint 57.10%–87.50%
 of root causes for anomalies.

 C. Ablation Studies
 Anomaly detection results comparing with model variants:
 To investigate the influence of each component on ATUAD,
Fig. 4. Case study of anomaly diagnosis. (a) Anomaly score. (b) Ab- we examine three variants of ATUAD. First, we study ATnormal windows. UAD without adversarial loss. We remove the adversarial
 training and only consider the reconstruction loss of phase
 1, i.e., L1 = W − Q1 2 + W − Q2 2 . Second, to verify the
YU et al.: ADVERSARIAL TRANSFORMER-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 2479

Fig. 5. Performance comparison between ATUAD and variant models. (a) F1-score. (b) AUC score.

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF TRAINING TIME ON ALL DATASETS AND PARAMETER SIZE ON WADI

effectiveness of the POT-based dynamic threshold mecha- all datasets. The decrease is more pronounced on the MSAP
nism, we replace it with the best-F-score threshold selection and MSL datasets, with a decrease of approximately 15% and
method [29]. Finally, we substitute the transformer networks 28% in the F1 score and approximately 13% and 7% in the AUC,
with feedforward networks for reconstruction to demonstrate respectively. These changes demonstrate that the attention-based
the necessity of a transformer-based structure for modeling transformer is more advantageous in identifying anomalies in
sequences. Fig. 5 draws the comparison results of ATUAD and large-scale datasets.
its variants in F1 score and AUC. From Fig. 5, we can report the
following conclusions.
 ATUAD_Adversarial: After removing the adversarial train- D. Overhead Analysis
ing, the variant’s performance has declined on most datasets, This section investigates the complexity of all models on
especially the WADI dataset, whose F1 score and AUC have de- the given datasets. For this purpose, we measure the average
creased by 26% and 12%, respectively. However, censoring the training time in seconds per epoch and model size (Params)
adversarial training generally has less impact on the performance and record them in Table V. In general, the three models with
of the other datasets, and even the SMD dataset exhibits a slight the shortest training time are TranAD, DAGMM, and ATUAD,
improvement in the F1 score and the AUC. These results reflect followed by USAD, while the remaining models have longer
that the adversarial training is more suitable for datasets with a training time, especially MSCRED. Next, we gradually analyze
large percentage of mild anomalies (e.g., the WADI dataset) by the reasons for this situation to clarify the effectiveness of our
amplifying errors to recognize them. ATUAD. The training times of MSCRED, OmniAnomaly, and
 ATUAD_POT: Replacing the POT-based dynamic threshold MAD-GAN are longer than those of TranAD and ATUAD
mechanism with the best-F-score method resulted in a decrease since the formers use recurrent neural networks for sequential
in the F1 score and AUC for most datasets, which suggests that processing while the later apply parallel computing. DAGMM
the anomaly detection model with POT can avoid more underre- and USAD consist of fully connected neural networks whose
porting and false alarms on the time-series datasets. The tiniest training times are generally shorter than those of MSCRED,
change is in the WADI dataset, where the F1 score decreased OmniAnomaly, and MAD-GAN while still higher than TranAD
from 59.16% to 20.27%, while the AUC increased slightly. The and ATUAD over the most datasets. This fully demonstrates the
most significant impact was observed on the SMAP and MSL advantage of using transformer blocks with position encoding
datasets, with a decrease of approximately 71% and 44% in for sequence modeling. ATUAD obtains a lower training time
the F1 score and AUC, respectively. Therefore, the POT-based while keeping a slightly higher parameter size than MSCRED,
dynamic threshold mechanism positively influences the model’s OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN, and USAD. This illustrates that
performance. our ATUAD can effectively accomplish the model training with
 ATUAD_Transformer: Substituting the transformer structure less calculation. Furthermore, ATUAD achieves a significantly
with a feedforward network, the variant model has an average lower parameter size while holding a slightly higher training
decrease of about 10% in the F1-score and 4% in the AUC on time than TranAD, which can be explained by the input size
2480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

of the whole model and its component. On the one hand, the [8] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veerainput size of the model affects the parameter size. Specifically, machaneni, “TADGaN: Time series anomaly detection using generative
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2020,
in one iteration, TranAD takes as input a complete batch of time pp. 33–43.
window sequences and a local contextual window, whereas our [9] L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Cui, “A multi-scale U-shaped attention network-
ATUAD only handles the complete batch of window sequences. based GaN method for single image dehazing,” Hum.-Centric Comput. Inf.
 Sci., vol. 11, no. 38, 2021, pp. 562–578.
As a result, our ATUAD has much fewer parameters (1.35 MB) [10] Z. Chen, D. Chen, Z. Yuan, X. Cheng, and X. Zhang, “Learning graph
than TransAD (5.16 MB). On the other hand, the input size of structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
the model’s component affects the training time. Concretely, our in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
 [11] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
ATUAD pushes the complete window sequences as the input “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
to its Decoder1 and Decoder2 for aiding temporal attention, Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
while just one local contextual window is fed into TranAD’s pp. 3395–3404.
 [12] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
Window Encoder. The outcome is that our ATUAD consumes time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
more training time while capturing more temporal information. pp. 11106–11115.
Consequently, the training efficiency and storage overhead of our [13] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst. 30, 2017, vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008.
ATUAD is competitive and acceptable compared to the related [14] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
baselines. networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Very
 Large Data Bases, vol. 15, pp. 1201–1214, 2022.
 [15] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detec-
 V. CONCLUSION tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1409–1416.
 Confront the multivariate time series with complex spatiotem- [16] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
poral correlations and the demand for swift anomaly detection detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
in modern applications, we construct ATUAD, an unsupervised Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
anomaly detection model based on adversarially trained trans- [17] D. Li, D. Chen, L. Shi, B. Jin, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-GaN: Multiformers. ATUAD uses a transformer-based encoder–decoder variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, vol. 11730,
framework to reconstruct data in parallel and applies adversarial pp. 703–716.
training to amplify the deviation of mild anomalies. Besides, [18] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupera POT-based dynamic threshold mechanism is utilized in AT- vised anomaly detection,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2018.
UAD to determine a threshold for identifying anomalies. Exten- [19] L. Xu et al., “TGAN-AD: Transformer-based GaN for anomaly detection
sive experiments on six public datasets demonstrated that AT- of time series data,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 16, pp. 8085–8102, 2022.
UAD outperforms most state-of-the-art baselines on evaluation [20] Y. Li, X.-J. Peng, J. Zhang, Z. Li, and M. Wen, “DCT-GaN: Dilated
 convolutional transformer-based GaN for time series anomaly detection,”
metrics. Despite ATUAD achieving competitive performance in IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3632–3644, Apr. 2023.
anomaly detection and training efficiency, centralized anomaly [21] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouët, “Anomaly detection
detection on time-series data in a cloud server may lead to in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM Knowl. Discov.
 Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
privacy breaches, limiting the model’s applicability in scenarios [22] S. D. Grimshaw, “Computing maximum likelihood estimates for the genwith high privacy protection requirements. Consequently, our eralized Pareto distribution,” Technometrics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 185–191,
future work will focus on introducing personalized federated 1993.
 [23] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
learning and cryptography into our model to make it suitable for are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
handling sensitive heterogeneous data. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 [24] G. B. Moody and R. G. Mark, “The impact of the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45–50,
 REFERENCES May/Jun. 2001.
 [25] P. E. O’neill, D. Entekhabi, E. G. Njoku, and K. H. Kellogg, “The NASA
 [1] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced
 Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) mission: Overview,” in Proc. 2010
 anomaly detection for industrial Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., 2010, pp. 3236–3239.
 vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021.
 [26] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söder-
 [2] Z. Jingyu, Z. Siqi, T. Wang, H. C. Chao, and J. Wang, “Blockchain-based
 ström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 systems and applications: A survey,” J. Internet Technol., vol. 21, no. 1,
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 pp. 1–14, 2020.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
 [3] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT time-series
 [27] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494,
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. 2016 Int. Workshop
 Jul. 2020.
 Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
 [4] C. Yin, S. Zhang, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Anomaly detection based
 [28] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
 on convolutional recurrent autoencoder for IoT time series,” IEEE Trans.
 testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
 Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2022.
 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
 [5] C. Chen, K. Li, S. G. Teo, X. Zou, K.-C. Li, and Z. Zeng, “Citywide traffic
 pp. 25–28.
 flow prediction based on multiple gated spatio-temporal convolutional
 [29] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An evaluation
 neural networks,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. From Data, vol. 14, no. 4,
 of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,” IEEE
 pp. 1–23, 2020.
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517, Jun. 2022.
 [6] D. Cao, Z. Chen, and L. Gao, “An improved object detection algorithm
 based on multi-scaled and deformable convolutional neural networks,”
 Hum.-Centric Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 10, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. 10.
 [7] A. Graves, A. R. Mohamed, and G. E. Hinton, “Speech recognition with
 deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.
 Speech Signal Process., 2013, pp. 6645–6649.