IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025 1285

 ALAD: A New Unsupervised Time Series Anomaly
 Detection Paradigm Based on Activation Learning
 Fengqian Ding , Bo Li, Xianye Ben , Senior Member, IEEE, Jia Zhao , and Hongchao Zhou

 Abstract—Time series anomaly detection has been received time series anomaly detection as the classic problem has been
growing interest in industrial and academic communities due to its widely studied by researchers, which has provided necessary
substantial theoretical value and practical significance in reality. technique guarantees for diversified application scenarios, such
Recent advanced methods for time series anomaly detection are
based on deep learning techniques, since they have shown their as industrial Internet, Internet of Things and distributed computsuperiority in some specific situations. However, most existing ing, etc [1], [2], [3]. Effective anomaly detection in time series
deep learning-based anomaly detection methods require prede- data can enhance the robustness, reliability, and performance of
fined, specific tasks of reconstruction or prediction, necessitating various systems and processes by providing insights into untask-specific loss functions. Designing such anomaly-aware loss derlying patterns and trends. This can inform decision-making,
functions poses a significant challenge due to the ambiguity in
defining ground-truth anomalies. Moreover, these methods of- optimize resource allocation, and lead to increased efficiency,
ten rely on complex network architectures that tend to lead to reduced costs, and improved overall functionality [4].
over-generalization, resulting in even abnormal data being well Time series anomaly detection is the process of identifying
reconstructed or fitted. To mitigate this situation, grounded in unusual, unexpected patterns or behaviors in time series data.
activation learning theory, we propose a novel unsupervised time It involves developing models that can automatically detect unseries anomaly detection paradigm termed ALAD. ALAD utilizes a
straightforward fully connected network architecture, measuring usual patterns or events in time series data, which may be caused
the typicality of input patterns through the sum of the squared by various factors such as errors in data collection, changes in the
output. Despite its simplicity, ALAD achieves competitive perfor- underlying system dynamics, or external disturbances. Most of
mance compared to state-of-the-art models trained using back- the existing advanced anomaly detection methods are based on
propagation. By utilizing various real-world and synthetic datasets, deep learning models, which typically adopt reconstruction or
experimental results have confirmed the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed paradigm. This work also demonstrates that forecasting-based models and perform anomaly detection based
biologically-plausible local learning can sometimes outperform on the deviation errors between real values and reconstruction
backpropagation in real-world scenarios. or forecasting results [5]. For reconstruction-based models, the
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, time series analysis,
 autoencoder architecture is usually applied. For instance, Kieu
biologically-plausible learning, unsupervised learning. et al. [6] proposed an RNN-based autoencoder framework for
 time series anomaly detection, since recurrent neural network
 had been shown to be effective for time series modeling. Li et
 I. INTRODUCTION al. [7] present a temporal convolutional network autoencoder,
 ITH the rapid developing of modern technologies, data and performed anomaly detection based on the reconstruction
W from various fields such as finance, economics and finance are recorded as time series data, and thus there is a growing
 error. For forecasting-based models, Deng et al. [8] applied a
 graph neural network as the predictor, and used the deviation
interest in modeling and exploring time series data. Wherein, between the predicted value and the true value as the anomaly
 criterion. Wu et al. [9] proposed a long short-term memory
 (LSTM) based anomaly detection method, which was built
 Received 23 May 2023; revised 13 July 2024; accepted 22 August 2024.
Date of publication 3 September 2024; date of current version 15 May 2025. on normal time series and detected anomalies by utilizing the
This work was supported in part by the the National Key Research and De- predictive error for the Gaussian Naive Bayes model.
velopment Program of China under Grant 2021YFB2800300, in part by the Although these deep learning-based models have shown their
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62322111 and
Grant 62271289, in part by the Natural Science Fund for Outstanding Young superiority in some specific situations, they inherently suffer
Scholars of Shandong Province under Grant ZR2022YQ60, in part by the from the limitations associated with the following technique-
Research Fund for the Taishan Scholar Project of Shandong Province under specific challenges. First, these methods generally assume the
Grant tsqn202306064, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program
under Grant JCYJ20230807094000001, in part by Jinan “20 Terms of New models will fail to reconstruct or forecast the anomalous sam-
Universities” Funding Project under Grant 202333035, and in part by the Fun- ples, since they are trained only using normal samples. However,
damental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2022JC017. this assumption does not always holds in time series data, since
Recommended for acceptance by S. Ma. (Corresponding authors: Hongchao
Zhou; Xianye Ben.) these methods mainly focus on the quality of reconstruction
 The authors are with the School of Information Science and Engineering, or forecasting. This may leads to an over-generalization [10]
Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China (e-mail: wygtsmile1020 of model, thus it would cause even abnormal data to be well
@gmail.com; 202212656@sdu.edu.cn; benxianye@gmail.com; zhaojia
@sdu.edu.cn; hongchao@sdu.edu.cn). reconstructed or fitted [11]. Second, these tailored anomaly
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBDATA.2024.3453762 detection models are typically more complicated than the

 2332-7790 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

conventional neural network models. Furthermore, the core is the first biologically plausible algorithm trained neural
algorithm for training deep learning-based anomaly detection network for time series anomaly detection to the best of
methods is backpropagation (BP), which requires predefining a our knowledge.
task-specsific loss function between the outputs of network and r ALAD dose not rely on BP training, complicated network
expectations. However, designing anomaly-aware loss functions structures, or tailored anomaly-aware learning objectives.
poses significant challenges due to the ambiguity of defining A simple fully connected network architecture and local
ground-truth anomalies [12]. Additionally, the training proce- learning rules are all that is needed to achieve competitive
dure for these elaborate models demands additional resources for anomaly detection performance.
gradient computations and storage, which limits their applicabil- r By utilizing various synthetic and real-world time series
ity in resource-limited scenarios. Third, the training data from anomaly datasets, experimental results have illustrated the
real-world sources are often unbalanced with limited labeled effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed paradigm.
anomalies, and most of them exhibit diverse or even unseen More importantly, this work has also demonstrated that
patterns that are not known as a priori. Due to these constraints, biologically plausible algorithm trained models can outhow to develop a new paradigm for time series anomaly detection perform BP in certain scenarios.
is still an open problem. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
 In this work, we address the challenging problems of time presents the related work, including the anomaly detection in
series anomaly detection by developing a simple yet promis- time series and Hebbian learning. Section III covers the prelimiing architecture termed ALAD (Activation Learning based nary work. Section IV introduces the framework of the proposed
Anomaly Detection). It does not rely on complicated network method. The experimental results and discussion are given in
architectures or any additional mechanisms, such as contrastive Section V, followed by the conclusion and future work.
learning [13], [14] or adversarial learning [15], yet can achieve
promising unsupervised time series anomaly detection per- II. RELATED WORK
formance simply by a fully connected network architecture.
ALAD is built upon the core of activation learning [16], a A. Anomaly Detection in Time Series
new learning paradigm we have recently proposed for neural Anomaly detection in time series is an emerging topic in data
networks training. Quiet different from BP, activation learning mining and machine learning communities. Various anomaly
relies on an improved Hebbian learning rules [17] to induce detection methods have been proposed and shown their superilocal competition among neurons for network training, thus it ority in some specific situations, which mainly can be divided
does not require predefining a task-specific loss function or any into statistical-based methods, machine learning-based methods
feedback of error signals. As a result, it can not only facilitate and deep learning-based methods.
eliminating the burden of designing complicated anomaly-aware 1) Statistical-based Methods: Statistical-based methods genlearning objectives, but also achieve neural networks train- erally utilize traditional statistical algorithms to identify anomaing with biological plausibility and computational efficiencies. lies. For example, Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
More importantly, in activation learning, common input patterns (ARIMA) is one of the widely used tools to analyze time series
can be learned more and activated more. The output activation data, a series of ARIMA-based methods have been proposed to
value can reflect the relative typicality of the data in the whole exploit the temporal pattern of time series data and perform
data set. In time series anomaly detection, the aim is to mine anomaly detection [18]. Additionally, methods that rely on
anomalous temporal patterns, i.e., patterns that rarely or never statistical distribution assumptions and those based on distance
occur. Correspondingly, the mechanism of activation learning measurements are also prevalent, offering different approaches
facilitates the intuitive understanding of anomalies based on the to identifying deviations from normal patterns [19], [20]. Howactivation values, thus it motivates us to apply activation learning ever, real-world time series data generally exhibit volatile charto time series anomaly detection. acteristics due to various internal/external factors, and these
 The proposed method shows advantages from both theoretical classical methods intrinsically lack the capability of capturing
and practical perspectives. Theoretically, it does not rely on the temporal dependencies among time series data [21].
BP or task-specific loss functions and provides an intuitive and 2) Machine Learning-based Methods: Machine learningeffective way to interpret detected anomalies based on activation based methods apply modern techniques to detect anomalies.
values, offering a solution for designing novel anomaly detec- For instance, Isolation Forest (IF) [22] relies on an ensemble of
tion models. Practically, our approach establishes criteria for isolation trees, which recursively randomly partitions the dataset
identifying anomalies based on statistical distribution, avoiding to find isolated anomalies. Local Outlier Factor (LOF) [23] is
the ambiguity of manually defined anomalies. Additionally, our a density-based anomaly detection algorithm, which performs
method employs a simple network architecture and updates anomaly detection by judging on the density between data points
parameters via forward propagation, requiring less storage for with their neighbors. Ji et al. [24] developed a hybrid model
intermediate results, making it more efficient and suitable for that projected multivariate time series into a lower-dimensional
various practical applications. Overall, the main contributions space to facilitate anomaly detection. Hu et al. [25] introduced
of this work can be summarized as follows: a computational framework for identifying discords in multir A new unsupervised time series anomaly detection variate time series using a recurrence plot analysis, alongside a
 paradigm based on activation learning is proposed. This strategy for efficient pairwise distance comparisons.
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1287

 3) Deep Learning-based Methods: Nowadays, a series of reconstruction probabilities to identify anomalies. Li et al. [38]
studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of deep learning- introduced a prototype-oriented unsupervised anomaly detecbased methods in time series anomaly detection [26]. Gen- tion method for multivariate time series, enhancing adaptabilerally, deep learning-based methods are divided into two ity through a probabilistic framework that utilizes transferable
categories: forecasting-based and reconstruction-based meth- prototypes. These methods amplify reconstruction errors or use
ods [27]. Forecasting-based methods perform anomaly detec- robust representations to identify anomalies, showcasing the
tion based on deviations between predicted results and actual adaptability of unsupervised approaches in handling complex
values, typically using models based on LSTM [28], TCN [7], datasets.
and Transformer [29]. Reconstruction-based methods typi- Compared to existing unsupervised methods, ALAD demoncally employ autoencoders (AE) [30], variational autoencoders strates several advantages. It leverages activation learning to uti-
(VAE) [31], and their variants [32] to learn latent representations lize the global information of the dataset for estimating statistical
from normal data. These methods conduct anomaly detection aspects of time series patterns, offering an intuitive interpreby comparing reconstruction errors between the reconstructed tation of anomalies based on activation values. This approach
and actual samples, operating under the assumption that the eliminates the need for predefined task-specific loss functions
models would fail to accurately reconstruct unseen abnormal and reduces resource usage by avoiding gradient computations
samples. However, these assumptions do not always hold. For and storage. Furthermore, by not relying on backpropagation,
instance, these models often rely on complicated architectures ALAD aligns more closely with biologically plausible models
and focus predominantly on reconstruction or prediction quality, of learning, providing a more efficient and scalable alternative
potentially causing even abnormal data to be well reconstructed in real-world settings.
or fitted due to ignored inconsistencies in latent representations.
Moreover, the fundamental algorithm for training these deep C. Hebbian Learning
learning-based methods is BP, which not only requires prede-
 Hebbian learning is a biologically plausible and ecologically
fined loss functions for error propagation but also demands addivalid learning mechanism, which follows the principle of ‘units
tional resources for gradient computations and storage. Overall,
 that fire together, wire together’ [39]. In the literature, there
there remains an open need for designing more innovative soluare several researchers have attempted to develop Hebbian-like
tions to expand the application scenarios of time series anomaly
 mechanisms for training neural networks and as an alternative
detection.
 to BP, since it can address the biological implausibility of BP
 while not require any feedback of error signal, thus mitigated the
B. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection Methods computational inefficiencies in BP. Hebbian learning is used for
 neural network training by changing the strength of the synapses
 In the landscape of anomaly detection, supervised and unbetween neurons, i.e., the connection weights. Formally, given
supervised methods are widely utilized. Supervised anomaly
 a synapse of weight wij connecting neuron ai in layer l and
detection relies on labeled datasets to train models that can
 neuron aj in layer l + 1, the rule of vanilla Hebbian learning
distinguish between normal and anomalous patterns. In contrast,
 can be defined by
unsupervised anomaly detection methods do not require labeled
data, focusing instead on learning the normal patterns from the l
 Δwij = ηali al+1
 j , (1)
data and identifying deviations as anomalies. This lack of dependence on labeled data makes unsupervised methods particularly where ali and al+1
 j denote the activation values of pre-synaptic
significant, as they are more adaptable to a variety of real-world neuron and post-synaptic neuron, respectively, and η is the
applications where labeling is impractical or impossible [33]. learning rate. The core idea of Hebbian learning is that con-
 Unsupervised anomaly detection methods generally leverage nection weight wij should be associated with both pre-synaptic
various architectures, including autoencoders, graph neural net- and post-synaptic neurons. When both of the two neurons are
works, and Transformers, to detect anomalies by learning normal activated at the same time, the connection weight between them
data patterns and identifying deviations without the need for la- should be strengthened, while when the two neurons are in
beled data [34]. For example, Unsupervised Anomaly Detection opposite states, the connection weight should be weakened.
(USAD) [35] adopts an autoencoder architecture within an ad- Recently, motivated by Hebbian learning rules, Krotov and
versarial training framework, which amplifies the reconstruction Hopfiled [40] proposed a learning algorithm for training neural
error of anomalies and contributes to anomaly detection. Graph network, which leveraged the global inhibition in hidden layers
Deviation Network (GDN) [8] combines a structure learning and was capable of learning lower-layer early representations
module with a graph neural network and uses forecasting devia- that facilitated the training of high-layer weights with a regular
tions as anomaly scores. TranAD [36], a state-of-the-art anomaly backpropagation algorithm on various tasks. HebbNet [41] was
detection method, is based on the Transformer architecture and an improved Hebbian learning based neural network, which
uses a Transformer encoder and self-conditioning mechanism applied an activation threshold and gradient sparsity into the
to achieve representation learning and perform anomaly de- Hebbian learning rules. Similar to the training procedure detection. OmniAnomaly [37] learns robust representations from signed by Krotov and Hopfiled, the first layer weights in Hebbtime series using a stochastic recurrent neural network, recon- Net were learnt in an unsupervised manner by the proposed
structs the input data from these representations, and uses the Hebbian learning rules, and the weights between hidden and
1288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

output layer were learnt by BP. HebbNet achieved comparable where C = E{xxT } is the covariance matrix of inputs. For
performance to Krotov and Hopfiled, while simplifying the train- the number of receiving neurons m = 1, there are two stable
ing procedure. SoftHebb [42] combined a soft winner-takes-all solutions of w, corresponding to v and −v, where v is the
strategy with Hebbian learning rule to minimize cross-entropy, eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of C. For
which was proved to be capable of increasing learning speed m > 1, there are infinite number of stable solutions, and the
and higher robustness to noise and adversarial attacks. Grounded specific stable solution depends on the initial value of weight
on SoftHebb, Adrien et al. [43] presented multilayer SoftHebb, and the training samples.
which achieved depth in Hebbian learning and was verified to
realize promising performance on difficult tasks with relatively B. Problem Statement
high efficiency.
 However, there are very few attempts to further improve the Given a time series data S = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } with length
effectiveness of Hebbian learning in training neural networks. T , each point xt is collected at a specific timestamp t. For
Besides, existing approaches only adopt Hebbian learning-based time series anomaly detection, historical data are beneficial
methods to solve image classification tasks while not applying to understand the contextual relationships of an observation
Hebbian learning to other specific scenarios. Thus, the potential xt . Therefore, like most methods [35], [37], a lookback winof Hebbian learning-based methods has been underestimated. In dow with size n is applied to convert time series data into
this work, we proposed a Hebbian learning-improved method for a sequences of sliding windows, and each window is used to
time series anomaly detection, which broadens the applications calculate the anomaly result, rather than just xt . At a time step
scenarios of Hebbian learning algorithms and also demonstrates t, the input time series data in window Xt can be represented
that biologically plausible algorithm trained models can outper- as Xt = [xt−n+1 , xt−n+2 , . . . , xt ]T . The task of time series
form BP in certain scenarios. anomaly detection is to assign a binary label yt ∈ {0, 1} to
 indicate whether timestamp t is anomalous or not.
 III. PRELIMINARIES
 IV. METHOD
A. Activation Learning Rules
 In this section, we first introduce how activation values are
 In the vanailla Hebbain learning, the rule in (1) is not stable utilized for anomaly detection. Subsequently, we detail the
since the weights may grow unboundedly. A series of modified network architecture that we have adopted. Finally, we describe
rules have been proposed to improve Hebbian learning in terms the manner of training and inference.
of convergence, which typically introduce additional constraints
or restrictions [17], [44], but this reduces the biological plausi-
 A. Activation Value for Input Typicality Estimation
bility. Moreover, such rules are used to train a single neuron
and are not applicable to the training of multiple neurons in Given a layer trained by the above learning rule (2), if the
a layer. Therefore, by introducing a competition mechanism input strength of al 2 is fixed, a more common input pattern
within neurons and among neurons into Hebbian learning, we will induce a higher activation al+1 2 , which means that the
develop the activation learning rule in [16], which can work with output strength of activation can be used to estimate the typicality
the training of multiple neurons in a layer: of the input pattern, i.e., how probable the input pattern is. To
   further explain the phenomenon, assume that the number of
  receiving neurons in next layer m is smaller than the input
 l l+1 l l+1 l
 Δwij = ηaj ai − ak wik . (2) dimension and V represents the vector space spanned from
 k the eigenvectors v1 , v2 , . . ., vm . Wherein, V is called typical
  space, which is a convex and compact area shaped by multiple
In the learning rule, al+1j = r alr wrj l
 denotes the result of layers, and it contains majority of the common inputs, thus the
feedforward  propagation to neuron j from the previous layer. distance between it and a input sample can be used to measure
The term k al+1 l
 k wik represents the internal feedback from the typicality of the input. Fig. 1 visually demonstrates how the
all the neurons in layer l + 1, which forces the neurons in output activation values are used to measure the typicality of the
layer l + 1 to compete with neuron j to fire. To understand this time series patterns.
phenomenon, assuming that al+1 j , ak
 l+1 l
 and wik are all positive Given the input vector of a layer al , the distance between it
 l+1
variables, and if ak is activated, then the connection weight and the typical space can be expressed as
 l+1
wij is weakened by a strength of ηal+1 l+1 l
 j ak wik . After iterative 
training, certain weights tend to activate more for specific input 
 l
 d(a , V ) = al 2 − alT vi 2 . (4)
patterns. This mechanism we call local competition, since it
 i
raises local competitions within and among neurons.
 The weight matrix w of each layer can converge to an asymp- More importantly, from the stable solutions described in [16],
totically stable solution after a sufficient number of training steps it is derived that the squared norm of the output activation,
by learning rule (2), which takes the form of al+1 2 , tends to be upper bounded by

 Cw − wwT Cw = 0, (3) al 2 − d2 (al , V ). (5)
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1289

 As mentioned previously, the output of a layer trained by the
 learning rule (2) is prone to generating higher activation value
 on a more probable pattern. In order to output a scalar value
 for evaluating directly whether the input pattern is abnormal or
 not, an output activation layer is deployed on the top of ALAD,
 which performs  · 22 operation on the output of the last hidden
 layer.
 By employing multiple layers with specific nonlinear activation functions, ALAD constructs a compact typical space
 that effectively captures the probability distribution of input
 patterns. In time series anomaly detection, this is crucial because
Fig. 1. The output activation measures the typicality of the time series pattern, anomalous patterns often have a low probability of occurrence or
and anomalous patterns will be far from the typical space, leading to smaller may not appear in the training dataset at all. During the training
activation values.
 phase, this approach ensures that anomalous patterns are situated
 far from the typical space, resulting in smaller activation values.
 These values serve as a critical metric for identifying anomalies,
In particular, when w = [v1 , v2 , . . ., vm ], al+1 2 converges as they signify substantial deviations from expected patterns.
to al 2 − d2 (al , V ). Consequently, when the magnitude of the ALAD enhances anomaly detection by leveraging activation
input al 2 is fixed, the output activation al+1 2 can be used to learning to effectively utilize global dataset information, facilmeasure the distance between the input al and the typical space itating intuitive interpretations of anomalies through activation
V . It should be noted that although only the case that m is less values and statistical insights, thereby alleviating the ambiguthan the input dimension is discussed, the above conclusion still ity in defining ground-truth anomalies. The method employs
holds for generic m. a simple network architecture, consisting of just a few fully
 Overall, the aforementioned useful insights in activation connected layers, and it does not require the definition of a
learning motivate us to apply it to time series anomaly detection. global task-specific loss function, thereby minimizing resource
Specifically, in realistic time series data, anomalous patterns demands such as gradient computations and storage. Additiongenerally rarely or never occur, which causes difficulties in ally, its simplified structure also enables potential integrations
establishing anomaly rules manually. Fortuitously, the mech- with advanced deep learning models, offering opportunities for
anism of activation learning is capable of leveraging the global model initialization and combining with pretrained models.
information of the dataset to estimate the statistical aspects of the
time series patterns, and it further provides an intuitive way to
interpret the detected anomalies based on the activation values. C. Model Training
 Activation learning adopts local Hebbian learning rules to
B. Network Architecture update the synaptic weights. Therefore, the training of ALAD
 with a multi-layer network structure is conducted in a bottom-up
 In this subsection, the designed network architecture is preunsupervised manner. The training process of ALAD is sumsented. To incorporate the mechanism of activation learning,
 marized in Algorithm 1. Specifically, the weight matrix of the
we design a simple but tailored architecture based on a fully
 network is first initialized from a normal distribution with zero
connected network, as shown in Fig. 2.
 mean and small variance. Then, input data is normalized to unit
 Specifically, the original time series data are first transformed
 vector before being fed into the network. Subsequently, forward
into sliding windows for keeping the contextual relationships,
 propagation is performed and the weight matrixes are trained
and then fed into the ALAD. In the bottom-up network structure
 layer by layer by learning rule. This process is repeated until the
of ALAD, the sliding windows are first fed to a norm layer,
 specified epochs.
which transforms the input data into a unit vector to fix the input
 The above training method can also be applied to batch-wise
magnitude. Then, following is a fully connected network with
 training manner. Specifically, in each training epoch, the training
multiple hidden layers. In order to cascade multiple layers in a
 samples are divided into multiple mini-batches fed into the
network, the input and output magnitudes of each layer need to
 network for training the weights through feedforward and local
be maintained consistent to control the activation output, i.e.,
 feedback, such that the weights of the multi-layer network can
x2 = f (x)2 . Therefore, the following form of nonlinear
 be updated layer by layer with each batch. Given a batch of
function is adopted here as the activation function
 samples, the learning rule (2) can be modified as
 f (x) = β(|x| − |x|), (6)  
 B
 η  l+1 
which serves to de-mean the absolute value of the input x, and l
 Δwij = aj(b) ali(b) − al+1 l
 k(b) wik , (7)
β is a coefficient used to rescale x2 = f (x)2 . It should B
 b=1 k
be noted that any nonlinear function that does not change the
magnitude of the input can be considered as a candidate for the where B denotes the batch size, b represents the index of samples
activation function. in a batch, and η is the learning rate.
1290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

Fig. 2. The framework of ALAD. The upper subfigure of the framework shows the sliding windowing of the original time series. The lower subfigure shows how
ALAD works and the network architecture details.

D. Anomaly Inference V. EXPERIMENTS

 The inference phase of ALAD is summaried in Algorithm 2. A. Datasets
During the inference phase, the data Xt in the sliding window is We use synthetic datasets and real-world datasets for the
fed into the trained model, and then being normalized to a unit performance evaluation of all the methods. The descriptions of
vector. Then, the output of the last hidden layer is obtained via these datasets are as follows:
layer by layer forward propagation. Subsequently, the activation Synthetic Datasets: We apply the synthesizing strategy
value of Xt is derived by  · 22 operation. In the mechanism of from [45] to inject anomalies into time series, which provide
activation learning, the more common patterns induce larger a general and unified synthetic criterion for generating various
activation values, while the rarer patterns induce smaller ac- anomalies from different applications. Wherein, 24 synthetic
tivation values, thus for intuitiveness, 1 − Act(Xt ) is used to univariate time series data are generated, which contain six types
indicate the anomaly score of input data. If the anomaly score of of anomalies covering point-wise and pattern-wise anomalies,
input data is greater than a certain threshold μ, it is anomalous, including global, contextual, shapelet, seasonal, trend and mixotherwise, it is normal. In this work, similar to [22], [23], ture anomalies. Specifically, the synthetic univariate time series
the threshold value is obtained through grid search. Notably, are generated with sinusoidal wave and each series has a length
our model’s output activation values reflect the distribution of of 2000. The first half of the data is used as training data and the
data patterns in the training set, enabling anomaly detection by rest is used as test data with different proportions of anomalies
identifying anomalously low activation values during testing. injected. Each type of anomalies is manipulated with different
Thus, in practical scenarios, even in the absence of anomaly ratio 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2.
samples, we can determine the threshold μ by setting it at various Real-World Datasets: We use four publicly available datasets
percentiles within normal data, such as the 95th percentile. This collected from real-world application scenarios. These include
threshold can be further adjusted based on the specific definition CPU usage data from an Amazon server (Service), real-time
of anomalies or prior knowledge relevant to the application traffic data from the Twin Cities Metro area in Minnesota
context. (Traffic) [46], internal bleeding data derived from arterial blood
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1291

 Algorithm 1: Algorithm for Training ALAD. Algorithm 2: Algorithm for Anomaly Inference.
 Input: The set of training data X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XT }, Input: The set of test data X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XT },
 learning rate η, epochs E. threshold μ.
 Output: L layers of trained weight matrixes Output: The label yt of Xt .
 ∗
 W1∗ , W2∗ , . . . , WL . 1: Load the trained model with weight matrixes
 1: Random initialize L layers of weight matrixes ∗
 W1∗ , W2∗ , . . . , WL .
 W1 , W2 , . . . , WL from a normal distribution of zero 2: for all t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 mean and small variance. 3: //normalize input
 2: while e < E do 4: A0 ← N orm(Xt )
 3: for all t = 1, 2, . . . , T do 5: for all l = 1, . . . , L do
 4: //normalize input 6: //forward pass
 5: A0 ← N orm(Xt ) 7: Al = f (Wl∗T Al−1 )
 6: for all l = 1, . . . , L do 8: end for
 7: //forward pass 9: //calculate the output activation of Xt
 8: Al = WlT Al−1 10: Act(Xt ) ← AL 22
 9: //use learning rule to train weights layer by layer 11: if (1 − Act(Xt )) > μ then
 10: ΔWl ← (Al−1 − Wl Al )ATl 12: yt =“Anomalous”
 11: Wl ← Wl − ηΔWl 13: else
 12: Al ← f (Al ) 14: yt =“Normal”
 13: end for 15: end if
 14: end for 16: end for
 15: e ← e + 1
 16: end while
 17: return W1∗ , W2∗ , . . . , WL ∗
 . 2 · P recision · Recall
 F 1 score = (10)
 P recision + Recall
 where T P is the True Positives, F P is the False Positives, and
pressure measurements in pigs (Bleeding) [47], and a subset F N is the False Negatives. In actual cases, anomalies typically
of the UCR dataset, which includes data from various natural last for a period of time and thus form a continuous segment of
sources [48]. The characteristics of real-world datasets are sum- anomalies. Therefore, we do not care about point-by-point evalmarized in Table II. uation, but use a point-adjust evaluation approach [51], which is
 widely used in the evaluation of anomaly detection tasks [36],
B. Experimental Settings [52]. Specifically, for a continuous segment of anomalies, if one
 of the observations from the ground truth is correctly identified,
 Comparison Methods. We make a comparative study then all anomalies in the segment are viewed to be correctly
of the proposed method with nine representative methods, detected, and observations outside the ground truth anomaly
including IF [22], LOF [23], AE [30], USAD [35], DAGMM segment are treated as normal.
[49], GDN [8], TranAD [36], DCdetector [48] and Anomaly-
BERT [50]. For each comparison method, we use grid search to
 C. Experimental Results on Real-World Datasets
select anomaly thresholds for different datasets separately.
 Datasets Configuration. To maintain consistency, all methods In this subsection, experiments on real-world datasets are
use a sliding window of size 5, with overlapping windows for conducted to evaluate the performance of ALAD. The experthe real dataset and non-overlapping windows for the synthetic imental results are shown in Table I, where three metrics are
dataset. For the real-world dataset, we use the same dataset divi- calculated, and P, R, F1 respectively represent the Precision,
sion proportion as [36]. For the synthetic dataset, all methods are Recall, F1 score. For these metrics, a higher value indicates a
trained on the unmanipulated data and tested on the manipulated better performance. Specifically, the best F1 scores are bolded,
data. and in particular, the average F1 scores are also provided for the
 Evaluation Metrics. To measure and evaluate the performance Traffic, Bleeding and UCR datasets.
of the proposed method, similar to previous studies [36], three From the experimental results, one can find that ALAD has
common metrics, Recall, Precision and F1 score are employed achieved competitive performance than comparison methods
to compare the performance of different models, these metrics on most datasets. In particularly, ALAD has realized the best
are derived: average F1 scores on Bleeding, Traffic and UCR datasets. Machine learning-based methods, like IF and LOF achieve worst
 TP performance, since they are both unsupervised methods that
 P recision = (8)
 TP + FP consider each instance as an individual, thus they are susceptible
 TP to noisy and perturbed data. USAD, DAGMM and TranAD
 Recall = (9) are recent representative reconstruction-based methods, they
 TP + FN
1292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

 TABLE I
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR ALAD WITH COMPARISON METHODS ON REAL-WORLD DATASETS

 TABLE II to various internal/external factors. Thus, normal observations
 REAL-WORLD DATASET STATISTICS
 would be easily mistaken detected by GDN and cause a false
 positive. DCdetector and AnomalyBERT are state-of-the-art
 methods that have achieved commendable results, but DCdetector’s reliance on dual attention contrastive learning may not
 adapt well to datasets where anomaly signatures are subtle and
 highly variable, leading to less effective anomaly discrimination. Similarly, AnomalyBERT’s dependency on self-supervised
 learning with predefined synthetic outliers can limit its ability to
 generalize across real-world datasets that exhibit highly diverse
 and unforeseen anomaly patterns. More importantly, real-world
 time series data are generally composed of a large of number
 of short-term behaviors with various temporal patterns. The
 more common patterns can be learned more and activated more,
 while the anomalous patterns that exhibit distinct characteristics
only use local window as input for reconstruction, and cannot cannot be activated, thus, in ALAD the global information of
fully utilize the global information of the entire dataset. More- dataset can be fully utilized.
over, reconstruction-based methods mainly focus on the quality In addition, from the experimental results, one can find that
of instance reconstruction, thus even abnormal data could be most methods achieve higher Recall but lower Precision. The
well reconstructed. Forecasting-based methods, like GDN, tries reason behind this is that realistic anomalous patterns gento predict the values based on historical data, and performs erally exhibit relatively distinct patterns, so that most methanomaly detection according to the forecasting errors. However, ods can handle the detection of most anomalies, thus achieve
real-world time series data are inherently unpredictable due high recall. However, time series data in realistic scenarios are
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1293

Fig. 3. Experimental results on synthetic datasets.

inevitably disturbed by high noises, uncertainties, etc. These trend anomalies when the window size is not appropriately set.
realistic sophisticated compositions would considerably affect Even though, ALAD still achieves better performance than the
the performance of detection precision. Even so, ALAD still other methods. The main reason for the promising performance
achieves competitive performance compared with the state-of- achieved by ALAD on synthetic data is that ALAD is trained on
the-arts. It should be noted that ALAD does not use BP, meaning the training set without injected anomalies, which is facilitated to
it does not rely on any anomaly-specific learning objectives, learn the normal patterns, thus the unseen abnormal patterns will
which makes the method more versatile for anomaly detection be reflected more timely and accurately during the evaluation
tasks. Additionally, ALAD employs a straightforward, fully phase.
connected network architecture without complex mechanisms,
suggesting significant potential for further enhancements.
 E. Case Study
 To show the performance of ALAD in capturing the anoma-
D. Experimental Results on Synthetic Datasets
 lous patterns of time series data intuitively, four cases of
 The experimental results on synthetic datasets are demon- visualization of anomaly detection results are shown in
strated in Fig. 3, where the F1 scores of each method in different Fig. 5. From the visualizations, one can see that ALAD achieves
ratios of anomalies are summarized. First, Fig. 3 demonstrates high precision and recall. ALAD aims at learning the statistical
that ALAD achieves better results than other comparison meth- distribution of the input patterns, and it is capable of generatods. In particular, ALAD exhibits a competitive performance in ing anomaly scores based on the rarity of patterns in training
detecting collective types of anomalies. To be specific, collective data, which means that ALAD dose not require the hypothesis
anomalies are defined as a collection of related data instances of pollution-free training set like existing reconstruction-based
that is anomalous with respect to the entire dataset [45]. Accord- methods, thus it has more practical significance. Moreover, it can
ingly, kinds of related data instances are fed into ALAD in the also be seen from the figures that ALAD raises different magniform of sliding windows, thus the contextual relationships can be tudes of anomaly scores according to the anomalous degree of
fully utilized for activation learning. In this way, compared with the input pattern, which is useful to distinguish the severity of
the anomalies caused by individual points, anomalous patterns anomalies in practical scenarios.
in a sequence of consecutive points are more likely to induce To visualize the statistical distribution of the samples learned
larger responses. In addition, it can also be found that collective by ALAD from an intuitive perspective, we add a hidden layer
trend anomalies are more challenging for ALAD. The reason with 3 nodes after the last hidden layer in the network structure,
behind this is that a norm layer is first applied in the structure which facilitates showing the distribution of different input
of ALAD, which may damage the performance for identifying patterns in 3D space. Specifically, ALAD is trained on the
1294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

Fig. 4. Hyperparameters analysis for (a) the number of units, (b) the number
of layers, and (c) the window size.

training set, then tested on a selected time series containing
anomalous data and the results of the last hidden layer are
visualized by projection into the 3D space. The results of the
visualization on the collective global, point global, Bleeding_1
and Bleeding_2 datasets are shown in Fig. 6, where each black
 Fig. 5. Four cases of visualization of anomaly detection results on (a) service,
point denotes a normal sample and each red point denotes an (b) bleeding_1, (c) collective global anomalies, and (d) collective seasonal
abnormal sample. From the visualization results, it can be seen anomalies.
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1295

Fig. 6. Four cases of visualization of the learned statistical distribution results for (a) collective global anomalies, (b) point global anomalies, (c) bleeding_1, and
(d) bleeding_2.

that the normal samples are concentrated on the arc, while the are kept unchanged. From the visualizations in Fig. 4, one can
abnormal samples are scattered in the interior of the arc. The observe that different combinations have varying effects on the
reason for this phenomenon is that, given a fixed strength of the model’s performance. Specifically, with an increase in hidden
input samples, normal samples usually have stronger activation units given a fixed depth, the F1 score of ALAD first increases
values, i.e., L2 norm, causing them to be scattered on arcs farther and then decreases. Similar observations can also be found in
from the center of the circle. The abnormal samples, in contrast, the analysis of the number of layers. This phenomenon can be
have lower activation values, so they are closer to the center of the attributed to the fact that smaller hidden units or fewer layers
arc. Consequently, the anomalous patterns are well distinguished result in a simpler network structure, thus the model is incapable
from the normal patterns. of learning effectively from data. Conversely, higher numbers of
 hidden units and layers may lead to a more complicated network
 structure, making the model susceptible to noise and harder to
F. Analysis of Hyperparameters optimize. The discussion on window size indicates that different
 The influences of three hyperparameters, i.e., the number of window sizes also have an impact on the experimental results.
layers, the number of units per layer, and the window size, This occurs because if the window size is set too large, it becomes
may impact performance. Therefore, the Traffic_1 and Traffic_2 difficult to capture subtle anomalies, whereas a window size that
datasets are used for analysis. Specifically, the number of units is too small may not effectively detect anomalies that manifest
discussed ranges from {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}, the number of layers over longer trends. Overall, since different time series data may
from 1 to 5, and the window sizes from {3, 5, 10, 15, 20}. When exhibit different temporal characteristics, the combination of
analyzing the effectiveness of one hyperparameter, the others hyperparameters suitable for one dataset may not be appropriate
1296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2025

for another, thus it is necessary to choose hyperparameters based [12] J. Zhao, F. Deng, J. Zhu, and J. Chen, “Searching density-increasing path
on empirical experience when applying ALAD to a specific to local density peaks for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Big Data, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1198–1209, Aug. 2023.
dataset. [13] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
 Dec. 2023.
 VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [14] M. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. Chu, Y. Hu, and B. Yin, “Self-supervised
 In this work, based on activation learning, a new unsupervised nodes-hyperedges embedding for heterogeneous information network
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1210–1224, Aug. 2023.
time series anomaly detection paradigm is proposed, which [15] X. Zhang, J. Mu, X. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zong, and Y. Li, “Deep anomaly
provides an intuitive and effective way to interpret detected detection with self-supervised learning and adversarial training,” Pattern
anomalies based on the activation values. Experimental results Recognit., vol. 121, 2022, Art. no. 108234.
 [16] H. Zhou, “Activation learning by local competitions,” 2022. [Online].
on various real-world and synthetic datasets confirm the promis- Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.13400
ing performance of the proposed method compared with the [17] K. D. Miller and D. J. MacKay, “The role of constraints in Hebbian
state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, this work has comple- learning,” Neural Computation, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 100–126, 1994.
 [18] X. Jin, Y. Sun, Z. Que, Y. Wang, and T. W. Chow, “Anomaly detection and
mented the activity of existing Hebbian-like methods, and also fault prognosis for bearings,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 65, no. 9,
demonstrated that biologically plausible algorithm can achieve pp. 2046–2054, Sep. 2016.
more promising performance than BP in certain scenarios. In [19] F. Angiulli, S. Basta, and C. Pizzuti, “Distance-based detection and
 prediction of outliers,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 18, no. 2,
future work, we plan to extend the capabilities of our method pp. 145–160, Feb. 2006.
to adaptive anomaly detection, for example by integrating peak [20] L. Li, J. Yan, Q. Wen, Y. Jin, and X. Yang, “Learning robust deep state
detection techniques that can dynamically adjust based on the space for unsupervised anomaly detection in contaminated time-series,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 6058–6072, Jun. 2023.
distribution of activation values, thereby enhancing its practical [21] M. Tang, M. Alazab, and Y. Luo, “Big data for cybersecurity: Vulnerability
value in real-world scenarios. Additionally, as a new paradigm, disclosure trends and dependencies,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, no. 3,
our approach holds significant potential for integration with pp. 317–329, Sep. 2019.
 [22] S. Hariri, M. C. Kind, and R. J. Brunner, “Extended isolation forest,” IEEE
modern deep learning technologies such as pretrained mod- Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1479–1489, Apr. 2021.
els and self-supervised learning techniques. Moreover, we are [23] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
particularly excited about the potential of activation learning density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
to facilitate the design of innovative neural network architec- [24] Z. Ji, Y. Wang, K. Yan, X. Xie, Y. Xiang, and J. Huang, “A spacetures, broadening the application of our method across various embedding strategy for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,”
domains. Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 206, 2022, Art. no. 117892.
 [25] M. Hu, X. Feng, Z. Ji, K. Yan, and S. Zhou, “A novel computational
 approach for discord search with local recurrence rates in multivariate
 time series,” Inf. Sci., vol. 477, pp. 220–233, 2019.
 REFERENCES [26] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate
 time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 91,
 [1] L. Cui et al., “Security and privacy-enhanced federated learning for pp. 93–102, 2023.
 anomaly detection in IoT infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., [27] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory networks
 vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3492–3500, May 2022. with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
 [2] C. Huang, G. Min, Y. Wu, Y. Ying, K. Pei, and Z. Xiang, “Time series Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080, Dec. 2023.
 anomaly detection for trustworthy services in cloud computing systems,” [28] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder-
 IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 60–72, Feb. 2022. strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 [3] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multi- dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021. Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
 [4] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly [29] H. Kang and P. Kang, “Transformer-based multivariate time series
 analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, anomaly detection using inter-variable attention mechanism,” Knowl.-
 vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022. Based Syst., vol. 290, 2024, Art. no. 111507.
 [5] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph atten- [30] C. C. Aggarwal, “An introduction to outlier analysis,” in Outlier Analysis.
 tion network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017, pp. 1–34.
 [6] T. Kieu, B. Yang, C. Guo, and C. S. Jensen, “Outlier detection for time [31] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time series with
 series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,” IEEE Trans.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2725–2732. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191, Mar. 2021.
 [7] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Yang, Z. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Unsupervised machine [32] Y. Yao, J. Ma, and Y. Ye, “Regularizing autoencoders with wavelet transanomaly detection using autoencoder and temporal convolutional net- form for sequence anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 134, 2023,
 work,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, 2022, Art. no. 3525813. Art. no. 109084.
 [8] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection [33] J. Fan, Z. Wang, H. Wu, D. Sun, J. Wu, and X. Lu, “An adversarial time–
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, frequency reconstruction network for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 pp. 4027–4035. Neural Netw., vol. 168, pp. 44–56, 2023.
 [9] D. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Xie, X. Wei, W. Yu, and R. Li, “LSTM learning [34] R. Bouman, Z. Bukhsh, and T. Heskes, “Unsupervised anomaly detection
 with Bayesian and Gaussian processing for anomaly detection in industrial algorithms on real-world data: How many do we need?,” J. Mach. Learn.
 IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5244–5253, Aug. 2020. Res., vol. 25, no. 105, pp. 1–34, 2024.
[10] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang, [35] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for Internet of Things time “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023. pp. 3395–3404.
[11] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, [36] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 “Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,” networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” in Proc.
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 6440–6454, 2022. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022.
DING et al.: ALAD: A NEW UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION PARADIGM BASED ON ACTIVATION LEARNING 1297

[37] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Xianye Ben (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural PhD degree in pattern recognition and intelligent
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data system from the College of Automation, Harbin En-
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. gineering University, Harbin, China, in 2010. She is
[38] Y. Li, W. Chen, B. Chen, D. Wang, L. Tian, and M. Zhou, “Prototype- currently working as a full professor with the School
 oriented unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series,” in of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 19 407–19 424. University, Qingdao, China. She has authored or
[39] Y. Munakata and J. Pfaffly, “Hebbian learning and development,” Devlop. coauthored more than 100 papers in major journals
 Sci., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 141–148, 2004. and conferences such as the IEEE Transactions on
[40] D. Krotov and J. J. Hopfield, “Unsupervised learning by competing hidden Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE
 units,” in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 116, no. 16, pp. 7723–7731, 2019. Transactions on Image Processing, IEEE Transac-
[41] M. Gupta, A. Ambikapathi, and S. Ramasamy, “HebbNet: A simplified tions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on Mulhebbian learning framework to do biologically plausible learning,” in Proc. timedia, Pattern Recognition, CVPR, etc. Her current research interests include
 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 3115–3119. pattern recognition, image processing, and machine learning. She received the
[42] T. Moraitis, D. Toichkin, Y. Chua, and Q. Guo, “SoftHebb: Bayesian Excellent Doctorial Dissertation awarded by Harbin Engineering University. She
 inference in unsupervised Hebbian soft winner-take-all networks,” was also enrolled by the Distinguished Young Scholars Program of Shandong
 2021, arXiv:2107.05747. University and the Shi Qingyun Female Scientists of China Society of Image
[43] A. Journé, H. G. Rodriguez, Q. Guo, and T. Moraitis, “Hebbian deep Graphics.
 learning without feedback,” 2022, arXiv:2209.11883.
[44] E. Oja, “Simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer,” J.
 Math. Biol., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 267–273, 1982.
[45] K.-H. Lai et al., “TODS: An automated time series outlier detection
 system,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 16 060–16 062.
[46] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised realtime anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262, Jia Zhao received the BEng and PhD degrees from
 pp. 134–147, 2017. Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2006 and
[47] E. Keogh, D. R. Taposh, U. Naik, and A. Agrawal, “Multi-dataset time- 2011, respectively. He is currently a professor with
 series anomaly detection competition,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. the School of Information Science and Engineering,
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://compete. Shandong University. His research interests include
 hexagonml.com/practice/competition/39 nanophotonic, chip-scale optical interconnection, and
[48] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual machine learning.
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[49] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018.
[50] Y. Jeong, E. Yang, J. H. Ryu, I. Park, and M. Kang, “AnomalyBERT:
 Self-supervised transformer for time series anomaly detection using data
 degradation scheme,” 2023, arXiv:2305.04468.
[51] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder Hongchao Zhou received the BSc degree in physics
 for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., and mathematics and the MSc degree in control sci-
 2018, pp. 187–196. ence and engineering from Tsinghua University, Bei-
[52] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation jing, China, in 2006 and 2008, respectively, and the
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th MSc and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230. the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
 USA, in 2009 and 2012, respectively. From 2012 to
 2015, he was a post-doctoral researcher with the Signals, Information and Algorithms Laboratory, Mas-
 Fengqian Ding received the MS degree from Shan- sachusetts Institute of Technology. He is currently
 dong Normal University, Shandong, China, in 2022. a professor with the School of Information Science
 He is currently working toward the PhD degree with and Engineering, Shandong University. His current research interests include
 the School of Information Science and Engineering, information theory, data systems, learning systems, and machine learning. He
 Shandong University, Qingdao, China. His research was a recipient of the 2013 Charles Wilts Prize for the best doctoral thesis in
 interests include application of time series analysis electrical engineering with the California Institute of Technology.
 and machine learning.

 Bo Li received the BEng degree from Shandong
 University, Shandong, China, in 2022. He is currently
 working toward the MSc degree with the School
 of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong
 University, Qingdao, China. His research interests
 include anomaly detection and machine learning.