1876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 An Unsupervised Learning Approach for Pavement
 Distress Diagnosis via Siamese Networks
 Ruiqi Ren , Peixin Shi , Pengjiao Jia, and Jinwoo Kim

 Abstract— Accurate, automated diagnosis of pavement distress A commonly used pavement distress diagnosis system typis essential for effective roadway maintenance but presents ically includes a remote sensing module for digital image
considerable challenges. Supervised learning methods are con- acquisition, a global positioning system (GPS), and a digital
strained by limited labeled data, while existing unsupervised
representation learning approaches are difficult to capture the image analysis system for recognition and segmentation. The
fine-grained details needed for precise pixel-level segmentation early image analysis system heavily relies on hand-crafted
in pavement images with similar backgrounds. To address features, including texture, gradient, and shape descriptors,
these limitations, we propose a novel unsupervised approach to identify various distress types [5], [6], [7]. These traditional
for pavement distress segmentation that employs a new pre- feature extraction methods have limited generalization capatext task within Siamese networks. Our method integrates an
explicit prediction head and a high-dimensional cross-entropy bilities, struggling to accommodate the diverse and complex
loss, enabling implicit class labeling and enhancing fine-grained nature of pavement images. Moreover, designing hand-crafted
recognition of distress patterns. Additionally, vision transformers features is time-consuming, requiring meticulous engineering
are employed to leverage self-attention mechanisms, facilitating efforts. There is a pressing need for advanced pavement disaccurate segmentation of foreground distress regions. Experimen- tress diagnosis techniques that can overcome these limitations
tal results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing
unsupervised representation learning and anomaly detection and offer more robust, efficient solutions.
methods. Notably, when used to pre-train backbone networks In recent years, deep learning has emerged as a promissuch as ResNet-50, our method yields higher accuracy and ing solution for pavement distress diagnosis [8], [9], [10],
faster convergence on downstream supervised tasks compared [11], [12]. Compared to traditional methods, deep learning
to pre-training on the labeled ImageNet dataset. The proposed is data-driven and can learn to automatically extract relevant
method holds promise for advancing pavement maintenance
decision-making and enhancing the performance of traditional features. It eliminates the requirement for laborious manual
supervised deep learning models. feature engineering, making it more generalized and suitable
 for a wide range of diagnosis tasks. Deep learning-based
 Index Terms— Pavement distress, unsupervised deep learning,
Siamese networks, vision transformers. methods represented by supervised learning train a network to
 recognize pavement distress by feeding it images with manual
 I. I NTRODUCTION labels. By sampling different distresses, a deep learning net-

A CCURATE automatic pavement distress diagnosis is
 crucial for efficient roadway maintenance while faces
significant challenges [1]. Manual pavement distress diagnosis
 work can be trained to identify cracks, potholes, rutting, and
 other pavement distresses with high accuracy. However, one
 of the major challenges of supervised learning is the availand maintenance often disrupt road traffic and cost significant ability of labeled data. Insufficient data may lead to network
labors and time [2]. As a corollary, pavement management overfitting while manual labeling is very labor-intensive.
must navigate a fine balance between maintenance costs, Deep representation learning offers a novel technique to
potential serviceability losses, and structural health preserva- mitigate the reliance on manual annotations. Mainstream
tion [3]. In recent decades, the emergence of fast, economical, approaches can be broadly categorized into generative learning
and automated pavement distress detection technology has and contrastive learning. Generative learning leverages the
provided an effective solution for pavement management. redundant characteristics of image information, allowing for
Integrating a pavement distress diagnosis system onto an the generation of complete images from a subset of this
inspection vehicle enables automatic diagnoses without dis- data, thereby facilitating the extraction of deep represenrupting traffic and saves cost [4]. tations inherent within the images [13], [14], [15], [16].
 Contrastive learning focuses on maximizing the mutual infor-
 Received 19 December 2023; revised 7 July 2024 and 30 October 2024;
accepted 7 November 2024. Date of publication 27 November 2024; date of mation between different views of the same image, commonly
current version 4 February 2025. This work was supported by the National employing Siamese networks [17], [18], [19]. Theoretically,
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52278405. The Associate the ability to learn deep representations from pavement images
Editor for this article was Y. Hou. (Corresponding author: Peixin Shi.)
 Ruiqi Ren, Peixin Shi, and Pengjiao Jia are with the School of holds the promise of extracting robust distress features with-
Rail Transportation, Soochow University, Suzhou 215000, China (e-mail: out the necessity for manual annotations. However, practical
20204046002@stu.suda.edu.cn; pxshi@suda.edu.cn). applications reveal several significant challenges. First, dis-
 Jinwoo Kim is with the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, South Korea. tress objects often exhibit unique characteristics, frequently
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3500030 presenting elongated shapes. Consequently, when employing
 1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1877

Fig. 1. Training schema of unsupervised siamese networks for pavement distress diagnosis (SiapaveNet).

generative learning architectures with limited information, their variants for crack segmentation. For example, Yang et al.
there is a substantial risk of overlooking critical foreground [23] proposed a U-Net variant with a pyramid and hierardistress targets, which undermines the learning of robust fea- chical boosting network for pavement crack segmentation.
tures; Second, the existing pretext tasks designed for Siamese Xiang et al. [24] combined super-resolution image reconnetworks, which are based on the similarity or difference of struction with U-Net segmentation to enhance the accuracy
images within batches, encounter difficulties when applied of low-pixel microcracks, while Zhang et al. [25] designed
to pavement images that possess similar backgrounds and a non-symmetric U-Net architecture with a discriminator to
small objects; Last, achieving unsupervised distress segmenta- effectively segment small cracks. Recently, transformer-based
tion through deep representation learning remains a complex methods have emerged as the state-of-the-art for fine crack
challenge that necessitates further exploration. Effectively segmentation, highlighting the potential of transformers in this
addressing these limitations is crucial for unlocking the full field [26]. While current research efforts are mainly focused
potential of unsupervised methods in pavement distress seg- on improving the accuracy of pavement distress segmentation
mentation applications. through supervised learning, there has been very limited work
 To address this issue, this study investigates the feasibility on completely unsupervised approaches. This research aims to
of applying unsupervised learning to learn representations explore unsupervised pavement distress diagnosis as an alterdirectly from unlabeled pavement images. We propose a native, which has the potential to complement and enhance
novel solution for pavement distress diagnosis, which uti- existing supervised learning solutions.
lizes a predicting classification-based Siamese network with
cross-entropy loss and high-dimensional output to provide
 B. Anomaly Detection
implicit class labels (SiapaveNet), as illustrated in Figure 1.
It utilizes the self-attention mechanism of Vision Transformers Anomaly detection techniques, commonly utilized for iden-
(ViTs) to achieve pixel-level segmentation. The proposed tifying human diseases and industrial defects, can also be
framework can be employed to train commonly used backbone adapted to detect pavement distress, which serves as an
networks such as ResNet-50 [20], and the performance is anomaly on healthy surfaces. While these methods often
superior to ImageNet pre-trained backbone networks. It is employ unsupervised or semi-supervised approaches due to
an innovative exploration of fully unsupervised pixel-level the unpredictable nature of anomalies [27], [28], [29], they still
pavement distress diagnosis and may serve as a baseline for rely on weak labels, limiting their effectiveness. Solutions typfuture research in this field. ically involve transforming abnormal images into normal ones
 for comparative analysis [30] and using various unsupervised
 II. R ELATED W ORK techniques such as convolutional autoencoders [31], vector
 quantized variational autoencoders (VQ-VAE), autoregressive
 Currently, deep learning is probably the most prevalent and
 transformers [32], and FastFlow [33]. Recent advancements,
potent technique for pavement distress diagnosis. This section
 such as the Learning Disentangled Priors (LDP) [34],
provides an overview of existing deep learning-based methods
 which combines model-driven low-rank representation with
that may be used for pavement distress diagnosis to highlight
 data-driven deep learning, have improved anomaly detection
the significance and potential of the proposed method.
 capabilities by effectively modeling both background and
 anomalies through explicit and implicit priors. However, the
A. Crack Segmentation non-standardized nature of pavement distress images and
 Cracking is the most common form of pavement distress the influence of diverse field conditions present significant
and crack segmentation has received intensive attention in challenges that necessitate the exploration of fully unsuperacademia. Most existing approaches employ CNNs such as vised feature extraction methods without reliance on weak
U-Net [21] or Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [22] and labels.
1878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

C. Unsupervised Representation Learning the momentum encoder. Then branch 2 network will predict
 Unsupervised representation learning enables deep neural the output of branch 1 network by a predictor. The loss
networks to be trained on large unlabeled visual datasets, function between the resulting vector z 1 = g( f (v1 )) and
enhancing their ability to transfer knowledge to specific tasks. p2 = q(g( f (v2 ))) is cross-entropy:
One approach involves generative learning methods, which L(z 1 , p2 ) = − p2 log z 1 (1)
extract information from images by masking most regions and
using the visible parts to reconstruct the hidden areas. For After each input of a pair of images, the network updates
instance, Zhou et al. effectively applied Masked Autoencoders constantly. To ensure the efficacy of the proposed approach,
(MAE) for medical imaging tasks [15], while Sun et al. the Siamese network is treated as a mutual binary classification
introduced RingMo [35], which trains the remote sensing problem, i.e., to determine if the image input by the Siamese
foundation model using masked image modeling. Hong et al. network is augmented by the same image. Therefore, the
introduced SpectralGPT [16], a 3D generative pretrained output vector is softmax processed, modifying Equation (1)
transformer specifically designed for spectral remote sensing as follows:
images, optimizing the analysis of complex datasets. While
 L(softmax(z 1 ), softmax( p2 )) (2)
this technique has been adapted for fields like remote sensing
and medical imaging, it faces challenges in pavement distress Since branch 1 no longer uses backpropagation to update
images, where small targets may be obscured by similar its parameters, its gradient is no longer calculated. Therefore,
backgrounds, leading to inadequate reconstruction. Another Equation (1) can be expressed as:
common approach is the use of Siamese networks, which aim
to place similar inputs close together in a shared embedding L(z 1 , stopgrad( p2 )) (3)
space [36], [37], [38]. Dufumier et al. advanced this approach Furthermore, a centering operation for the parameters of
by incorporating proxy metadata into their contrastive learning branch 1 is applied, which is a bias term c added to the
framework [39], enhancing positive sampling and improv- network: g1 ( f (v)) ← g1 ( f (v)) + c. The center c is updated
ing classification tasks in 3D brain MRI scans. Similarly, with an exponential moving average:
Wang et al. proposed TransPath [19], a hybrid model that
 B
utilizes self-supervised learning on unlabeled histopathological 1 X
images, achieving superior performance in downstream clas- c ← mc + (1 − m) N1 (xi ) (4)
 B
sification tasks. However, there is no clear agreement on the i=1

best implementation practices, with some methods focusing where B is the batch size, and N1 is the Siamese network 1,
on predicting outcomes and others on comparing similarities m is a rate parameter. The pseudo-code implementation of
and differences between inputs. In data-limited areas such SiapaveNet is in Algorithm 1.
as pavement distress diagnosis, it is crucial to thoroughly
evaluate and choose the most effective unsupervised methods. B. Avoiding Collapse
Integrating deep learning visual explanation methods such as
Grad-CAM [40], Ablation-CAM [41], and Score-CAM [42] 1) Momentum Encoder: SiapaveNet incorporates the use of
presents opportunities for enabling pixel-level distress diag- momentum encoders in branch 1 of the networks. The momennosis via unsupervised learning. However, challenges remain, tum encoder, introduced by [36], is a type of moving average
including whether such methods can achieve fine-grained encoder that smoothens the data representations in contrastive
segmentation for uniquely shaped distresses and whether com- learning algorithms by employing exponential moving average
paratively small pavement datasets can sufficiently leverage over multiple mini-batches of the data representations during
the potential of unsupervised learning. This study investigates the training phase, instead of updating each representation
these challenges and explores potential solutions. after every mini-batch. This mechanism reduces variance and
 prevents overfitting. The utilization of momentum encoders in
 SiapaveNet ensures stability and contributes to the final output
 III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
 result. SiapaveNet employs three networks, f , g, and q, which
 This section describes how the proposed prediction-based all make use of the momentum encoder, as summarized by the
Siamese network works and how does it achieve unsupervised following equation:
pixel-level pavement distress diagnosis.
 θt = αθt−1 + (1 − α)θt (5)
A. Forward Propagation and Loss Functions where θ is the network parameter, t represents the iteration
 The network architecture, as shown in Figure 1, first extracts step, and α is the smoothing parameter that controls the
an image x from the dataset X , and obtains two different moving average of the momentum encoder.
views v and v ′ through different data augmentation methods t 2) Stop-Gradient: The stop-gradient technique, commonly
and t ′ , respectively. Then, v and v ′ are processed similarly. utilized in conjunction with the momentum encoder, helps
They are first represented by the backbone network (e.g., in optimizing network by blocking gradients from flowing
ResNet or ViT), and then projected by MLP layers. The through certain parts of the network during backpropagation.
difference is that branch 1 of the Siamese network will not This helps prevent overfitting and stabilize the training process
update the parameters through back propagation, but through by preventing updates to positive example representations and
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1879

Algorithm 1 SiapaveNet Pseudo-Code, PyTorch-Like Dosovitskiy et al. [44]. The architecture is designed to handle
 # f: backbone large-scale image data by transforming the input image into
 # g: projection mlp a sequence of fixed-length vectors, which are then processed
 # q: prediction mlp by a Transformer network. Self-attention block is a key com-
 # tpp, tpz: temperature parameters ponent of the Transformer architecture, which enables ViT to
 # C: center capture global information from the image input. Self-attention
 is implemented by computing attention scores between all
 # load a minibatch x with n samples vector tokens in the sequence, which can be represented
 mathematically as:
 for x in SiapaveN et:
 QK T
  
 v1, v2 = aug(x), aug(x) # random augmentation Attention(Q, K , V ) = softmax √ V (6)
 y1, y2 = f(v1), f(v2) # representations dk
 z1, z2 = g(y1), g(y2) # projections where Q, K , and V are the query, key, and value matrices,
 p2 = q(z2) # predictions respectively, and dk is the dimension of the key vectors. The
 attention scores are then used to weigh the value vectors and
 L(p2, z1).backward() # loss and back-propagate generate the output. This mechanism allows the network to
 update(f, h) # SGD update attend to different regions of the image and effectively capture long-range dependencies. By combining the self-attention
 def L(p, z): mechanism with the transformer architecture, ViT has achieved
 z = z.detach() # stop-gradient state-of-the-art results on several benchmark datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in large-scale image classification
 p = softmax(p / tpp, dim=1) tasks. In the proposed method, the attention mechanism of
 z = softmax((z - C) / tpz, dim=1) # centering ViT is aimed to utilize to segment pavement distress without
 manual labeling. Specifically, the ViT is trained to attend to the
 # cross entropy foreground of the input image, i.e., pavement distress, by calreturn - (p * log(z)).sum(dim=1).mean() culating the attention score of each patch of the input image.
 Later experimental chapters will demonstrate the effectiveness
 of this approach.
smoothing data representations through exponential moving
average, respectively. It is first introduced in by He et al. [36], D. Implement Details
and the irreplaceable role of stop-gradient has been widely 1) Evaluation: The evaluation metrics utilized by Siarecognized, as demonstrated by Chen and He [38]. SiapaveNet paveNet include mean Dice (mDice), mean Intersection over
also employs this optimization strategy for ensuring consis- Union (mIoU), mean Pixel Accuracy (mPA). These metrics
tency across mini-batches and mitigating overfitting. are commonly used to evaluate the performance of image
 3) Centering: Inspired by SwAV [43], SiapaveNet employs segmentation models, providing a comprehensive assessment
clustering centers to smooth the output. The clustering centers of the model accuracy and precision in classifying image
serve as prototypes to represent clusters of similar data exam- pixels. The mDice is defined as the average Dice coefficient
ples. This study calculates the average of the output of each over all classes, mIoU is the average Intersection over Union
batch of branch 1 as the center. This center affects the output over all classes, and mPA is the average Pixel Accuracy over
of branch 1 as a bias term. It can be regarded as self-adaption all classes, calculated as:
normalization process. The specific operation of centering has PC
been explained in Section III-A and Equation (5). 2 i=1 |GTi ∩ Pr edi |
 m Dice = (7)
 4) Batch Normalization: Batch normalization is widely (|GTi | + |Pr edi |)/C
acknowledged as a pivotal aspect to avoid collapse, as dis- PC
 |GTi ∩ Pr edi |
cussed by [37]. It is a normalization technique applied to m I oU = i=1 (8)
 |GTi ∪ Pr edi |/C
the activations of neural networks, which helps mitigate the PC
internal covariate shift, i.e., the changes in activation distri- |GTi ∩ Pr edi |
 m P A = i=1 (9)
bution caused by weight updates during the training phase. |GTi |/C
This technique stabilizes the training process and reduces the where C is the number of classes, GTi is the set of ground
sensitivity of the network to the initial weight values. However, truth pixels for class i, and Pr edi is the set of predicted
it can lead to a loss of discriminative information between pixels for class i. The Dice coefficient measures the overlap
image pairs. This study shows its impact in Section V. between the predicted and ground truth segments, with a value
 of 1 indicating perfect agreement.
C. Unsupervised Distress Segmentation Mean Average Precision (mAP) is used as an evaluation
 To achieve unsupervised segmentation of pavement dis- metric to assess the performance of downstream tasks. The
tress, the proposed method utilizes a ViT backbone network mAP metric calculates the average performance of a detection
(Figure 1), which is a transformer based architecture for system across multiple object classes by computing precision
image classification tasks, proposed in the seminal work of and recall values for each class and averaging the results.
1880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF S IAPAVE N ET W ITH E XITING M ETHODS
 ON C OPAVE DATASET

 data during training, with an auto-encoder reconstructing
Fig. 2. Examples of pavement distress images following Pre-processing.
 images. When abnormal images are input, the auto-encoder
 cannot reconstruct anomalous regions, enabling their detection.
 2) Dataset and Other Details: Two datasets are used to For this experiment, these baselines utilized only normal
evaluate the pavement distress segmentation capability of the pavement images during training. Conversely, MAE and BEIT
proposed method. One is the continuous pavement images are unsupervised representation learning approaches that learn
dataset(copave dataset). It comprises of 1,000 large pavement effective image representations from unlabeled data. MAE
images, acquired via a pavement inspection vehicle. As a pre- randomly masks out patches of the input image and is
processing step, these images are cropped into 88,088 smaller trained to reconstruct the original unmasked image. BEIT
images of size 256 × 256 pixels each. These images con- is a Transformer-based approach that learns representations
tain various forms of pavement distress, including transverse by predicting both the masked image patches and the visual
cracks, longitudinal cracks, oblique cracks, alligator cracks, tokens obtained by performing various image transformations.
potholes, and other forms, as shown in Figure 2. Another is the 2) Results on Copave Dataset: Table I and Figure 3 demonpavementscapes dataset [45], we do the same pre-processing strate the superior performance of the proposed method for
to ensure a comparable results. An A40 GPU is employed for pavement distress segmentation. It outperforms most unsuthe experiments, with a batch size of 64. AdamW is utilized pervised and semi-supervised methods, while requiring less
as the optimization and the learning rate is set to 0.0005. The manual labeling effort. The method achieves an mDice of
momentum parameter is set to 0.996. 0.523, mIoU of 0.366, and mPA of 0.807. Both mDice and
 mIoU provide a balanced evaluation by considering the overlap
 IV. E XPERIMENT AND R ESULTS between the predicted and ground truth masks, with mDice
 being more sensitive to instances with small areas, while mIoU
 In this section, two main outcomes of the proposed
 can be more influenced by instances with larger areas. Meanapproach, known as SiapaveNet, are presented. These include
 while, mPA computes the ratio of correctly classified pixels
pavement distress segmentation and transfer learning on
 averaged across instances, which may overestimate perfordownstream tasks. To this end, the SiapaveNet framework
 mance for small targets due to the dominance of background
is firstly employed to train a ViT network, utilizing its
 pixels. In Table I, FastFlow obtains the highest mPA, but it
self-attention mechanism for unsupervised segmentation. Subonly assumes that the image does not contain pavement dissequently, the SiapaveNet framework is utilized to train a
 tress, and its effect is obviously inferior to that of SiapaveNet.
ResNet-50 backbone, using it as a pre-trained network for
 Figure 3 provides further visual evidence of the effectiveness
completing downstream tasks. Notably, the training process
 of the proposed method in achieving accurate pixel-level
in the SiapaveNet approach is fully unsupervised.
 pavement distress diagnosis. SiapaveNet can accurately locate
 the distress pixels and differentiate pavement distress from the
A. Pavement Distress Segmentation background. While other anomaly detection schemes such as
 1) Baselines: A comprehensive evaluation of the pro- f-AnoGAN and GANormaly can obtain the basic contour of
posed SiapaveNet method was conducted in comparison pavement distress, they are weaker than SiapaveNet across
to several state-of-the-art unsupervised and semi-supervised various metrics. MAE and BEIT are deep representation learntechniques with potential applications for pavement dis- ing methods using the same backbone network structure and
tress segmentation. As few pavement distress diagnosis self-attention mechanism as the proposed method for segmenapproaches are based on unsupervised or semi-supervised tation. BEIT has shown better performance than other anomaly
learning, a set of methods demonstrating promising results detection schemes but weaker than the proposed SiapaveNet.
in fields like human disease detection, industrial defect iden- However, the masking patches and reconstructing of MAE
tification, and other cutting-edge unsupervised representation may not be well-suited for small pavement distress instances,
learning were selected. These included f-Anogan [27], Fast- resulting in bad performance and weaker than most baselines.
Flow [33], GANormaly [29], MAE(Masked Autoencoders) These results suggest that the proposed SiapaveNet method is
[13] and BEIT(Bidirectional Encoder representations from a highly effective approach for pavement distress segmentation
Image Transformers) [14]. f-AnoGAN, GANormally, and Fast- and presents a viable alternative for semi-supervised anomaly
Flow are anomaly detection methods that consider only normal detection methods.
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1881

Fig. 3. Comparative analysis of SiapaveNet with existing approaches for pavement distress segmentation.

Fig. 4. Comparison of Self-attention methods with visual explanation methods for pavement distress segmentation.

 Compared with anomaly detection methods, SiapaveNet Figure 5 displays the specific attention of different selfis an unsupervised approach, which do not use image-level attention head. The brightness of the color serves as the
labels. As a result, it cannot segment pavement distress via score of the attention head for that patch. The observaconverting abnormal images into normal ones. SiapaveNet tions reveal that not all self-attention heads can accurately
uses a self-attention visualization scheme. It is compared focus on the foreground object (i.e., the pavement distress).
with other visual explanation techniques in Figure 4, includ- Specifically, self-attention head 0 and 3 show more attention
ing Grad-CAM and its variants. It is observed that the to the foreground object, while self-attention head 4 shows
self-attention visualization scheme more accurately segments more attention to the background (i.e., the pavement). Selfpavement distress when ViT is used as the backbone net- attention head 1, 2 and 3 are ambiguous. This pattern is
work of SiapaveNet. To investigate the performance of CNNs observed in all test images, leading to use self-attention
without self-attention heads, experiments are conducted using head 3 as the primary tool for segmenting pavement dis-
ResNet-50 and show regions of interest using Grad-CAM, tress. This finding specifically addresses the second challenge
as illustrated in the last column of Figure 4. The results raised earlier, which is how to extract pavement distress
indicate that CNNs can only focus on more obscure ranges, characteristics and distinguish foreground objects from the
highlighting the advantages of self-attention and ViT. background.
1882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 5. Visualization of Self-attention mechanism in pavement distress segmentation.

 TABLE II tasks related to pavement distress diagnosis, namely pavement
 C OMPARISON OF S IAPAVE N ET W ITH E XITING M ETHODS ON crack semantic segmentation, object detection, and instance
 PAVEMENTSCAPES DATASET
 segmentation. The pavement crack semantic segmentation task
 entails segmenting cracks from pavement, while the object
 detection task focuses on locating cracks on pavement. The
 instance segmentation task aims to locate and roughly segment
 the cracks on pavement.
 These tasks are illustrated in Figure 6. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, three different datasets are
 used for each task: dataset I for semantic segmentation [23],
 dataset II for object detection [46], and dataset III for instance
 segmentation [47]. These datasets consist of 1896, 1538, and
 3) Results on Pavementscapes Dataset: We also evaluated 133 images, respectively with dimensions of 640 × 360,
SiapaveNet against other methods using the pavementscapes 1612 × 1947, and 480 × 320. They are different from the
dataset. The results are presented in Table II. Our proposed dataset used in pre-training.
method outperforms other approaches across two evaluation 2) Results: The evaluations presented in Figures 7, 8, and 9
metrics, demonstrating its advanced capabilities. Notably, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in the
traditional anomaly detection methods require manual clas- downstream tasks of semantic segmentation, object detection,
sification of normal data, as the current dataset contains few and instance segmentation. The metrics used for semantic
images of normal pavement. This process typically involves segmentation are mIoU, while mAP is used for both object
manually labeling and training a deep learning classifier, which detection and instance segmentation. The results indicate that
may not perfectly capture the normal class. While we strive the proposed method outperforms the training-from-scratch
to exclude distress images from the training data, manual method in terms of both convergence speed and accuracy in all
screening of large datasets is impractical, highlighting the three tasks. When compared to networks pre-trained on labels
advantage of our proposed fully unsupervised learning scheme. and a larger dataset such as ImageNet, the proposed approach
The results in Table II align with those in Table I, under- demonstrates a faster convergence speed and comparable
scoring the consistency of the superior performance across accuracy in semantic segmentation and instance segmentation,
different datasets. Existing anomaly detection methods con- while slightly lower performance in object detection. This
tinue to perform poorly on this dataset, while BEIT achieves discrepancy in performance may be attributed to the larger
the second-highest segmentation accuracy after our proposed image size and increased information content of the dataset
SiapaveNet. used for object detection.

B. Transfer Learning on Downstream Tasks V. A BLATION S TUDY
 1) Tasks and Datasets: This section presents the outcomes This section presents the results of comprehensive ablation
of finetuning a pre-trained ResNet-50, acquired from the unsu- experiments that investigate the impact of different settings
pervised SiapaveNet framework, on three distinct downstream on the performance of SiapaveNet. The aim is to analyze the
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1883

 Fig. 8. Object detection evaluation.

 Fig. 9. Instance segmentation evaluation.

Fig. 6. Exploring three downstream tasks for pavement distress diagnosis: (a) Semantic segmentation, (b) Object detection, and (c) Instance
segmentation. and BEiT. In this section, we compare various Siamese network methods that are conceptually similar to our proposed
 approach, as illustrated in Figure 10. Specifically, we examine:
 (1) MoCov3 [17]. It employs a prediction head and the
 InfoNCE loss to compare the outputs of the Siamese network
 branches;
 (2) BYOL [37]. It utilizes a prediction head and the mean
 squared error (MSE) loss to regress the output of one Siamese
 network branch to the other;
 (3) SimSiam [38]. It uses a prediction head and the negative
 cosine similarity (NCS) loss, without a momentum encoder,
 to measure the similarity between the output vectors of the
 Siamese network branches;
 (4) DINO [18]. It directly predicts the output of one Siamese
 network branch from the other under cross entropy (CE) loss
Fig. 7. Semantic segmentation evaluation. without employing a prediction head;
 (5) SiapaveNet (Ours). It incorporates a prediction head to
 predict a vector from one branch of the Siamese network based
significance of each component of the system and how they on the other branch under CE loss.
affect its overall performance. The results demonstrate that employing a prediction head
 (predictor) combined with a cross-entropy loss function for the
A. Comparison With Similar Methods classification task achieves the most effective performance as
 Our primary objective is to investigate the potential of shown in Table III. The proposed SiapaveNet method outperunsupervised representation learning for pavement distress forms similar schemes across all evaluation metrics. Existing
segmentation. Previously, we demonstrated that our proposed self-supervised learning methods face limitations in pavement
scheme outperforms generative learning models such as MAE distress detection tasks due to the subtle differences between
1884 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 of probability distributions. While this enables complex relationship capture, its symmetric branch structure may limit
 fine-grained feature separation. Our proposed SiapaveNet
 addresses these challenges by employing an explicit prediction
 head architecture with cross-entropy loss and high-dimensional
 output. This approach provides implicit class labels and
 detailed gradient information, enabling more detailed representation of subtle distress patterns. The cross-entropy loss
 encourages the model to distinguish between different distress
 classes, even when visually similar. The asymmetric Siamese
 structure, combined with the prediction task, facilitates learning of invariant features while maintaining sensitivity to
 fine-grained differences.

 B. Different Settings on Predictor
 1) Number of MLP Layers: One crucial hyperparameter
 of the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) used as the predictor is
 the number of layers. This section evaluates the influence of
 MLP depth on the performance of the model while keeping
 the previously determined optimal settings fixed. The results,
 presented in Table IV, indicate that the best performance is
 achieved when employing a 3-layer MLP as the predictor.
 2) Output Dimension: Another crucial parameter is the
 output dimension of the MLP prediction head, especially when
 combined with the cross-entropy loss function. As demonstrated in Table V, a larger output dimension enables the model
 to learn more detailed information, but at the cost of increased
 computational overhead.
 3) Batch Normalization: While previous study [37] suggests that batch normalization is crucial for maintaining model
 stability and enhancing performance, our findings indicate that
 excluding batch normalization from the prediction head yields
 better results for the proposed model, as shown in Table VI.

 C. Loss Functions
 As mentioned earlier, the results demonstrate that classification tasks employing a combination of a prediction head
 (predictor) and a cross-entropy loss function yield the most
 effective performance. However, the results also compare
 the differences between various networks. In this section,
 we utilize the exact same network architecture to evaluate
Fig. 10. Training pipeline of different methods: (a) MoCo v3, (b) BYOL,
(c) SimSiam, (d) DINO, and (e) SiapaveNet(ours). the impact of the loss function on the results. Specifically,
 we compare three commonly used loss functions: InfoNCE
 loss, negative cosine similarity (NCS) loss, and cross-entropy
foreground objects and consistent backgrounds. MoCo v3 (CE) loss. Interestingly, when we fixed the optimal settings
employs the InfoNCE loss, a contrastive learning function obtained in the previous section, only the CE loss and NCS
that maximizes mutual information between different views loss enabled the model to function properly as shown in
of the same image while minimizing it for different images. Table VII. InfoNCE failed to decrease the loss, resulting
However, this approach struggles to capture fine-grained dis- in a collapse of the self-supervised mapping. This collapse
tinctions when images within a batch are highly similar. BYOL manifested as each image patch exhibiting the same value,
uses a regression-based loss, predicting the consistency of the indicating a failure in learning meaningful representations.
output from other branch, which may lack the detail needed
for distinguishing subtle distress. The NCS loss in SimSiam, D. Centering
focusing on feature vector similarity, potentially provides Centering is an important technique that ensures stable
insufficient supervision for subtle foreground differences. convergence of the network. For the predicting classification
DINO utilizes high-dimensional outputs and implicit labels task of the proposed method, it is necessary to maintain suffivia softmax for cross-entropy loss, allowing direct comparison cient stability in the predicted network. In fact, the predicted
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1885

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER S IMILAR M ETHODS

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT N UMBER OF MLP L AYERS

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT O UTPUT D IMENSION

 Fig. 11. Comparison of loss convergence between SGD and AdamW
 optimizers.

 decoupled weight decay (AdamW) optimizer. The results show
 TABLE VI that the model does not converge when trained using SGD,
 C OMPARISON ON BATCH N ORMALIZATION as evidenced by the non-decreasing trend in the loss curve
 shown in Figure 11. This suggests that the choice of optimization algorithm has a significant impact on the performance of
 the SiapaveNet. Compared to SGD, AdamW is found to be
 more effective in optimizing the SiapaveNet, as indicated by
 the decrease in loss over the course of training. This outcome
 TABLE VII
 is consistent with the findings of prior studies [48], [49],
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT L OSS F UNCTIONS
 which have shown that Adam and its variants such as AdamW
 and AMSGrad can outperform SGD in the training of visual
 representations. This difference in performance is attributed
 to the nature of the ViT network, which has been shown to
 be less prone to overfitting. The faster convergence of the
 network with AdamW may therefore be a result of its ability
 TABLE VIII to reduce the loss more effectively in such a scenario. This
 C OMPARISON ON C ENTERING hypothesis is further supported by the successful convergence
 of the ResNet-50 when trained with SGD, as presented in
 Section IV-B.2.

 VI. D ISCUSSION
 Unsupervised deep learning represents a promising direction
network utilizes stop-gradient and centering techniques, and for the future advancement of pavement distress diagnosis.
its parameters are updated through the momentum encoder. It has achieved significant success in natural language pro-
This configuration significantly enhances performance of the cessing, general computer vision, and other fields due to
model, as evidenced by the results presented in Table VIII. the scarcity of labeled data compared to the vast amount of
 unlabeled data available. For the task of pavement distress
 diagnosis, unsupervised learning is a critical tool to address
E. Optimizer the challenge of expensive and limited labeling of pavement
 This section aims to evaluate the performance of the distress types. This study makes an exploratory effort to assess
proposed SiapaveNet when trained using stochastic gradi- the potential and limitations of unsupervised pavement distress
ent descent (SGD) and adaptive moment estimation with diagnosis.
1886 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 An important aspect of this study is the effects of differ- datasets in other fields such as the COCO dataset [50], which
ent techniques on the stable convergence and performance contains 330,000 images. Our work makes efforts to expand
of unsupervised pavement distress diagnosis methods. The the dataset by using common data augmentation methods. And
unique shape of the pavement distress object makes ensuring it is demonstrated that using artificially generated data with
stable convergence a difficult problem. Technically, we aim weak labels is possible to expand datasets according to recent
to identify specific measures within the Siamese network studies [18], [51], [52]. This may be an effective solution and
framework to achieve better pavement distress segmentation our future research direction.
performance. Comprehensive ablation experiments demon- Although pixel-level unsupervised deep learning is not yet
strate that employing a predicting classification task using fully mature for direct application in real-world pavement
a prediction head and cross-entropy loss function is more distress diagnosis projects due to its current limitations, it has
suitable for this task compared to other existing methods. shown promising potential for improving downstream tasks.
We posit that ensuring stable variation in the predicted branch Furthermore, even with limited evaluation, it can provide valuwhile maintaining flexibility in the predicting branch is a able insights for decision-making in pavement maintenance
crucial element. This could explain why the predicting branch systems without relying on time-consuming manual labeling.
requires a prediction head, needs to be updated by back- Moving forward, larger and more comprehensive datasets,
propagation without batch normalization, while the predicted advanced data augmentation techniques, and more powerful
branch should be kept as stable as possible, updated with a models are expected to significantly enhance the accuracy of
momentum encoder, and incorporate stop-gradient and cen- pixel-level unsupervised deep learning in pavement distress
tering techniques. Besides, we speculate that a larger output diagnosis.
dimension of the prediction head incentivizes the network to
learn more detailed information. We hypothesize that if the VII. C ONCLUSION
classification task merely requires determining whether the This study proposes a novel self-supervised approach for
predicting branch belongs to the same class as the predicted pixel-level pavement distress diagnosis, effectively addressbranch, the network may easily converge to suboptimal solu- ing the challenges of extracting fine-grained features in
tions or learn shortcut strategies. In addition, it is observed complex and similar backgrounds. By employing a predicthat the AdamW optimizer performs better when training ViT tion task with an explicit prediction head and integrating
networks, while the SGD optimizer performs better when ViTs with self-attention mechanisms, the method enables
training CNN networks, similar to supervised learning. These precise distress segmentation without the need for labeled
findings provide valuable insights for future unsupervised data. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the supepavement distress diagnosis methods. rior performance of this approach over existing unsupervised
 It is a significant advantage that the unsupervised representation learning and anomaly detection baselines. Furlearning-based approach can identify rare types of distress that thermore, as a pre-training strategy, the proposed method
are difficult to label beforehand, when faced with a small significantly enhances the accuracy and convergence speed of
sample of tasks [27], [29], [30]. In addition, unsupervised backbone networks in downstream pavement distress diagnosis
learning may have a greater advantage when dealing with tasks tasks compared to conventional supervised pre-training on
with limited samples. The experimental results show that when ImageNet. This approach offers a promising pathway for
trained with only 133 images over 5 epochs, the accuracy improving pavement maintenance decision-making through
of the unsupervised pre-training model is more than double reliable unsupervised distress detection. It facilitates more
that of the supervised pre-training model commonly used in effective identification and prioritization of repair needs,
the field. Several studies [17], [36] have suggested that the thereby extending infrastructure longevity and reducing maindistribution of unsupervised and supervised learning differs tenance costs.
significantly, with unsupervised learning having the ability to
identify distinct clusters or patterns, which is advantageous R EFERENCES
when dealing with the unusual form of pavement distress. This [1] T. F. Fwa, W. T. Chan, and K. Z. Hoque, “Multiobjective optimization for
may also explain the results of the semantic segmentation task, pavement maintenance programming,” J. Transp. Eng., vol. 126, no. 5,
as shown in Figure 7. When faced with the object detection pp. 367–374, Sep. 2000.
 [2] C. Torres-Machi, E. Pellicer, V. Yepes, and A. Chamorro, “Towards a
task in Figure 8, our results are not as good as those obtained sustainable optimization of pavement maintenance programs under budusing the supervised pre-training model based on ImageNet. getary restrictions,” J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 148, pp. 90–102, Apr. 2017.
The large pixel size of the dataset for this task (nearly 50 times [3] W. Chen and M. Zheng, “Multi-objective optimization for pavement
 maintenance and rehabilitation decision-making: A critical review
that of the pre-training image), the substantial difference and future directions,” Autom. Construct., vol. 130, Oct. 2021,
between the object detection and the object segmentation task, Art. no. 103840.
and the presence of a specific target, pavement irrigation [4] K. C. Wang and W. Gong, “Real-time automated survey system of
 pavement cracking in parallel environment,” J. Infrastruct. Syst., vol. 11,
sewing, in the target dataset may be contributing factors. no. 3, pp. 154–164, Sep. 2005.
 The dataset used in this study comprises pavement images [5] L. Ying and E. Salari, “Beamlet transform-based technique for pavement
captured by continuous sections, totaling 88,000 small images, crack detection and classification,” Comput.-Aided Civil Infrastruct.
which represents a significant improvement over previous Eng., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 572–580, Nov. 2010.
 [6] Q. Zou, Y. Cao, Q. Li, Q. Mao, and S. Wang, “CrackTree: Automatic
methods in terms of the number of images that can be pro- crack detection from pavement images,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 33,
cessed. However, there is still a considerable gap compared to no. 3, pp. 227–238, Feb. 2012.
REN et al.: UNSUPERVISED LEARNING APPROACH FOR PAVEMENT DISTRESS DIAGNOSIS VIA SIAMESE NETWORKS 1887

 [7] A. Cubero-Fernandez, F. J. Rodriguez-Lozano, R. Villatoro, J. Olivares, [29] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
 and J. M. Palomares, “Efficient pavement crack detection and classifi- Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
 cation,” EURASIP J. Image Video Process., vol. 2017, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2019, pp. 622–637.
 Dec. 2017. [30] M. M. R. Siddiquee et al., “Learning fixed points in generative adver-
 [8] Y. Hou et al., “MobileCrack: Object classification in asphalt pavements sarial networks: From image-to-image translation to disease detection
 using an adaptive lightweight deep learning,” J. Transp. Eng., Part B, and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Pavements, vol. 147, no. 1, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 04020092. Oct. 2019, pp. 191–200.
 [9] Z. Qu, C. Cao, L. Liu, and D.-Y. Zhou, “A deeply supervised convo- [31] Y. Shi, J. Yang, and Z. Qi, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation
 lutional neural network for pavement crack detection with multiscale via deep feature reconstruction,” Neurocomputing, vol. 424, pp. 9–22,
 feature fusion,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 9, Feb. 2021.
 pp. 4890–4899, Sep. 2022. [32] W. Hugo Lopez Pinaya et al., “Unsupervised brain anomaly detection
[10] Z.-X. Lan and X.-M. Dong, “MiniCrack: A simple but efficient convo- and segmentation with transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2102.11650.
 lutional neural network for pixel-level narrow crack detection,” Comput. [33] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
 Ind., vol. 141, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 103698. via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[11] H. Yao, Y. Liu, X. Li, Z. You, Y. Feng, and W. Lu, “A detection [34] C. Li, B. Zhang, D. Hong, X. Jia, A. Plaza, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
 method for pavement cracks combining object detection and atten- disentangled priors for hyperspectral anomaly detection: A coupling
 tion mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, model-driven and data-driven paradigm,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 pp. 22179–22189, May 2022. Learn. Syst., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Apr. 2024.
[12] H. Yao, Y. Liu, H. Lv, J. Huyan, Z. You, and Y. Hou, “Encoder– [35] X. Sun et al., “RingMo: A remote sensing foundation model with
 decoder with pyramid region attention for pixel-level pavement crack masked image modeling,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
 recognition,” Computer-Aided Civil Infrastructure Eng., vol. 39, no. 10, 2022, Art. no. 5612822.
 pp. 1490–1506, May 2024. [36] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum
[13] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc.
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009. pp. 9729–9738.
[14] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of [37] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfimage transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254. supervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[15] L. Zhou, H. Liu, J. Bae, J. He, D. Samaras, and P. Prasanna, “Self 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
 pre-training with masked autoencoders for medical image classification [38] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
 and segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag. (ISBI), in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
 Apr. 2023, pp. 1–6. Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
[16] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation [39] B. Dufumier et al., “Contrastive learning with continuous proxy metamodel,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, data for 3D MRI classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
 pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2021, pp. 58–68.
[17] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He, “An empirical study of training self- [40] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
 supervised vision transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9640–9649. gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
[18] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision trans- (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.
 formers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, [41] S. Desai and H. G. Ramaswamy, “Ablation-CAM: Visual explanapp. 9650–9660. tions for deep convolutional network via gradient-free localization,”
[19] X. Wang et al., “TransPath: Transformer-based self-supervised learning in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020,
 for histopathological image classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. pp. 972–980.
 Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2021, pp. 186–195. [42] H. Wang et al., “Score-CAM: Score-weighted visual explana-
[20] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for tions for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. pp. 24–25.
[21] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional net- [43] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin,
 works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. “Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assign-
 Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham, ments,” in Proc. NIPS, Dec. 2020, pp. 9912–9924.
 Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241. [44] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
[22] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
 for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [45] Z. Tong, T. Ma, J. Huyan, and W. Zhang, “Pavementscapes: A large-scale
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 3431–3440. hierarchical image dataset for asphalt pavement damage segmentation,”
[23] F. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Yu, D. Prokhorov, X. Mei, and H. Ling, “Feature 2022, arXiv:2208.00775.
 pyramid and hierarchical boosting network for pavement crack detec- [46] R. Ren, F. Liu, P. Shi, H. Wang, and Y. Huang, “Preprocessing of crack
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1525–1535, recognition: Automatic crack-location method based on deep learning,”
 Apr. 2020. J. Mater. Civil Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 04022452.
[24] C. Xiang, W. Wang, L. Deng, P. Shi, and X. Kong, “Crack detection [47] X. Xu et al., “Crack detection and comparison study based on
 algorithm for concrete structures based on super-resolution recon- faster R-CNN and mask R-CNN,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1215,
 struction and segmentation network,” Autom. Construction, vol. 140, Feb. 2022.
 Aug. 2022, Art. no. 104346. [48] A. Kolesnikov, X. Zhai, and L. Beyer, “Revisiting self-supervised visual
[25] K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and H.-D. Cheng, “CrackGAN: Pavement crack representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 detection using partially accurate ground truths based on generative Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1920–1929.
 adversarial learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, [49] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 pp. 1306–1319, Feb. 2021. for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
[26] H. Liu, X. Miao, C. Mertz, C. Xu, and H. Kong, “CrackFormer: Trans- Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, Jul. 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 former network for fine-grained crack detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF [50] T. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 3783–3792. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2014, pp. 740–755.
[27] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt- [51] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self-
 Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
 generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44, IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 May 2019. pp. 9664–9674.
[28] J. Huang, C. Li, Y. Lin, and S. Lian, “Unsupervised industrial [52] J. Kim, D. Kim, S. Lee, and S. Chi, “Hybrid DNN training using
 anomaly detection via pattern generative and contrastive networks,” both synthetic and real construction images to overcome training data
 2022, arXiv:2207.09792. shortage,” Autom. Construct., vol. 149, May 2023, Art. no. 104771.
1888 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 Ruiqi Ren received the B.E. degree from Central Pengjiao Jia received the Ph.D. degree in geotechni-
 South University, Changsha, China. He is currently cal engineering from Northeastern University. He is
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Rail currently an Associate Professor of geotechnical
 Transportation, Soochow University, Suzhou, China. engineering with the School of Rail Transportation,
 His research interests include the application of Soochow University (PRC). His research has been
 deep learning and computer vision techniques for recognized by 56 technical articles and more than ten
 infrastructure health monitoring, with a particular patents. His research interests include pipelines and
 interest in developing efficient, automated methods trenchless technology, pipe jacking, and tunneling.
 for pavement distress diagnosis, and structural health
 assessment.

 Jinwoo Kim received the Ph.D. degree in civil
 and environmental engineering from Seoul National
 Peixin Shi received the Ph.D. degree in civil and
 University, South Korea. He is currently with
 environmental engineering from Cornell University.
 the Department of Civil and Environmental Engi-
 He is currently a Full Professor with the School
 neering, Hanyang University, South Korea, as an
 of Rail Transportation, Soochow University. His
 Assistant Professor. His long-term goal is to
 research interests include tunneling and underground
 realize human-centered digitalization and robotic
 space technology, smart infrastructure systems for
 automation in the construction industry. To this
 underground environments, and lifeline earthquake
 end, he researches how to leverage and integrate
 engineering.
 emerging artificial intelligence and automation technologies with long-established human theories and
 knowledge.