IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2502109

 Anomaly Detection Framework With Contrastive
 Learning and Multiview Augmentation for
 Time-Series Domain Generalization
 Yeseul Lee , Seunghwan Song , Kwan-Yong Park , Byoung-Mo Koo , and Jun-Geol Baek

 Abstract— Time-series data are generated and collected the distribution of the training data [2]. This is because most
in manufacturing processes. Time-series data have different models assume that all the data are collected from the same
distribution characteristics, with the underlying assumption distribution during training and testing. However, this strong
being that all data originate from the same distribution. Timeseries anomaly detection methods are trained on stationary data assumption is not appropriate in the real world. In particular,
derived from the source domain. However, the performance of the distributions often change during manufacturing processes due
trained model diminishes when confronted with a nonstationary to labor, machine changes, or maintenance. In this study, this
distribution in the target domain. Consequently, there is a need situation is referred to as a domain shift. Since a domain
for a model that can adapt to any distribution using only the shift causes performance degradation in existing models,
source domain. In this study, we propose an anomaly detection
framework with contrastive learning and multiview augmentation appropriate measures are required [3].
for time-series domain generalization. The proposed method Domain adaptation has been proposed to address domain
uses multiview augmentation to learn three representations for shifts by transferring knowledge or information obtained from
time-series domain generalization. Moreover, the augmented training data (i.e., the source domain) to a model based on test
samples use a temporal convolutional network (TCN) to extract data (i.e., the target domain) [4], [5]. This process primarily
these representations. Subsequently, the extracted representations
are trained with a contrastive learning method inspired by involves reducing or adjusting the differences between the
simple triplet representation learning (SimTriplet). Therefore, source and target domains, enabling the model to be trained
the proposed method can attain the diversity and generalization in the source domain and adaptable to the target domain [6].
performance of the source domain. The performance superiority Despite its success in various tasks, domain adaptation still
of our proposed method is experimentally validated across faces significant challenges. First, training in the target
various domain shift scenarios. Additionally, the effectiveness of
the modules used in the proposed method is confirmed through domain becomes unstable if the distribution is nonstationary.
qualitative analysis. Domain adaptation aims to generalize from in-distribution
 (ID) data with stationarity. However, model performance
 Index Terms— Contrastive learning, multiview augmentation,
temporal convolutional network (TCN), time-series domain degrades when the target domain distribution shifts to out-ofgeneralization. distribution (OOD) and becomes nonstationary, necessitating
 additional learning. Second, effective domain adaptation
 requires collecting samples from all possible distributions,
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 which is inefficient and impractical [7]. Consequently, there

I N THE digital twin manufacturing process, the data are
 collected from several sensors. A large amount of normal
data and a small amount of abnormal data are collected during
 is a need for models that can adapt to any distribution using
 only the source domains collected from the ID.
 Domain generalization aims to maintain performance on
the manufacturing process. The few abnormal data are related unknown domains by training multiple independent source
to the yield of the manufacturing process. Semisupervised domains [8]. Domain adaptation focuses on minimizing the
anomaly detection aims to train the normality of a time- difference between the source and target domains; in contrast,
series representation under the assumption that most of the domain generalization has been proposed as a technique
training data are normal [1]. However, these methods rely on to address the inherent limitations of domain adaptation.
 Domain generalization has been successful in a variety
 Received 9 August 2024; accepted 19 September 2024. Date of publication
27 November 2024; date of current version 9 December 2024. This work was of vision tasks [9], [10] and natural language processing
supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded (NLP) tasks [11], [12], [13]. Representation learning is
by the Korean government (MSIT) (NRF- 2022R1A2C2004457). Also, this often used in domain generalization to extract a generalized
work was supported by Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd (IO201210-07929-01)
and BK21 FOUR funded by the Ministry of Education of Korea and National representation for the source domain. Contrastive learning
Research Foundation of Korea. The Associate Editor coordinating the review among representation learning has demonstrated effective
process was Dr. Zhibin Zhao. (Yeseul Lee and Seunghwan Song are co-first performance for feature extraction [14], [15], [16]. Contrastive
authors.) (Corresponding author: Jun-Geol Baek.)
 The authors are with the Department of Industrial and Management learning trains the same classes (i.e., positive pairs) to
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea (e-mail: be closer in distance, while different classes (i.e., negative
yetsyl0705@korea.ac.kr; ss-hwan@korea.ac.kr; gamja331@korea.ac.kr; pairs) are further apart. Contrastive learning-based domain
kbm970709@korea.ac.kr; jungeol@korea.ac.kr).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3507042 generalization studies typically aim to train domain-invariant
 1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2502109 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

and class-variant representations. Contrastive learning is performance. Then, the augmented sample is processed using
an effective method for domain generalization, which is a temporal convolutional network (TCN). A TCN is a
the problem of interest in this study. It affords several convolutional neural network (CNN)-based model that can be
advantages over traditional methods, such as less dependence used for time-series modeling and has the advantage of fast
on labeled data, improved robustness to domain shifts, and computation speed [27]. Finally, the extracted representation
utilization of effective data augmentation techniques for is trained using a contrastive learning method inspired by
time-series data [15], [16]. Dou et al. [17] proposed model- SimTriplet [25].
agnostic learning of semantic features (MASF). This method The key contributions of this study are as follows:
can be used to extract domain-invariant and class-variant 1) multiview augmentation improves domain generalization
representations. In contrast, Kim et al. [16] overcame the by generating multiple representations of time-series
instability of training due to negative pairs with self-supervised data;
contrastive regularization (SelfReg), which uses only positive 2) the TCN and SimTriplet structures make training
pair samples. suitable for time-series data; and
 However, adapting contrastive learning-based domain gen- 3) domain generalization experiments on various timeeralization to time-series data presents several challenges. series datasets demonstrate the robustness of the
First, previous studies have focused on supervised learning proposed method.
or assumed fully annotated datasets [18]. In manufacturing The remainder of this study is organized as follows.
processes, obtaining sufficient labeled data is time-consuming, Section II provides a detailed description of the proposed
making these approaches impractical. Second, many of these method and its structure. Section III presents an evaluation of
methods are designed for vision and NLP tasks, which three different time-series datasets using the proposed method
utilize data augmentation techniques to diversify the source to verify its performance. Finally, Section IV presents the
domain [19]. Contrastive learning-based domain generalization conclusions and future works of this study.
uses data augmentation to diversify the source domain used for
training. Data augmentation is a technique used to increase II. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
the size of a practical dataset by diversifying the source In this section, we propose an anomaly detection framework
domain [20]. Adding random noise, changing colors, and with contrastive learning and multiview augmentation for timeshapes have been used to augment the source domain [21], series domain generalization. The proposed method draws
[22], [23]. However, because data augmentation is specialized inspiration from SimTriplet [25] but undergoes a model
for vision and NLP tasks, augmentation for time-series data redesign to better suit the requirements of time-series anomaly
is limited. Therefore, appropriate augmentation for time-series detection. Initially, multiview augmentation is employed to
data is required. enhance the diversity of time-series data in the source
 Meanwhile, defining negative pairs in time-series data is domain. Subsequently, the TCN encoder is utilized to extract
difficult owing to the dependencies between time variables representations for each augmented time-series dataset. The
and inter-variables. Therefore, it is necessary to design a overall structure of the proposed method is depicted in Fig. 1.
model that uses only positive pairs [24]. Liu et al. [25]
proposed a simple triplet representation learning (SimTriplet)
that uses only positive pairs. SimTriplet is a modified version A. Multiview Augmentation
of the exploring simple Siamese representation learning Effective time-series domain generalization necessitates
(SimSiam) [26] network structure. Compared to SimSiam, achieving three primary objectives [14]. First, the considerit has the advantage of learning multiple representations by ation of domain-invariant representations between the source
adding features. SimTriplet uses the spatial property that domains allows for the learning of generalized representations
geographically adjacent images are more likely to belong across domain variations without being constrained to a
to the same class, achieved through two-view consistency specific domain. Second, the model must exhibit robustness
learning, which minimizes the distance between two positive against external environments, ensuring stable training under
pairs. However, there are limitations when applied to diverse conditions by accounting for noise. Lastly, it must
time-series data, as they lack distinct classes and spatial possess task-adaptive capabilities to effectively perform tasks
features. in the target domain, making the model applicable to real-
 In this study, we proposed an anomaly detection framework world scenarios. In this study, we utilized three augmentations
with contrastive learning and multiview augmentation for to perform domain generalization in time-series anomaly
time-series domain generalization. The proposed method detection. First, we extracted general features from multiple
aims to detect time-series anomalies in a domain shift tasks in the source domain; this helps achieve performance
situation by extracting a generalized representation. First, the in the target domain. It also enables the extraction of
proposed method uses multiview augmentation for time-series representations that are robust to real-world, noisy time-series
data. Multiview augmentation learns three representations anomalies.
for time-series domain generalization: 1) domain-invariant To attain these objectives, multiview augmentation is
representation; 2) robust representation; and 3) task-adaptive employed, incorporating adversarial attacks and jitter-based
representation. These representations have the advantage data augmentation. Adversarial attacks for data augmentation
of providing source domain diversity and generalization are implemented using the fast gradient sign method (FGSM)
LEE et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND MULTIVIEW AUGMENTATION 2502109

Fig. 1. Contrastive learning with multiview augmentation for time-series domain generalization framework.

[28] in this study. The FGSM-based data augmentation is denotes the gradient of the loss function. The noise
expressed as follows: sign(∇x L(θ S , D S , y S )) is adjusted by the hyperparameter ∈DI .
 Consequently, x̃ DI trains the source domain-invariant represenxadversarial = x+ ∈adversarial ·sign(∇x L(θ, x, y)) (1)
 tation by adding noise, which can lead to misclassification.
where x and y denote the train data and labels, respectively, θ 2) Robust Representation: In the real world, a model that
is the weight of the network, and L(·) is the loss function. The can reliably perform in various environments is required.
process for creating an adversarial sample using the FGSM is In particular, considerable noise is generated during the manas follows: ufacturing process, making it crucial to ensure the robustness
 Step 1: Calculate the gradient ∇x L(θ, x, y) for the loss of generalized performance under diverse conditions and
function on the training data. environments. In this study, we employed jitter-based data
 Step 2: The gradient ∇x L(θ, x, y) is updated in a direction augmentation, as it has been demonstrated to effectively handle
opposite to the label y. real-world noise in several studies [30]. The creation of a
 Step 3: The noise sign(∇x L(θ, x, y)) that can cause sample for a robust representation is shown in the following
misclassification during the update process is defined. equation:
 Step 4: The noise sign(∇x L(θ, x, y)) is adjusted by a
 x̃ R = x+ ∈ R ·σ (3)
hyperparameter ∈adversarial , which is added to the original
data x. where x is the original data and σ is the standard deviation
 FGSM-based data augmentation was used for source for each variable. The standard deviation σ is adjusted by
domain-invariant and task-adaptive representations. This is the hyperparameter ∈ R . Consequently, x̃ R trains the robust
achieved by updating the noise values obtained from each representation to deal with real-world noise and variation.
model in the existing FGSM equation. By contrast, jitter-based 3) Task-Adaptive Representation: Time-series domain genaugmentation is used for external robustness. eralization must be task-adaptive to the target domain,
 1) Domain-Invariant Representation: If the model is trained signifying that the proposed model can be applied in
on common and general patterns across the source domains, new environments. For this purpose, we utilized inverse
it can achieve performance in the target domain. This implies FGSM (InvFGSM) [28]. InvFGSM enhances task-adaptive
that training the model to distinguish between source domains performance by subtracting the noise of the model from the
prevents overreliance on a particular domain. In this study, original data. In this process, InvFGSM aids in achieving better
we utilized FGSM-based data augmentation. FGSM trains performance by adjusting the inputs with minimal loss [31].
the source domain-invariant representation by adding noise to Therefore, InvFGSM-based data augmentation can enhance
the original data [28]. This process increases the uncertainty anomaly detection performance in the target domain. In this
of the model because it generates an adversarial sample study, we employed a temporal convolutional autoencoder
that confuses the model, leading to misclassification. In this (TCN-AE) [32] as an anomaly detection model, with the mean
study, we employed long short-term memory (LSTM) [29] squared error (mse) serving as the loss function. The creation
as a classification model to consider the temporal pattern, of an adversarial sample for a task-adaptive representation is
and cross-entropy served as the loss function. Consequently, as shown in the following equation:
the creation of an adversarial sample for a domain-invariant
 x̃ TA = x− ∈TA ·sign ∇x L θiS , DiS , i = 1, . . . , M (4)
 
representation is shown in the following equation:
 where x is the original data, and DiS is the ith source domain.
 x̃ DI = x+ ∈DI ·sign ∇x L θ S , D S , y S
 
 (2)
 The total number of source domains is M. In addition, θiS
where x is the original data and D S and y S are the data is the ith source domain network weights and ∇x L(θiS , DiS )
and labels in the source domain, respectively. In addition, θ S denotes the gradient of the ith loss function. The ith noise
is the source domain network weights and ∇x L(θ S , D S , y S ) sign(∇x L(θiS , DiS )) is adjusted by the hyperparameter ∈TA .
2502109 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Consequently, x̃ TA trained the task-adaptive representation to as pDI , p R , and pTA . The proposed method involves two
allow the model to achieve more robust results. loss functions for time-series domain generalization: 1)
 minimizing the dissimilarity between the source domain-
B. TCN Encoder for Feature Extraction and Predictor invariant representation and the robust representation to ensure
 that the learned features are stable and generalizable across
 In this study, we employed a TCN encoder for feature different domains and 2) minimizing the dissimilarity between
extraction from the augmented samples. TCN is a CNN- the task-adaptive representation for the target domain and the
based model that can be used in sequence modeling and robust representation to enhance the model’s ability to adapt
uses dilated convolution [27]. Dilated convolution has the to new tasks and improve anomaly detection performance in
advantage of increasing the receptive field to obtain long the target domain. Each loss function is expressed as follows:
time step information without the need for a convolutional
 1
layer. TCN is suitable for time-series modeling and offers the L RDI = NCS(z DI , p R ) + NCS(z R , pDI )
 
 (6)
advantage of faster computation compared to a recurrent neural 2
 1
network (RNN)-based models [27]. The proposed method L RTA = NCS(z TA , p R ) + NCS(z R , pTA ) .
 
 (7)
utilized three parallel TCN encoders with shared weights, 2
extracting features from the multiview augmented samples. In (6), L RDI maximizes the similarity between the source
In this study, we utilized ten dilated convolution layers in domain-invariant representation and the robust representation,
the TCN encoder, enabling the extraction of generalized promoting a robust domain-invariant to facilitate learning
representations from long-term timesteps. As a result, TCN and avoid misclassification among between different source
encoders could process each sequential input and capture the domains. Conversely, L RTA in (7) maximizes the similarity
relationship between the augmented samples. between the task-adaptive representation for the target domain
 The predictor and stop-gradient are devices to prevent mode and the robust representation, fostering robust task adaptation
collapse that occurs when SimTriplet performs contrastive to enhance the extraction of representations for improved
learning using only positive pairs. The predictor utilizes a anomaly detection performance in the target domain. The final
multilayer perceptron structure with two linear layers, which loss function of the proposed method is shown in the following
is the same as the SimTriplet structure. equation:
 L Total = L RDI + L RTA . (8)
C. Loss Function
 The final loss function of the proposed method helps TCN
 In domain generalization, training and testing are performed encoders with shared weights in embedding the representations
using the source and target domains, respectively. In this study, of different augmentations. Meanwhile, the stop-gradient is
we trained an encoder that can extract the representation with accomplished by stopping or not propagating a particular
the loss function negative cosine similarity (NCS) loss using gradient during backpropagation [26]. Therefore, the proposed
the source domain data in the training process. In the test method can be trained to avoid mode collapse through the final
process, we defined the Euclidean distance between the target loss function and to stop the gradient.
domain representation and the source domain representation Consequently, the output of the proposed method is the
obtained by the encoder as the anomaly score and utilized it latent vector calculated by the TCN. Training of the proposed
for anomaly detection. method yields a feature extractor that is task-adaptive and
 Our model for contrastive-learning-based time-series capable of extracting domain-invariant representations.
domain generalization relies on positive pairs exclusively,
drawing inspiration from the SimTriplet [25]. The suitability III. E XPERIMENT
of two-view consistency learning in SimTriplet for learning
 A. Datasets
the relationship between augmented samples motivated this
choice. Consequently, each output of the TCN encoder serves The aim of the proposed method is to train a representation
as an asymmetrical predictor, with a stop gradient applied. for time-series data in the source domain, enabling effective
The NCS [33] is employed to calculate dissimilarity between time-series anomaly detection, even in a domain shift situation
the outputs, reducing differences between the augmented in the target domain. Therefore, two datasets were selected to
samples through opposite characteristics. The NCS is shown evaluate the proposed method.
in the following equation: 1) SKAB Dataset: The Skoltech Anomaly Benchmark
 (SKAB) dataset was collected during the simulation of a
 p q
 NCS( p, q) = − · . (5) water circulation system [34]. It comprises Valve1 at the outlet
 ∥ p∥2 ∥q∥2 and Valve2 at the inlet of the water circulation pump. Each
In (5), p and q denote two vectors. Further, ∥ p∥2 and ∥q∥2 subset of Valve1 and Valve2 signifies the time order in which
denote the Euclidean distances between the two vectors. NCS they were collected. There were 14 subsets of Valve1 and
makes the two vectors more similar and ranges from −1 to 1. four subsets of Valve2. The data consist of eight variables
 In this study, x̃ DI , x̃ R , and x̃ TA were created using (accelerometer1, accelerometer2, temperature, thermocouple,
multiview augmentation. These representations are processed current, pressure, voltage, and rate) along with a time step.
using the TCN encoder to obtain z DI , z R , and z TA . These The SKAB dataset contains the following anomaly types:
features were passed on to the predictor and expressed abrupt change, contextual anomalies, collective anomalies, and
LEE et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND MULTIVIEW AUGMENTATION 2502109

 TABLE I changes. Three different machines Machine01, Machine02,
 TASK I NFORMATION FOR T IME , M ACHINE , AND and Machine03 of a CNC milling machine were considered for
 O PERATION D OMAIN S HIFT S CENARIO
 this purpose. Three tasks (M1, M2, and M3) were established
 to verify the machine domain shift, with each task’s source
 domain comprising two machines and the target domain
 consisting of the remaining machine not used in the source
 domain.
 The operation domain shift evaluates the proposed method’s
 performance when the operating conditions of the machine
 undergo changes. Fifteen different operations (Operation01 to
 Operation15) from the CNC milling machine dataset were
 considered for this purpose. Four tasks (O1, O2, O3, and O4)
 were employed to verify operational domain shifts. In each
 task, the source domain included the remaining 14 operations,
 excluding one specific operation. In this study, Operation02,
 Operation04, Operation07, and Operation10 were chosen as
 specific operations because only four out of the 15 contain
 both normal and abnormal data.

gradual change. Additionally, both normal and abnormal data C. Experiment Details
are labeled, with a 35% anomaly ratio. Time-series domain generalization requires testing of
 2) CNC Milling Machine Dataset: The computer numerical distributions that are not used in training. Therefore, M source
control (CNC) milling machine dataset was collected during domains D S = [D1S , . . . , D M
 S
 ] with only normal data used in
the processing of a piece of aluminum [34]. It includes the training process. The testing process used the target domain
three machine subsets and 15 operation subsets, reflecting D T that was not part of the training, containing both normal
the variability in the physical flow of production during the and abnormal data. This setup allowed the evaluation of the
manufacturing process. The data consist of three variables (x- performance of the target domain for a model trained in the
axis, y-axis, and z-axis vibrations) along with a time step. source domain.
The CNC milling machine dataset contains the following The proposed method aims to achieve generalized perforanomaly types: tool wear, spindle malfunction, unexpected mance in time-series anomaly detection. Consequently, various
vibrations, temperature anomalies, and misalignment. Normal time-series anomaly detection models were employed for comand abnormal data are labeled, with a 4.12% anomaly ratio. parison: deep support vector data description (Deep SVDD)
 [36], multiscale convolutional recurrent encoder–decoder
 (MSCRED) [37], unsupervised anomaly detection (USAD)
B. Problem Definition
 [38], deep transformer networks for anomaly detection
 The proposed method aims for good performance in the (TranAD) [39], and SimSiam [26]. All algorithms were trained
target domain by training in the source domain. Therefore, for 50 epochs with a window size of 60 and a batch size of 64,
three domain shift scenarios were considered using the SKAB and each experiment was repeated five times. The experiments
and CNC milling machine datasets. For the time domain shift were implemented using the PyTorch software package in
scenario, the SKAB dataset is considered because it contains the Python3 language. Training procedures utilized an Intel1
valves collected at different times in the same environment. Core2 i9-12900K CPU at 3.60 GHz, 64 GB of RAM, and an
For the machine and operation domain shift scenarios, the NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090Ti graphics card with 32 GB of
CNC milling machine dataset is considered as it contains G6X memory.
information about different machines or operations collected
simultaneously. The task information for each domain shift D. Evaluation Metrics
scenario is presented in Table I.
 Two metrics were employed to evaluate the performance
 The time domain shift assesses the performance of the
 of time-series domain generalization. First, the area under
proposed method as the temporal distribution undergoes
 the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve assessed
changes. Valve1 was considered because it contained sufficient
 the anomaly detection performance. A higher AUROC
subsets of the SKAB dataset. There are 14 subsets of Valve1
 value indicates effective discrimination between normal and
ranging from Valve1_00 to Valve1_13, where “t” in each
 abnormal data. Second, to evaluate generalization performance
Valve1_t signifies the temporal order. Tasks for evaluating the
 in domain shift situations, a new metric, the GP-Score, was
time domain shift scenario were categorized from T1 to T7,
 defined as follows:
with the number of source domains increasing by one for
 AUROC of source to target domain
each task to align with the temporal order. The target domain GP-Score = . (9)
consists of a subset immediately after each task. AUROC of source to source domain
 The machine domain shift assesses the performance 1 Registered trademark.

of the proposed method as the distribution of machines 2 Trademarked.
2502109 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. GP-Score in time domain shift. Fig. 3. GP-Score in machine domain shift.

 The GP-Score is calculated as the ratio of the AUROC
for different types of test data when the model is trained on
normal data from the source domain. In (9), the denominator
represents the AUROC when the model is trained on normal
data from the source domain and tested on normal and
abnormal data from the source domain. The numerator
represents the AUROC when the model is trained on normal
data from the source domain and tested on normal and
abnormal data from the target domain. Essentially, the GP-
Score quantifies the performance change as the distribution
shifts. Any GP-Score greater than 1 is scaled to 1, enabling
the observation of quantitative performance changes in domain
shift situations. Fig. 4. GP-Score in operation domain shift.

E. Experiment Results included the remaining unused machines in the source domain.
 1) Time Domain Shift Result: To assess the performance Table III and Fig. 3 present the AUROC and GP-Score results,
of the proposed method under changes in the temporal respectively, for the machine domain shifts.
distribution, seven tasks (T1–T7) were considered using the Experimental results reveal that the proposed method
SKAB dataset. The source domains were utilized for training performs the best in two out of the three tasks. The
in chronological order, while the target domain is a subset AUROC performance for task M2 was suboptimal; however,
immediately after each task. Table II and Fig. 2 present the the GP-Score results remained stable compared to those
AUROC and GP-Score results for the time domain shifts, of other models. The comparison models, except for Deep
respectively. SVDD, demonstrated effective performance under machine
 The experimental findings indicate that the proposed method domain shifts. This is attributed to the CNC milling machine
outperforms the comparison models in four out of seven tasks. dataset not inherently being prone to machine domain shifts.
For the remaining three tasks, the proposed method exhibits Consequently, the results indicate that the proposed method
less performance degradation than the comparison models. extracts general representations from multiple source domains
In contrast, anomaly detection models based on adversarial and adapts to variations in the machine distribution, suggesting
learning, such as USAD and TranAD, exhibit limitations in that stable performance can be achieved with a small number
their ability to learn representations from source domains. of source domains.
TranAD performs poorly due to overfitting to the source 3) Operation Domain Shift Result: To assess the perfordomains caused by the transformer structure used in the model. mance of the proposed method under changes in machine
Additionally, deep SVDD performs inadequately as it involves operating conditions, four tasks (O1, O2, O3, and O4) were
converting multiple source domains into a single center. The considered using the CNC milling machine dataset. The
GP-Score suggests that the proposed method maintains stable source domain for each task included all 14 operations,
performance under time domain shifts, indicating its ability except for one specific operation, while the target domain
to sustain generalized performance even when the temporal comprised the remaining unused operations in the source
distribution changes. domain. Table IV and Fig. 4 present the AUROC and GP-
 2) Machine Domain Shift Result: To evaluate the perfor- Score results, respectively, for the operation domain shifts.
mance of the proposed method under changes in the machine The experimental results showed that the proposed method
distribution, three tasks (M1, M2, and M3) were considered performed the best in all tasks. Because the experiment on
using the CNC milling machine dataset. Each task’s source the operational domain shifts trains 14 source domains, most
domain comprised two machines, and the target domain of the comparison models also performed well. However,
LEE et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND MULTIVIEW AUGMENTATION 2502109

 TABLE II
 AUROC OF T IME -S ERIES D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION IN T IME D OMAIN S HIFT (SKAB DATASET )

 TABLE III
 AUROC OF T IME -S ERIES D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION IN M ACHINE D OMAIN S HIFT (CNC M ILLING M ACHINE DATASET )

 TABLE IV
 AUROC OF T IME -S ERIES D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION IN O PERATION D OMAIN S HIFT (CNC M ILLING M ACHINE DATASET )

the performance of most models tended to drop sharply standard deviation. The experiments were performed on the
at O4. This is because Operation10, which is used as the SKAB dataset in a time domain shift scenario. Elucidating
target domain in O4, has a greater variation in the operation the individual effects of multiview augmentation is difficult
distribution than the source domains. In contrast, the GP-Score because the framework used in this study consists of shared
shows that the proposed method performs consistently and weights of the three TCN encoders. Therefore, we replaced
well in all tasks. This demonstrates that the proposed method the augmentation with jitter-based augmentation to verify its
maintained its generalized performance when the machine effectiveness. Experiments showed that the best performance is
operation distribution changed. achieved when the multiview augmentation technique is fully
 utilized. In addition, x̃ DI had the greatest impact on multiview
 augmentation.
F. Ablation Study Fig. 5(b) shows the sensitivity of each augmented sample
 We performed an ablation study involving a qualitative anal- to the hyperparameters ∈DI , ∈ R , and ∈TA of the multiview
ysis of the proposed method to validate the effectiveness and augmentation. The box plot represents the AUROC of
necessity of the employed modules. Multiview augmentation the seven tasks in the SKAB dataset. The experimental
achieves source domain-invariant, robust, and task-adaptive results show that x̃ DI and x̃ TA are hardly affected by
representations in the target domain. Fig. 5 illustrates the hyperparameters, while x̃ R is considerably affected.
the individual impact of multiview augmentation and the Consequently, multiview augmentation is relatively robust
sensitivity of each augmented sample to hyperparameters ∈DI , to hyperparameters. This can lead to stable performance
∈ R , and ∈TA . in time-series domain generalization. The proposed method
 Fig. 5(a) shows the AUROC performance as a result of the used fixed hyperparameters regardless of the dataset: ∈DI =
individual impacts of multiview augmentations x̃ DI and x̃ TA . 0.001, ∈ R = 0.0005, and ∈TA = 0.005. The hyperparameter
The bar graph shows the mean, and the line graph shows the values were determined through extensive experimentation
2502109 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 IV. C ONCLUSION
 This study devised a novel anomaly detection framework
 that utilizes multiview augmentation to enhance time-series
 domain generalization. This structure leverages multiview
 augmentation to learn three features for time-series domain
 generalization. Subsequently, the time-series features are
 extracted using a TCN encoder. Finally, the extracted
 representations are trained using a contrastive learning method
 inspired by SimTriplet. Experiments were conducted in three
 domain shift scenarios to evaluate the performance of the
 proposed method; the results demonstrated its effectiveness
 in learning generalized features from various source domains
 to perform reliably within the target domain. Moreover, the
 proposed method exhibited high generalization performance
 compared to existing methods. Finally, qualitative analysis was
 performed to verify the effectiveness of the modules used in
 the proposed method.
 Despite the promising results, a few limitations must be
 acknowledged. First, the proposed method heavily relies on the
 quality and diversity of the source domain data. If the source
 domains are not adequately representative of potential target
 domains, the model’s generalization performance may suffer.
 Second, while the method shows robustness in simulated
 domain shifts, its performance in real-world applications,
Fig. 5. Ablation study of multiview augmentation. (a) Comparison of where domain shifts can be more unpredictable and complex,
the impacts of multiview augmentation. (b) Hyperparameter sensitivity in requires further validation. Future studies should focus on
multiview augmentation.
 addressing these limitations by exploring more efficient
 algorithms, incorporating additional real-world datasets for
 validation, and enhancing the adaptability of the model to
 unforeseen domain shifts.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] F. Zhou, G. Wang, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and T. Zhong, “Semi-supervised
 anomaly detection via neural process,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1–13, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3266755.
 [2] F. Gao, J. Li, R. Cheng, Y. Zhou, and Y. Ye, “ConNet:
 Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection based on sparse positive samples,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 67249–67258, 2021, doi:
 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3077014.
 [3] Z. Sun et al., “Dynamic domain generalization,” 2022,
Fig. 6. Ablation study for feature extraction. arXiv:2205.13913.
 [4] C. Chen, F. Shen, J. Xu, and R. Yan, “Domain adaptation-based
 transfer learning for gear fault diagnosis under varying working
 conditions,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–10, 2021, doi:
to balance model performance in different domains and 10.1109/TIM.2020.3011584.
 [5] G. Michau and O. Fink, “Unsupervised transfer learning for anomaly
tasks. detection: Application to complementary operating condition transfer,”
 In this study, we utilized a TCN encoder for feature Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 216, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106816, doi:
extraction for the augmented samples. Comparison with other 10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2021.106816.
 [6] P. Singhal, R. Walambe, S. Ramanna, and K. Kotecha, “Domain adapencoder methods demonstrated the effectiveness of the TCN tation: Challenges, methods, datasets, and applications,” IEEE Access,
encoder for time-series modeling. Three time-series encoders vol. 11, pp. 6973–7020, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3237025.
were used for comparison: 1-D CNN, LSTM, and linear. Fig. 6 [7] Y. Liao, R. Huang, J. Li, Z. Chen, and W. Li, “Deep semisupervised
 domain generalization network for rotary machinery fault diagnosis
presents the ranking results for the AUROC performance upon under variable speed,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 10,
changing the encoder in the proposed method. pp. 8064–8075, Oct. 2020.
 For the domain shift scenario, we performed investigations [8] J. Wang et al., “Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on
 domain generalization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8,
by changing the encoder used for feature extraction. pp. 8052–8072, Aug. 2022.
We performed five experiments with each of the encoders [9] C. Liu, “Learning causal semantic representation for out-of-distribution
and ranked the results. As shown in Fig. 6, the best results prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
corresponded to the use of the TCN encoder on all datasets. pp. 6155–6170.
 [10] R. Gong, W. Li, Y. Chen, and L. Van Gool, “DLOW: Domain flow for
This shows that the TCN encoder can effectively extract adaptation and generalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
features from time-series data. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2472–2481.
LEE et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND MULTIVIEW AUGMENTATION 2502109

[11] G. Perez, “Improving domain generalization using style regularization,” [36] L. Ruf et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 in Proc. LatinX AI Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Conf., Jun. 2021, Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 pp. 1006–1016. [37] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
[12] Z. Wang, Q. Wang, C. Lv, X. Cao, and G. Fu, “Unseen target stance detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
 detection with adversarial domain generalization,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–8. [38] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[13] B. Wang, M. Lapata, and I. Titov, “Meta-learning for domain “USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 generalization in semantic parsing,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. Technol., 2021, pp. 366–379. Aug. 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[14] S. Motiian, M. Piccirilli, D. A. Adjeroh, and G. Doretto, “Unified deep [39] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 supervised domain adaptation and generalization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 5716–5726. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[15] H. Yun, R. Wang, R. Rayhana, S. Pant, M. Genest, and Z. Liu,
 “WaveCLR: Contrastive learning of guided wave representations for
 composite damage identification,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, Yeseul Lee received the B.S. degree in industrial
 pp. 1–14, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3386207. engineering from Hanyang University, Seoul,
[16] D. Kim, Y. Yoo, S. Park, J. Kim, and J. Lee, “SelfReg: Self- South Korea, in 2022. She is currently pursuing
 supervised contrastive regularization for domain generalization,” in Proc. the M.S. degree in industrial and management
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9599–9608. engineering with Korea University, Seoul.
 Her research interests include time-series
[17] Q. Dou, K. Kamnitsas, and B. Glocker, “Domain generalization via
 anomaly detection and domain generalization for
 model-agnostic learning of semantic features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 manufacturing.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 6447–6458.
[18] Q. Zhang et al., “Conditional adversarial domain generalization with a
 single discriminator for bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–15, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3071350.
[19] X. Zhang, L. Zhou, R. Xu, P. Cui, Z. Shen, and H. Liu, “Towards Seunghwan Song received the B.S. degree in
 unsupervised domain generalization,” 2021, arXiv:2107.06219. information statistics from Korea University, Seoul,
[20] L. Zhang et al., “When unseen domain generalization is unnecessary? South Korea, in 2019, where he is currently pursuing
 Rethinking data augmentation,” 2019, arXiv:1906.03347. the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in industrial and
[21] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, management engineering.
 “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from His research interests include representation learnsimulation to the real world,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots ing and prognostics and health management in
 Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2017, pp. 23–30. manufacturing. He is conducting research to improve
[22] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-to- manufacturing systems using the latest deep learning
 real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization,” in Proc. technologies.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2018, pp. 3803–3810.
[23] R. Khirodkar, D. Yoo, and K. Kitani, “Domain randomization for scenespecific car detection and pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Kwan-Yong Park received the B.S. degree in indus-
 Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2019, pp. 1932–1940. trial engineering from Seoul National University
[24] X. Zheng, X. Chen, M. Schurch, A. Mollaysa, A. Allam, and of Science and Technology, Seoul, South Korea,
 M. Krauthammer, “Simple contrastive representation learning for time in 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. and Ph.D.
 series forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2303.18205. degrees in industrial and management engineering
[25] Q. Liu et al., “SimTriplet: Simple triplet representation learning with a with Korea University, Seoul.
 single GPU,” 2021, arXiv:2103.05585. His research interests include anomaly detection,
[26] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” fault detection, object detection, and representation
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), learning.
 Jun. 2021, pp. 15745–15753.
[27] S. Bai, J. Zico Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
 arXiv:1803.01271. Byoung-Mo Koo received the B.S. degree in
[28] M. Tasnim Pervin, L. Tao, A. Huq, Z. He, and L. Huo, “Adversarial statistics and industrial and management engineering
 attack driven data augmentation for accurate and robust medical image from Korea University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2023,
 segmentation,” 2021, arXiv:2105.12106. where he is currently pursuing the M.S. and Ph.D.
[29] R. C. Staudemeyer and E. Rothstein Morris, “Understanding LSTM—A degrees in industrial and management engineering.
 tutorial into long short-term memory recurrent neural networks,” 2019, His research interests include anomaly detection,
 arXiv:1909.09586. fault detection, and classification.
[30] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112.
[31] S. Liang, Y. Li, and R. Srikant, “Enhancing the reliability
 of Out-of-distribution image detection in neural networks,” 2017,
 arXiv:1706.02690. Jun-Geol Baek received the B.S., M.S., and
[32] M. Thill, W. Konen, H. Wang, and T. Bäck, “Temporal convolutional Ph.D. degrees in industrial engineering from Korea
 autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,” University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1993, 1995, and
 Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 112, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107751, doi: 2001, respectively.
 10.1016/J.ASOC.2021.107751. From 2002 to 2007, he was an Assistant
[33] F. Baier, S. Mair, and S. G. Fadel, “Self-supervised Siamese Professor with the Department of Industrial Systems
 autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2304.02549. Engineering, Induk University, Seoul. He was also
[34] D. Pau, A. Khiari, and D. Denaro, “Online learning on tiny micro- an Assistant Professor with the Department of
 controllers for anomaly detection in water distribution systems,” in Proc. Business Administration, Kwangwoon University,
 IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE-Berlin), Nov. 2021, Seoul, from 2007 to 2008. In 2008, he joined the
 pp. 1–6. School of Industrial and Management Engineering,
[35] M.-A. Tnani, M. Feil, and K. Diepold, “Smart data collection system Korea University, where he is currently a Professor. His research interests
 for brownfield CNC milling machines: A new benchmark dataset for include fault detection and classification (FDC), advanced process control
 data-driven machine monitoring,” Proc. CIRP, vol. 107, pp. 131–136, (APC), prognostics and health management (PHM), and big data analytics in
 Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.PROCIR.2022.04.022. manufacturing.