888 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Anomaly Detection in Event-Triggered Traffic Time
 Series via Similarity Learning
 Shaoyu Dou , Kai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yang Jiao , Chengbo Qiu , and Kui Ren , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Time series analysis has achieved great success in
cyber security such as intrusion detection and device identification. Learning similarities among multiple time series is a crucial
problem since it serves as the foundation for downstream analysis.
Due to the complex temporal dynamics of the event-triggered
time series, it often remains unclear which similarity metric is
appropriate for security-related tasks, such as anomaly detection
and clustering. The overarching goal of this paper is to develop
an unsupervised learning framework that is capable of learning Fig. 1. Representative event-triggered traffic time series from the UNSW-IoT
similarities among a set of event-triggered time series. From the ma- dataset.
chine learning vantage point, the proposed framework harnesses
the power of both hierarchical multi-resolution sequential autoencoders and the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to effectively device may send sensitive personal information to the Internet,
learn the low-dimensional representations from the time series.
Finally, the obtained similarity measure can be easily visualized which compromises users’ privacy and requires immediate atfor the explanation. The proposed framework aspires to offer a tention [1]. More generally, machine learning applied to time
stepping stone that gives rise to a systematic approach to model series, including applications like network device behavior deand learn similarities among a multitude of event-triggered time tection and IoT detection, is anticipated to be pivotal in various
series. Through extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments, emerging applications [2], [3], [4], [5]. This motivates the exit is revealed that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods considerably. tension of similarity learning beyond just anomaly detection to
 a broader range of machine learning tasks, such as clustering.
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, clustering, event-triggered The past decade has witnessed a proliferation of eventtime series, Internet of Things security, software security.
 triggered sensors or software-generated time series data, where
 events refer to human intervention or programmed machine
 I. INTRODUCTION activity. Such events will trigger the working state transition
 of the program, resulting in heterogeneous dynamics of the
 IME series anomaly detection is crucial in various do-
T mains, including cyber-security and astronomy. A central challenge in time series anomaly detection is measuring
 traffic time series. Please refer to Section III-A for an informal
 definition of event-triggered time series. A key challenge in
 analyzing such event-triggered (traffic) time series is that it
the similarity between two time series, which is essential for often contains temporal event sequences that are sporadic or
comparing samples and differentiating abnormal from normal. highly heterogeneous as shown in Fig. 1. It may contain a
Practically, computing a suitable similarity metric lies at the few short traffic bursts and a long sleep time with no data
heart of numerous machine learning tasks, including clustering transmission, as shown in the first sub-figure, or seems to be the
and supervised classification. The motivation for learning the “superposition” of multiple time series, as shown in the second
similarity of event-triggered time series in this paper is to detect and third sub-figures. The unique pattern makes this type of time
anomalous or malicious behavior of devices or software via series extremely heterogeneous and exhibits both long-term and
their traffic. For instance, a hacked malicious healthcare IoT short-term temporal dependencies which render the traditional
 machine learning algorithms not directly applicable. Apart from
 Manuscript received 5 December 2022; revised 28 March 2024; accepted 16 the heterogeneity, other challenges include: 1) Since the labeling
June 2024. Date of publication 25 June 2024; date of current version 14 March process is often very expensive, there are rarely sufficient and
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 12371519, Grant 61771013, and Grant 62032021, in accurate labels for similarity learning. 2) To achieve the best
part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China, performance, similarity learning needs to be tuned for a parand in part by the Fundamental Research Funds of Shanghai Jiading District. ticular task. 3) Event-triggered sensors or software-generated
(Corresponding author: Kai Yang.)
 Shaoyu Dou, Kai Yang, Yang Jiao, and Chengbo Qiu are with the Department traffic time series data often vary in time granularity. 4) In many
of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 201800, applications, we need to not only compute the similarity between
China (e-mail: kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn). two unlabeled time series but also provide insight into the
 Kui Ren is with the Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail:
kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn). mechanism so that domain experts can understand the similarity
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3418906 metric.

 1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 889

 The above challenges give rise to the following questions. To address this issue, one may employ techniques such as Edit
 How can we design an unsupervised machine learning ap- Distance with Real Penalty (EDR) and Dynamic Time Warping
proach to learn the similarity between two event-triggered time (DTW) to handle sequences of unequal length. However, EDR
series? is calculated based on local procedures and treats all change
 The traditional sequential autoencoder, such as GRU or operations equally, making it sensitive to noise and irregular
LSTM-based autoencoder, encounters the problem of error ac- sampling rates. Thus, even minor deviations in a group of data
cumulation during autoregressive decoding [6], [7], leading to points within the time series can cause EDR to produce large
suboptimal reconstruction and representation quality, particu- values, compromising its effectiveness. DTW is a time series
larly for non-smooth time series with high temporal dynam- similarity metric that has been widely studied and used in recent
ics, as shown in Fig. 1. In this paper, we present ET-Net, years. It aims to calculate an optimal matching between two
a bagging model designed to effectively model the temporal time series and has proved to be capable of providing strong
dynamics of Event-Triggered time series. To address the chal- baseline performance in many machine learning tasks such as
lenges mentioned above, we propose two ensemble compo- classification and clustering. In addition, there exists a lot of
nents that adopt different autoencoders, which are named W work dedicated to improving the performance of DTW [14] or
compression network and D compression network and inspired combining DTW with deep learning methods [15], [16].
by multi-task and multi-resolution learning, respectively. The The majority of deep learning-based methods for time series
proposed autoencoders learn robust representations and form similarity learning use a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) or
the basis of similarity learning. Each ensemble component then Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to model the temporal
utilizes a statistical Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to measure dynamics and convert them into low-dimensional representasimilarities among a collection of time series on the learned tions. Similarity or distance metrics in this low-dimensional
representations. The overall ET-Net provides visual outcomes latent space are expected to reflect the semantic relationship
to aid human understanding. More specifically, we have made between time series. [17] proposes a structure called WaRTEm
the following contributions: to generate time series embedding that exhibits resilience to
 r Unsupervised similarity learning: ET-Net is completely warping. [18] proposes a model named DTCR that integrates
 unsupervised and can learn similarities among unlabeled the seq2seq model and the K-means objective to generate latent
 event-triggered time series. In addition, similarity learning space representations that are better suited for clustering. Autocan be tuned for a particular task to optimize the detection warp proposed in [19] obtains a vector embedding through the
 performance. sequence autoencoder, which helps to guide the optimization of
 r Visualization and interpretability: ET-Net generates a a warping metric.
 semantically meaningful latent space that can be visualized
 to explain the learned model. In addition, some classification rules can be drawn from the visualization of the B. Anomaly Detection
 original space to help human experts understand the data. Time series anomaly detection can be broadly categorized
 r Effectiveness: ET-Net exhibits strong empirical perfor- as either supervised or unsupervised methods. Supervised
 mance for downstream analysis such as anomaly detection anomaly detection techniques such as Support-Vector Machine
 and clustering than other competing state-of-the-art meth- (SVM) [20] and Random Forest (RF) [21] require a large amount
 ods over real-world datasets. It remains effective even when of accurate labels to achieve optimal performance. However, in
 the training data is contaminated by anomalies or noises practice, imbalanced training data and inaccurate labeling can
 that are common in time series analysis [8]. In addition, lead to performance degradation. Additionally, in many cases,
 the proposed model still has competitive performance on it is not possible to obtain labels for anomaly detection, making
 testing data with different time granularity [9] and traffic the supervised approach completely inapplicable. Unsupervised
 disturbances without retraining. anomaly detection, which includes classification-based methods [22] and density-based methods [23], [24], detects anomalies
 II. RELATED WORK by training a one-class classifier on normal data points or by
 performing density estimation. Although these methods can
A. Similarity Learning
 achieve satisfactory anomaly detection accuracy, they are often
 We summarize related work on similarity learning that has ineffective when dealing with high-dimensional time series data.
received significant attention over the past decade, including Recently, reconstruction-based deep learning methods have
non-parametric methods and parametric methods based on deep emerged as a new means for unsupervised anomaly detecneural networks. tion in high-dimensional data. These methods assume that the
 There exists a large body of work on non-parametric methods reconstructions of low-dimensional projections of anomalies
for time series similarity learning, including euclidean Distance will deviate greatly from the original samples, and use the
(ED) [10], Editing Distance on Real sequences (EDR) [11], reconstruction error to detect anomalies [25], [26]. However,
and Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [12]. Euclidean distance, vanilla reconstruction-based methods are often limited because
while the most widely used distance metric, often yields poor they only conduct anomaly detection based on reconstruction
performance for time series similarity learning because it is error. Hybrid methods have been developed to harness the
sensitive to anomalies, noise, warping and contamination [13]. power of both autoencoders and model-driven approaches. This
890 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

combined approach compresses the original data into a latent Example-based attribution methods visualize a set of training
space and then performs model estimation in that space. For samples or prototypes to explain the output of the network. [39]
instance, [18] uses density-based K-means clustering in the utilizes the influence function to determine which training samlatent space, while [27] and [28] model the latent space from ples play a decisive role in the model prediction for a given
the perspective of probability by leveraging normal distribution sample. [40] proposes that the K nearest neighbors of a given
and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), respectively. However, sample in the feature space are the training samples that conthe assumption that the reconstruction error follows a Gaussian tribute the most to the network output. While extensive efforts
distribution in [27] is not applicable to highly heterogeneous have been undertaken for the example-based attribution method,
event-triggered time series. This is because different networks its application to time series data is still an under-explored area.
have varying reconstruction performances on heterogeneous ET-Net adopts an example-based visually interpretable apdata. Additionally, [29] learns a normalized flow in the latent proach for several reasons. First, feature-based approaches such
space. as LIME and SHAP attribute the model output to a set of data
 It is worth noting that some recent studies have explored hy- points in a time series. However, in event-triggered time series,
brid methods or ensembled autoencoders which are also adopted each data point is aggregated from the behavior of multiple
in proposed ET-Net. For instance, [30] proposed a two-stage events, thus analyzing only a single sample, and attributing outapproach that trains an SAE-based representation network with put to data points does not explore the specific event that caused
GMM, which can lead to suboptimal results due to the separate the anomaly, nor help humans understand how to distinguish
optimization. In contrast, ET-Net adopts an end-to-end approach normal and abnormal samples. In contrast, the example-based
to jointly optimize the representation learning and density esti- method provides a group of similar abnormal samples and a
mation. As a result, the representations are constrained by GMM, set of normal samples for comparison when analyzing a given
leading to a visually interpretable latent space. Another example abnormal sample. Although this cannot directly indicate the
is [31], which proposed learning graph representations with a specific reason for the anomaly, humans can obtain knowledge
node similarity measure based on topology as supervision, but to distinguish normal and abnormal samples by comparing and
this type of supervised information is not available for time series summarizing these samples, as discussed in Section IV-C4.
since there is no prior knowledge that represents the similarity Moreover, while some methods, such as the counterfactual
among a set of time series. In [32], sample representations sample generation-based method [41], add perturbations to the
are generated using a homogeneous multichannel autoencoder, original sample to generate samples that would alter the model
and the network is optimized in a supervised manner using prediction, this can be problematic in time series analysis scenardomain labels. In contrast, ET-Net is a completely unsupervised ios. Specifically, any artificial perturbation on the time series can
architecture that learns the similarity of event-triggered time cause difficulties understanding the time series. Furthermore,
series without relying on any prior knowledge or labels. interpretation methods designed for specific network structures,
 such as CNN [42], can be challenging to extend to the task of
 time series analysis. To avoid the drawbacks mentioned above,
C. Visual Interpretability ET-Net employs a similar approach as [40], but instead outputs
 Visual interpretability is often seen as the first step in explain- normal and abnormal samples for a given anomaly sample in
ing deep neural networks. It can be used to explain the inherent an unsupervised setting. This approach helps humans to better
mechanism of the neural network [18], [28], [33], and can also understand the anomaly and may summarize knowledge from
be used to trace which training samples or features significantly that.
affect the output of the neural network, i.e., attributing the output In this paper, we propose an end-to-end general framework for
of neural network to a set of features or samples. In general, the learning the similarity between event-triggered time series in a
attribution methods can be roughly categorized into two groups, fully unsupervised manner. The resulting outcomes can be easily
i.e., feature-based and example-based. The feature-based attri- visualized in latent space for human comprehension. We also
bution methods compute the contribution of each input feature use the example-based attribution method to explain the model
to the model output and visualize the result through a heat decisions from the original space. Moreover, the proposed model
map superimposed on the input sample. LIME [34] optimizes a learns the vector embeddings in the latent space by taking into
white-box model to locally approximate the output of the given account the machine learning task under investigation. Finally,
neural network, and then determine the contribution of each the probabilistic GMM model offers probabilistic measurement
feature by analyzing the learned white-box model. SHAP [35] and is more flexible than the K-means clustering method. We
calculates the contribution of each feature based on game theory. summarize the unique features of our model and compare it
[36] optimizes a masking model to identify the input features that with other state-of-the-art approaches in Table I. In particular,
most influence the decision of the classifier. IntegratedGrads [37] the GMM adopted in this framework adopts mixed membership
proposes to use the integrated gradients of the feature as the and is much more flexible in terms of cluster covariance than
importance score of the feature. However, such methods often the hard assignment approach such as the K-means clustering
struggle to generate convincing attribution results on time series method [18]. The proposed task-aware approach can learn the
data, because the model may highlight features that the model vector embeddings that are tailored for a particular machine
considers important but not to human experts [38]. learning task, so the detection performance can be improved.
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 891

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF RELATED WORK

 TABLE II Event-triggered time series are primarily characterized by
 CHARACTERISTICS OF MTC AND HTC EVENTS
 heterogeneity, and dependency across multiple time scales. HTC
 events, originating from various applications and connecting to
 different servers, along with the unpredictability of human behavior, lead to significant heterogeneity even within the normal
 data. Furthermore, traffic from a single MTC event is notably
 homogeneous and typically periodic [43]. Due to the superposition of multiple events, the seasonality stemming from MTC
 events is observable across different time scales, resulting in an
As evident from Table I, only ET-Net meets all the desired intricate dependency.
requirements. Problem Statement: Given a collection of event-triggered time
 series denoted by X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ], which may exhibit
 III. HIERARCHICAL MULTISCALE VARIATIONAL high dynamics, heterogeneity, and variation in time granularity.
 AUTOENCODER WITH GAUSSIAN MIXTURE MODEL Our objective is twofold: (1) to obtain a robust low-dimensional
 representation vector for each time series in X for similarity
A. Problem Statement measurement; (2) to detect anomalous time series xi or to cluster
 Event-triggered time series: Here we take the traffic time the all time series based on the learned representations and
series of IoT devices as an example to illustrate the temporal similarity measurements.
characteristics of such event-triggered traffic time series. We will describe the architecture of the basic ensemble
 Let x ∈ RL denote a traffic time series of length L which is component in Section III-B. Then, we introduce the W and D
triggered by K events, i.e, compression networks in Sections III-C and III-D, which are the
 main differences between the W and D branches. Other technical
 x = f (a1 ◦ e1 , . . . , aK ◦ eK ), (1) details are described in Section III-E.

where e i ∈ R is a indicator sequence, and its tth element,
 L
 B. General Framework
eit ∈ {0, 1}, signifies whether event i is triggered at time t.
a The basic ensemble component consists of two modules: a
 i ∈ R represents an intensity sequence, and its tth element,
 L

ait ∈ R, denotes the traffic generated by event i at time t. The compression network and a distribution estimator. The comsymbol ◦ denotes the Hadamard product. The events discussed pression network maps the event-triggered time series into a
in this paper typically fall into two categories: Machine-type low-dimensional latent space Z, while the distribution estimator
communication (MTC) events, like transmitting sensing data models the probability distribution of the latent space using
and sending DNS requests, induce short-term and periodic de- GMM. These two modules work in a coordinated manner to
pendencies. Meanwhile, Human Type Communication (HTC) jointly capture the temporal dynamics of the event-triggered time
events, such as requesting streaming videos or web pages via a series and generate vector embeddings optimized for GMM. The
smartphone, initiate long-term and bursty dependencies [43]. objective function used to learn this model is presented below.
 Consider the traffic generated by a webcam. The traffic time L = X − g(X)22 + λE(Z, X), (2)
series of the webcamis a superposition of traffic from K events,
represented as x = K i=1 ai ◦ ei , where interaction between the where g(·) is the autoencoder. Z is the representation of X
camera and controller, including routine queries and responses, in the latent space.  · 22 denotes the squared L2-loss. E(·)
are categorized as MTC events. These events, occurring fre- is the negative log-likelihood of the estimated GMM, a.k.a an
quently but consuming small traffic, can be considered back- energy function, which models latent space distribution. λ is
ground traffic, contributing to short-term dependencies in the a weighting parameter that governs the tradeoff between two
time series. In contrast, human interactions, such as viewing individual objective functions. The above formula is similar to
surveillance videos, are classified as HTC events. While less that of various existing works, such as VAE [44], DAGMM [28],
frequent than MTC events, HTC events consume significant DTCR [18], and SOM-VAE [45].
traffic and manifest as bursts in the traffic time series. The As previously mentioned, the heterogeneity and complex
characteristics of MTC and HTC events are summarized in temporal dependencies in event-triggered time series pose chal-
Table II. lenges to representation learning. In this section, we propose
892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 2. The architecture of ET-Net.

two special types of sequence auto-encoder architectures that denote a trainable weight matrix and a bias vector, respectively.
are partly similar to seq2seq [46] and are particularly suitable The extended latent space representation is then given by zw =
for learning the robust representation of event-triggered time w ), dcos (x, xw ], where drel (·) and dcos (·) are the
 [zwc , drel (x, xp q

series. We first propose the W compression network, which is reconstruction error, denoting the relative distance and cosine
inspired by multi-task learning, to tackle the heterogeneity. This similarity, respectively, p and q are the indexes of auto-encoder
network treats recurrent networks with varying time scales as branch with the minimum reconstruction relative distance and
independent tasks, jointly optimized for robust representation cosine distance, respectively.
of heterogeneous sequences. To address the complex temporal The recurrent function used to update the hidden state of the
dependencies, we developed a D compression network, in- recurrent cell in the ith layer of is as follows,
spired by multi-resolution learning. This network incrementally
 hi (t)
learns temporal representations, transitioning from fine-grained
to coarse-grained. To avoid the curse of dimensionality, we equip w1i (t) · frnn (hi (t − 1), x(t)) + w2i (t) · f  (hi (t − si ), x(t))
each compression network with an estimation network featuring =
 w1i (t) + w2i (t)
a learnable GMM, rather than directly concatenating the two
representations. This approach constrains the sample within s.t.w1i (t), w2i (t) ∈ {0, 1}, w1i (t) + w2i (t) = 0 (3)
a GMM. We further ensemble these two anomaly detection where w1i (t) and w2i (t) are randomly initialized weights. frnn (·)
models using the bagging method, aiming to enhance anomaly denotes a non-linear function including Long-Short Term Memdetection performance. ory (LSTM) [50] or Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [51]. f  (·)
 denotes a linear operation. si is a parameter that controls the
C. W Compression Network memory ability of SRNN. When si is small, SRNN tends to
 learn short-term dependencies. Otherwise, it will learn long-term
 The motivation behind designing a W compression network dependencies. We set the parameter si of each encoder/decoder
is to capture the intricate temporal dependencies among event- to a different value but no more than three, so that it tends to
triggered time series in a multi-task learning fashion, which learn short-term dependencies in time series.
has been demonstrated to yield robust representations [47], When LSTM is set as the recurrent cell, frnn (·) in (3) can be
[48]. This is particularly suitable for event-triggered time se- expanded as flstm (·),
ries, which can be highly heterogeneous. To achieve this, each
encoder-decoder pair in the W compression network randomly flstm (h(t − 1), c(t − 1), x(t)) = o(t) ◦ c(t)
models a different type of temporal dependency with a diso(t) = σ(Wo · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + bo )
tinct time span using a Stochastic Recurrent Neural Network
(SRNN) [49]. The output of the W compression network in- c(t) = f (t) ◦ c(t − 1) + i(t) ◦ c̃(t)
cludes a compressed latent space representation zwc and an
 f (t) = σ(Wf · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + bf )
extended latent space representation zw . The architecture of the
W compression network is illustrated in Fig. 2. i(t) = σ(Wi · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + bi )
 Reconstructed sequence output by ith decoder xiw is comc̃(t) = tanh(Wc · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + bc ) (4)
puted as ziwc = gwei
 (x) and xiw = gwd
 i
 (zwc ), where gwe
 i
 (·) and
gwd (·) are the ith encoder and decoder of W branch, ziwc is the
 i
 where i, o and f are input gate, output gate and forget gate
final state of ith encoder. zwc = Ww [z1wc , . . . , zN
 wc ] + bw ,
 E T
 respectively. c is the memory. Wo , Wf , Wi , Wc , bo , bf , bi
where NE is the number of encoders/decoders, Ww and bw and bc are the parameters to be learned. The frnn (·) is defined
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 893

as fgru (·) when GRU is set as the recurrent cell. representing the probability that sample z belonging to the kth
 mixture component. ϕk , μk and Σk are mixture probability,
 fgru (h(t − 1), x(t)) = (1 − u(t)) ◦ h(t − 1) + u(t) ◦ h̃(t) mean and covariance for kth mixture component, respectively.
 u(t) = σ(Wu · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + bu ) η(·) denotes a function for computing the mean and covariance.
 In practice, we use the iterative EM algorithm to update μk and
 h̃(t) = tanh(Wh · [(r(t) ◦ h(t − 1)), x(t)] + bh ) Σk based on z, instead of computing them directly using γ and
 r(t) = σ(Wr · [h(t − 1), x(t)] + br ) (5) ϕ like DAGMM.
 Once we obtain the parameters of the GMM model, the sample
where u and r are update gate and reset gate respectively, Wu , energy function (c.f. (2)) can be calculated as follows,
Wh , Wr , bu , bh and br are parameters to be learned. K 
 
 E(z, x) = − log ϕk θ (z|(μk , Σk ))
D. D Compression Network
 k=1
 The purpose of the D compression network is to use multi-
 1 (z − μk )2
resolution learning to capture the complex long-term dependen- θ (z, (μk , Σk )) =  exp − (8)
cies (introduced by HTC) and short-term dependencies (intro- |2πΣk | 2Σk
duced by MTC) in event-triggered time series. To achieve this, where the θ(z, (μk , Σk )) is the density function of Gaussian
multiple layers of dilated RNNs [52] are stacked sequentially to distribution N (μk , Σk ).
obtain deep representations of time series. The D compression 2) Loss Function and Task-Aware Output: During training,
network outputs a compressed vector zdc and an extended latent ET-Net is trained end-to-end using either normal or unlabeled
representation zd that can be used for further processing. Fig. 2 data. It’s assumed that the unlabeled data contains few anomaillustrates the architecture of the D compression network. lies, an assumption typically holds due to the rarity of anomalies.
 The D compression network learns representations of the The loss function for the W branch and the D branch is given
time series at different levels of granularity, from fine-grained below, where N is the number of training samples.
to coarse-grained. The final state of each encoder layer is denoted as zidc , and the overall compressed vector is computed 1
  
 N N E 2 
 N
 Lw = N N xi − xj + Nλ Ew (zwi , xi )
as zdc = Wd · [z1dc , . . . , zN
 dc ] + bd , where Wd and bd are
 L T E
 i=1 j=1
 wi
 2 i=1
trainable weight and bias parameters, respectively. NL is the 
 N 
 N

number of resolution levels. The resulting zdc is then used as Ld = N1 xi − xdi 22 + Nλ Ed (zdi , xi ).
 i=1 i=1
the input for the decoder, which generates the reconstructed (9)
time series xd . The extended representation zd is then formed where Ew (·) and Ed (·) denote the energy functions of W and D
by concatenating zdc with the relative distance drel (x, xd ) and branches, respectively.
the cosine similarity dcos (x, xd ). During testing, the output of ET-Net y corresponds to the
 The hidden state of the recurrent cell in the ith layer of dilated specific machine learning task we aim to carry out. For anomaly
RNN is updated as detection, y represents the anomaly score of the sample x, and is
 calculated as y = max(Ew (zw , x), Ed (zd , x)), In doing so, the
 hi (t) = f (hi−1 (t), hi (t − di ))
 network outputs the highest anomaly score to ensure high recall.
 h0 (t) = x(t) (6) For clustering or classification tasks, y represents the predicted
 label and is defined as y = arg maxi (max([γ w , γ d ] )), where
where di denotes the dilation size in ith layer. The hidden state γ w and γ d represent probabilistic GMM membership predicted
of layer i at time t only depends on the state at t − di and the by W and D branches respectively. Here we take the maximum
fine-grained state at layer i − 1. In practice, we set 3 as the of the two predicted probabilities since the resulting output by
dilations in first layer, then an exponential growth strategy is the sharper softmax distribution is preferred [53].
used to set the dilation in the subsequent layer, that is, di = 3i .
 IV. EXPERIMENTS
E. Estimation Network, Loss Function and Task-Aware Output
 Recall that the motivation of this paper is to detect anomalous
 1) Estimation Network: After obtaining the extended latent
 or malicious behavior of devices or software via their traffic time
space representation zw or zd , it is input to a GMM estimator
 series. Besides focusing on anomaly detection, it also explores
for density estimation, as illustrated in the following equation.
 the underlying fundamental problem of similarity learning. Con-
To simplify the notation, we omit the subscripts and use z to
 sequently, the experiment considers two security-related marepresent the extended latent space representation generated by
 chine learning tasks, i.e., anomaly detection and clustering. The
either the W or D compression network.
    applications of these two tasks in security management include
 γ ik
 γ = gm (z) ϕk = M i=1 M μk , Σk = η {[zi , γ i ]}M
 i=1 , intrusion detection and device identification. Furthermore, the
 (7) clustering results also aim to validate the adaptability of similarwhere K is the number of mixture components in GMM and ity learned by ET-Net on tasks other than anomaly detection. We
M is the number of samples in mixture component k. gm (·) carry out the study to answer the following questions regarding
is a membership estimator, and γ is a K-dimensional vector the proposed approach.
894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 r Effectiveness: Whether ET-Net outperforms the existing deviate from a season’s typical pattern, potentially indicating
 state-of-the-art anomaly detection and clustering methods? illegal activities such as unauthorized bitcoin mining.
 r Robustness: Whether the trained model capable of being In addition, we selected three non-event-triggered datasets
 robust to noise, time granularity variations and potential from the UCR time series classification archive, MedicalImages,
 traffic disturbance, which often occur during practical de- SmoothSubspace, and MoteStrain, as these datasets have similar
 ployment? heterogeneous properties as event-triggered time series. Addir Visualization: Can we visualize and interpret the similarity tionally, the results on these datasets emphasize the adaptability
 metric learned by ET-Net? of ET-Net to a wide range of applications. We followed the
 anomaly injection experimental setup detailed in [57] for these
A. Datasets and Experimental Design datasets, as well as for the PowerCons dataset. This approach
 ensures the abnormal-to-normal sample ratio does not exceed
 1) Datasets: We first conduct anomaly detection and clus- 0.1. AUC (Area under the receiver operating curve) is employed
tering experiments with synthetic datasets to visualize the latent to assess the anomaly detection performance.
space learned by ET-Net, which provides an intuitive interpre- Likewise, the clustering performance of the proposed frametation of the model results. work is elucidated via experiments on three real-world datasets,
 We then conduct anomaly detection on several public, real- including UNSW-IoT, IoT23 and cell traffic. NMI (Normalized
world traffic datasets. The UNSW-IoT1 [54], cell traffic.2 Mutual Information) is employed to assess the clustering per-
IoT23,3 and PowerCons dataset from the UCR time series clas- formance.
sification archives4 are four event-triggered time series datasets. 2) Baselines: For anomaly detection, we compare ET-Net
 The UNSW-IoT and IoT23 datasets originate from traffic data against the following state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, inof IoT devices. These devices generate traffic only when they cluding One-Class SVM (OCSVM), Local Outlier Factor (LoF),
communicate, and remain in a dormant state at other times. Isolation Forest (IF), Dynamic Time Warping (DTW), Kit-
The communication events include HTC and MTC. During the NET [58], GRU-AE [59], Shared-SRNN [49], DAGMM [28],
collection process, packets from all devices are captured and and USAD [60].
recorded, with each device being identified by a unique label. We The baseline algorithms for clustering include K-means,
divide the traffic time series into non-overlapping windows, each GMM, K-means+DTW, K-means+EDR, K-shape [61], DEC
covering a 120-minute interval. Within each window, each data [62], IDEC [63], SPIRAL [64], DTC [65], and Autowarp [19].
point represents the number of packets collected in one minute. For a fair comparison, all baseline methods use the parameter
For the UNSW-IoT dataset, the targeted anomalous events for settings recommended by the authors.
detection are communications initiated directly by humans on
non-IoT devices. These events pose potential security risks to
private data in the sensing network [55], [56]. In the IoT23 B. Latent Space Visualization on Synthetic Datasets
dataset, our objective is to detect malicious attack events within In this section, we visualize the latent space learned by ETthe sensing network. Net on anomaly detection and clustering tasks to elucidate the
 The cell traffic dataset is derived from traffic data on the underlying mechanism of the ET-Net, and provide an intuitive
cellular base station, which generates traffic only when users explanation for the model outcomes. Finally, we examine the
within the coverage area initiate communication activities. If no robustness of latent space representation against data granularity
users are utilizing the mobile network during a certain period, variations and different types of noise.
the data will be zero. Time series data from a selected cell are To assess visualization results quantitatively, we utilize the
considered non-anomalous. We create anomalies by injecting average Silhouette Coefficients (SC) in clustering tasks. An
traffic time series from another cell. Thus, anomalous events are SC closer to 1 indicates better performance, whereas an SC
defined as communications that deviate from a cell’s historical approaching -1 signifies poorer clustering. For the unsupervised
patterns, possibly signifying unusual public events. anomaly detection task, ET-Net uses a GMM to group normal
 For the UNSW-IoT, IoT23, and cell traffic datasets, we divided samples in the latent space and identifies samples that deviate
them into training and test datasets with a 40-60 split. The from the normal cluster as anomalies. Ideally, the samples within
proportion of normal and abnormal samples in these datasets the normal cluster should be highly cohesive and deviate from
are 0.012, 0.093, and 0.077, respectively. the scattered anomalous samples, so we use the Silhouette Coef-
 The PowerCons dataset originates from household electricity ficient Ratio (SCR) for normal and abnormal clusters to evaluate
usage, recording data solely during human electricity use. In this the visualization results. An SCR greater than 1, with higher
dataset, data from one season is considered normal, while data values, indicates better performance, while an SCR close to 1
from other seasons are treated as anomalies [57]. Anomalous signifies ineffective separation between normal and abnormal
events in this dataset are defined as consumption behaviors that clusters.
 1) Anomaly Detection: We first assess the performance of
 1 https://iotanalytics.unsw.edu.au/iottraces.html
 the proposed framework via conducting machine learning tasks
 2 https://dandelion.eu/datagems/SpazioDati/telecom-sms-call-internet-mi on a synthetic dataset, as shown in Fig. 3. This dataset consists
 3 https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-iot23 of three non-anomalous time series samples, i.e., a sine wave, a
 4 https://www.cs.ucr.edu/ ∼eamonn/time_series_data_2018 square wave, and a triangle wave. We also create a total of five
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 895

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF TIME SERIES SIMILARITY MEASURES [8], [66]

Fig. 3. Normal samples from the synthetic anomaly detection dataset that
exhibit temporal heterogeneity.

hundred copies for each time series and use them to train the
proposed deep learning model.
 A total of four types of anomalies5 have been generated to assess the effectiveness of the proposed ET-Net framework. Type-1
anomaly refers to strong local additive white Gaussian noise, as of Fig. 7) to make them more realistic. The vector embeddings
shown in Fig. 4(a1). Type-2 anomaly stands for an unusually in the latent space can be obtained for the time series through
high activity that spans a short period of time (Fig. 4(b1)). Type-3 the ET-Net, as visualized in Fig. 8 using the t-SNE algorithm.
is the “breakdown” anomaly (Fig. 4(c1)). Type-4 anomaly is It is evident that we can easily cluster these time series in the
created by adding an impulse noise into the time series, as latent space.
shown in Fig. 4(d1). Both the time domain and latent space Robustness against different types of noise: Four types of
representations are illustrated in Fig. 4. In the second and third noise described in [8] are considered in this experiment. Type-1
sub-figures of Fig. 4, the blue symbols represent non-anomalous and type-2 noise stand for increasing (Fig. 9(a)) and decreastime series while the red ones correspond to anomaly time ing sampling rate (Fig. 9(b)), respectively. Type-3 noise is the
series. It is seen through both 2D and 3D visualization that shifting noise (Fig. 9(c)). Type-4 noise refers to adding Gaussian
ET-Net can effectively separate the anomalous time series from noise to the entire time series (Fig. 9(d)).
non-anomalous ones in the latent space. We then apply the four types of noise to a sine time series and
 Robustness against time granularity variations: We then ex- compute the euclidean distance between the original time series
plored the ability bounds of ET-Net to generate robust represen- and the time series with noise in both original and latent spaces.
tations when the data granularity changes, taking a sin signal As shown in Fig. 10, for all four types of noise, the euclidean
with a frequency of 10 Hz as an example, and Fig. 3(a) is an distance will increase quickly with the level of noise. In contrast,
example of one of the cycles. We set the original sampling the proposed framework remains effective in the presence of all
interval Δto to 1/120 second, and then vary the sampling rates four types of noise and can mine the similarity between the
from Δt = 1/110, 1/130 second to Δt = 1/30, 1/5 second, original time series and the ones with noise. As a matter of fact,
and visualize the obtained latent space representations in Fig. 5. as shown in Table III, it is the only method that remains robust
Specifically, ET-Net produced robust time series representations against all types of noise.
when the data had small sampling frequency variations relative
to sample 0 (e.g., 130 Hz,110 Hz for samples 1 and 2). And
when the sampling frequency is close to the Nyquist sampling C. Anomaly Detection Results on Real-World Datasets
frequency (20 Hz) for sample 3, compared to sample 4, which 1) Implementation Details: We conduct experiments on a
does not satisfy the sampling law, ET-Net generates a relatively workstation with 2 NVIDIA Titan V GPUs. TensorFlow is
more robust representation, as shown by point 3 being closer to employed to implement the proposed ET-Net framework.
point 0,1 and 2 while point 4 being far from all data points. Next, ET-Net contains four types of hyperparameters, 1) the number
we apply the obtained anomlay detection model to a test time of encoders or decoders NE in the W compression network;
series dataset in which the sampling rate differs from that of the 2) the number of layers NL in the D compression network; 3)
training dataset. Fig. 6 illustrates the latent space representations the number of neurons NN in each encoder or decoder; 4) the
of type-1 to type-4 anomaly time series and corresponding non- number of mixture components K in GMM. We perform a grid
anomalous time series, where red and blue symbols represent search to determine the hyperparameters of ET-Net. The hyperabnormal and normal time series, respectively. It is seen that parameter settings for ET-Net are listed in Table IV. LSTM cell
a ET-Net can be applied to time series with a different time and GRU cell are adopted in the W and D compression network
granularity without any model retraining. respectively. Please note that either GRU or LSTM can be used as
 2) Clustering: This dataset consists of three types of time se- the recurrent unit for both compression networks, in most cases,
ries, i.e., sine waves, square waves and triangle waves (as shown we recommend using GRU as the recurrent unit, considering
in different columns of Fig. 7), we also pass these time series the trade-off between model size and performance. We use the
through an Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and Adam optimization algorithm [67] to train the proposed model,
introduce phase difference artificially (as shown in different rows and the initial learning rate is set to 10−3 .
 2) Effectiveness: The performance of ET-Net and other state-
 5 https://anomaly.io/anomaly-detection-twitter-r/ of-the-art methods on a total of seven real-world datasets are
896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 4. Exemplary samples, 2D and 3D latent space visualizations of type-1 to type-4 anomalies. An SCR greater than 1, with higher values, indicates better
visualization performance.

 TABLE IV
 HYPERPARAMETER SETTINGS

Fig. 5. Latent space representation of sine signals with different sampling
intervals.

listed in Table V. ET-Net-W and ET-Net-D represent W compression network with GMM and D compression network with
GMM, respectively. It is evident that the proposed ET-Net out- does not always hold in practice, since a small portion of the
performs other competing methods considerably. It ranks first training data might be anomalies. As a remedy, we artificially
in five out of seven datasets, and ranks second in the remaining inject anomalies into the training dataset to check whether we
two datasets. In particular, for the cell traffic datasets, ET-Net can still obtain an effective anomaly detector. Table VI demonoutperforms the second-best method by around 14%. Further- strates that the proposed ET-Net architecture remains effective
more, ET-Net outperforms ET-Net-W and ET-Net-D thanks to even in the presence 10% of anomalies in the training dataset.
the ensemble of multiple networks. For the MoteStrain dataset, 3) Robustness Against Data Granularity and Traffic Disturshared-SRNN and GRU-AE, based only on reconstruction er- bances: Time series generated by event-triggered sensors can be
rors, show superior detection performance compared to ET- highly complex due to different sampling intervals. This raises
Net-W and ET-Net-D, which integrate data representations with the question of whether an ET-Net model trained on time series
reconstruction errors. This is attributed to the severe shortage of with one sampling interval can be applied to a time series with
training samples, that is, only 10 training samples, leading to the other intervals. To investigate this, we trained an ET-Net model
undertraining of large-parameter models, hindering the effective on a dataset with a 60-second sampling interval and tested its
differentiation of normal and abnormal latent representations. performance on time series with sampling intervals varying from
 In the previous study, we assume all the training dataset consti- 60 to 120 seconds. Table VII shows that the model remains
tutes non-anomalous time series. However, such an assumption effective even when the data granularity changes, indicating its
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 897

Fig. 6. 2D and 3D latent space representations of type-1 to type-4 anomalies with different sampling intervals. An SCR greater than 1, with higher values,
indicates better visualization performance.

 TABLE V
 ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE MEASURED BY AUC

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 AUC WITH INJECTED ANOMALIES IN TRAINING SET AUC ON DIFFERENT SAMPLING INTERVALS

robustness. We also tested the robustness of ET-Net to traffic
disturbances that may occur in real-world scenarios. We applied
the trained model to a test dataset with different perturbation
898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 7. Three category of samples from the synthetic clustering dataset.

 Fig. 9. Exemplary synthetic samples of four types of noise, using a sine signal
 as an example.

Fig. 8. 2D and 3D visualization of clustering. An SC closer to 1 indicates
better performance, whereas an SC approaching -1 signifies poorer clustering.

ratios, the injected disturbances include adding dummy data Fig. 10. Normalized euclidean distance matrix of a collection of time series
 in the original space (top row) and latent space (bottom row). The four columns
packets [68] and adversarial perturbations [69]. Fig. 11 shows are distance matrices when the time series contains different types of noise.
that even in the worst case where half of the samples are
perturbed, the AUC of ET-Net is only reduced by about 2%,
which is still better than the majority of baselines, demonstrating
its robustness.
 4) Visualization and Interpretability: From a perspective of
latent space visualization, ET-Net models the distribution of
normal samples using a GMM model, and forms a normal cluster
in the latent space in the anomaly detection task. Thus, the vector
embedding that deviates from this distribution is deemed as an
anomaly. A typical example is shown in Fig. 4.
 Based on the fact that normal samples are grouped into clusters in the latent space, we propose an example-based attribution
method to explain the detected anomalies. Specifically, given
a time series xa that is deemed as an anomaly, we draw a
straight line in latent space from the representation of xa to Fig. 11. AUC with perturbation in the testing set, where the solid and dashed
the center of normal cluster zcnt . We call this line reference line lines represent adding adversarial perturbations and dummy data packets, respectively.
hereafter. The comparison among the anomaly time series and
corresponding reference time series around the reference line
helps to explain the difference between the anomalous times the remains are reference time series, where the samples in the
series and the normal ones. Note that the reference samples are second column are the reference sample closest to the abnormal
selected from the training set. Figures in the first column in samples, and the third and fourth columns of samples are closer
Fig. 12 illustrate three representative abnormal time series, and to zcnt . See Fig. 14 for the complete figure. By observing these
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 899

 TABLE VIII
 CLUSTERING PERFORMANCE MEASURED BY NMI

Fig. 12. Exemplary test samples and corresponding reference samples from
the UNSW-IoT dataset. The x-axis represents time in minutes and the y-axis
represents traffic in kilobytes.

 It is worth noting that the computational complexity of the
 model depends on the hyperparameters NL , NE , and NN , which
 2
 have complexities of O(NL ), O(NE ), and O(NN ), respectively.
 In anomaly detection tasks, selecting the appropriate number of
 Gaussian components K is crucial, and should be determined
 based on the complexity of the distribution of the normal samples. For small datasets, it is recommended to appropriately
 reduce these parameters to avoid overfitting. As demonstrated
Fig. 13. Effect of hyperparameters.
 in Fig. 13(b), increasing the number of neurons to 24 results in a
 decrease in performance. On the other hand, in clustering tasks,
 the number of GMM components is set equal to the number of
examples, we may extract semantic information that may explain clusters.
the difference between the abnormal and normal time series.
 r Anomalous traffic time series may carry an unusually high
 amount of traffic data compared with normal traffic time
 D. Time Series Clustering Results on Real-World Datasets
 series, as given in the first two examples.
 r Abnormal traffic time series may bear long and deep sleep- Implementation Details: We conduct clustering experiments
 ing modes in which no traffic is transmitted. on three real datasets, including UNSW-IoT, IoT23 and cell
 Please notice that such semantic information extracted from traffic. Hyperparameters used in the experiment are listed in
these examples may be used to identify other anomalous time Table IV.
series as well. Effectiveness: Table VIII lists the clustering performance of
 5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: In Table IV, we list ET-Net and other state-of-the-art methods on three real-world
four hyperparameters of ET-Net. NE determines the number datasets. Two other methods have also been considered for comof tasks in the W compression network, while NL specifies the parison, including 1) AE+K-means in which the clustering is carnumber of resolution levels used to parse the time series in the D ried out over the latent space representations, which is obtained
compression network. To evaluate their impact, we vary NE and through the sequence autoencoder. 2) ET-Net+K-means in which
NL from 1 to 4 and report the average AUC of ET-Net-W and the clustering is carried out over the vector embeddings obtained
ET-Net-D after five runs on the UNSW-IoT dataset, as depicted by the W and D compression network. For both approaches, the
in Fig. 13(a). Our findings suggest that increasing both NE same network hyperparameters as ET-Net are adopted.
and NL enhances performance. Datasets with heterogeneous The results show that ET-Net outperforms all other state-oftemporal dynamics, such as UNSW-IoT, can benefit from an the-art methods in two out of three datasets. This substantiates
increased number of Gaussian components K. This adjustment the effectiveness of the ET-Net for clustering. However, as noted
better estimates the complex distribution of the latent space, in [70], there is no universally suitable similarity metric for all
as indicated by the green line in Fig. 13(a). Moreover, we tasks. SPIRAL, which utilizes the inner product of representainvestigated the effect of the number of neurons NN on ET-Net’s tions as a similarity metric, outperforms other distance-based
performance. Fig. 13(b) highlights that increasing the number methods in the UNSW-IoT dataset. Moreover, the proposed
of neurons leads to improved performance. method performs best among all distance-based methods.
900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 14. Exemplary test samples and corresponding reference samples from the UNSW-IoT dataset. The first column is the test samples, and each subsequent
column is closer to the center of the normal cluster. The x-axis represents time in minutes and the y-axis represents traffic in kilobytes.

 V. CONCLUSION [9] G. Eibl and D. Engel, “Influence of data granularity on smart meter privacy,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 930–939,
 In this paper, we present ET-Net, an unsupervised deep learn- Mar. 2015.
ing approach that learns similarity metrics on event-triggered [10] E. Keogh and S. Kasetty, “On the need for time series data mining
 benchmarks: A survey and empirical demonstration,” in Proc. 8th ACM
time series. Through extensive qualitative and quantitative stud- SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2002, pp. 102–111.
ies, it is revealed that the proposed model can effectively capture [11] L. Chen, M. T. Özsu, and V. Oria, “Robust and fast similarity search for
the temporal dynamics of event-triggered time series. In addi- moving object trajectories,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Data, 2005, pp. 491–502.
tion, a single ET-Net model can be applied to time series with [12] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
different time granularity with little performance degradation, for spoken word recognition,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Prowhich shows its robustness. cess., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 43–49, Feb. 1978.
 [13] M. Toller, B. C. Geiger, and R. Kern, “A formally robust time series
 distance metric,” in Proc. 5th Workshop Mining Learn. From Time Ser.
 (Held Conjunction), 2019, pp. 1–10.
 REFERENCES [14] D. F. Silva et al., “On the effect of endpoints on dynamic time warping,” in
 Proc. SIGKDD Workshop Mining Learn. From Time Ser. II, 2016, pp. 1–10.
 [1] J. Ren, D. J. Dubois, D. Choffnes, A. M. Mandalari, R. Kolcun, and H. [15] M. Cuturi and M. Blondel, “Soft-DTW: A differentiable loss function for
 Haddadi, “Information exposure from consumer IoT devices: A multidi- time series,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 894–903.
 mensional, network-informed measurement approach,” in Proc. Internet [16] X. Cai, T. Xu, J. Yi, J. Huang, and S. Rajasekaran, “DTWNet: A dynamic
 Meas. Conf., 2019, pp. 267–279. time warping network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 [2] K. Yang, R. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Yang, and X. Chen, “Deep network analyzer pp. 11636–11646.
 (DNA): A Big Data analytics platform for cellular networks,” IEEE [17] A. Mathew et al., “Warping resilient time series embeddings,” in Proc.
 Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 2019–2027, Dec. 2017. Time Ser. Workshop 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 1–5.
 [3] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. Modelo-Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava, [18] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations
 “Hunting for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,” for time series clustering,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462, pp. 3776–3786.
 Jan./Feb. 2023. [19] A. Abid and J. Y. Zou, “Learning a warping distance from unlabeled time
 [4] F. Simmross-Wattenberg, J. I. Asensio-Perez, P. Casaseca-de-la Higuera, series using sequence autoencoders,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 M. Martin-Fernandez, I. A. Dimitriadis, and C. Alberola-Lopez, “Anomaly Syst., 2018, pp. 10547–10555.
 detection in network traffic based on statistical inference and stable model- [20] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 20,
 ing,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 494–509, no. 3, pp. 273–297, 1995.
 Jul./Aug. 2011. [21] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
 [5] I. Nevat et al., “Anomaly detection and attribution in networks with 2001.
 temporally correlated traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, [22] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. J. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. C.
 pp. 131–144, Feb. 2018. Platt, “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 [6] S. Bengio, O. Vinyals, N. Jaitly, and N. Shazeer, “Scheduled sampling for Inf. Process. Syst., 2000, pp. 582–588.
 sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural [23] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 1–9. density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 [7] A. M. Lamb, A. Goyal, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio, Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 “Professor forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent networks,” in [24] K. Leung and C. Leckie, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in network
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 1–9. intrusion detection using clusters,” in Proc. 28th Australas. Conf. Comput.
 [8] H. Wang, H. Su, K. Zheng, S. Sadiq, and X. Zhou, “An effectiveness Sci., 2005, pp. 333–342.
 study on trajectory similarity measures,” in Proc. 24th Australas. Database [25] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,”
 Conf., 2013, pp. 13–22. in Proc. ICML Workshop Unsupervised Transfer Learn., 2012, pp. 37–49.
DOU et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION IN EVENT-TRIGGERED TRAFFIC TIME SERIES VIA SIMILARITY LEARNING 901

[26] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous [54] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments using
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. 28th network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 18,
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439. no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
[27] L. Shen, Z. Yu, Q. Ma, and J. T. Kwok, “Time series anomaly detection [55] J. Ortiz, C. Crawford, and F. Le, “DeviceMien: Network device behavior
 with multiresolution ensemble decoding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., modeling for identifying unknown IoT devices,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Internet
 2021, pp. 9567–9575. Things Des. Implementation, 2019, pp. 106–117.
[28] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsu- [56] A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in smart
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, cities and campuses,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops,
 2018, pp. 1–12. 2017, pp. 559–564.
[29] Y. Zhao, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “AE-FLOW: Autoencoders with nor- [57] S.-E. Benkabou, K. Benabdeslem, and B. Canitia, “Unsupervised outlier
 malizing flows for medical images anomaly detection,” in Proc. 11st Int. detection for time series by entropy and dynamic time warping,” Knowl.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–5. Inf. Syst., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 463–486, 2018.
[30] D. Luo, R. Yang, B. Li, and J. Huang, “Detection of double compressed [58] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensem-
 AMR audio using stacked autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secu- ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, arXiv:
 rity, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 432–444, Feb. 2017. 1802.09089.
[31] L. Yang, N.-M. Cheung, J. Li, and J. Fang, “Deep clustering by gaus- [59] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
 sian mixture variational autoencoders with graph embedding,” in Proc. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detec-
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 6440–6449. tion,” in Proc. ICML Anomaly Detection Workshop, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[32] P. An, Z. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Ensemble unsupervised autoencoders and [60] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 gaussian mixture model for cyberattack detection,” Inf. Process. Manage., “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 1–13, 2022. Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
[33] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional pp. 3395–3404.
 networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2014, pp. 818–833. [61] J. Paparrizos and L. Gravano, “K-shape: Efficient and accurate clustering
[34] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ““why should I trust you?” of time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2015,
 explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD pp. 1855–1870.
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. [62] J. Xie, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “Unsupervised deep embedding for
[35] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model clustering analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016, pp. 478–487.
 predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4765–4774. [63] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering
[36] P. Dabkowski and Y. Gal, “Real time image saliency for black box with local structure preservation,” in Proc. 26th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 classifiers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6967–6976. 2017, pp. 1753–1759.
[37] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep [64] Q. Lei, J. Yi, R. Vaculin, L. Wu, and I. S. Dhillon, “Similarity preserving
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3319–3328. representation learning for time series clustering,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint
[38] J. V. Jeyakumar, J. Noor, Y.-H. Cheng, L. Garcia, and M. Srivastava, ”How Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2845–2851.
 can I explain this to you? an empirical study of deep neural network [65] N. S. Madiraju, S. M. Sadat, D. Fisher, and H. Karimabadi, “Deep
 explanation methods,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, temporal clustering: Fully unsupervised learning of time-domain features,”
 pp. 1–12. 2018, arXiv: 1802.01059.
[39] P. W. Koh and P. Liang, “Understanding black-box predictions via influ- [66] N. Magdy, M. A. Sakr, T. Mostafa, and K. El-Bahnasy, “Review on
 ence functions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1885–1894. trajectory similarity measures,” in Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Comput.
[40] N. Papernot and P. McDaniel, “Deep k-nearest neighbors: Towards confi- Inf. Syst., 2015, pp. 613–619.
 dent, interpretable and robust deep learning,” 2018, arXiv: 1803.04765. [67] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
[41] C. Chen, O. Li, D. Tao, A. Barnett, C. Rudin, and J. K. Su, “This looks 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 like that: Deep learning for interpretable image recognition,” in Proc. Adv. [68] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A sys-
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–12. tematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
[42] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Matwin, and D. Pedreschi, “Black box expla- defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014,
 nation by learning image exemplars in the latent feature space,” in Proc. pp. 227–238.
 Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases: Eur. Conf., 2020, pp. 189–205. [69] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Defeating DNN-based
[43] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of traffic traffic analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial perturbations,”
 classification in IoT networks: A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 154, in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 2705–2722.
 pp. 1–20, 2020. [70] A. S. Shirkhorshidi, S. Aghabozorgi, and T. Y. Wah, “A comparison study
[44] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc. on similarity and dissimilarity measures in clustering continuous data,”
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2013, pp. 1–14. PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 12, 2015, Art. no. e0144059.
[45] V. Fortuin, M. Hüser, F. Locatello, H. Strathmann, and G. Rätsch, “SOM-
 VAE: Interpretable discrete representation learning on time series,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–18.
[46] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning with
 neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., pp. 1–9, 2014.
[47] M. Long, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and S. Y. Philip, “Learning multiple tasks with
 multilinear relationship networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 2017, pp. 1594–1603.
[48] C. Mao et al., “Multitask learning strengthens adversarial robustness,” in
 Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 158–174.
[49] T. Kieu, B. Yang, C. Guo, and C. S. Jensen, “Outlier detection for time
 series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2725–2732.
[50] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Shaoyu Dou received the BEng degree from Hohai
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. University, Nanjing, China, in 2018, and the PhD
[51] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of degree from Tongji University, Shanghai, China. She
 gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” in Proc. Workshop currently holds the position of senior research &
 Deep Learn., 2014, pp. 1–9. development engineer at Ant Group. Her primary
[52] S. Chang et al., “Dilated recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural research interests include large language models, AI
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 77–87. for IT Operations, Big Data analytics, and machine
[53] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A Baseline for detecting misclassified and learning.
 out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Representations, 2017, pp. 1–12.
902 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Kai Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BEng Chengbo Qiu received the MS degree from the
 degree from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 the MS degree from the National University of Singa- Wuhan, China, in 2018. He is currently working
 pore, Singapore, and the PhD degree from Columbia toward the PhD degree in computer science from the
 University, New York, NY, USA. He is a distinguished Department of Computer Science, Tongji University,
 professor with Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Shanghai, China. His major research interests include
 He was a technical staff member with Bell Labora- Big Data analytics and machine learning.
 tories, Murray Hill, NJ, USA. He has also been an
 adjunct faculty member with Columbia University
 since 2011. He holds more than 20 patents and has
 been published extensively in leading IEEE journals
and conferences. His current research interests include Big Data analytics,
machine learning, wireless communications, and signal processing.

 Kui Ren (Fellow, IEEE) received the BEng degree
 in chemical engineering, in 1998, the MEng degree in materials engineering, in 2001, both from
 Zhejiang University, China, and the PhD degree in
 Yang Jiao received the BS degree from Central South electrical and computer engineering from Worcester
 University, Changsha, China, in 2020. He is currently Polytechnic Institute, USA, in 2007. Professor Kui
 working toward the PhD degree in computer science Ren, AAAS, ACM, CCF, is currently the dean of the
 with the Department of Computer Science and Tech- College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhenology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. He has jiang University. He is mainly engaged in research in
 authored at top-tier artificial intelligence conferences, data security and privacy protection, AI security, and
 such as NeurIPS, ICLR in his research areas, which security in intelligent devices and vehicular networks.
 include machine learning, robust optimization, and
 distributed optimization.