1038 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

 Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks via
 Multiview and Multiscale Contrastive Learning
 Shuxin Qin , Yongcan Luo , Student Member, IEEE, Jing Zhu , Gaofeng Tao ,
 Jingya Zheng , and Zhongjun Ma

 Abstract—Detecting abnormal nodes from attributed networks it plays a key role in minimizing risks and preventing adverse
plays an important role in various applications, including cy- events. As we know, an attributed network can be defined as a
bersecurity, finance, and social networks. Most existing methods graph in which nodes and/or edges have attributes. Therefore,
focus on learning different scales of graphs or using augmented
data to improve the quality of feature representation. However, anomaly detection on attributed networks is also known as
the performance is limited due to two critical problems. First, the graph anomaly detection (GAD) in most security-related scehigh sensitivity of attributed networks makes it uncontrollable narios, such as fraud detection [5], cybersecurity [6], and social
and uncertain to use conventional methods for data augmenta- spam detection [7]. Generally, GAD aims to identify anomalous
tion, leading to limited improvement in representation and gener- nodes whose behaviors significantly differ from those of the
alization capabilities. Second, under the unsupervised paradigm,
anomalous nodes mixed in the training data may interfere with majority in attributed networks. Given the intricate topologthe learning of normal patterns and weaken the discrimination ical structure and characteristics of the nodes, the anomalies
ability. In this work, we propose a novel multiview and multiscale can be classified into different categories: structural anomalies
contrastive learning framework to address these two issues. and contextual anomalies [8]. For example, in social networks,
Specifically, a network augmentation method based on parameter unexpected social activities indicated by node relationships
perturbation is introduced to generate augmented views for both
node–node and node–subgraph level contrast branches. Then, represent structural anomalies, whereas malicious users whose
cross-view graph contrastive learning is employed to improve attributes markedly differ from those of their neighbors are
the representation without the need for augmented data. We contextual anomalies.
also provide a cycle training strategy where normal samples GAD is a challenging task due to the complex graph strucdetected in the former step are collected for an additional ture, the lack of positive samples, and the high cost of annotraining step. In this way, the ability to learn normal patterns
is enhanced. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets tations. In the past few years, a considerable number of works
demonstrate that our method outperforms the existing state- [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] have been presented to
of-the-art baselines. solve the problem in an unsupervised manner. Earlier research
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attributed networks, con- [17], [18], [19] mainly resorts to shallow learning methods to
trastive learning, parameter perturbation. learn graph structures and measure the anomalies. For example, in [18], a learning framework is proposed to characterize
 attribute reconstruction residuals and correlational patterns with
 I. INTRODUCTION
 network structure information. Residual errors generated by

R ECENT years have experienced rapid advancements in
 real-world scenarios leveraging attributed networks, e.g.,
social networks [1], IoT networks [2], infrastructure neta regression function are used to detect anomalies. Similarly,
 attribute and network structure information are used together for
 simultaneous attribute selection and anomaly detection in [19].
works [3], and financial transaction networks [4]. Anomaly Despite the simplicity of these shallow methods, they cannot
detection from attributed networks holds great importance as capture the complex correlational patterns in the graph data.
 Thanks to the rapid development of deep neural networks,
 recent deep GAD methods have made impressive progress [20],
 Received 24 February 2024; revised 26 October 2024 and 28 November
2024; accepted 5 December 2024. Date of publication 17 December 2024; [21]. Graph neural networks (GNNs) and deep graph repredate of current version 2 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the sentation have become indispensable to deal with the highinternal research program of Purple Mountain Laboratories. (Corresponding dimensional and complex correlated graph data [22]. Generally,
authors: Shuxin Qin; Gaofeng Tao.)
 Shuxin Qin and Jing Zhu are with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing GNNs learn the representations of a node by aggregating in-
211111, China (e-mail: qinshuxin@pmlabs.com.cn). formation from its neighboring nodes in the graph. Therefore,
 Yongcan Luo is with the Department of Computer Science, City University both the attributes of the individual nodes and the structure
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, China.
 Gaofeng Tao is with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China, of the entire graph can be easily captured by GNNs. CoLA
and also with Shandong Future Network Research Institute, Jinan 250003, [8] employs a GNN-based contrastive learning framework to
China (e-mail: taogaofeng@pmlabs.com.cn). model the relationship between each node and its partial neigh-
 Jingya Zheng and Zhongjun Ma are with Shandong Future Network
Research Institute, Jinan 250003, China. boring substructure (node–subgraph contrast). To improve the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3514148 representation capability and capture the anomalous patterns

 2329-924X © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1039

from different perspectives, ANEMONE [11] adds a node–node learning framework that learns latent patterns at different
contrast branch to detect anomalies in multiple graph scales. views and scales.
GRADATE [23] further improves the representation of local 2) We utilize a network augmentation technique to create
features and structure for subgraphs through contrastive learn- correlated views for cross-view contrast. In contrast to
ing from different perspectives. The view is generated by data existing approaches that directly augment graph data,
augmentation, which is an efficient strategy to improve gener- our method relies on parameter perturbation. The crossalization and self-adaption ability. AugAN [24] enhances the view GCL enhances both node–node and node–subgraph
model generalization ability of GAD through a well-designed branches.
data augmentation method, which improves the quantity of 3) We propose a cycle training strategy in which normal
labeled anomalies and enhances the diversity of normal back- samples detected in the former step are collected for
grounds. In summary, most existing methods focus on learning an additional training step. It is an online sampling and
different scales of graphs or using augmented data to improve training strategy that can refine the model in a circular
the quality of node embeddings and structure representations. manner.
 Despite the remarkable progress in GAD, its performance is 4) The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art perforstill limited due to two critical problems. First, due to the high mance on six public datasets. Ablation study and detailed
sensitivity of attributed networks, it is uncontrollable and uncer- analysis are provided.
tain to directly apply conventional data augmentation methods, The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
resulting in limited improvement in representation and general- Section II presents a brief overview of related work. Section III
ization capabilities. In practice, we usually have to try different outlines the problem formulation. Section IV details the prodata augmentation strategies, which is inefficient and unreli- posed method. Section V presents the experimental results.
able. Even worse, data augmentation is not always effective. Finally, Section VI offers the conclusions.
Second, under the unsupervised paradigm, anomalous nodes
mixed in the training data may interfere with the learning of II. RELATED WORK
normal patterns and thus weaken the discrimination capability
 In this section, we briefly review previous work: anomaly
to some extent. Considering that anomalies are the nodes devidetection on attributed networks, graph representation learning,
ating from the normal patterns, the performance is limited by
 and contrastive learning. Finally, we provide a summary of
the mixed training data.
 comparisons between the proposed method and its related work.
 To solve the above challenges, in this article, we propose
a multiview and multiscale contrastive learning framework for
graph anomaly detection (MMGAD). It is a multitask learning A. Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
framework in which the multiview graph contrastive learning Detecting anomalies from attributed networks is of great
(GCL) task is designed as an auxiliary task to the multiscale importance as it has a vital function in mitigating risks.
learning task. Specifically, the multiscale task is used to capture Attributed networks can be defined as graphs with attributed
anomalous patterns at the node level and subgraph level by nodes and edges. So, the task is also referred to as GAD, which
performing node–node and node–subgraph contrasts in parallel. is different from other kind of tasks (e.g., time series [25] and
Each contrast branch employs a GNN-based network to learn videos [26]). Before the era of deep learning, traditional meththe latent patterns. The multiview task is designed to improve ods of shallow learning are often used for GAD. Perozzi and
the representation of the two branches by cross-view GCL. In Akoglu [17] proposed a quality measure strategy for attributed
contrast to existing methods, MMGAD generates augmented neighborhoods that uses structure and attributes together to
views for both node–node and node–subgraph contrasts using quantify both internal consistency and external separability.
a novel network augmentation method. The method is based on Li et al. [18] characterized the residuals of attribute reconstrucparameter perturbation, which avoids modifying the sensitive tion and their correlational features to detect anomalies. Peng
training data. With the augmented views, GCL can enforce the et al. [19] improved GAD performance by jointly considering
agreement between positive pairs compared to negative pairs CUR decomposition (C, U, and R stand for the three matrices
at the cross-view level, resulting in a better representation. We into which this decomposition can break a matrix.) and residual
also provide a novel cycle training strategy to enhance the analysis results. The performance of these methods is limited
learning of normal patterns and thus improve the discrimination by their shallow mechanisms.
capability. Normal samples recognized with high confidence in Recently, deep neural networks have shown tremendous pothe former step are collected as training data for an additional tential in mining latent patterns from high-dimensional graph
training step. After a certain number of steps, reliable normal data [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33]. Contrastive learning
samples can be picked out without the help of ground truth method is frequently employed for deep GAD. In [8], the node–
labels, and the model can be further refined step by step with subgraph contrast method is first proposed to learn the representhe relatively pure training samples. tative information from the previously sampled node–subgraph
 In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows. instance pairs. This method has been widely used due to its sim-
 1) We develop a novel multiview and multiscale contrastive ple and effective contrastive learning mechanism. To improve
 learning framework, MMGAD, for anomaly detection the feature representation, node–node and subgraph–subgraph
 on attributed networks. It is an unsupervised multitask contrasts are proposed by [11] and [23], respectively. Utilizing
1040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

a multiscale learning strategy can further explore the latent between the nodes. To deal with graph data, researchers have
patterns to achieve better performance. The reconstruction strat- developed different augmentation strategies that target either
egy is another viable choice for GAD. In [9], an autoencoder node attributes or the structure of the graph. Ding et al. [48]
framework is employed to reconstruct the original graph with presented a structured survey of graph data augmentation. You
the learned node embeddings from GNN. Anomalies are then et al. [10] designed four types of graph data augmentations
flagged by reconstruction errors. Similarly, Zhang et al. [13] [node dropping, edge perturbation, attribute masking (AM), and
provided a masked autoencoder-based reconstruction module subgraph]. The views generated by these strategies are then
to identify the nodes with large reconstruction errors. In [34], used to maximize mutual information. In [49], graph views
attribute reconstruction based on generative learning schema are generated by an adaptive augmentation method that can
is proposed to identify the distances between nodes and their preserve intrinsic structures and attributes. In contrast to the
neighbors in the attribute space. In contrast to the methods predefined view generation methods, adaptive augmentation
mentioned above, Ding et al. [35] used a generative adversarial strategies can provide more informative contrastive views, leadtraining strategy to improve the generalization ability of the ing to better performance. In [50], graph views are generated by
model on newly added data. In [36], anomalies are distin- perturbing the node embeddings instead of introducing complex
guished by a learned hypersphere with normal nodes clustered operations over graphs. Then, a neighbor-oriented contrastive
around the center. loss is developed for training. In the GAD task, the views are
 usually generated by AM or subgraph extraction. Different contrastive learning methods (node–node [8], node–subgraph [11],
B. Graph Representation Learning
 and subgraph–subgraph [23]) have been developed to improve
 GNN is a powerful tool for graph representation learning. the performance. Unlike the above methods based on graph
Nodes from attributed networks are richly related to each other, data augmentation, in [51], the GNN encoder is perturbed to
which can be well captured by graph learning. Many different generate an augmented branch for learning. Such methods can
types of GNNs have been developed and used for graph rep- maintain the semantics of highly sensitive graph data while proresentation, e.g., graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [37], ducing a qualified view for contrast. In general, augmentation
graph attention network (GAT) [38], and GraphSage [39]. In is designed to generate different views for contrastive learning.
[27], graph learning is combined with Transformer [40] to better The objective of contrastive learning is to develop an embedrepresent the roles of nodes in an evolving graph space. Simi- ding space where similar sample pairs are positioned close
larly, graph structure learning module [41] based on Gumbel- together, while dissimilar pairs are located farther apart. With
softmax sampling is integrated into the encoding blocks of the the limited training data, contrastive learning can maximize the
Transformer. To improve graph learning of normal patterns, utilization of training data to improve pattern representation and
hierarchical memory blocks are developed in [16] to record generalization capabilities.
prototypical patterns of normal samples and prevent unexpected In this article, we present MMGAD that uses node–node
generalization to abnormal samples. In [42], graph representa- and node–subgraph contrasts as a foundation and utilizes GCL
tion learning is enhanced through local and global regulariza- to improve representation learning. The parameter perturbation techniques. In [43], a Haar-type graph framelet network tion method [51] is employed to create views for cross-view
is introduced for multiscale learning on heterophilous graphs. contrast. We also provide a cycle training strategy to refine
In [44], quantum walk kernels are introduced to better capture the model. To summarize, MMGAD differs from the related
complex inherent features of graphs for classification purposes. work [23] in three main aspects: 1) MMGAD utilizes a network
In [45], an adaptive multifrequency GNN framework is de- view augmentation method based on parameter perturbation for
signed to capture both low- and high-frequency information cross-view GCL; 2) MMGAD performs additional graph-level
of neighboring nodes. This approach allows for the creation GCL for both node–node and node–subgraph branches; and 3)
of more distinct representations. In general, GNNs are widely MMGAD introduces a new cycle training strategy to improve
employed to model graph data and to learn the relationships performance.
between nodes.
 III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
C. Contrastive Learning In this article, we focus on the problem of detecting anoma-
 Contrastive learning aims to improve performance by match- lies from the attributed graph. Let G = (V, E, X) be an ating representations under appropriate transformations [10]. A tributed graph. It is an undirected graph with a node set V =
comprehensive overview of mainstream contrastive learning {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } and an edge set E. X ∈ Rn×d denotes the atapproaches in various domains is provided in [46]. Typically, tribute matrix. There are n nodes, each of which has an attribute
data augmentation techniques are employed initially to create vector with length d. Thus, the attributes for the node vi can be
various views for learning. For time series or visual data, Gaus- defined as xi ∈ Rd , 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n. The edge set E is based on an
sian noise and random/adaptive masking [47] are commonly adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n , which represents the underlying
utilized for data augmentation and view generation. However, graph structure of G. Specifically, Ai,j = 1 indicates that there
the attributed networks are more complex due to the correlations is an edge between nodes vi and vj , otherwise Ai,j = 0.
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1041

 TABLE I is generated in each branch by perturbing the parameters of the
 SUMMARY OF THE NOTATIONS corresponding GNN module. For example, the GNN module
 f (·, θns ) for node–subgraph contrast is perturbed to generate
 Notations Definitions 
 a new module defined as f (·, θns ). We consider this as a
 G = (V, E, X) An undirected attributed graph new view from the perspective of networks (GNN function).
 V The node set of G
 E The edge set of G With the same input data Gi , the two views then output two
 X ∈ Rn×d The attribute matrix of G representations, denoted as Hins and Ĥins . Finally, contrastive
 A ∈ Rn×n The adjacency matrix of G learning is used at the graph level to maximize the agreement
 x i ∈ Rd The attribute vector for the ith node in G
 vi The ith node in V of the two representations. In the scoring stage, the results
 Gi The subgraph of the target node vi from the two branches are combined by a weighted sum. We
 Xi ∈ Rm×d The attribute matrix of subgraph Gi with m nodes also develop a cycle training strategy that selects nodes with a
 S : (·) Learned anomaly score function for G.
 n The number of nodes in G
 high likelihood of being normal for an additional training step.
 d The dimension of node attributes in G This is an online sampling and training method that allows for
 m The size of subgraph continuous refinement of the model in an iterative process.
 f (·, θ) The GNN module with weight parameters θ
 Hinn , Ĥinn Graph representations of Gi at node–node level
 Hins , Ĥins Graph representations of Gi at node–subgraph level B. Multiscale Contrastive Learning
 hinn Node embedding of vi by GNN at node–node level
 hins Graph embedding of vi by GNN at node–subgraph level Multiscale contrastive learning is used to capture anomaeinn , eins Node embeddings of vi by MLPs lous patterns at different scales. The task consists of two levels: node–node and node–subgraph contrasts. The node–node
 contrast mainly focuses on contextual anomalies, whereas the
 The goal of anomaly detection on attributed networks is to node–subgraph contrast captures the abnormal patterns of strucidentify anomalous nodes in the graph. Due to the unsupervised tural anomalies. The input for multiscale contrastive learning
manner, there is no ground truth indicating which nodes are consists of the target nodes along with their subgraphs. To avoid
positive. That is to say, the graph data mixed with anomalous information leakage, the target nodes within the corresponding
nodes as rare categories are directly used for training any anno- subgraphs are masked using zero vectors. For contrast, we must
tation. Generally, given an attributed graph G = (V, E, X), the first establish the positive and negative pairs. More precisely, a
target is to learn a score function S : (·), which takes the graph node and its subgraph form a positive pair. In contrast, a node
G as input and assigns an anomaly score to each node in G. A and a subgraph of the other nodes form a negative pair.
larger score indicates that the corresponding node is of higher 1) Node–Node Contrast: Given a node vi with attributes
abnormality. With a proper threshold, anomalous nodes can be xi and its subgraph Gi , the goal of node–node contrast is to
flagged easily. For convenience, the main notations used in this maximize the agreement between the embedding of vi and the
article are summarized in Table I. embedding of the corresponding masked node in Gi . Specifically, the embedding of the masked node is aggregated from the
 other nodes of Gi . First, a single-layer GNN module f (·, θnn )
 IV. METHODOLOGY with weight parameters θnn is used to learn the representation
A. Overall Framework Hinn for the subgraph Gi
 The overall architecture of the proposed framework, Hinn = f (Gi , θnn )
MMGAD, is shown in Fig. 1. It is an unsupervised and multi-
 − 12 − 12
task framework that partially follows the mainstream workflow: i
 = σ(D i
 i D
 A Xi θnn ) (1)
sampling, contrastive learning, and scoring. In the sampling
stage, target node vi and its subgraph Gi are first generated. where A i = Ai + I is the adjacency matrix with self-loop
Then, they are fed into the proposed model for contrastive 
 added, Di represents the degree of Gi , Xi is the attribute malearning. The subgraphs around the target nodes are sampled trix of Gi , and σ(·) refers to the PReLU activation function.
using the popular random walk with restart (RWR) method Although the target node in Gi is masked, the GNN module
[52], which has also been used in many previous works. can easily aggregate messages for the target node from its
The proposed model consists of two parallel branches for neighbors. The target node embedding hinn is selected from the
multiscale learning: node–node contrast and node–subgraph learned subgraph representation Hinn .
contrast. Each branch uses GNN-based networks to learn the For contrast, we should also learn an embedding of the origlatent patterns from the input subgraph data. To improve the inal node vi . In addition, the node features should be mapped
representation and generalization capabilities, we provide a in the same hidden space. Therefore, the weight parameters
multiview GCL method as an auxiliary task for the multiscale should be shared with hinn . Given the attribute vector xi of vi ,
learning task. Unlike existing methods that generate views by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) module is used to compute the
data augmentation, we directly augment the GNN modules by node embedding einn
perturbing the training parameters to generate new views for
graph-level contrastive learning. More specifically, a new view einn = MLP(xi ) = σ(xi θnn ). (2)
1042 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed MMGAD. It consists of three main components: sampling, contrastive learning, and scoring. In the sampling phase,
target node vi and its subgraph Gi are generated for training and inference. In the contrastive learning stage, there are two parallel branches for node–node
contrast and node–subgraph contrast, respectively. In each branch, a new GNN view is generated by parameter perturbation-based network augmentation.
Then, graph-level contrastive learning is used to maximize the agreement of the two views. For scoring, the results from two branches are merged for both
cycle training and anomaly detection. It is worth noting that the processes associated with the green line are only activated in the training phase.

 With hinn and einn , we can conduct contrast learning by need to define a new MLP module. Similarly, the node features
maximizing the agreement. In detail, we use a bilinear layer are mapped in the same hidden space as the subgraph features.
to measure their similarity The node embedding eins can be calculated as follows:

 sinn = Bilinear(hinn , einn ) eins = MLP(xi ) = σ(xi θns ). (6)
 = Sigmoid(hinn Wnn (einn ) ) (3) Before contrast, a Readout module is defined to further transform the learned representation Hins into a new embedding
where Wnn is the weight matrix of the discriminator for node– vector hins . Specifically, the average pool function is employed
node contrast. The aim of contrasting is to make the similarities as the Readout function. It is defined as follows:
of positive pairs tend toward 1 and negative pairs toward 0.
 i −1
 n
Therefore, cross-entropy loss is used for contrastive learning Hins [j, :]
 hins = Readout(Hins ) = (7)
 ni
 
 n j=0
 Lnn = − (yi log(sinn ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − sinn )) (4)
 i=1
 where ni is the number of the nodes in the subgraph Gi , and
 Hins [j, :] is the jth row of the matrix Hins . In this way, the node
where the ground truth label yi is set to 1 for positive pairs and embedding eins and the subgraph embedding hins have the same
0 for negative pairs. shape. Then, the bilinear layer is used again to measure their
 2) Node–Subgraph Contrast: Given the same node vi with similarity
attributes xi and its subgraph Gi , node–subgraph contrast aims
to maximize the agreement between the embedding of vi and sins = Bilinear(hins , eins )
the embedding of Gi . Similarly, a single-layer GNN module = Sigmoid(hins Wns (eins ) ). (8)
f (·, θns ) with weight parameters θns is used to learn the representation Hins for the subgraph Gi Here, Wnn is the weight matrix of the discriminator for node–
 subgraph contrast. Likewise, the objective function of node–
 Hins = f (Gi , θns ) subgraph contrasting learning is defined as
 − 12 − 12
 i
 = σ(D i D
 A i Xi θns ). (5) 
 n
 Lns = − (yi log(sins ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − sins )) (9)
 i=1
Here, the node–subgraph contrast shares the same input with
the node–node contrast. However, they are two independent and where the ground truth label yi is set to 1 for positive pairs and
parallel branches. To learn the embedding of node vi , we also 0 for negative pairs.
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1043

C. Multiview Contrastive Learning Finally, we can compute the cross-view contrastive loss at the
 The two GNN modules for graph learning defined above graph level for node–node and node–subgraph branches. The
are key members of the multiscale contrast. To improve the total loss Lmv for multiview is obtained by adding the two
 cross-view losses
representation of graph learning, multiview contrastive learning
methods are often used. In general, a new view should first Lmv = Lcl (Hnn , Ĥnn ) + Lcl (Hns , Ĥns ) (17)
be generated by graph augmentation. The principle is to learn
representations that are robust to data transformations [51]. where Hnn , Ĥnn , Hns , and Ĥns are batch features. For exam-
However, the semantic patterns may be violated by the data nn }.
 ple, Hnn = {H0nn , . . . , Hb−1
augmentation. Although many impressive strategies have been According to [54] and [55], alignment and uniformity are
proposed to mitigate the problem, such as adaptive augmenta- two key metrics to measure the quality of contrastive learning.
tion [47] and the use of domain knowledge [53], the efficiency When the positive pairs are sampled from the data space, the
and flexibility are still limited. two metrics can be defined as follows:
 Unlike the existing methods that directly augment the graph  
 2
data, we simply perturb the GNN modules for multiview con- Lalign (f, θ)  E f (x, θ) − f (y, θ)2 (18)
 (x,y)∼ppos
trastive learning. The GNN modules are augmented by param-  
 e−2f (x,θ)−f (y,θ)2
 2
eter perturbation to generate new GNN views. Specifically, we Luniform (f, θ)  log E (19)
perturb the GNN modules f (·, θnn ) and f (·, θns ) to generate i,i,d
 x,y ∼ pdata
  
f (·, θnn ) and f (·, θns ), respectively. The functions of perturbation are defined as where ppos denotes the positive pairs and pdata refers to the data
 distribution. Lalign is designed to measure the distance between
 
 θnn = θnn + λ · Δθnn , Δθnn ∼ N (0, σnn
 2
 ) (10) the positive samples in the hidden space. Luniform is employed
 
 θns = θns + λ · Δθns , Δθns ∼ N (0, σns
 2
 ). (11) to indicate whether the random samples are uniformly distributed on the hypersphere of the hidden space. Traditional data
Here, λ is the coefficient that scales the magnitudes of the two augmentation methods can generate different types of samples
perturbations, and Δθnn and Δθns are randomly sampled from for training. By using the basic loss function Lcl (Hx , Hy ) as
 2
Gaussian distributions with zero means and variances σnn and the learning objective, Lalign and Luniform can be improved
 2
σns , respectively. With the perturbed modules, we can easily (lower is better), resulting in better representation capability.
produce new learned representations. For node–node contrast However, due to the high sensitivity of graph structures,
branch, a new learned representation Ĥinn is calculated by the augmentation from the data perspective may violate the latent
 
augmented GNN view f (·, θnn ). Similarly, Ĥins is computed patterns. Moreover, it is difficult and tedious to find out the
 
by the augmented GNN view f (·, θns ). It is worth noting that optimal data augmentation strategies. We employ the parameter
the GNN module and its augmented view share the same input perturbation method for contrastive learning to avoid tampering
graph data Gi . The GNN functions are defined as with the original data. The augmented views are generated by
  the perturbed module. In this way, the metric Lalign can be
 Ĥinn = f (Gi , θnn ) (12)
 defined as follows:
 
 Ĥins = f (Gi , θns ). (13)  
 Lalign (f, θ, θ )  E f (x, θ) − f (x, θ )2 .
 2
 (20)
 Then, we use the normalized temperature-scaled cross- x∼pdata

entropy loss for multiview GCL. The loss is designed to enforce 
 Here θ refers to the perturbed parameters of f . Similarly, the
the agreement between positive pairs compared to negative loss function Lcl (Hx , Ĥx ) can also minimize Lalign to achieve
pairs. Inspired by [51], we use graph-level contrastive learning better representations. For Luniform , there is no difference in
to improve context expression. To be specific, with batch rep- the description of the formula. Since the perturbations of the
resentations H = {H0 , . . . , Hb−1 } and Ĥ = {Ĥ0 , . . . , Ĥb−1 }, parameters are only sampled from Gaussian distributions with
(Hi , Ĥi ) is a positive pair and (Hi , Hj ) is a negative pair. very small magnitudes, the inherent patterns in the embeddings
Here, b is the batch size for training and i ∈ [0, b − 1] , j ∈ can be preserved. Learning with Lcl , Luniform can also be im-
[0, b − 1] , i = j. The basic loss function Lcl is defined as proved well. To summarize, the parameter perturbation method
 exp(sim(Hi , Ĥi )/τ ) is theoretically effective for contrastive learning.
 Lclb (Hi , Ĥi ) = −log b−1 (14) Our multiview contrastive learning method differs from the
 i j
 j=0,j=i exp(sim(H , H )/τ ) existing parameter perturbation method [51] in three main aspects: 1) our method combines both node–node and node–edge
 1
 b−1
 Lcl (H, Ĥ) = Lclb (Hi , Ĥi ). (15) contrastive learning for the task of anomaly detection; 2) we
 b
 i=0 employ a cycle training approach to enhance the representation
Here, τ is the temperature parameter and sim(·, ·) is a cosine capabilities, whereas [51] uses adversarial training to improve
similarity function defined as follows: them; and 3) for the parameter perturbation-based contrast part,
 our method builds on [51] by adapting the parameters specifi-
 Hi · Hj cally for the anomaly detection task and running them in parallel
 sim(Hi , Hj ) = . (16)
 Hi  Hj  on both the node and edge branches.
1044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

D. Scoring and Training
 1) Scoring: We use a similar scoring method as in [8], [11],
and [23]. In particular, positive pairs and negative pairs are
included in the sample in equal numbers. Since the similarities
of the positive pairs tend to 1 and those of the negative pairs
tend to 0, the score for the node–node contrast can be defined
as follows:
 Snn (vi ) = sinn (−) − sinn (+) (21)
where sinn (−) and sinn (+) are the similarities for negative and
positive pairs of the node–node contrast, respectively. Similarly,
the score for the node–subgraph contrast is as follows:
 Sns (vi ) = sins (−) − sins (+). (22)
The fused score is a weighted sum of the node–node and node– Fig. 2. Training process. (a) Normal training process. (b) Proposed cycle
 training strategy that selects normal nodes as new training data for online
subgraph scores model learning.

 Ssum (vi ) = αSnn (vi ) + (1 − α)Sns (vi ) (23)
where α is a tradeoff factor. According to the previous works nodes are removed from the training data. Finally, the selected
[8], [11], [23], multiround scoring should be performed to cal- training data are fed into the model for an additional trainculate the anomaly score for each node. The final score S(vi ) ing step.
for node vi is calculated by the mean and standard deviation
  E. Complexity Analysis
  R−1
 1 
 S(vi ) = S(vi ) + (Sr (vi ) − S(vi ))2 . (24) There are three main stages that might affect the time com-
 R plexity of MMGAD: subgraph sampling, contrastive learning,
 r=0
 and scoring. In the inference phase, the time complexity of
 R−1 Sr (vi ) is the score of
Here, R is the number of scoring rounds, subgraph sampling is determined by the RWR method. Given
the rth round, and S(vi ) = (1/R) r=0 Sr (vi ) is the mean of the average node degree of the graph ε, the number of nodes n,
the R rounds scores. and the size of the subgraph m, the complexity of sampling
 2) Cycle Training: In the training phase, the multiscale is O(mnε). The time complexity of contrastive learning is
learning task and multiview GCL task are jointly trained. For mainly influenced by the GNN modules. The time complexity
the multiscale learning task, the objective function is as follows: can be defined as O(2m2 ) for each node and O(2m2 n) in
 total. For scoring, the computational time complexity is very
 Lms = αLnn + (1 − α)Lns (25)
 low and can be considered negligible. Considering R rounds
where α is shared with (23). Finally, the overall objective func- of detection, the overall time complexity is O(mnR(2m + ε)).
tion is defined as In the training phase, the computation of the loss function and
 gradient back propagation are required. The time complexity of
 L = Lms + βLmv (26) contrastive learning is doubled by the additional perturbed GNN
where β is a weight factor to balance the two losses. modules. The cost of parameter perturbation and normal nodes
 With L, we can learn the model jointly. However, anomalous selection can be neglected due to their constant complexity.
nodes in the training data may affect the learning of normal
patterns and weaken the discrimination capability. To solve this V. EXPERIMENTS
problem, we develop an online cycle training strategy as shown In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on six
in Fig. 2. Specifically, we first learn the model for a certain widely used benchmark datasets to prove the effectiveness of
rate (denoted as p) of the total steps through normal training so our proposed MMGAD framework. Performance comparison
that the model has a basic discrimination capability. Then, we with the state-of-the-art methods, ablation study, sensitivity
continue to learn the model by performing normal training and analysis and limitations are presented in detail.
cycle training simultaneously. The normal training is performed
and followed by a cycle training process that forms a new step
training. A. Datasets
 The cycle training process consists of several operations. The six benchmark datasets used in the experiments are listed
First, we calculate the anomaly scores of the nodes in the graph in Table II. BlogCatalog and Flickr [56] are social network
using the current model. Then, the nodes are ordered by their datasets collected from the blog website BlogCatalog and the
scores to select nodes with low-anomaly scores. The selected image website Flickr, respectively. Cora [57], CiteSeer [57],
rate is defined as q. After selection, most of the anomalous and ACM [59] are citation graph datasets collected from the
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1045

 TABLE II 3) Settings: To be efficient, the size of the subgraphs is
 STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS set to 4. For each branch, only one GNN layer is stacked for
 graph learning. The hidden dimension of the GNN modules
 Datasets Nodes Edges Attributes Anomalies
 is set to 64. α is chosen from different settings α ∈ {0.2, 0.4,
 BlogCatalog [56] 5196 171 743 8189 300 0.6, 0.8}, and β is chosen from β ∈ {1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001,
 Flickr [56] 7575 239 738 12 407 450
 Cora [57] 2708 5429 1433 150 0.0001}. The coefficient of the parameter perturbation λ is
 CiteSeer [57] 3327 4732 3703 150 chosen from the set λ ∈ {0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}. The
 UAI2010 [58] 3067 28 311 4973 150 normal training rate p is chosen from p ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}
 ACM [59] 16 484 71 980 8337 600
 to perform normal training for the first p × 100 percentage of
 the total steps. The selection rate q is chosen from the set q ∈
 {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95}, which indicates the percentage of
corresponding publication databases. UAI2010 [58] is a com- normal nodes selection. The Adam optimizer is employed with
munity detection dataset. Following previous works [8] and [9], an initial learning rate of 0.002 for BlogCatalog, 0.001 for
we inject contextual and structural anomalies into the original Flickr, Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM. The number of
graph datasets. For contextual anomalies, first a target node epochs is set to 600 for BlogCatalog and Flickr, 200 for Cora,
vi and a candidate set with another 50 nodes are randomly 100 for CiteSeer and ACM, and 300 for UAI2010. The round
selected. Then, the attributes of vi are replaced by the attributes number R for scoring is set to 256. Our model is implemented
of the most dissimilar node from the set. For structural anoma- with PyTorch [60] and trained end-to-end. All experiments are
lies, 15 nodes are randomly selected from the graph and fully performed on a laptop with 32 GB dedicated memory, an Intel
connected. Finally, we repeat the operations and inject the same Core i7 CPU, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPU. Our
number of contextual and structural anomalies into the graphs. code is available at https://github.com/shuxin-qin/MMGAD.
The total number of anomalies is controlled according to the
size of each dataset.
 C. Performance Comparison
 We compare MMGAD with the eight baseline methods men-
B. Experimental Setup tioned above. The results of the AUC values are shown in
 1) Baselines: We compare MMGAD with eight state-of-the- Table III, and the comparison of ROC curves is shown in
art methods for GAD, given as follows. Fig. 3. According to the comparison, we can make the following
 a) Radar [18]: Radar models the residuals of node attributes observations.
 and their coherence with network information for GAD. 1) The proposed MMGAD outperforms all the baseline
 b) ANOMALOUS [19]: It is a joint learning framework that methods on the six datasets. It yields 0.08%, 0.09%,
 selects attributes and detects anomalies based on CUR 0.42%, 0.46%, 0.49%, and 1.44% absolute AUC value
 decomposition and residuals. promotions compared with the second-best values on
 c) DOMINANT [9]: It is a reconstruction-based method that the six datasets, respectively. The average AUC gain is
 measures anomalies based on the reconstruction errors. 1.05%. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
 d) CoLA [8]: It is a contrastive unsupervised method that proposed framework.
 detects anomalies based on node–subgraph contrast. 2) In general, deep learning methods achieve better ree) ANEMONE [11]: It is a multiscale method that uses both sults than shallow methods (Radar and ANOMALOUS),
 node–node and node–subgraph contrasts. whose performance is limited by the hand-crafted feaf) SL-GAD [34]: It is a generative and contrastive frame- ture extraction and shallow learning capabilities. Deep
 work that uses generative attribute regression and multi- graph learning is a better choice to capture anomalous
 view contrastive learning for anomaly detection. patterns from graphs with complex structure and highg) GRADATE [23]: It is a multiview method that adds dimensional features.
 subgraph–subgraph contrast based on augmented view to 3) Based on graph learning, anomaly detection methods
 improve performance. such as reconstruction [9], [34], multilevel contrast [11],
 h) NLGAD [15]: It is a two-stage framework consisting of multiview contrast [23], and normality learning [15]
 normality selection and multilevel contrastive learning. have been proposed. They have improved the perfor-
 2) Metrics: To measure the performance and make a fair mance to a certain extent. Specifically, DONIMANT and
comparison, we choose ROC-AUC as the metric. ROC-AUC is SL-GAD are based on attribute reconstruction. A decoder
also frequently used in the earlier works. The ROC curve shows is required for the reconstruction and anomaly ranking,
the performance of a binary classifier with different decision which incurs additional computational costs. By adding
thresholds. It plots the true-positive rate (TPR) against the false- contrastive learning, SL-GAD achieves better results than
positive rate (FPR). The AUC value is the area under the ROC DONIMANT. Moreover, SL-GAD achieves the secondcurve. It summarizes how well a model can produce relative best results on BlogCatalog and Flickr, both of which
values that differentiate between positive and negative samples contain more edges. We argue that the reconstructionacross all detection thresholds. The AUC value ranges from based methods easily suffer from overfitting on small
0 to 1. A higher AUC value signifies better performance. datasets. Multilevel contrast has been shown to be an
1046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH BASELINES ON AUC VALUES

 Methods BlogCatalog Flickr Cora CiteSeer UAI2010 ACM Average
 Radar [18] 0.7401 0.7399 0.6587 0.6709 0.7132 0.7047 0.7046
 ANOMALOUS [19] 0.7237 0.7434 0.5770 0.6307 0.7038 0.7201 0.6831
 DONIMANT [9] 0.7468 0.7442 0.8155 0.8251 0.7736 0.7601 0.7776
 CoLA [8] 0.7854 0.7513 0.8779 0.8968 0.8354 0.8237 0.8284
 ANEMONE [11] 0.7992 0.7712 0.9057 0.9189 0.8913 0.8462 0.8554
 SL-GAD [34] 0.8184 0.7966 0.9130 0.9136 0.8729 0.8538 0.8614
 GRADATE [23] 0.8037 0.7796 0.9237 0.9311 0.9262 0.8546 0.8698
 NLGAD [15] 0.8012 0.7807 0.9286 0.9457 0.9320 0.8655 0.8756
 MMGAD 0.8192 0.7975 0.9328 0.9503 0.9369 0.8799 0.8861

 Note: The best values are highlighted in bold and the second best are underlined.

 (a) (b) (c)

 (d) (e) (f)

Fig. 3. ROC curves comparison on six benchmark datasets: (a) BlogCatalog; (b) Flickr; (c) Cora; (d) CiteSeer; (e) UAI2010; and (f) ACM. The larger the
area under the curve, the better the anomaly detection performance.

 effective strategy to improve anomaly detection perfor- normal nodes for contrastive learning at each step. This
 mance. ANEMONE, GRADATE, NLGAD, and MM- is an effective method to strengthen the discrimination
 GAD are all based on the multilevel strategy. In detail, capability. As a result, it achieves the second-best perfor-
 ANEMONE uses only nodes and subgraphs for multi- mance on four datasets except BlogCatalog and Flickr.
 level contrast. GRADATE provides subgraph–subgraph Accordingly, we argue that there is still room for further
 contrast as a complement by using edge modification improvement in representation and discrimination capa-
 (EM) to create a new view. In this way, the quality of bilities, especially on large datasets.
 feature representations can be improved. However, direct 4) After a comprehensive comparison, we propose a crossgraph augmentation may limit the improvement due to view GCL method based on network augmentation and
 the high sensitivity of the original networks. In contrast, cycle training strategy to avoid modifying the sensi-
 NLGAD designs a normality learning module that selects tive training data and improve the learning of normal
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1047

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 ABLATION STUDY OF MULTIVIEW GCL W.R.T. AUC EFFECTIVENESS OF PARAMETER PERTURBATION ON AUC VALUES

Methods BlogCatalog Flickr Cora CiteSeer UAI2010 ACM Methods BlogCatalog Flickr Cora CiteSeer UAI2010 ACM
w/o M V 0.8002 0.7758 0.9175 0.9214 0.9021 0.8522 using AM 0.8006 0.7787 0.9232 0.9267 0.9184 0.8492
with M Vnn 0.7998 0.7839 0.9246 0.9318 0.9163 0.8540 using EM 0.8079 0.7814 0.9218 0.9381 0.9175 0.8617
with M Vns 0.8127 0.7918 0.9306 0.9462 0.9298 0.8648
 MMGAD 0.8192 0.7975 0.9328 0.9503 0.9369 0.8799
MMGAD 0.8192 0.7975 0.9328 0.9503 0.9369 0.8799
 Note: The best values are highlighted in bold.
Note: The best values are highlighted in bold.

 graph augmentation to generate views. Our method directly
 patterns, respectively. Our method utilizes the advantages augments the GNN networks to form two parallel GNNs with
 of multiview GCL and normality learning and compen- the same input graph data, while the other methods put the
 sates for the weaknesses of the baseline methods. First, input graph data and its augmented version into the same GNN
 network augmentation and graph-level contrastive learn- networks. To verify the effectiveness of parameter perturbation,
 ing force the node–node and node–subgraph branches to commonly used graph augmentation methods are employed
 become more representative and generalized. Second, the for comparison, including AM and EM. AM is a contextual
 proposed cycle training can further strengthen the dis- augmentation method in which parts of the node attributes are
 crimination capability by training with collected normal randomly masked. EM is a structural modification strategy in
 samples for additional steps. Our cycle training is differ- which edges are randomly removed and added. As shown in
 ent from NLGAD in two aspects: 1) the cycle training is Table V, using AM and using EM indicate that our paramfully integrated into the training phase in a circular man- eter perturbation-based network augmentation mechanism is
 ner, while NLGAD is a two-phase framework consisting replaced by AM and EM, respectively. The proposed method
 of normality selection and normality learning; and 2) we achieves better performance than the traditional graph augmenprovide a simple but efficient selection strategy which is tation methods. We argue that the modification of graph data
 different from NLGAD. As a result, our method is more may destroy the inherent semantics due to the high sensitivity
 efficient. For example, NLGAD requires 700 epochs of of graph data, which limits the performance. The key of GCL
 total training on Cora, while MMGAD requires only 200 is to improve the alignment and uniformity of graph embedepochs with cycle training (which is equivalent to 300 dings through contrastive learning. With the perturbed GNN
 epochs since we perform cycle training for the last half branches, our method can not only meet the requirements of
 of the total steps). GCL naturally but also preserve the data semantics of the graph.
 We also provide a visualization of the learning results based
 on the Cora dataset. It is shown in Fig. 4, where each point
D. Ablation Study represents a node with its node–node and node–subgraph scores
 In this section, we conduct an ablation study to clearly verify as 2-D coordinate values. The normal nodes are blue, while the
the effectiveness of the main components of MGCLAD, in- abnormal nodes are red. For a better view, only the first 1000
cluding the multiview GCL, the parameter perturbation-based nodes are visualized. There are four subfigures representing
augmentation, and the cycle training strategy. the learning results under different settings: without multiview
 1) Effectiveness of Multiview GCL: We add multiview GCL GCL, using AM for graph augmentation, using EM for graph
for both node–node and node–subgraph branches to improve augmentation, and the proposed MMGAD. The point with
graph representation. To verify the effectiveness, we run the higher node–node score and node–subgraph score indicates a
experiments with three different configurations: without multi- higher probability of being an abnormal node. Based on Fig. 4,
view GCL (denoted as w/o M V ), only with multiview for node– we can make the following observations: 1) most of the abnornode branch (denoted as with M Vnn ), and only with multiview mal nodes are located in the upper right area of each subfigure.
for node–subgraph branch (denoted as with M Vns ). As shown However, there are also some red points scattered in the lowin Table IV, the proposed multiview GCL method achieves sig- score areas, which leads to an increase in the number of false
nificant AUC improvements on the six datasets for both node– negatives. 2) MMGAD achieves a better learning result than
node and node–subgraph branches. Moreover, using multiview the other three settings [Fig. 4(d)]. The parameter perturbation-
GCL for a single branch can also improve the performance. based GCL forces the node–node and node–subgraph branches
In general, the proposed multiview GCL is a cross-view and to become more representative and generalized. As a result, the
graph-level contrastive learning method that can improve the node–node and node–subgraph scores become more discrimigraph representations for both node–node and node–subgraph native. 3) GCL methods based on traditional graph augmencontrasts. With better graph representations, MMGAD achieves tation (AM and EM) fail to achieve significant improvement
higher AUC values. [Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)]. Random data augmentation on highly sen-
 2) Effectiveness of Parameter Perturbation: We use a net- sitive graph networks is uncontrollable and uncertain, leading
work augmentation method based on parameter perturbation to a limited improvement in representation and generalization
to generate new views for GCL. Existing methods usually use capabilities.
1048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

 (a) (a) (a) (b)

 (c) (d) (c) (d)

Fig. 4. Visualization of learning results under different settings using the Fig. 5. Diagrams of the distribution of anomaly scores. (a) and (b) Results of
Cora dataset: (a) without multiview; (b) using AM; (c) using EM; and models training on Cora. (c) and (d) Results training on ACM. Without cycle
(d) MMGAD. We use the node–node score and node–subgraph score as the training means that the model is trained without the proposed cycle training
2-D coordinate to draw the corresponding node. The normal nodes are blue, strategy, while with cycle training it means the proposed MMGAD. The
while the abnormal nodes are red. For a better view, only the first 1000 nodes overlapping areas indicate the discrimination capability of the corresponding
are visualized. model. (a) Without cycle training on Cora. (b) With cycle training on Cora.
 (c) Without cycle training on ACM. (d) With cycle training on ACM.

 TABLE VI
 ABLATION STUDY OF CYCLE TRAINING W.R.T. AUC Under the unsupervised paradigm, abnormal nodes mixed into
 the training data may interfere with the learning of normal
 Methods BlogCatalog Flickr Cora CiteSeer UAI2010 ACM patterns and thus weaken the discrimination capability to some
 w/o 0.8108 0.7931 0.9247 0.9356 0.9289 0.8587 extent. To mitigate this problem, nodes with lower anomaly
 p=1 0.8127 0.7914 0.9255 0.9428 0.9326 0.8691
 scores (considered as normal nodes) are collected online for
 p = 0.5 0.8192 0.7975 0.9328 0.9503 0.9369 0.8799 an additional training step. In this way, the learning of normal
 Note: The best values are highlighted in bold. patterns can be improved. The experimental results mentioned
 above have confirmed our analysis.

 3) Effectiveness of Cycle Training: We design a cycle training strategy to improve the model’s learning of normal patterns E. Sensitivity Analysis
and discrimination ability. We compare the performance with In this subsection, we conduct several experiments to investithree different settings: without cycle training (denoted as w/o), gate the effects of the main hyperparameters on the performance
with cycle training starting from the first step (p = 1), and with of MMGAD, including the weight factors α and β, the coefficycle training for the last half of the total steps (p = 0.5). As cient of parameter perturbation λ, the normal training rate p, the
shown in Table VI, cycle training can significantly improve the selection rate q, the subgraph size, and the hidden dimension of
performance of these datasets. Using cycle training from the the GNN modules.
first step is not the best choice, because the selection results 1) Weight Factors α and β: The weight factor α is used
have low credibility at the beginning of training. Therefore, we to balance the node–node and node–subgraph branches in both
set p = 0.5 in our experiments, considering the performance the training and inference phases. Fig. 6 shows the performance
and training time. We also provide the plots of the anomaly of MMGAD under different settings of α ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}.
score distributions with and without cycle training on Cora and For different datasets, the settings of α that lead to the best per-
ACM datasets, as shown in Fig. 5. We first train models on formances are also different. The best settings for BlogCatalog,
both datasets without the cycle training strategy. Then, the cycle Flickr, Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM are 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.8,
training is used in the training phase for comparison. From 0.4, and 0.6, respectively. The weight factor β is used to balance
the visualization results, the anomaly scores generated by the the two learning tasks: multiscale learning and multiview GCL.
models with cycle training are more discriminative than those It is only used in the training phase. As shown in Fig. 7, the AUC
generated by the model without cycle training. Theoretically, values change with different settings of β. The best settings of
anomalies are the nodes that deviate from the normal patterns. β for these datasets are 0.0001, 0.001, 0.1, 0.01, 0.01, and 0.01,
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1049

 Fig. 8. AUC values of MMGAD with different coefficient λ.
Fig. 6. AUC values of MMGAD with different weight factor α.

 (a) (b)

Fig. 7. AUC values of MMGAD with different weight factor β. Fig. 9. AUC values of MMGAD with different (a) normal training rate p
 and (b) selection rate q.

respectively. The best settings of α and β are used in the other
experiments. the model has a weaker discrimination ability before cycle
 2) Coefficient of Parameter Perturbation λ: The coeffi- training, which could influence the selection of normal nodes.
cient of the parameter perturbation λ is used to control the If the process of selecting normal nodes is unreliable, cycle
amplitude of the parameter perturbation. A large λ indicates training will degrade into normal training. In this experiment,
a large difference in the GNN functions, resulting in a large p is chosen from p ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}. As illustrated in
gap between the two graph embeddings generated for con- Fig. 9(a), when p increases from 0 to 1, the AUC values
trast. In this case, the multiview loss Lmv becomes large. In generally show a slight upward trend at first, followed by a
contrast, the distance between the embeddings for contrast is slight decline. Accordingly, we set p = 0.5 for all datasets in
short and the loss is small. To find out the best settings of λ other experiments. The selection rate q is a hyperparameter for
for these datasets, we compare the performance of MMGAD cycle training. We simply select q percent of the training nodes
under different λ ∈ {0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}, as shown according to their anomaly scores. A larger q indicates that more
in Fig. 8. When λ is set to 0, there is no difference between samples are selected for an additional cycle training step. Since
the perturbed module and the original module. In this case, a small percentage of the anomalous nodes in the samples are
the contrastive learning is completely ineffective. When λ is mixed, we should set an appropriate q for each dataset to extract
greater than 0.2, the performance shows a gradual downward as many normal samples as possible. Considering the small
trend as λ increases overall. We find that better performance percentage of anomalies and the basic discrimination capability
is obtained when λ is in the range of 0.05–0.2. Theoretically, of the model with half of the total training steps (p = 0.5), we set
an appropriate λ forces MMGAD to capture latent patterns that q ∈ {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95}. As shown in Fig. 9(b), there
are invariant to perturbation by contrastive learning. In contrast, is a slight upward trend with the increase of q. In general, better
excessive perturbations make it difficult to learn the globally performance can be achieved when q increases to 0.9 or 0.95.
optimal representations due to the strong oscillations in their In practice, we set q = 0.9 for BlogCatalog and Flickr, and
gradients. Accordingly, we fixedly set λ = 0.1 for all datasets q = 0.95 for Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM.
in our experiments. 4) Subgraph Size and Hidden Dimension: We further ex-
 3) Normal Training Rate p and Selection Rate q: The plore the sensitivity of the subgraph size m and the hidden
rate p for normal training is a hyperparameter that specifies the dimension of the GNN modules. Fig. 10(a) shows the AUC
proportion of total training steps dedicated to normal training. values with different subgraph sizes. The subgraph size is se-
This phase of training takes place prior to the cycle training, lected from the set m ∈ {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}. As can be seen in the
ensuring the model develops a foundational level of discrimi- figure, m = 4 is a better choice for most of the datasets. If the
nation. A higher value of p means that fewer steps are allocated size is set to m = 2, the performance drops on most datasets. In
to cycle training. In contrast, a lower value of p implies that this case, there are only two nodes in a subgraph, which leads
1050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

 anomalies on the edges. This method is not ideally suited for
 evolving networks because of the dynamic changes in both the
 network topology and the data flow. Integrating dynamic graph
 representation with incremental learning techniques could serve
 as a feasible solution.

 VI. CONCLUSION
 In this work, we propose MMGAD, a multiscale and mul-
 (a) (b) tiview contrastive learning framework for anomaly detection
 on attributed networks. Unlike existing multiview methods that
Fig. 10. AUC values of MMGAD with different (a) subgraph sizes and directly augment graph data to generate new graph views, our
(b) hidden dimensions.
 parameter perturbation-based network augmentation method
 generates new GNN views for graph-level contrast at multito a lack of structural information. However, the performance scale. It is a simple yet efficient mechanism that improves the
does not always improve with increasing size m. We argue that alignment and uniformity of graph embeddings without modiredundant information contained in a subgraph with excessive fying the highly sensitive graph data. We also provide a cycle
large size degrades the performance. The hidden dimension dh training strategy to alleviate the problem of learning normal
is another parameter that affects the learning of graph repre- patterns caused by the training data mixed with anomalous
sentation. We compare the performance of MMGAD under dif- samples. The model is refined by additional training steps using
ferent dh ∈ {16, 32, 64, 128, 256}, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The selected normal samples in a circular manner. The experimental
performance improves with the increase of dh when dh ⩽ 64. results demonstrate that MMGAD outperforms the baseline
However, when dh is greater than 64, there is no improvement methods and that each designed module in MMGAD is effecin performance. In fact, a slight decrease in AUC values is tive. In the future, we plan to investigate the hypergraph learning
observed when dh increases from 64 to 256. In addition, a larger method for GAD and extend the framework to support edge
dh increases the computational cost and the risk of overfitting. anomaly detection on attributed networks.
In a comprehensive view, dh is set to 64 for all datasets.
 REFERENCES
F. Discussion [1] W. Fan et al., “Graph neural networks for social recommendation,”
 MMGAD fully exploits the methods of multiview GCL and in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW), New York, NY, USA, 2019,
 pp. 417–426.
cycle training for node anomaly detection on attributed net- [2] M. Gao, L. Wu, Q. Li, and W. Chen, “Anomaly traffic detection in IoT
works. Although the method has shown promising results, there security using graph neural networks,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 76, 2023,
are still some limitations and challenges that need to be ad- Art. no. 103532.
 [3] S. I. Popoola, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, G. Gui, and H. Gacanin,
dressed further. “Hybrid deep learning for botnet attack detection in the Internet-of-
 1) Limitations: There are several limitations. First, the Things networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4944–4956,
method introduces an additional graph-level contrastive learn- Mar. 2021.
 [4] A. Srivastava, A. Kundu, S. Sural, and A. Majumdar, “Credit card fraud
ing branch and a cycle training stage, which leads to higher detection using hidden Markov model,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
computational complexity and may affect its application for Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 37–48, Jan./Mar. 2008.
real-time or large-scale tasks. An area for future work will focus [5] J. Yu et al., “Group-based fraud detection network on e-commerce
 platforms,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
on improving computational efficiency. Second, the reliance Min. (KDD), New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 5463–5475.
on multiview contrastive learning and cycle training introduces [6] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for
additional hyperparameters that must be manually tuned, po- fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023.
tentially creating challenges in contexts where anomalies are [7] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detection:
vaguely defined or extremely heterogeneous. Furthermore, the Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
representation learning is closely tied to the structures and vol. 186, 2021, Art. no. 115742.
 [8] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly deattributes, which could reduce its effectiveness in networks with tection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
inadequate or misleading attributes. One possible avenue for IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
future research is to create a more streamlined and resilient Jun. 2022.
 [9] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
framework against perturbations and noise. attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Inter. Conf. Data Mining (SDM),
 2) Opportunities: Although the method is developed for 2019, pp. 594–602.
node anomaly detection, it could potentially be adapted for edge [10] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
 contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf.
anomaly detection through upgrades and modifications. One Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc.,
worthwhile approach is to replace the graph representation of 2020, pp. 5812–5823.
MMGAD with a hypergraph representation, allowing edges in [11] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Anemone: Graph
 anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM
the network to be represented as nodes in the hypergraph. In Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), New York, NY, USA, 2021,
this manner, the method could potentially be adapted to detect pp. 3122–3126.
QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1051

[12] C. Wang and H. Zhu, “Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based behavioral [36] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-l. Chung, “Subtractive
 anomaly detection in cyber security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM
 vol. 17, pp. 2703–2718, 2022. Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
[13] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view [37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 259–268. (ICLR), 2017, pp. 1–14.
[14] F. Liu et al., “DAGAD: Data augmentation for graph anomaly detection,” [38] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2022, pp. 259–268. Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
[15] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection via Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–12.
 multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, [39] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 2023, pp. 7502–7511. learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
[16] C. Niu, G. Pang, and L. Chen, “Graph-level anomaly detection via (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
 hierarchical memory networks,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. [40] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 Knowl. Discovery Databases (ECML PKDD), D. Koutra, C. Plant, Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
 M. Gomez Rodriguez, E. Baralis, and F. Bonchi, Eds., 2023, [41] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 pp. 201–218. graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
[17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of at- detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 tributed neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, Jun. 2022.
 pp. 207–215. [42] M. Li, L. Zhang, L. Cui, L. Bai, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “BLoG: Bootstrapped
[18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly graph representation learning with local and global regularization for
 detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. recommendation,” Pattern Recogn., vol. 144, no. C, pp. 1–13, 2023.
 (IJCAI), 2017, pp. 2152–2158. [43] J. Li, R. Zheng, H. Feng, M. Li, and X. Zhuang, “Permutation
[19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint equivariant graph framelets for heterophilous graph learning,” IEEE
 modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11634–11648,
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3513–3519. Sep. 2024.
[20] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection [44] L. Bai et al., “HAQJSK: Hierarchical-aligned quantum Jensen-Shannon
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, kernels for graph classification,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 6370–6384, Nov. 2024.
[21] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory, [45] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?,”
 models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 1945–1951.
 Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, Apr. 2024. [46] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
[22] C. Huang, M. Li, F. Cao, H. Fujita, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “Are graph Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
 convolutional networks with random weights feasible?,” IEEE Trans. [47] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 2751–2768, Mar. 2023. learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
[23] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
 learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. [48] K. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Data augmentation for deep
 Intell. (AAAI), 2023, pp. 7459–7467. graph learning: A survey,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 24, no. 2,
[24] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang, pp. 61–77, Dec. 2022.
 “Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via [49] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive
 data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW),
 pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023. 2021, pp. 2069–2080.
[25] S. Qin, L. Yongcan, and T. Gaofeng, “Memory-augmented u-transformer [50] Y. Liu et al., “Simple contrastive graph clustering,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 13789–13800, Oct. 2024.
 Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5. [51] J. Xia, L. Wu, J. Chen, B. Hu, and S. Z. Li, “SimGRACE: A simple
[26] Y. Lai, Y. Han, and Y. Wang, “Anomaly detection with prototype-guided framework for graph contrastive learning without data augmentation,”
 discriminative latent embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW), 2022, pp. 1070–1079.
 (ICDM), 2021, pp. 300–309. [52] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
[27] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,” and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2006,
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094, pp. 613–622.
 Dec. 2023. [53] M. Sun, J. Xing, H. Wang, B. Chen, and J. Zhou, “MoCL: Data-driven
[28] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for molecular fingerprint via knowledge-aware contrastive learning from
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. molecular graph,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min.
 1–38, 2021. (KDD), 2021, pp. 3585–3594.
[29] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly [54] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning
 detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Min. (WSDM), through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. Int.
 New York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 657–665. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2020, pp. 9929–9939.
[30] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed net- [55] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of
 works,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12249– sentence embeddings,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang.
 12263, Dec. 2023. Process. (EMNLP), Nov. 2021, pp. 6894–6910.
[31] L.-H. Chen et al., “AnomMAN: Detect anomalies on multi-view [56] L. Tang and H. Liu, “Relational learning via latent social dimensions,”
 attributed networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 628, pp. 1–21, 2023. in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min. (KDD), 2009,
[32] J. Liu, M. He, X. Shang, J. Shi, B. Cui, and H. Yin, “BOURNE: Boot- pp. 817–826.
 strapped self-supervised learning framework for unified graph anomaly [57] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Gallagher, and T. Eliassidetection,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), 2024, Rad, “Collective classification in network data articles,” AI Mag.,
 pp. 2820–2833. vol. 29, pp. 93–106, Sep. 2008.
[33] J. Kim, Y. In, K. Yoon, J. Lee, and C. Park, “Class label-aware graph [58] W. Wang, X. Liu, P. Jiao, X. Chen, and D. Jin, “A unified weakly
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. supervised framework for community detection and semantic match-
 (CIKM), 2023, pp. 4008–4012. ing,” in Proc. Pacific-Asia Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2018,
[34] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, pp. 218–230.
 “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly [59] J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su, “Arnetdetection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220– Miner: Extraction and mining of academic social networks,” in Proc.
 12233, Dec. 2023. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min. (KDD), 2008,
[35] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection pp. 990–998.
 on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), [60] A. Paszke et al., “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch,” in Proc.
 2020, pp. 1288–1294. NIPS-W, 2017, pp. 1–4.