IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 11303

 AutoKAN: A Federated Lightweight Anomaly
 Detection Framework for Securing Constrained IoT
 Healthcare Diabetes Monitoring Systems
 Nguyen Khanh Son , Arun Kumar Sangaiah , Chuang Chun-Chi, Honda Hsu, Chung-Chian Hsu ,
 and Chuan-Yu Chang

 Abstract—The adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) technol- and achieving twice the speed in training and inference time.
ogy in healthcare has significantly enhanced patient care by This demonstrates the superiority of our approach in anomaly
improving both the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of health- detection, particularly in fields where precision is the most
care delivery systems. Specifically, for diabetic patients, IoT important metric, such as medical applications.
facilitates continuous health monitoring, enabling healthcare
professionals to track patients’ conditions in real time and Index Terms—Federated learning, smart healthcare, IoT,
detect potential complications at an early stage. However, the anomaly detection, Kolmogorov-Arnold networks, diabetes
growing number of IoT devices has also introduced security monitoring.
concerns, particularly in terms of cyber threats that exploit S YMBOL D EFINITIONS
resource limitations such as power and memory. Especially
in the healthcare sector, where data is highly sensitive and • L: Total number of layers in a KAN network.
distributed in nature, privacy is one of the most critical aspects. • z0 : Input to the KAN, z0 ∈ Rd0 .
A promising privacy-preserving technology, known as federated • l : Function matrix corresponding to the l-th layer in
learning, addresses these challenges effectively. This research KAN.
presents a lightweight federated anomaly detection framework
 • ψl,j,i : Activation function linking layer l to layer l+1,
tailored for constrained environments, including small-scale IoT
devices. We conceptualize IoT devices as essential components where l = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L−1; i = 1, 2, . . . , dl ;
within the edge continuum and leverage anomaly detection j = 1, 2, . . . , dl+1 .
models to enhance security. Our anomaly detection model is • dl : Number of nodes in layer l.
built on an autoencoder architecture; however, rather than • dl+1 : Number of nodes in layer l + 1.
relying on conventional multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks,
 • zl,i : Input to ψl,j,i .
we utilize Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks (KAN) with an adaptive
threshold to minimize parameter complexity and enable real- • z̃l,j,i : Output of ψl,j,i .
time deployment. Additionally, the federated learning mechanism • z(l+1),j : Activation value of the (l + 1, j) neuron.
is applied to ensure the privacy of patient data is safeguarded. • αs : A learnable parameter in the activation function.
Experimental results indicate that our model achieves an accu- • αr : A learnable parameter in the activation function,
racy exceeding 99.5% and a precision of 100%, outperforming
traditional autoencoders while utilizing 50% fewer parameters initialized according to Xavier initialization.
 • S(z): A learnable function computed using B-spline basis
 functions.
 Received 19 March 2025; revised 24 May 2025 and 27 July 2025; accepted
2 August 2025. Date of publication 6 August 2025; date of current version • wtl : AutoKAN model at round t, where l ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . ,
8 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of L} and L is the number of devices.
Education (MOE), Taiwan, through the Yushan Young Scholar Fellowship • Z: Input to the Encoder network, (z1 , z2 , z3 , . . . , zn ).
under Grant MOE-111-A013, and in part by the Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital,
Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation under Grant TCRD113(2)-C-02. • K: Encoder network.
(Nguyen Khanh Son and Arun Kumar Sangaiah contributed equally to this • h: Output of the Encoder network, K(Z).
work.) (Corresponding authors: Chuang Chun-Chi; Honda Hsu.) • K  : Decoder network.
 Nguyen Khanh Son and Arun Kumar Sangaiah are with the International
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, National Yunlin University • Z  : Output of the Decoder network, K  (h).
of Science and Technology, Douliu 64002, Taiwan (e-mail: khanhson- • LAutoKAN : Loss function, calculated using Mean Squared
nguyen0811@gmail.com; aksangaiah@ieee.org). Error (MSE).
 Chuang Chun-Chi is with the Department of Surgery, Division of
Plastic Surgery, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical • gt : Gradient at time step t.
Foundation, Dalin 622, Chia-Yi, Taiwan (e-mail: rosa71234@tzuchi.com.tw; • θ : Learnable parameters {αs , αr , c}.
putinto3@gmail.com). • mt : Moving average of gradients.
 Honda Hsu is with the Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery,
Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Dalin 622, • vt : Moving average of squared gradients.
Chia-Yi, Taiwan, and also with the School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, • β1 , β2 : Hyperparameters for momentum and variance
Hualien 97004, Taiwan (e-mail: hondahsu@yahoo.com.tw). decay.
 Chung-Chian Hsu is with the Department of Information Management,
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu 64002, Yunlin, • η: Learning rate.
Taiwan (e-mail: hsucc@yuntech.edu.tw). • : Small constant for numerical stability.
 Chuan-Yu Chang is with the Department of Computer Science and • nl : Number of samples on device l.
Information Engineering, National Yunlin University of Science and
Technology, Douliu 64002, Taiwan (e-mail: chuanyu@yuntech.edu.tw). • N: Total dataset size across selected devices.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3596250 • Ei : Reconstruction error for Zi .

 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
11304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 • λmax : Maximum reconstruction error. detection models essential. Fan et al. [9] introduced LUAD,
 • λmin : Minimum reconstruction error. a lightweight anomaly detection framework that integrates a
 • Eitest : Reconstruction error for test data Ti . Temporal Convolutional Network with a Variational autoencoder. Their approach significantly reduces the number of
 parameters—nearly ten times fewer than the OmniAnomaly
 I. I NTRODUCTION model—while maintaining comparable accuracy. Additionally,
 IABETES is a chronic health condition that arises when several studies have also focused on designing lightweight
D the pancreas fails to produce sufficient insulin or when
the body is unable to use insulin effectively. The World Health
 anomaly detection models for edge devices [10], [11], [12].
 However, many of these works primarily demonstrate their
Organization (WHO) reported that in 2021, an estimated effectiveness in high-computing environments and often rely on
830 million individuals were affected by diabetes, leading to a limited set of evaluation metrics, which may not fully validate
approximately 2 million deaths. Furthermore, elevated blood their performance in real-world edge computing scenarios. On
glucose levels were linked to nearly 11% of deaths associated the other hand, privacy is also an important aspect of healthcare,
with cardiovascular diseases [1]. and concerns about data security often hinder the sharing
 Advancements in IoT-based biomedical devices are playing of healthcare information, thereby limiting opportunities for
a crucial role in both self-management for diabetic patients improvement and innovation in the field.
and supporting healthcare organizations responsible for patient This research aims to address the following questions:
care [2]. IoT healthcare sensors and smart devices collect a 1) What level of accuracy and precision can a lightweight
variety of health parameters, including blood pressure, glucose anomaly detection framework based on Kolmogorov–
levels, heart rate, and electrocardiogram (ECG) readings. The Arnold Networks (KANs) achieve in IoT-based
gathered data is then transmitted to a healthcare server for healthcare monitoring systems?
storage and analysis via wireless networks, such as WLANs, 2) How does the proposed framework perform in
PANs, or WMANs. In recent years, the Ambient Assisted resource-constrained environments compared to tradi-
Living (AAL) methodology has been introduced to improve tional autoencoder-based methods?
care for elderly diabetic patients. This approach enables care- 3) How does integrating federated learning into the
givers to monitor blood sugar and glucose levels in real time AutoKAN framework support the preservation of patient
using smart devices. Additionally, IoT-enabled solutions, such data privacy while maintaining effective anomaly detecas ambulance dispatch systems, ensure immediate medical tion in decentralized healthcare settings?
assistance in emergency situations. Anomaly detection in To address the challenges mentioned above, this
IoT healthcare refers to identifying observations, events, or work proposed a novel deep federated learning anomaly
data points that deviate significantly from normal patterns, autoencoder-based detection in IoT healthcare system,
distinguishing them from the rest of the sensor dataset. focusing on lightweight, performance, privacy, and precision
Identifying and handling anomalies is crucial because they detection. Inspired by the latest existing research, an
can impact the decision-making process of medical profes- autoencoder-based model has been developed due to
sionals and directly affect patient well-being. Furthermore, the advantage of Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks [13] in
detecting anomalies improves data quality, contributing to the performance. The reconstructed error is calculated and
integrity and reliability of data, which is essential not only used as the anomaly score with an adaptive threshold to
for training machine learning models but also for accurate ensure the scalability and model accuracy, especially in an
patient diagnosis. The main cause of unusual events is sen- uncertainty environment like IoT. Therefore, a federated
sor inaccuracies, which can lead to anomalies for various learning mechanism is proposed to aggregate local data while
reasons, such as low latency, cyberattacks, or hardware fail- ensuring patient privacy. Hence, the contribution of this work
ures. Additionally, anomalies can arise in resource-constrained can be written as follows:
environments. 1) Develop the AutoKAN federated anomaly detection
 In the healthcare domain, Abououf et al. [3] introduced framework for healthcare IoT, ensuring high accuracy,
an interpretable method for anomaly detection, utilizing an efficiency, privacy and robustness in detecting anomalies
autoencoder to rapidly identify anomalous events, while a deep within a controlled environment. The model is designed
neural network handles classification. To enhance explain- to adapt to real-world healthcare scenarios, where reliaability, the authors incorporated KernelSHAP. Likewise, bility and privacy are critical.
Aguilar et al. [4] integrated a decision tree with an autoencoder 2) Simulate a resource-constrained computing environment
to enhance the interpretability of the autoencoder’s outputs, to evaluate the efficiency and scalability of the proposed
offering domain experts a more intuitive explanation. Although model. This includes testing under limited computaautoencoders offer a promising approach for anomaly detec- tional resources to assess the feasibility of deploying
tion, their performance still needs improvement [5], [6], [7], AutoKAN in edge and IoT-based healthcare systems.
[8], particularly in IoT systems, where millions of data points The results showcase the model’s proficiency in terms
are generated daily. Even a 1% error rate can translate into a of execution time, inference speed, and overall computasignificant number of misdetections, making accuracy crucial tional complexity, ensuring its practicality for real-time
in such environments. applications.
 In IoT systems, edge devices often have limited computational 3) Enhance detection reliability by minimizing false
resources, making the development of lightweight anomaly positives and false negatives through an adaptive
SON et al.: AutoKAN: A FEDERATED LIGHTWEIGHT ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 11305

 thresholding mechanism. This approach dynamically Sivapalan et al. [16] developed an interpretable rule-mining
 adjusts detection thresholds based on contextual fac- solution for detecting anomalies in real-time ECG signals.
 tors, improving accuracy while ensuring scalability. The Additionally, the model achieves over 50% power savproposed method contributes to more reliable anomaly ings in sensor consumption by transmitting only anomaly
 detection, making it suitable for large-scale deployments events. However, its performance is not highly comparable,
 in diverse healthcare environments. reaching only approximately 85-90% accuracy. Achieving
 The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 100% effectiveness in malware detection for Linux-based
reviews related work. Section III describes the methodology IoT, Breitenbacher et al. [17] proposed HADES-IoT, a hostfor stress prediction and the experimental design. Further based anomaly detection system that not only ensures high
details on the experimental setup are provided in Section IV. accuracy but also maintains low overhead, making it suit-
Section V evaluates the performance of the proposed model able for high-performance demanding tasks. Xu et al. [29]
and includes a discussion. The study’s limitations and poten- proposed an unsupervised framework to jointly optimize the
tial future research directions are outlined in Section VI-C. graph contrastive learning module and the network recon-
Finally, Section VII summarizes the key findings of this struction module for high-precision anomaly detection in
paper. networks of consumer electronic devices. Their approach
 shows superior results on three public benchmark datasets.
 II. R ELATED W ORK AlMahadin et al. [30] applied the deep learning technique
 GRU to detect anomalies such as DDoS attacks in Vehicular
 Anomaly detection in IoT, particularly in healthcare, has
 Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs). Similarly, Nissar et al. [31]
emerged as a critical area of research due to the increasing
 employed a variational autoencoder with various optimization
connectivity of medical devices and the associated security
 objectives, including divergence, KL-divergence, and reconrisks. This section provides a detailed exploration of anomaly
 struction error, using the AGE-MOEA and R-NSGA-III
detection techniques, frameworks, and models tailored for
 algorithms. Zhao et al. [32], using a convolutional encoder
IoT healthcare applications, drawing insights from recent
 and a deconvolutional decoder—each leveraging the paralstudies. Additionally, a Comparison of related work is detailed
 lelism of stacked Advanced Dilated Causal Convolutional
in Table I.
 (ADCC) blocks—demonstrated that their approach outperforms traditional methods in anomaly detection within satellite
A. Anomaly Detection in IoT orbit environments. Zukai et al. [33] introduced a meta-
 Anomaly events may be well-reconstructed but difficult learning framework that demonstrated superior performance
to distinguish. Zeng et al. [26] applied particle swarm compared to other algorithms across multiple datasets,
optimization to optimize hyperparameters for an adversarial including USTL-EHMS-2020, IoTID20, and WUSTL-IIOT-
VAE for anomaly detection. Their method achieves high 2021, attaining an accuracy of 99%. However, ensemble
performance in various domains, such as secure water treat- methods may not be well-suited for IoT-based environment, water distribution, the Mars Science Laboratory, and ments where real-time applications demand rapid processing.
power systems. Katbi et al. [27] propose a novel IoT anomaly Fang et al. [18] developed an anomaly detection model
detection system that uses a one-class approach with a deep tailored for medical IoT systems, utilizing rough set thelearning architecture. Their methodology involves integrat- ory and fuzzy core vector machines. Despite its novel
ing a Deep SVDD objective function with an adversarial approach, the model’s accuracy remains approximately 92%.
interpolated network structure to achieve effective grouping Albattah and Rassam [19] employed a convolutional long
of normal data points in the latent space. Using a multi- short-term memory (ConvLSTM) network to detect anomahead graph attention network (MD-GAT) to capture feature lies in wireless body area networks. Experimental findings
correlations and a temporal convolution network to learn validated the model’s effectiveness, reporting a 98% F1-
temporal dependencies, Tang et al. [28] proposed a supervised score and 99% accuracy, surpassing traditional CNN and
contrastive learning-based spatiotemporal variational autoen- LSTM-based models. Likewise, Shaikh et al. [34] achieved
coder (SC-STVAE). Vijai and Sivakumar [14] propose a novel an impressive 99.78% accuracy in intrusion detection within
anomaly detection approach for industrial applications using the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) by leveraging a
a BiLSTM-Variational Autoencoder (BiLSTM-VAE) model hybrid approach combining CNN and LSTM architectures.
with a dynamic loss function. The model aims to overcome Building on LSTM-based methodologies, Wang et al. [35]
the limitations of traditional anomaly detection methods, such concentrated on constructing a distributed anomaly detection
as scalability issues, high false alarm rates, and reliance on system that ensures both high precision and low latency.
skilled expertise. In a similar vein, Hasniuj et al. [36] proposed a robust
 Focusing on energy-efficient models by reducing anomaly- framework capable of identifying anomalous behaviors in IoT
irrelevant sensory data transmitted within the network, devices while also implementing mechanisms to restrict and
Guo et al. [15] developed EGNN, an anomaly detection mitigate their effects on interconnected systems. Their solution
method utilizing a graph neural network. Nonetheless, this incorporates a lightweight machine learning model designed
approach lacks generalization and scalability. Utilizing a bias- for accurate packet-level anomaly detection. Additionally,
trained artificial intelligence neural network to formulate Balaji et al. [20] explored an ensemble-based strategy by
a set of rules at each node of a tree-based algorithm, integrating SqueezeNet and NasNet architectures to train a
11306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORK IN A NOMALY D ETECTION FOR I OT H EALTHCARE S YSTEMS

deep learning model aimed at intrusion detection within addressed some challenges in federated learning using the
healthcare-related IoT infrastructures. Polyak-averaging method. To enhance privacy-aware access
 control in IoT healthcare systems, Lin et al. [24] proposed
B. Federated Learning In IoT Healthcare System a deep federated learning approach that utilizes graph con-
 With the rise of privacy concerns and the growing number volutional networks to gain user trust by obtaining users’
of data breaches across industries, the need for technolo- influences. Li et al. [25] developed a federated supervised
gies that safeguard data privacy while maintaining accuracy learning model focused on solving the data heterogeneity
and sustainability has become crucial. Federated learning is problem. This approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
gaining attention as a promising solution to address these such as SCFed, CBAFed, and FedCD by providing a suitable
challenges. Elayan et al. [21] introduced a deep federated strategy to mitigate imbalanced class distributions.
learning approach for monitoring and analyzing healthcare
data to detect skin diseases. Meanwhile, Akter et al. [22]
developed a three-fold federated edge aggregator to enhance C. Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
the security of healthcare systems against privacy attacks. The Nowadays, in addition to the popular MLP network, various
effectiveness of their model was evaluated using the MNIST, new architectures are emerging to explore novel structures
CIFAR-10, STL-10, and COVID-19 chest X-ray datasets, with better interpretability and higher performance. Abd
achieving an accuracy of approximately 90%. Utilizing Non- Elaziz et al. [13] introduced the Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
Fungible Tokens (NFTs) with federated learning, Sai et al. [23] (KAN), drawing inspiration from the Kolmogorov-Arnold
encouraged patients to store data in the NFT marketplace and representation theorem. The Kolmogorov–Arnold Network has
SON et al.: AutoKAN: A FEDERATED LIGHTWEIGHT ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 11307

recently garnered significant attention for its strong inter- for j = 1, . . . , dl+1 . This can be rewritten as:
pretability and exceptional performance. Seydi et al. [37]
 zl+1 = l zl (4)
compared various KAN variants, including Fully Connected
KAN, Chebyshev-KAN, Radial Basis Function KAN, and where:
Naïve-Fourier-KAN, for hyperspectral change detection. Their ⎡ ⎤
 ψl,1,1 ψl,1,2 ψl,1,3 . . . ψl,1,dl
experiments demonstrated that Chebyshev-KAN achieved ⎢ ψl,2,1 ψl,2,2 ψl,2,3 . . . ψl,2,dl ⎥
 ⎢ ⎥
the best performance for this task. In another study, l = ⎢ . .. .. .. .. ⎥ (5)
Jiang et al. [38] employed the Kolmogorov–Arnold Network ⎣ .. . . . . ⎦
for short-term load forecasting in power systems. Their ψl,dl+1 ,1 ψl,dl+1 ,2 ψl,dl+1 ,3 . . . ψl,dl+1 ,dl
results demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed model, The activation function is computed as:
as the RMSE score outperformed other methods, such as
XGBoost and MLP. Liu et al. [39] utilized Kolmogorov– ψ(z) = αr b(z) + αs S(z) (6)
Arnold Networks for semi-supervised impedance inversion.
 where:
Through experimental comparisons of acoustic impedance
 z
fitting results, they showed that KAN and Convolutional b(z) = (7)
KAN exhibit stronger fitting capabilities for long-term acoustic 1 + e−z
impedance data than traditional linear layers and CNNs. and S(z) is computed as, with ci are the learnable variable and
To address the challenges related to limited computing and Bi (z) are B-spiline basis functions:
memory resources, Song et al. [40] propose an adaptive 
 ci Bi (z) (8)
wavelet transform Kolmogorov–Arnold network approach
 i
for hybrid control devices using motor imagery electroencephalography. Do et al. [41] evaluated and compared In the initial stage, αs = 1, αr is initialized according to the
multiple KAN variants, such as Original-KAN, Fast-KAN, Xavier initialization and S(z) ≈ 0.
Jacobi-KAN, DeepKAN, and Chebyshev-KAN, for botnet A smaller KAN network can achieve accuracy comparable
classification. Their findings indicated that the Original-KAN to or even surpass that of a larger MLP network by learning
achieved the best performance on the N-BaIoT, IoT23, and the activation functions directly. This is especially beneficial
IoT-BotNet datasets. The application of KAN shows its poten- for developing lightweight models on devices with limited
tial for better performance in various tasks. This motivates us computational resources.
to conduct research with KAN for our work.
 B. AutoKAN Architecture
 III. M ETHODOLOGY Based on the KAN layer, we design the proposed AutoKAN,
A. KAN Layer whose structure is illustrated in Figure 1. The AutoKAN
 model, denoted as wtl at round t, where l ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , L} and
 KAN emerges as a promising alternative to Multi-Layer
 L is the number of devices in the federated network, consists
Perceptrons (MLPs), delivering enhanced performance and
 of two main components: the encoder and the decoder. Each
faster computation. The primary difference between KAN and
 component is built using a stack of KAN layers. After training
MLP lies in their activation functions: while MLPs rely on
 for E local epochs, the weights are sent to the server to update
fixed activation functions, KAN utilizes learnable activation
 the global model.
functions on the edges, which are subsequently aggregated at
 We denote the encoder network as K, with input Z =
the nodes.
 (z1 , z2 , z3 , . . . , zn ). By applying equation (1), we obtain:
 A KAN can be structured as a composition of multiple
KAN layers. Let L denote the total number of layers in a K(Z) = ( L−1 ◦ L−2 ◦ · · · ◦ 0 )Z = h (9)
KAN network, with the input represented as z0 ∈ Rd0 . The
transformation of KAN can be expressed as: Similarly, the encoder network is denoted as K  , with input
   h = K(Z), with P denoted as the total number of layers in
 K(z) = L−1 ◦ L−2 ◦ · · · ◦ 0 (z) (1) Decoder network, leading to:
where l represents the function matrix corresponding to the K  (h) = ( P−1 ◦ P−2 ◦ · · · ◦ 0 )h = Z
 
 (10)
l-th layer in KAN. More specifically, we define ψl,j,i with:
 The loss function is calculated using the Mean Squared
 l = 0, 1, 2, . . . , L − 1; i = 1, 2, . . . , dl ; j = 1, 2, . . . , dl+1 Error (MSE):
 (2) 1   2
 LAutoKAN = Z −Z (11)
where ψ denotes the activation function linking layer l to layer N
l + 1. Here, dl and dl+1 represent the number of nodes in The learnable parameters in KAN are updated using the
layers l and l + 1, respectively. Let zl,i be the input to ψl,j,i Adam optimizer. The optimization process can be described
and z̃l,j,i be the corresponding output. The activation value of as follows:
the (l + 1, j) neuron is computed as:
 gt = ∇θ J(θt ), where θ = {αs , αr , c} (12)
 
 dl 
 dl
   mt = β1 mt−1 + (1 − β1 )gt (13)
 z(l+1),j = z̃l,j,i = ψl,j,i zl,i (3)
 i=1 i=1 vt = β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2 )g2t (14)
11308 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. Federated mechanism for anomaly detection for privacy-preserving IoT diabetes healthcare system. This illustrates the flow of information and model
updates within the federated learning framework.

 mt vt
 m̂t = , vˆt = (15) Algorithm 1 Federated Learning Framework for Local Model
 1 − β1t 1 − β2t Aggregation (FedAvg)
 η
 αs(t+1) = αs(t) − m̂t (16) 1: Input: Initial global model w0global , number of participatvˆt +  ing devices L, local training epochs E, learning rate η, and
 η
 αr(t+1) = αr(t) − m̂t (17) total communication rounds T.
 vˆt +  2: Output: Optimized global model wT global
 (t+1) (t) η 3: Server Initialization:
 c =c − m̂t (18)
 vˆt +  4: The global model w0global is initialized
 5: The initialized model is distributed to all devices l ∈ L
where η represents the learning rate, β1 and β2 serve as
 6: for t = 1 to T do
hyperparameters that influence momentum and variance decay,
 7: Server selects a subset of devices St ⊆ L
and  is a small constant ensuring numerical stability by
 8: for each device l ∈ St concurrently do
preventing division by zero. The gradient at time step t is
 9: Retrieve the current global model wtglobal
denoted as gt , while mt and vt correspond to the moving
 10: Train a local model on device l over E epochs,
averages of gradients and squared gradients, respectively.
 following equations (12)–(18)
Additionally, t signifies the current iteration step.
 11: Transmit the updated local model wt+1 l back to the
 This step-by-step optimization ensures efficient parameter
 server
updates, allowing AutoKAN to learn feature representations
 12: end for
effectively.
 13: The server applies FedAvg to aggregate the models:
 nl t+1
 14: wt+1
 global = l∈St N wl
C. Federated Autoencoder Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
With Adaptive Threshold for Anomaly Detection 15: The updated global model wt+1 global is then shared with
 all devices
 After training, the server aggregates updates using Federated 16: end for
Averaging mechanism. 17: Return the final trained global model wT
  nl global
 wt+1
 global = wt+1
 l (19)
 t
 N
 l∈S

where nl is the number of samples on device l and N = intentionally overfit the model to the training data so that
 l∈St nl is the total dataset size across selected devices. The techniques such as dropout and batch normalization are not
updated global model is then sent back to all devices, and required. After training, the reconstruction error E can be used
this process repeats for T rounds until convergence. The final to extract the threshold for normal data as follows:
model wTglobal is deployed for inference. Details process is
provided in Algorithm 1.
 The process flow of testing and calculating adaptive thresh- λmax = max(E), λmin = min(E)
old is illustrated in Algorithm 2. The normal data is fed
into AutoKAN to calculate the reconstruction error. Note that During the testing phase, any value exceeding or falling
the input data consists only of normal data. Our aim is to below this boundary is considered an anomaly.
SON et al.: AutoKAN: A FEDERATED LIGHTWEIGHT ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 11309

Algorithm 2 AutoKAN Anomaly Detection With Adaptive utilized normal traffic from the 70% training set, resulting in
Threshold at the Local lth Device in Round t a total of 56,044 normal traffic samples specifically used for
 1: Input: Normal data Z, Test data T, Local model wtl model training.
 2: Compute the reconstruction error:

 Ei = wtl (Zi ) − Zi ∀Zi ∈ Z (20) B. System and Model Configuration
 The experimental setup involved a high-performance com-
 3: E ← E ∪ {Ei }
 puting system featuring an Intel Core i7-13700 processor (24
 4: Compute anomaly thresholds:
 cores), 32GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060
 λmax = max(E), λmin = min(E) (21) GPU. The implementation was performed in Python 3.10.15,
 leveraging the PyOD library [44] to execute anomaly detection
 5: Test Phase: algorithms for benchmarking against the proposed method.
 6: for each Ti ∈ T do To further evaluate the model’s efficiency in real-world
 7: Compute the reconstruction error: deployment scenarios, we simulated a resource-constrained
 1  t 2 environment comparable to a Raspberry Pi 5, featuring 2GB
 Eitest = wl (Ti ) − Ti (22)
 N RAM and a quad-core processor. This setup was used to assess
 8: if Eitest > λmax or Eitest < λmin then the feasibility of deploying the proposed model in low-power
 9: Ti is classified as an Anomaly edge computing devices.
10: else The model was trained using Mean Squared Error (MSE)
11: Ti is classified as Normal Loss, with the Adam optimizer and a total of 30 training
12: end if epochs, learning rate α = 0.001. This configuration ensures
13: end for
 stable learning while minimizing reconstruction errors, making
14: Output: Classification result (Anomaly or Normal)
 the model suitable for anomaly detection in both high-end and
 low-resource environments.

 C. Evaluation Metrics
 IV. E XPERIMENT D ESIGN To comprehensively assess the performance of the proposed
A. Dataset model, we consider multiple evaluation metrics.
 The dataset simulates an IoT-based environment, specif- 1) Accuracy:
ically an Intensive Care Unit (ICU), populated with nine Pt + Nt
patient monitoring devices. The detailed specifications of the Accuracy = (23)
 Pt + Nt + Pf + Nf
sensors integrated within this setup are illustrated in Figure 3.
To rigorously evaluate the system’s security and resilience, where Pt , Nt , Pf , and Nf represent true positives, true negafour distinct types of cyberattacks were meticulously sim- tives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively.
ulated: Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) 2) Precision:
Publish Flood, MQTT Authentication Bypass Exploit, MQTT Pt
 Precision = (24)
Malicious Packet Injection, and Constrained Application Pt + Pf
Protocol (CoAP) Replay Exploit. The simulation was con-
 3) Recall (Sensitivity):
ducted using IoT-Flock [42], a specialized and open-source
tool designed explicitly for modeling and generating traffic in Pt
 Recall = (25)
diverse IoT environments. IoT-Flock was carefully configured Pt + Nf
to closely emulate real-world ICU equipment and operational 4) F1-Score:
dynamics, incorporating actual data profiles and time profiles
 2PR
derived from the analysis of real-time value ranges of ICU F1 = (26)
devices. During the simulation, network traffic, encompass- P+R
ing both normal and attack scenarios, was captured using 5) Memory Usage: Represents the amount of RAM
Wireshark, a widely-used network protocol analyzer, to log required by the model during inference, measured in
both packet headers and payloads. Subsequently, a custom megabytes (MB) or gigabytes (GB).
Python script was employed to extract relevant network- 6) Floating Point Operations per Second (FLOPs):
layer and application-layer features from the captured traffic, Indicates the total number of floating-point calculations perfacilitating a detailed and focused analysis. The dataset, formed by the model, reflecting computational efficiency.
originally created and openly published by Hussain et al. [43], 7) Number of Parameters: Represents the total learnable
comprises 80,126 normal traffic samples and 76,810 attack weights in the model, influencing both computational cost and
traffic samples, meticulously labeled as 0 (normal) and 1 generalization ability.
(attack), respectively. In our experiment, we allocated 70% of 8) Running Time: Measures the time taken by the model
the data for training and 30% for testing to ensure robust model to process whole test input samples, evaluated in seconds (s).
development and evaluation. However, given that our approach 9) Traffic Per Second: Determines the number of data
necessitates only normal data for training, we exclusively points or samples processed by the model per second.
11310 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. Two-dimensional (left) and three-dimensional (right) t-SNE embeddings of the dataset, revealing distinct clusters corresponding to two different
classes.

Fig. 3. Overview of Patient Monitoring Sensors.

 These metrics collectively provide a comprehensive evalu- However, not all deep learning approaches perform equally
ation of the model’s accuracy, efficiency, and computational well. Models such as DeepSVDD, MO_GAAL, and VAE
feasibility in different deployment scenarios. exhibit relatively lower performance, suggesting that certain
 architectures may not be well-suited for specific anomaly
 detection tasks.
 V. E XPERIMENT R ESULT
 Figure 4 illustrates the training loss of a model over 30
A. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Anomaly Detection epochs, showing a general trend of decreasing loss as training
Techniques progresses. The loss decreases significantly in the initial
 The results are presented in Table II, where it is evi- epochs (0-20), indicating rapid learning, and then plateaus
dent that AutoKAN outperformed more than 28 methods, after epoch 20, suggesting convergence with diminishing
including deep learning, unsupervised learning, and statistical returns from further training. While the low final loss suggests
approaches, demonstrating its superior performance across successful training, the plateauing raises the possibility of
various anomaly detection techniques. AutoKAN achieved an overfitting, which is the goal we are trying to achieve. This
accuracy of 99.11% and a precision of 100%, indicating that overfitting with normal training data aims to increase the
the model produced no false positives. The high F1-score of model’s sensitivity to anomalies. Figure 5 reveals that the
99.08% further highlights the model’s proficiency in the medi- model performs exceptionally well in correctly classifying
cal field, where minimizing errors is crucial. Once again, deep normal events, with 24,082 out of 24,082 instances correctly
learning models clearly showcase their effectiveness in tasks predicted. However, there is a small number of misclassificasuch as anomaly detection, particularly when large amounts of tions in anomaly detection. Specifically, 420 anomaly events
data are available. For instance, deep learning-based models, were incorrectly classified as normal. This indicates that while
such as autoencoder and AnoGAN, exhibit significantly better the model has a very low false positive rate, it exhibits a small
performance compared to other categories, such as Proximity- but non-zero false negative rate.
Based and Outlier Ensemble methods. This can be attributed Another reason that contributes to the superiority of the
to the increasing complexity of modern networks and IoT proposed method over other approaches is the adaptive threshenvironments, where traditional approaches fail to capture olding strategy. Instead of using a fixed threshold, we define
intricate patterns. Deep learning models, on the other hand, dynamic boundaries by taking the maximum and minimum
are better equipped to learn from complex data distributions. values from the normal distribution. This allows the model
SON et al.: AutoKAN: A FEDERATED LIGHTWEIGHT ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 11311

 Fig. 5. Confusion matrix for AutoKAN on the testing dataset, showing the
 number of correct and incorrect predictions for normal and anomaly events.

Fig. 4. Training Loss Progression During Model Training (30 Epochs).

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT A NOMALY D ETECTION
 M ODELS

 Fig. 6. Comparison of training time between autoEncoder and AutoKAN,
 demonstrating the improved efficiency of AutoKAN.

 Our model achieves the highest precision among all models.
 However, for other metrics such as recall, accuracy, and F1-
 score, supervised models demonstrate superior performance.
 This outcome is expected, as supervised models rely on a
 large volume of labeled data for training, allowing them to
 effectively learn and recognize cyberattack patterns.
 The key advantage of our model is that it does not require
 labeled attack data for training. In real-world applications, the
 lack of labeled data is often a significant challenge, both in
 terms of data availability and cost. Despite this limitation, our
 model still achieves comparable performance to supervised
 models, with only approximately 0.01% error margin, which
 is an acceptable trade-off given the benefits of unsupervised
 learning.

to adapt more effectively to variations in data, ensuring C. Model Complexity Compare With Traditional Auto
that anomalies are detected more reliably. By leveraging Encoder
this adaptive threshold, the proposed method achieves better
performance compared to other approaches, as it minimizes In this section, we demonstrate the advantages of AutoKAN
both false positives and false negatives, making it more robust compared to the conventional autoencoder in anomaly detecin real-world anomaly detection tasks. tion tasks. Additionally, we compare both models in terms
 of model complexity and runtime performance. Table V provides details on memory usage, FLOPs, and the number of
B. Compare With Supervised Models parameters compared between the traditional autoencoder and
 In this section, we compare our model with various super- AutoKAN. The traditional autoencoder has seven times more
vised models. The experiments and results are based on the parameters than AutoKAN while achieving slightly lower
study by Hussain et al. [43], with details provided in Table III. performance. Furthermore, AutoKAN requires only 0.01 MB
11312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ML C LASSIFIERS

 TABLE IV
 I NFERENCE P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF AUTOENCODER AND AUTO KAN of traffic simultaneously, AutoKAN demonstrates remarkable computational efficiency, utilizing only 21.82% of CPU
 resources and approximately 1050 MB of memory. These
 findings indicate that AutoKAN can handle substantial workloads without significantly taxing system resources, ensuring
 smooth and uninterrupted performance. This efficiency is especially vital for deployment in resource-limited environments,
 including embedded systems, edge computing devices, and
of memory–ten times less than the traditional autoencoder– IoT applications, where computational power and memory
while the FLOPs of the autoencoder are nearly eighty times are restricted. AutoKAN stands out as a highly practical
higher than those of AutoKAN. solution by minimizing resource consumption while efficiently
 On the other hand, we recorded the training time in processing large-scale data in real time. Its ability to per-
Figure 6, which highlights a significant difference in com- form high-speed anomaly detection with minimal hardware
putational efficiency between the two models. AutoKAN investment makes it well-suited for such scenarios. Its abilrequires only 95.9 seconds to train 50,000 samples, whereas ity to operate effectively under such conditions reinforces
the autoencoder takes 157.6 seconds for the same dataset. its suitability for large-scale, cost-effective implementations
This demonstrates that AutoKAN not only accelerates the across various domains, including cybersecurity, industrial
training process but also scales more efficiently as the dataset monitoring, and healthcare analytics.
size increases. As training data grows, the gap in training
time between the two models is expected to widen, making
AutoKAN a more practical choice for large-scale applications VI. D ISCUSSION
where computational efficiency is critical. A. The Potential of AutoKan in Real-World Application
 The AutoKAN model presents a significant potential for
 real-world deployment in IoT devices for hospitals in monitor-
D. Model Performance in a Resource-Constrained ing sensor signals. Due to its lightweight design, the model can
Environment offer the advantage of cost-effectiveness by using less powerful
 In this section, we demonstrate the efficiency of AutoKAN processors and less memory, which results in a lower price
in a resource-constrained environment, where computa- point per device. This is crucial for widespread deployment
tional capacity is highly limited. Table IV provides detailed in health settings, where numerous sensors and monitoring
information based on ten independent runs, reporting the aver- devices might be needed across a hospital or for large numbers
age values. The average runtime per sample is 0.0297 seconds, of patients. Furthermore, the reduction in device cost makes
indicating that AutoKAN can process more than 1.6 million it more economically feasible to deploy on a large scale.
traffic samples per second. This meets the requirements for Hospitals can equip more beds and rooms with monitoring
real-time applications. Even when processing a high volume capabilities without incurring exorbitant expenses.
SON et al.: AutoKAN: A FEDERATED LIGHTWEIGHT ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 11313

Fig. 7. Comparison of execution time and processing speed for autoEncoder and AutoKAN, highlighting AutoKAN’s superior performance.

B. The Ethical and Privacy Implications to further explore and refine explainable AI (XAI) approaches
 Federated learning inherently provides a robust framework to interpret our model’s decision-making process with greater
for data privacy. In our framework, the federated averaging granularity. This will involve not only identifying which input
algorithm is utilized to ensure that patient data remains features are most influential in the model’s predictions but also
decentralized. Instead of transmitting raw data to a central quantifying the uncertainty associated with those predictions
server for AI model training, federated learning offers a and providing clinicians with actionable insights into the
decentralized solution where each local device trains its local factors contributing to each anomaly detection. This enhanced
AutoKAN model using its own data. While KANs offer better explainability will help build trust and facilitate adoption
explainability than traditional MLPs, the federated learning among users, such as hospitals and IT administrators, ensuring
process itself can introduce complexity. Ensuring transparency transparency, reliability, and clinical utility in real-world
in the model aggregation process and providing explanations applications. Additionally, the AutoKAN federated learning
for the model’s decisions are crucial ethical considerations, model is indeed designed to preserve data privacy by ensuring
particularly in healthcare. Furthermore, establishing clear data patient data remains decentralized and is not transmitted to a
governance and responsibility locally is another essential eth- central server. This fundamental architectural choice inherently
ical and privacy aspect. Due to the model’s local deployment, supports privacy preservation, which is a key tenet of regulations
it becomes more sensitive to adversarial attacks, which also like HIPAA and GDPR. While the current study lays this
raises ethical concerns about the reliability and security of the strong privacy-preserving foundation, future work will focus
AI system in patient care. on explicitly demonstrating compliance with such stringent
 healthcare regulations.

C. Limitation and Future Work
 VII. C ONCLUSION
 Through our experiments and results, we demonstrate the
 In this study, we introduce AutoKAN, an anomaly detecpotential of AutoKAN as a smart anomaly detection device
 tion model integrated with a federated learning mechanism.
with the capability for large-scale deployment at a reasonable
 AutoKAN outperforms over 28 state-of-the-art anomaly deteccost. However, all testing in this study was conducted through
 tion models, achieving an impressive 99% accuracy and
simulations, lacking real-device evaluations to validate its
 100% precision. Additionally, it demonstrates its capability to
performance in practical applications. In the future, we plan
 function efficiently in resource-constrained environments with
to develop a smart device for anomaly detection using sensor
 limited computational resources. By integrating Kolmogorov–
signals to monitor diabetes patients in hospitals. Furthermore,
 Arnold Networks (KAN) into the autoencoder architecture,
evaluating the proposed approach on a larger and more diverse
 AutoKAN serves as a lightweight and faster alternative to
scale, encompassing approximately 50 to 100 devices deployed
 traditional neural networks. Additionally, the adaptive threshacross multiple hospital wards, particularly in challenging nonold strategy has shown its effectiveness through experimental
IID scenarios with varying patient demographics and sensor
 results. In conclusion, the proposed framework holds signifinoise profiles, would provide a more robust demonstration of
 cant application value in medical anomaly detection and has
its performance and generalizability in real-life applications.
 the potential to be extended to other fields requiring efficient
This expanded evaluation would also allow us to assess the
 and accurate anomaly detection.
system’s scalability and its ability to handle the complexities of
a real hospital environment, including network latency and data
synchronization issues. One key reason we chose Kolmogorov– R EFERENCES
Arnold Networks (KAN) over traditional black-box neural [1] “Diabetes.” who.int. Accessed: Mar. 3, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
networks is their inherent explainability. As a next step, we aim www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/diabetes
11314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 [2] M. S. Farooq, S. Riaz, R. Tehseen, U. Farooq, and K. Saleem, “Role of [23] S. Sai, V. Hassija, V. Chamola, and M. Guizani, “Federated learning
 internet of things in diabetes healthcare: Network infrastructure, taxon- and NFT-based privacy-preserving medical-data-sharing scheme for
 omy, challenges, and security model,” Digit. health, vol. 9, Jun. 2023, intelligent diagnosis in smart healthcare,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 Art. no. 20552076231179056. vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 5568–5577, Feb. 2024.
 [3] M. Abououf, S. Singh, R. Mizouni, and H. Otrok, “Explainable AI for [24] H. Lin, K. Kaur, X. Wang, G. Kaddoum, J. Hu, and M. M. Hassan,
 event and anomaly detection and classification in healthcare monitoring “Privacy-aware access control in IoT-enabled healthcare: A federated
 systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 3446–3457, deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4,
 Jan. 2024. pp. 2893–2902, Feb. 2023.
 [4] D. L. Aguilar, M. A. Medina-Pérez, O. Loyola-Gonzalez, [25] B. Li, W. Gao, J. Xie, H. Li, and M. Gong, “A unified framework
 K.-K. R. Choo, and E. Bucheli-Susarrey, “Towards an interpretable for federated semi-supervised learning in heterogeneous IoT Healthcare
 autoencoder: A decision-tree-based autoencoder and its application in systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 41110–41123,
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, Dec. 2024.
 no. 2, pp. 1048–1059, Mar./Apr. 2023. [26] G.-Q. Zeng, Y.-W. Yang, K.-D. Lu, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng,
 [5] Z. Li and X. Zhang, “An enhanced autoencoder-based anomaly detec- “Evolutionary adversarial autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection model for time series data from wearable medical devices,” tion of Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Rel., early access,
 IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., early access, Aug. 20, 2024, Jan. 27, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TR.2025.3528256.
 doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2024.3434420. [27] A. Katbi and R. Ksantini, “One-class IoT anomaly detection system
 [6] A. Abusitta, G. H. de Carvalho, O. A. Wahab, T. Halabi, B. C. Fung, using an improved interpolated deep SVDD autoencoder with adversarial
 and S. Al Mamoori, “Deep learning-enabled anomaly detection for IoT regularizer,” Digit. Signal Process., vol. 162, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 105153.
 systems,” Internet Things, vol. 21, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 100656. [28] L. Tang et al., “Online anomaly detection in industrial IoT networks
 [7] M. A. Rassam, “Autoencoder-based neural network model for anomaly using a supervised contrastive learning-based spatiotemporal variational
 detection in wireless body area networks,” IoT, vol. 5, no. 4, autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 17399–17412,
 pp. 852–870, 2024. Jun. 2025.
 [8] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang, [29] B. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, H. Lin, and F. Xia, “Unsupervised anomaly
 “Tsmae: A novel anomaly detection approach for internet of things time detection on attributed networks with graph contrastive learning for
 series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. consumer electronics security,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
 Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023. no. 1, pp. 4062–4072, Feb. 2024.
 [9] J. Fan et al., “LUAD: A lightweight unsupervised anomaly detection [30] G. ALMahadin et al., “VANET network traffic anomaly detection using
 scheme for multivariate time series data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 557, GRU-based deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 Nov. 2023, Art. no. 126644. vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–4555, Feb. 2024.
[10] M. Gu et al., “A lightweight convolutional neural network hardware [31] N. Nissar, N. Naja, and A. Jamali, “Securing VANETs: Multi-objective
 implementation for wearable heart rate anomaly detection,” Comput. intrusion detection with variational autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Biol. Med., vol. 155, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 106623. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3867–3874, Feb. 2024.
[11] C. Li, L. Qi, and X. Geng, “A sam-guided two-stream lightweight model [32] H. Zhao, M. Liu, S. Qiu, and X. Cao, “Satellite unsupervised
 for anomaly detection,” ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun. anomaly detection based on deconvolution-reconstructed temporal con-
 Appl., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1–23, 2025. volutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
[12] V. Goyal, A. Yadav, S. Kumar, and R. Mukherjee, “Lightweight LAE for pp. 2989–2998, Feb. 2024.
 anomaly detection with sound-based architecture in smart poultry farm,” [33] U. Zukaib, X. Cui, C. Zheng, M. Hassan, and Z. Shen, “Meta-IDS:
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 8199–8209, Mar. 2024. Meta-learning-based smart intrusion detection system for Internet of
[13] M. Abd Elaziz, I. A. Fares, and A. O. Aseeri, “CKAN: Convolutional Medical Things (IoMT) network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 Kolmogorov–Arnold networks model for intrusion detection in IoT no. 13, pp. 23080–23095, Jul. 2024.
 environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 134837–134851, 2024. [34] J. A. Shaikh et al., “RCLNet: An effective anomaly-based intrusion
[14] P. Vijai and P. B. Sivakumar, “Anomaly detection solutions: The dynamic detection for securing the IoMT system,” Front. Digit. Health, vol. 6,
 loss approach in VAE for manufacturing and IoT environment,” Results Oct. 2024, Art. no. 1467241.
 Eng., vol. 25, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 104277. [35] R. Wang, H. Qiu, X. Cheng, and X. Liu, “Anomaly detection with a
[15] H. Guo, Z. Zhou, D. Zhao, and W. Gaaloul, “EGNN: Energy-efficient container-based stream processing framework for Industrial Internet of
 anomaly detection for IoT multivariate time series data using graph Things,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 35, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 100507.
 neural network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 45–56, [36] H. Zahan, M. W. Al Azad, I. Ali, and S. Mastorakis, “IoT-AD: A
 Feb. 2024. framework to detect anomalies among interconnected IoT devices,”
[16] G. Sivapalan, K. K. Nundy, A. James, B. Cardiff, and D. John, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 478–489, Jan. 2024.
 “Interpretable rule mining for real-time ECG anomaly detection [37] S. T. Seydi, M. Sadegh, and J. Chanussot, “Kolmogorov-Arnold network
 in IoT edge sensors,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 15, for hyperspectral change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 pp. 13095–13108, Aug. 2023. vol. 63, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 5505515.
[17] D. Breitenbacher, I. Homoliak, Y. L. Aung, Y. Elovici, and [38] B. Jiang, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, and H. Geng, “A novel interpretable short-
 N. O. Tippenhauer, “HADES-IoT: A practical and effective host-based term load forecasting method based on Kolmogorov-Arnold networks,”
 anomaly detection system for IoT devices (extended version),” IEEE IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1180–1183, Jan. 2025.
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9640–9658, Jun. 2022. [39] M. Liu, F. Bossmann, and J. Ma, “Kolmogorov-Arnold networks for
[18] L. Fang, Y. Li, Z. Liu, C. Yin, M. Li, and Z. J. Cao, “A practical model semi-supervised impedance inversion,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
 based on anomaly detection for protecting medical IoT control services vol. 22, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 7503205.
 against external attacks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 6, [40] Y. Song, H. Zhang, J. Man, X. Jin, and Q. Li, “AWKNet: A
 pp. 4260–4269, Jun. 2021. lightweight neural network for motor imagery electroencephalogram
[19] A. Albattah and M. A. Rassam, “A correlation-based anomaly detection classification based on adaptive wavelet transform Kolmogorov–Arnold,”
 model for wireless body area networks using convolutional long short- IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1219–1234,
 term memory neural network,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 5, p. 1951, 2022. Feb. 2025.
[20] K. Balaji, S. S. Kumar, D. Vivek, S. P. K. Deepak, K. D. Sagar, and [41] P. H. Do, T. D. Le, T. D. Dinh et al., “Classifying IoT Botnet attacks with
 S. T. Khan, “An effective deep learning-based intrusion detection system Kolmogorov-Arnold networks: A comparative analysis of architectural
 for the Healthcare environment,” Int. J. Comput. Intell. Appl., vol. 24, variations,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 16072–16093, 2025.
 no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 2450033. [42] S. Ghazanfar, F. Hussain, A. U. Rehman, U. U. Fayyaz, F. Shahzad,
[21] H. Elayan, M. Aloqaily, and M. Guizani, “Sustainability of Healthcare and G. A. Shah, “IoT-flock: An open-source framework for IoT traffic
 data analysis IoT-based systems using deep federated learning,” IEEE generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Emerg. Trends Smart Technol. (ICETST),
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 7338–7346, May 2022. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[22] M. Akter, N. Moustafa, T. Lynar, and I. Razzak, “Edge intelligence: [43] F. Hussain et al., “A framework for malicious traffic detection in IoT
 Federated learning-based privacy protection framework for smart health- healthcare environment,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 9, p. 3025, 2021.
 care systems,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 26, no. 12, [44] Y. Zhao, Z. Nasrullah, and Z. Li, “PyOD: A Python toolbox for scalable
 pp. 5805–5816, Dec. 2022. outlier detection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 20, no. 96, pp. 1–7, 2019.