5362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 Bipartite Graph Anomaly Detection With
 Contrastive Learning
 Pinlyu Zhou , Jiayang Wu , and Wensheng Gan , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Bipartite graphs are widely used to model social
fintech interactions, particularly user-transaction and investorproject relationships. The rapid shift toward digital financial
ecosystems has heightened the need for secure and reliable
artificial intelligence (AI) models to detect anomalies. Existing
graph neural network (GNN) models for anomaly detection
often concentrate on homogeneous graphs and address node
or edge anomalies, limiting their ability to capture the full
complexity of bipartite interactions. These limitations reduce
their effectiveness in protecting data and trust within social
fintech applications. To overcome these challenges, we propose
the bipartite graph anomaly detection with contrastive learning
(CL-BGAD), an innovative framework designed to enhance AI Fig. 1. Example of a real-world interaction network and its bipartite graph
model security by comprehensively capturing intricate interac- representation. Left: real-world network with users and products. Right:
tions in bipartite graphs. The encoder features a node attention bipartite graph where circles represent users (red for abnormal, orange for
mechanism that prioritizes critical interactions among nodes, normal) and squares represent products, with red and black edges indicating
while the structure decoder leverages contrastive learning to abnormal and normal interactions.
discern between normal and anomalous connections. This dual
strategy ensures robust anomaly detection at both the node
and edge levels, contributing to greater adaptability in social these advancements bring the challenge of ensuring artificial
fintech applications. Experimental results validate that CL- intelligence (AI) model security, addressing fraud, safeguarding
BGAD consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across data privacy, and maintaining public trust [2]. This transition
diverse real-world datasets, reinforcing the model’s capability to toward digitally responsible financial ecosystems requires adapmaintain secure and responsible AI-driven systems. The source
code and datasets are publicly available at https://github.com/ tive AI solutions for anomaly detection to secure these complex
DSI-Lab1/CL-BGAD. networks. In social fintech, interactions are often represented
 as bipartite graphs to capture relationships between distinct
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, bipartite graphs, contrastive
learning, graph neural networks (GNNs). entities, such as users and transactions, or investors and financial products [3], [4]. For example, peer-to-peer lending platforms can model user-borrower interactions in bipartite graphs,
 I. INTRODUCTION where anomalies might signify fraud or misuse. As shown in
 Fig. 1, real-world interactions can be abstracted into a bipartite
T HE rapid advancement of financial technology (fintech)
 has transformed financial services, changing interactions
from physical to digital, with a strong emphasis on convegraph, with anomalies (red edges) indicating behaviors that
 deviate from normal patterns (black edges), thereby supporting
nience and accessibility [1]. Social fintech, a subset of fintech AI model security, social responsibility, and sustainable fintech
focused on fostering trust, social responsibility, and sustainable development.
development, has emerged as a key area of innovation. Plat- Despite the promise of graph-based anomaly detection, exforms in this domain facilitate activities, such as peer-to-peer isting methods often struggle to address the unique structural
lending, crowdfunding, social impact investing, and financial complexities of bipartite graphs [5], [6]. Traditional GNNs,
education, promoting inclusivity and social equity. However, optimized for homogeneous or heterogeneous graphs, tend to
 focus on either node or edge anomalies, potentially missing
 crucial interdependencies necessary for detecting fraud in social
 Received 1 December 2024; revised 25 February 2025 and 8 May 2025; fintech [7]. To enhance AI model security and promote sustainaccepted 14 May 2025. Date of publication 17 June 2025; date of current able practices, methods must capture irregularities at both node
version 3 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the National and edge levels within bipartite structures.
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272196, and in part by
the Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant Attention mechanisms have emerged as essential tools in
2024A04J9971. (Corresponding author: Wensheng Gan.) graph-based anomaly detection for social fintech [2], enabling
 The authors are with the College of Cyber Security, Jinan Univer- the model to assign different levels of importance to varsity, Guangzhou 510632, China (e-mail: pinlvzhou@gmail.com; csjywu1@
gmail.com; wsgan001@gmail.com). ious interactions. This capability is particularly valuable in
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2025.3572961 high-stakes applications, such as financial fraud detection. In

 2329-924X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5363

these cases, certain transactions, such as large transfers or structural and feature-level differences; and 2) it ensures the
unusual trading patterns, require special attention. Traditional learned embeddings capture the natural distribution of finan-
GNNs typically assume all interactions are of equal impor- cial interactions without artificial perturbations [13]. The structance, which can lead to the model overlooking critical signals. ture decoder utilizes random sampling for contrastive learning
Self-attention mechanisms address this limitation by dynami- to preserve the graph’s inherent structure, avoiding potential
cally weighting interactions based on their contextual relevance, distortions from data augmentation. This design enhances the
thereby enhancing the model’s ability to focus on key aspects model’s ability to distinguish between normal and anomalous
for identifying anomalies in socially responsible fintech appli- node pairs while maintaining uniformly distributed embeddings
cations [8]. This is crucial for maintaining AI model security through InfoNCE loss optimization [14]. The integration of
within social fintech, where accurate anomaly detection is foun- attention mechanisms, feature reconstruction, and contrastive
dational for trust, transparency, and sustainability. learning enables CL-BGAD to effectively capture both local in-
 Contrastive learning enhances the robustness of anomaly de- teraction patterns and global structural information. This comtection models by distinguishing between normal and anoma- prehensive approach provides reliable anomaly detection for
lous patterns through relational comparisons in the embed- social fintech applications where security and trust are essential.
ding space [9]. Unlike traditional methods that focus solely The primary contributions of this article are as follows.
on feature values, contrastive learning emphasizes the relative 1) We propose CL-BGAD, an unsupervised anomaly detecdifferences between samples, making it particularly effective in tion model tailored for bipartite graphs, addressing both
detecting subtle fraud signals in bipartite graphs where anoma- node and edge anomalies to enhance AI model security
lies may not be obvious as outliers. In applications such as in social fintech.
social fintech, fraudulent behavior often appears to be slightly 2) We introduce a node attention mechanism that improves
different from typical transaction patterns. Contrastive learning the encoder’s ability to capture significant interactions,
helps the model identify these deviations more precisely, lead- facilitating more reliable and transparent detection in soing to improved AI model security [10]. Recent studies also cial fintech networks.
show that contrastive learning improves the uniformity of node 3) We incorporate contrastive learning in the decoder to
embeddings by establishing a contrastive space between posi- improve model generalization, particularly in adapting
tive and negative samples. This approach helps the model better to evolving fraud patterns, thus supporting sustainable
distinguish meaningful patterns from frequent, less informative development goals.
interactions, which is a common challenge in large-scale finan- 4) Our model is validated on real-world datasets, demoncial networks [11]. While traditional contrastive learning often strating its superior performance over state-of-the-art
uses data augmentation to create different views of the same methods and its effectiveness.
data, these transformations can disrupt the inherent structure The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
of bipartite graphs and introduce noise, which is problematic Section II reviews the literature related to anomaly detection
for anomaly detection tasks. In contrast, our approach uses in bipartite graphs. Section III introduces preliminary concepts
random sampling to generate contrastive pairs, which maintains and definitions essential for understanding our framework.
the original graph structure and provides meaningful learning Section IV details the proposed method, including the encoder–
signals. This strategy helps preserve the key relationships be- decoder architecture and contrastive learning approach.
tween nodes, which is essential for accurately detecting subtle Section V presents the experimental settings and analyzes the
anomalies in financial transactions [12]. results. Finally, Section VI concludes the article and suggests
 In this article, we introduce CL-BGAD, a novel framework directions for future research.
for bipartite graph anomaly detection that combines node attention mechanisms with contrastive learning. The framework II. RELATED WORK
consists of three key components: an encoder with node at-
 A. Anomaly Detection in Graphs for Social Fintech
tention, a feature decoder for reconstructing node and edge
features, and a structure decoder with a contrastive learning Anomaly detection is critical in enhancing the security and
module. The encoder uses node attention to aggregate infor- reliability of social fintech applications, contributing to sustainmation from neighboring nodes based on their contextual im- able development by building trust in digital financial ecosysportance, enabling effective capture of suspicious interaction tems [15]. The unique requirements of social fintech emphasize
patterns. The feature decoder aims to accurately reconstruct transparency, accountability, and social responsibility. These
the original node and edge features from their latent represen- requirements demand robust mechanisms to detect fraudulent
tations, where reconstruction errors can serve as indicators of activities that compromise both financial integrity and user
potential anomalies. In the structure decoder, random sampling trust. Traditional approaches to anomaly detection in graphs,
strategically selects positive pairs from existing edges and neg- including statistical, supervised, and unsupervised methods,
ative pairs from unconnected nodes, enabling the model to learn have been widely applied in sectors like finance and healththe intrinsic patterns that differentiate normal from anomalous care [16]. Statistical models, such as Gaussian mixture models
interactions. This sampling-based contrastive learning serves (GMMs) [17], often assume a fixed data distribution, which
two key purposes: 1) it helps the model distinguish genuine can limit their applicability in dynamic financial systems where
transaction patterns from fraudulent ones by comparing their relationships continuously evolve. Supervised approaches, such
5364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

as support vector machines (SVMs) [18] and decision trees, Contrastive learning has recently gained prominence as an
require labeled data, posing a challenge in anomaly detection effective approach for enhancing anomaly detection in bipartite
contexts where fraudulent events are rare and costly to label graphs, especially within the context of social fintech [29]. By
[6]. These methods often lack the adaptability needed in social learning from positive and negative sample pairs, contrastive
fintech, where fraud tactics and user behaviors evolve rapidly, learning enables models to capture relative patterns that disunderscoring the need for flexible, scalable solutions. tinguish between normal and anomalous behaviors [30]. No-
 Unsupervised approaches, particularly clustering algorithms table bipartite graph models, including BiGI [31] and general
and autoencoders, offer greater flexibility by identifying anoma- contrastive frameworks like SimGCL [12] and COIN [32],
lies based on inherent data distributions without labeled sam- leverage InfoNCE loss [33] to improve representation learning.
ples. However, these methods often struggle with complex, While BiGI [31] focuses on mutual information maximization
high-dimensional graphs commonly found in social fintech, between node representations, it lacks attention mechanisms
where intricate user-transaction relationships must be preserved for capturing interaction importance. SimGCL [12] employs
to ensure accurate anomaly detection. Graph-based models, simple graph augmentation strategies but does not specifically
such as graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [19] and graph address bipartite structures. CONAD [34] effectively utilizes
attention networks (GATs) [20], leverage neighborhood infor- contrastive learning for anomaly detection and shows strong
mation to capture deviations in node behavior, providing a performance on certain datasets. However, it was originally
foundation for detecting anomalies in homogeneous graphs designed for homogeneous graphs rather than addressing the
[21]. However, GCNs and GATs generally assume uniform inherent heterogeneity in bipartite structures where different
properties across nodes and edges, limiting their effectiveness node types represent distinct entities. While it performs well on
in the bipartite graphs characteristic of social fintech applica- some bipartite datasets, particularly Wikipedia, our experiments
tions, where nodes represent distinct entities such as users and suggest that a specialized approach can further enhance detectransactions [22]. Accurate fraud detection is crucial for social tion capabilities for bipartite graph anomalies across diverse
fintech platforms to maintain both security and user trust while scenarios, especially in capturing the unique interaction patterns
fulfilling their social responsibilities. between different entity types, such as users and transactions
 Incorporating attention mechanisms has proven to be an in financial fraud detection contexts. COIN [32] proposes coeffective enhancement for anomaly detection in complex cluster infomax but does not consider the joint optimization
graph structures [2]. By dynamically assigning weights to of node and edge anomalies. In contrast, CL-BGAD integrates
interactions, attention mechanisms help models prioritize high- node attention with contrastive learning specifically designed
importance transactions, such as large-scale and irregular fi- for bipartite graphs, enabling more effective anomaly detection
nancial activities, over routine exchanges. This approach aligns at both node and edge levels. A key theoretical advantage of
with the ethical and social priorities of social fintech. In high- our approach lies in the strategic use of random sampling for
dimensional graph structures, attention mechanisms allow for contrastive pairs rather than relying on synthetic graph augmenadaptive aggregation from neighboring nodes, enhancing the tations. While augmentation techniques often modify the origdetection of subtle irregularities that might indicate fraud. This inal graph structure by adding, removing, or perturbing edges
capacity for selective focus aligns with social fintech’s demand and features, our random sampling method preserves the aufor AI-driven technologies that can adapt to changing fraud thentic bipartite structure—a critical requirement for financial
patterns while fostering a sustainable and responsible financial transaction networks where structural integrity directly impacts
ecosystem [23]. anomaly detection accuracy. This preservation ensures that the
 learned representations capture real transaction patterns without
 introducing artificial distortions that could mask subtle fraud-
B. Anomaly Detection in Bipartite Graphs for Sustainable ulent behaviors. In particular, random sampling of contrastive
Social Fintech
 pairs, as implemented in various models, preserves the intrinsic
 Bipartite graphs model interactions between two distinct structure of bipartite graphs, which is crucial for accurately
sets of nodes, such as users and products. In social fin- detecting anomalies in social fintech applications where even
tech applications, these graphs are essential for representing minor structural distortions can impact model performance and
user-transaction and investor-project relationships, enabling ef- erode user trust [35]. Unlike traditional graph augmentation
fective detection of fraudulent behaviors at both node and methods, which may introduce noise or inaccuracies, random
edge levels [24]. Traditional embedding techniques, such as sampling in contrastive learning maintains the authentic struc-
DeepWalk [25] and Node2vec [26], as well as heterogeneous ture of relationships, making it particularly suitable for highgraph models like Metapath2vec [27], have limitations in fully stakes applications such as fraud detection and risk assesscapturing the unique structural constraints of bipartite graphs, ment. Ensuring unbiased and fair representations is crucial in
particularly in applications where maintaining data integrity is social fintech to prevent the exacerbation of existing social
critical for trust-building [28]. This limitation has led to the inequalities. Contrastive learning contributes to this goal by
development of specialized methods tailored to bipartite graph creating a balanced embedding space that minimizes popularity
structures, especially in financial applications such as fraud bias [36]. Node attention mechanisms have also emerged as
detection and credit scoring, which are essential for sustaining indispensable tools for anomaly detection in graph strucreliable financial systems. tures. They dynamically prioritize significant activities, such as
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5365

unusually large or high-frequency transactions, ensuring that Definition 1 (Bipartite Graph Structure [31]): A bipartite
critical interactions receive higher weights in the embedding graph structure consists of two disjoint sets of nodes, U and
process. In social fintech contexts, attention mechanisms en- V , representing different entities. The edge set E represents the
hance the model’s sensitivity to emergent fraud patterns and connections between these nodes. Formally, the bipartite graph
changing user behaviors, which is essential for fostering a is defined as G = (U, V, E), where E ⊆ U × V represents the
safe and accountable environment [23]. Furthermore, recent ad- edge set, with adjacency matrix element Aij = 1 indicating an
vancements have demonstrated that attention-based models im- edge exists between nodes ui ∈ U and vj ∈ V , and Aij = 0
prove detection accuracy in high-dimensional, heterogeneous otherwise.
graph data by allowing adaptive aggregation from neighboring Definition 2 [Graph Convolution Network (GCN)] [37]: A
nodes. This approach supports the nuanced understanding of GCN aggregates features from neighboring nodes and edges in
complex interactions, thereby facilitating more precise anomaly a bipartite graph through multiple layers. For the kth layer, the
detection [8]. While existing attention-based approaches mainly feature matrices are defined as
focus on homogeneous graphs, CL-BGAD extends attention QU ∈ R|U |×d , QV ∈ R|V |×d , QE ∈ R|E|×d .
mechanisms to bipartite structures by considering the distinct
roles of different node types and their interactions. Recent The graph convolution operation updates the node and edge
research on contrastive learning and attention mechanisms re- representations as follows:
 ⎛ ⎛
flects a trend toward increasingly sophisticated, context-aware  
approaches to anomaly detection in bipartite graphs. By pre- Zi = σ ⎝BN ⎝
 U
 Aij QVj Wuv + QEi,j We
serving the graph’s natural structure and focusing on significant j∈N (i) ei,j ∈M(i)
 ⎞⎞
interactions, these methodologies directly contribute to the objectives of AI-driven social responsibility and ethical financial + QU
 i Wu
 ⎠⎠ (1)
practices. Addressing the unique challenges posed by social
fintech, these advanced methods support the sustainable devel- ⎛ ⎛
opment of secure, trustworthy digital financial ecosystems.  
 ZjV = σ ⎝BN ⎝ Aji QU
 i Wvu + QEi,j We
 i∈N (j) ei,j ∈M(j)
 ⎞⎞
 III. PRELIMINARIES AND DEFINITIONS
 The primary objective of this article is to enhance AI model + QVj Wv ⎠⎠ . (2)
security in social fintech by detecting anomalous patterns within
bipartite graphs, focusing on both node and edge anomalies. For edge feature updates, we first concatenate the features of
In social fintech contexts, including e-commerce, peer-to-peer connected nodes and the edge itself, and then apply a transforlending, and crowdfunding platforms, these anomalies may in- mation
dicate fraudulent activities, irregular transactions, or abnormal E
   E
 
 Zi,j = σ BN We · [QU i ||Qj ||Qi,j ] + be
 V
 . (3)
user behaviors that could compromise the integrity and trustworthiness of the platform. Detecting these anomalies is crucial Here, Aij represents the adjacency matrix element between
for ensuring the security of AI-driven systems in Fintech, as nodes ui ∈ U and vj ∈ V . N (i) and N (j) denote neighboring
well as for promoting responsible, transparent, and sustainable node sets, while M(i) and M(j) denote connected edge sets.
financial practices. For instance, in peer-to-peer lending plat- Wuv , Wvu , We , Wu , and Wv are learnable weight matrices
forms, node anomalies typically appear as users with suspicious shared across all nodes in the same set within each layer,
borrowing or lending behaviors. Edge anomalies, on the other σ(·) is a ReLU activation function, and BN denotes batch
hand, represent unusual transaction patterns that deviate from normalization. The symbol || represents the feature concatenormal platform activities. Early detection of these anomalies nation operation. The resulting representations Z U ∈ R|U |×d ,
helps maintain platform security and user trust, and it is crucial Z V ∈ R|V |×d , and Z E ∈ R|E|×d are the updated embeddings,
for sustainable social fintech development. where d is the embedding dimension.
 Problem statement. Given a bipartite graph G = (U, V, E), Definition 3 (Attention Mechanism in the Encoder [38]):
where U and V represent two distinct types of entities (e.g., The attention mechanism in the encoder dynamically assigns
users and transactions, or investors and projects), the task is to weights to neighboring nodes based on their relevance. The
assign anomaly scores to both nodes and edges. For u ∈ U and attention coefficient αij between node ui and its neighbor vj is
v ∈ V , node anomalies are detected, such as potentially fraudu- computed as
lent users or high-risk projects. For e ∈ E, edge anomalies, such exp(LeakyReLU(a [W hi W hj ]))
 αij = 
 (4)
 k∈N (ui ) exp(LeakyReLU(a [W hi W hk ]))
as suspicious transactions and irregular interactions, are identified. This scoring process differentiates abnormal patterns from
 where W is the learnable weight matrix, hi and hj are the
regular interactions, providing a robust mechanism for fraud
 feature representations of nodes ui and vj , and a is the attention
detection and safeguarding the AI model’s security within social
 vector. The updated node representation hi is as follows:
fintech applications. Through the detection of these anomalies, ⎛ ⎞
our model enhances the resilience and reliability of social fin- 
tech platforms, contributing to secure and socially responsible hi = σ ⎝ αij W hj ⎠ . (5)
AI-driven systems that support sustainable financial practices. j∈N (ui )
5366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

The attention mechanism is used exclusively in the encoder, not 3) maintaining temporal consistency in sequential interactions.
in the decoders. The final sample sizes are determined to balance computational
 Definition 4 (Feature Reconstruction [39]): The feature feasibility with statistical significance. The initialization of feadecoder in CL-BGAD reconstructs the original feature vectors tures in our model is crucial for both the encoder and decoder
QU , QV , and QE from their latent representations Z U , Z V , and stages, especially when handling graph-structured data. The
Z E . The reconstruction is achieved as follows: input bipartite graph G = (U, V, E) consists of two disjoint node
 sets U (users) and V (products), where edges E ⊆ U × V repre-
 X U = g(Z U ), X V = g(Z V ), X E = g(Z E ) (6)
 sent their interactions. Initial features for each node set (QU for
where g(·) is a series of transformations (e.g., graph convolu- users and QV for products) are derived from pretrained textual
tions and fully connected layers) that map the latent represen- embeddings, such as those generated by a Sentence Transtations back to the original feature space. former model [40]. Specifically, user nodes receive embed-
 Definition 5 (Contrastive Learning [33]): Contrastive learn- dings based on interaction texts (e.g., reviews and comments),
ing distinguishes between positive pairs (i.e., existing edges while product nodes use embeddings reflecting descriptions or
 / E)
(ui , vj ) ∈ E) and negative pairs (i.e., absent edges (ui , vk ) ∈ metadata. To ensure feature consistency and improve model
to learn effective representations for anomaly detection. The convergence, all node and edge features are standardized. Using
InfoNCE loss is given by a StandardScaler [41], each feature is normalized by removing
 its mean and scaling to unit variance. This standardization step
 exp (simpos /τ )
 Lcont = − log (7) is essential for effective contrastive learning and improves the
 exp (simpos /τ ) + exp (simneg /τ ) stability of graph convolution operations. Edge features, which
where simpos and simneg are the cosine similarities for positive encode interaction attributes, are similarly standardized to enand negative pairs, respectively, and τ is a temperature param- hance structural learning within the decoder.
eter controlling the concentration level of the distribution.
 B. Encoder With Node Attention
 IV. PROPOSED METHOD The encoder in CL-BGAD plays a pivotal role in transform-
 We propose CL-BGAD, a contrastive learning framework ing the input bipartite graph’s node and edge features into exdesigned for anomaly detection in bipartite graphs that incor- pressive latent representations. By employing a graph attention
porates both structural information and attribute features. This mechanism, the encoder dynamically assigns importance to
framework is developed to detect anomalies that could com- neighboring nodes, effectively capturing the intricate relationpromise platform trust and security, such as suspicious user ships essential for anomaly detection. The input to the encoder
behaviors, fraudulent transactions, and irregular project interac- includes node features from the sets QU and QV , edge features
tions. CL-BGAD’s robust detection capabilities support socially QE , and the structural information represented by the adjacency
responsible financial operations by identifying potential threats matrix A. The encoder begins by calculating attention scores
in user-transaction and user-investor relationships, which are to evaluate the relevance of neighboring nodes. For each node
central to social fintech applications. As illustrated in Fig. 2, ui ∈ U , the attention score αij between ui and its neighboring
the CL-BGAD framework includes three key components: an node vj ∈ V is computed as follows:
   
encoder with a node attention mechanism, a feature decoder, αij = softmax LeakyReLU aT [ui W  vj W] (8)
and a structure decoder with a contrastive learning module.
 where ui and vj are the feature vectors of nodes ui and vj ,
 respectively, W is a learnable weight matrix, a is a learnable
A. Feature Transformation attention vector, and  denotes concatenation. This score re-
 Our experimental data are collected from four widely used flects the influence of node vj on the representation of node
public datasets: Wikipedia’s edit history data from the Stanford ui , ensuring that more relevant neighbors are assigned greater
Network Analysis Project (SNAP),1 Reddit’s user-subreddit in- weight.
teraction data, and Amazon’s product review datasets (Fine- The attention scores are normalized using a softmax function
foods and Movies). For Wikipedia and Reddit, we collect user to ensure that attention weights across all neighbors of the node
behavior data, including editing patterns and community in- ui sum to 1. Specifically, the normalized attention weight αij
teractions, with timestamps and detailed action features. The is computed as
   
Amazon datasets contain user-product interactions through re- exp LeakyReLU aT [ui W  vj W]
views, including review texts, ratings, and timestamps. These αij =
 k∈N (ui ) exp (LeakyReLU (a [ui W  vk W]))
 T
datasets are chosen for their diverse characteristics in terms of (9)
interaction patterns and feature distributions. The data collection process ensures data quality through several measures: 1) where N (ui ) represents the set of neighboring nodes of ui .
filtering out users and items with too few interactions to ensure This normalization step allows the encoder to prioritize the most
sufficient behavioral patterns; 2) removing duplicate interac- influential neighbors, focusing on the key interactions within
tions and spam entries identified by platform-specific rules; and the graph.
 After computing the attention weights, the encoder aggre-
 1 http://snap.stanford.edu/jodie/#datasets gates information from neighboring nodes. For each node ui ∈
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5367

Fig. 2. CL-BGAD framework consists of three main components: The encoder, the feature decoder, and the structure decoder. The encoder processes input
bipartite graph data, including node features Qu , Qv , and edge features Qe , through graph attention mechanisms to produce latent representations Zu , Zv ,
and Ze . The feature decoder reconstructs the node and edge features, generating output features Xu , Xv , and Xe , while the structure decoder predicts edge
connections by combining latent representations and contrastive learning, producing the adjacency matrix A. The entire process is optimized through a unified
loss function to capture both node and edge anomalies.

U , the aggregated message is computed as a weighted sum of edge representation is generated using a convolution operation,
the feature vectors from its neighboring nodes vj ∈ V followed by batch normalization and a ReLU activation
 
 hui = αij vj . (10) Z E = ReLU(BN(Conv(QE , A))). (14)
 j∈N (ui )
 Conv represents a convolution operation that aggregates in-
 In this aggregation process, the feature vectors of neighformation from neighboring nodes and edges to capture local
boring nodes are multiplied by their corresponding attention
 structural patterns. BN represents batch normalization, which
weights, ensuring that more important neighbors contribute
 standardizes the features by adjusting their distribution to promore significantly to the final representation of node ui . This
 mote faster convergence and better training stability. The ReLU
step enables the encoder to embed the structural dependencies
 activation function, defined as ReLU(x) = max(0, x), introof the bipartite graph into the latent representation of each node.
 duces nonlinearity to the model for capturing complex patterns.
Similarly, for nodes vj ∈ V , the encoder aggregates information
 This transformation function projects the edge features into the
from neighboring nodes ui ∈ U . The aggregated representation
 latent space, enhancing the model’s ability to detect anomalies,
for node vj is calculated as
  particularly in scenarios where irregularities in node-to-node
 h vj = αji ui . (11) relationships indicate anomalous behavior.
 i∈N (vj ) By leveraging this attention-based encoding process, CL-
 BGAD can effectively capture both structural dependencies and
This bidirectional message passing ensures that both node sets subtle interactions within the bipartite graph. The encoder’s
U and V contribute to each other’s representations. By prop- dynamic focus on relevant neighbors and bidirectional message
agating information in both directions, the encoder effectively passing enables the generation of rich node and edge represenmodels the interactions between the two sets of nodes in the tations, establishing a robust foundation for anomaly detection
bipartite graph. in subsequent model stages.
 After completing the attention-based message aggregation,
the encoder outputs the final latent representations for the nodes
in both sets. The latent representation matrices for nodes in U C. Feature Decoder
and V are denoted as Z U and Z V , respectively,
 The feature decoder in CL-BGAD is responsible for recon-
 Z U = {hu1 , hu2 , . . . , hu|U | } (12) structing the original node and edge features QU , QV , and QE
 Z V = {hv1 , hv2 , . . . , hv|V | }. (13) from their corresponding latent representations Z U , Z V , and
 Z E , which are generated by the encoder. Reconstruction errors
 These latent representations encode both the feature and between original features and their reconstructed counterparts
structural information of the nodes, as determined by the at- serve as anomaly indicators, where larger deviations typically
tention mechanism. Additionally, the encoder computes latent suggest that the corresponding nodes or edges exhibit patterns
representations for the edges in the graph, denoted as Z E , significantly different from the majority of the data. The input
which capture the relationships between connected nodes. This to the feature decoder consists of latent representations Z U ∈
5368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

R|U |×d , Z V ∈ R|U |×d , and Z E ∈ R|e|×d , produced by the en- decoder operates on the latent representations Z U and Z V procoder. These latent representations encapsulate the structural duced by the encoder. These representations encapsulate both
and feature information of the nodes and edges in the bipartite the feature and structural information of nodes in U and V , but
graph. to make accurate predictions about the edges between them,
 To reconstruct the features, the feature decoder applies a further refinement is necessary.
series of transformation functions fdec to the latent represen- To refine the representations, the decoder applies a series of
tations. Specifically, the decoder performs the following oper- multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) [42], which adjust and transations, mathematically described as: form the initial latent vectors into more informative represen-
    tations. Each MLP consists of multiple fully connected layers
 U
 Znew = σ BN Wu · Z U · A (15)
    with ReLU activation and batch normalization. Specifically, for
 Znew = σ BN Wv · Z · A
 V V
 (16) a given MLP with L layers
 E
   E
 
 Znew = σ BN We · Z (17) MLP(x) = fL ◦ fL−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (x) (22)
where Wu , Wv , and We are learnable weight matrices applied where each layer fi is defined as
to the node and edge representations, BN(·) denote batch normalization, which stabilizes training and ensures consistency fi (x) = σ(BN(Wi x + bi )) (23)
across layers, σ(·) is the ReLU activation function, introducing
 with Wi and bi being the learnable weight matrix and bias
nonlinearity into the transformation, fdec combines these opvector of the ith layer, BN denoting batch normalization, and
erations sequentially: graph convolution with weight matrices,
 σ representing the ReLU activation function.
followed by batch normalization and ReLU activation, to refine
 For each node ui ∈ U , the refined representation ZnewU
 is
the latent representations.
 computed as
 Once the transformations are applied, the decoder reconstructs the original feature vectors QU , QV , and QE from U
 Znew = MLPU (Z U ). (24)
their respective latent representations. The final reconstructed
 Similarly, for each node vj ∈ V , the updated representation
features X U , X V , and X E are given by V
   Znew is obtained through another MLP transformation
 X U = σ Wrec,u · ZnewU
 (18) V
   Znew = MLPV (Z V ). (25)
 X = σ Wrec,v · Znew
 V V
 (19)
 E
  E
  These transformations allow the model to extract more ab-
 X = σ Wrec,e · Znew (20)
 stract and meaningful patterns from the nodes, effectively
where Wrec,u , Wrec,v , and Wrec,e are learnable matrices used preparing them for the task of edge prediction. With the refined
to map the transformed latent representations back to the feature node representations, the next step is to estimate the probability
space. σ(·) is the ReLU activation function applied to introduce P (Aij ) of an edge existing between a node ui ∈ U and a node
nonlinearity in the reconstruction process. The reconstruction vj ∈ V . This edge probability is crucial in identifying whether
loss, which serves as an indicator of anomalies, is formulated an interaction between two entities is anomalous. The structure
as decoder calculates this probability by computing the dot product of the updated latent representations of nodes ui and vj ,
 Lrec = QU − X U 22 + QV − X V 22 + QE − X E 22 (21)
 followed by a sigmoid activation to map the result into a valid
where  · 22 denotes the squared L2 norm of the difference probability range
between original and reconstructed features. This objective  U 
 Aij = P (Aij ) = σ Znew,i · (Znew,j
 V
 ) (26)
function ensures that the learned latent representations retain
as much information from the original features as possible where σ represents the sigmoid function. The predicted probwhile preserving the structural properties of the graph. High ability P (Aij ) serves as an indication of how likely an edge
reconstruction errors signal potential anomalies, highlighting exists between ui and vj , allowing the model to distinguish
nodes or edges that deviate from expected patterns. between expected and anomalous interactions.
 In summary, the feature decoder in CL-BGAD effectively reconstructs both node and edge features, preserving the structural E. Structure Decoder With Contrastive Learning
context of the graph and providing a basis for detecting node
and edge anomalies in bipartite graphs. A key innovation in the structure decoder is the integration
 of contrastive learning, which enhances the model’s ability
 to differentiate between normal and abnormal edges. In this
D. Structure Decoder With Graph Reconstruction
 context, contrastive learning serves to maximize the similarity
 The structure decoder in CL-BGAD is responsible for mod- between positive pairs (i.e., nodes that are connected by edges)
eling the structural relationships between nodes in the bipartite and minimize the similarity between negative pairs (i.e., nodes
graph G = (U, V, E). This decoder plays a key role in identify- that are not connected by edges).
ing irregularities in node-to-node interactions by reconstructing Positive and Negative Pair Generation: The structure dethe connections between the two disjoint sets U and V , de- coder adopts positive and negative node pairs for contrastive
tecting any anomalies in the structural patterns. The structure learning to distinguish between normal and anomalous patterns.
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5369

 Positive pairs are defined by existing edges in the bipartite where λstruct and λcont are hyperparameters controlling the imgraph. For each user ui ∈ U , a product vj ∈ V that shares an pact of structure and contrastive losses, respectively. This baledge with ui in the edge set E ⊆ U × V is selected as the anced objective ensures the model effectively learns meaningpositive pair (ui , vj ). This sampling process traverses each ful representations while discriminating between normal and
user node in U and randomly selects one connected product anomalous interactions.
node from V to ensure balanced and representative positive Feature reconstruction loss minimizes the discrepancy besamples across the graph. This process allows the model to learn tween the input feature vectors QU , QV , QE and their reconmeaningful relationships between connected nodes, capturing structed counterparts X U , X V , X E produced by the decoder.
typical interaction patterns in the bipartite structure. This loss guides the model to capture the essential nodes and
 Negative pairs are unconnected node pairs in the bipartite edges, defined as
graph, representing interactions that are less likely or anoma- Lfeat = RMSE(QU , X U ) + RMSE(QV , X V )
lous. For each user ui ∈ U , three product nodes from V that are
not connected to ui are randomly selected to form the negative + λE · RMSE(QE , X E ) (28)
pairs. This 3:1 ratio of negative to positive pairs is chosen to where λE is a weighting factor that controls the influence
balance the contrastive learning process, where each user node of edge feature reconstruction, and RMSE denotes the mean
has one associated positive pair and three associated negative squared error between the original and reconstructed features.
pairs. By focusing on disconnected nodes for negative samples Contrastive loss is designed to maximize the similarity of
(while ensuring they are associated with the same user for positive pairs (existing edges) while minimizing the similarity
contextual relevance), the model learns to discern typical con- of negative pairs (absent edges) in the latent space
nections from anomalous ones. This ratio also aligns with the exp (simpos /τ )
architectural design of our structure decoder. Since our model Lcont = − log (29)
 exp (simpos /τ ) + exp (simneg /τ )
employs both feature reconstruction and contrastive learning,
an excessive number of negative samples could overwhelm the where simpos and simneg are the cosine similarities between the
feature reconstruction signals in the joint optimization process. refined latent embeddings (ZiU , ZjV ) for positive and negative
The 3:1 ratio maintains an effective balance between these two pairs, respectively. The parameter τ ∈ (0, 1] controls the sharplearning objectives. Besides, as observed in financial transac- ness of the distribution: a smaller value (e.g., τ = 0.1) leads
tion networks [6], this ratio naturally corresponds to the sparsity to a more concentrated distribution and emphasizes the differpatterns where legitimate users typically interact with only a ences between similar and dissimilar pairs, while a larger value
small subset of all possible products or services. produces a smoother distribution. This formulation enables the
 Incorporating contrastive learning in this way, as shown in the model to effectively distinguish between normal and anomalous
structure decoder in Fig. 2, allows the model to refine its under- relationships in the latent space.
standing of both normal and abnormal interactions in the bipar-
 G. Anomaly Scoring
tite graph. By maximizing similarity within positive pairs and
minimizing similarity within negative pairs, the model enhances In the CL-BGAD framework, anomaly scores are generated
its ability to detect irregular patterns, contributing to more ac- for both nodes and edges to quantify the likelihood of each
curate anomaly detection. The model applies the InfoNCE [33] being anomalous. These scores are derived from reconstruction
loss function to enforce this distinction between positive and errors in features and structure prediction results, computed
negative pairs. The loss function is designed to push positive using the root mean square error (RMSE) [43] and binary crosspairs closer together in the latent space while pushing negative entropy loss (BCE) [43]. For nodes ui ∈ U and vj ∈ V , the
pairs further apart. Through the combination of edge probability anomaly score is computed based on the RMSE between the
prediction and contrastive learning, the structure decoder pro- original feature vectors QU , QV and the reconstructed features
vides a powerful mechanism for identifying deviations from X U , X V from the decoder. The anomaly scores for each node
typical interaction patterns in bipartite graphs. This approach type are defined as follows:
ensures that even subtle anomalies, which may not be evident
 1 U
 d
in traditional edge prediction models, are effectively detected. AnomalyScoreui =  (Qi,k − Xi,k
 U )2 (30)
 d
 k=1

F. Objective and Optimization
 1 V
 d

 The primary objective of CL-BGAD is to detect anomalous AnomalyScorevj =  (Qj,k − Xj,k
 V )2 (31)
 d
 k=1
patterns within bipartite graphs by jointly leveraging node and
edge features. The model optimizes a composite loss function, where d represent the number of features for nodes in U and
integrating feature reconstruction loss Lfeat , structure prediction V . For edges eij ∈ E, the anomaly score is similarly computed
Lstruct , and contrastive learning Lcont , each contributing to a using the RMSE between the original edge features QE and the
robust anomaly detection process. The total loss function is reconstructed edge features X E
defined as follows:
 1 E
 d

 Ltotal = Lfeat + λstruct · Lstruct + λcont · Lcont (27) AnomalyScoreeij =  E )2
 (Qij,k − Xij,k (32)
 d
 k=1
5370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

where d represents the number of features associated with each 3) Finefoods: This dataset contains Amazon reviews on
edge in E. This edge-level anomaly score provides an additional food products, with nodes representing users and products and
measure to identify irregularities in connections between nodes. edges capturing reviews. Node attributes and edge features from
 review content provide a basis for detecting anomalies, aiding
 transparency in online user-product interactions.
H. Computational Analysis
 4) Movies: Similar to Finefoods, this dataset includes Ama-
 The computational complexity of CL-BGAD mainly zon movie reviews, where nodes represent users and movies.
comes from three components: the node attention mechanism Node attributes capture review statistics, while edge features
O(|E|d), feature reconstruction O((|U | + |V |)d), and use review embeddings, which help in identifying potential
contrastive learning with negative sampling O(|E|d). |E| is biases in social recommendation systems.
the number of edges, |U | and |V | are the numbers of nodes Due to the large size of the Finefoods and Movies datasets,
in the two node sets, and d is the feature dimension. While we randomly sampled subgraphs with approximately 10 000
the attention mechanism introduces additional computational nodes to ensure computational feasibility. Each dataset was
overhead compared to simple aggregation, its complexity structured as a bipartite graph, with nodes representing users
remains linear with respect to the number of edges, making and items or transactions, and edges denoting interactions. To
it scalable to large graphs. The feature reconstruction process capture behaviors relevant to social fintech, node features (e.g.,
is also efficiently designed to maintain linear complexity user profiles and product descriptions) and edge features (e.g.,
in terms of node count. For various applications on larger timestamps and review embeddings) were included to identify
scale datasets, the model’s efficiency can be further improved potential anomalies.
through mini-batch training and sparse matrix operations.
 B. Experimental Settings
 V. EXPERIMENTS In our experiments, CL-BGAD utilized a four-layer archi-
 In this section, we evaluate CL-BGAD on multiple public tecture. The encoder consists of two graph convolutional layers
datasets, emphasizing its applicability in social fintech for se- that capture local structural and feature information by aggrecure and responsible anomaly detection. We compare the re- gating information from neighboring nodes, allowing the model
sults against seven state-of-the-art baselines to demonstrate the to learn robust embeddings for each node type. The feature deeffectiveness of the proposed model. All experiments were im- coder mirrors this structure with two GNN layers to reconstruct
plemented in Python, and the source code is available at https:// the input features from the latent embeddings, ensuring the
github.com/DSI-Lab1/CL-BGAD. Each experiment was re- learned representations retain relevant information. The strucpeated five times to ensure the reliability of results, with the av- ture decoder employs a two-layer MLP operating on concateerage performance reported. The experiments were performed nated node embeddings, with each dense layer transforming the
on a server with an RTX 3090, 24 GB vCPU AMD EPYC 7642 input into a 32-dimensional space, enabling effective learning
48-Core Processor, 80 GB RAM, and a 30 GB system disk. of complex node relationships and structural patterns while
 maintaining computational efficiency. The loss function was a
 combination of reconstruction, structure, and contrastive losses,
A. Experimental Datasets with weights set to Lstruct = 0.2 and Lcont = 0.2, respectively, to
 To evaluate the performance of CL-BGAD, we conducted balance feature and structural learning. This four-layer strucexperiments on four publicly available datasets,2 each capturing ture was mirrored in the GNN-based baselines (GraphBEAN,
different aspects of user behavior and interaction patterns rel- DOMINANT, AnomalyDAE, CONAD, and ADONE) for conevant to social fintech and AI model security. These datasets sistency. For optimization, CL-BGAD and the baselines used
provide diverse scenarios for studying anomaly detection in Adam with a learning rate of 0.01, determined to perform best
bipartite graph structures, which are essential for addressing after testing a range (0.0001, 0.001, 0.003, 0.01, and 0.03).
social responsibility and trust concerns in social fintech appli- To stabilize training, we applied learning rate decay at epochs
cations. 20 and 35 with a factor of 0.2. For contrastive learning, the
 1) Wikipedia: This dataset captures the editing activities of structure decoder sampled negative node pairs at a 3:1 ratio to
Wikipedia contributors, where edges represent user-edit inter- positive pairs, with each node sampling up to ten neighbors. The
actions. Node attributes summarize editing patterns, and edge random seed was set to 0 across all models. Isolation Forest
features include temporal data, providing insights into abnormal used Scikit-Learn’s default configurations for estimators and
user behaviors that could impact content credibility. samples, ensuring consistent parameterization in all models.
 2) Reddit: This dataset tracks user engagement across Red- To evaluate the robustness of CL-BGAD, we injected syndit subforums, with edges indicating user participation. Node thetic anomalies into these datasets following the strategy outattributes summarize user activity, while edge features reflect lined in GraphBEAN [39]. Anomalies were introduced at both
temporal patterns. Detecting anomalies in such data can help node and edge levels, simulating real-world irregularities such
identify irregular or coordinated behaviors relevant to commu- as fraudulent transactions or abnormal user behavior. The injecnity trust. tion process involved three types of anomalies: block anomalies, feature anomalies, and node-edge feature anomalies. Block
 2 http://snap.stanford.edu/jodie/#datasets anomalies created dense interaction patterns within specific
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5371

 TABLE I
 OVERVIEW OF THE USED DATASETS, INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF NODES FOR SETS U AND V ,
 THE NUMBER OF EDGES E, AND THE NUMBER OF ANOMALIES IN NODES U , V , AND EDGES E

 Dataset #U #V #E #anomalyu #anomalyv #anomalye
 Wikipedia 8,227 1,000 18,257 189 71 456
 Reddit 10,000 984 78,516 380 100 942
 Finefoods 9,705 4,879 18,523 126 127 685
 Movies 9,622 6,366 28,147 125 121 563

subgroups, feature anomalies altered node or edge features 7) Isolation Forest [48]: A classical machine learning apbeyond standard distributions, and node-edge feature anoma- proach for anomaly detection through data isolation.
lies targeted either node-only, edge-only, or combined features. The selection of these baselines allows us to evaluate several
Each type of anomaly was selected based on predefined proba- key aspects of CL-BGAD.
bilities to ensure diverse and realistic challenges for the model. 1) Effectiveness of Bipartite-Specific Design: Comparison
 The size of anomaly blocks and their degree of connectivity with GraphBEAN [39] and FRAUDAR [44] demonwere controlled by random sampling to reflect varying severity strates the advantages of our attention-based feature
levels. Parameters such as standard deviation cutoffs and scaling learning in bipartite settings.
factors were applied for feature anomalies to ensure realistic 2) Impact of Contrastive Learning: Results against CONAD
injection. For example, Gaussian noise was added to node fea- [34] highlight the benefits of our adapted contrastive
tures, and partial dense blocks of edges were created between learning strategy for bipartite structures.
selected node groups to reflect potential fraud or abnormal 3) Advantage of Joint Optimization: Comparison with
activity patterns [44], [45]. autoencoder-based methods (DOMINANT [45] and
 Baselines: We compared the performance of CL-BGAD with AnomalyDAE [47]) shows the benefit of combining
seven baseline models. attention mechanisms with contrastive learning.
 1) GraphBEAN [39]: Focuses on the dual reconstruction 4) General Anomaly Detection Capability: Results against
 of both graph structure and node attributes in bipartite traditional methods like Isolation Forest [48] validate our
 graphs. While it shares our goal of simultaneous node and graph-based approach.
 edge anomaly detection, it lacks attention mechanisms Note that AUC-ROC [49] measures the model’s ability to
 for capturing interaction importance and does not employ distinguish between anomalous and normal samples. It plots the
 contrastive learning for pattern discrimination. true positive rate against the false positive rate across different
 2) FRAUDAR [44]: Focuses on detecting fraudulent pat- thresholds. A score closer to 1 indicates better classification
 terns in bipartite graphs, with applications in anti-fraud performance. AUC-PR [49] is particularly effective for imbaltasks. Unlike our approach, which considers both struc- anced datasets where anomalies are rare. It plots precision (ratio
 tural and feature information, FRAUDAR relies solely on of correct positive predictions) against recall (ratio of detected
 structural patterns, limiting its ability to capture complex actual positives). A higher score indicates better performance
 anomalies. in handling class imbalance, making it suitable for anomaly
 3) CONAD [34]: A contrastive learning-based model de- detection tasks.
 signed for anomaly detection but focuses on homogeneous graphs. Our approach extends this idea to bipartite
 structures while incorporating node attention and feature C. Overall Evaluation
 reconstruction. In order to comprehensively evaluate the anomaly detection
 4) DOMINANT [45]: It utilizes an autoencoder framework performance of CL-BGAD, we focused on two primary metto reconstruct graph structure and features for anomaly rics: AUC-ROC and AUC-PR. These metrics provide critical
 detection. However, they lack specific mechanisms for insights into the model’s ability to distinguish between normal
 handling the distinct characteristics of bipartite graphs and anomalous instances, especially in imbalanced datasets
 and do not utilize contrastive learning for enhancing pat- where the number of anomalies is relatively small compared
 tern discrimination. to normal data. As shown in Table II, which presents the
 5) ADONE [46]: It handles both node and edge irregularities performance comparison between CL-BGAD and the baseline
 but does not specifically address the unique challenges of models, we report precision-recall (PR) scores for nodes of
 bipartite structures. Our framework explicitly models the U , V , and edges E across the four datasets. CL-BGAD conheterogeneous nature of user–item interactions. sistently outperformed the baseline models, demonstrating its
 6) AnomalyDAE [47]: It uses dual autoencoders to man- robust anomaly detection capabilities.
 age graph structure and independence. Unlike our uni- As shown in Table II, CL-BGAD achieved superior AUC-PR
 fied framework, this separation may miss important scores across all datasets, outperforming all baseline models.
 correlations between structural and feature anomalies in On the Finefoods dataset, CL-BGAD achieved an AUC-PR of
 bipartite settings. 0.961 for U nodes, 0.898 for V nodes, and 0.984 for edges,
5372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE II
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF CL-BGAD AND BASELINE MODELS ACROSS FOUR DATASETS

 Finefoods Movies Reddit Wikipedia
 Model
 P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE
 GraphBEAN 0.786 0.767 0.789 0.569 0.573 0.596 0.332 0.351 0.349 0.297 0.258 0.265
 FRAUDAR 0.262 0.389 0.279 0.228 0.178 0.033 0.059 0.105 0.018 0.101 0.086 0.042
 CONAD 0.740 0.721 0.691 0.684 0.695 0.564 0.115 0.180 0.016 0.740 0.721 0.692
 DOMINANT 0.735 0.721 0.686 0.631 0.710 0.388 0.121 0.186 0.016 0.164 0.179 0.049
 ADONE 0.239 0.162 0.048 0.164 0.129 0.021 0.138 0.133 0.007 0.201 0.128 0.025
 AnomalyDAE 0.771 0.774 0.671 0.679 0.753 0.556 0.128 0.194 0.016 0.174 0.193 0.052
 Isolation Forest 0.091 0.167 0.796 0.127 0.181 0.827 0.361 0.608 0.172 0.228 0.497 0.279
 CL-BGAD (ours) 0.961 0.898 0.984 0.741 0.772 0.717 0.513 0.520 0.513 0.304 0.273 0.254
 Note: The Table Reports Precision-Recall (PR) Scores for Nodes U , V , and Edge E. CL-BGAD Consistently Outperforms the
 Baselines, Demonstrating its Robust Anomaly Detection Capabilities. The bold values indicate the best performance for each metric.

significantly outperforming GraphBEAN, which scored 0.786,
0.767, and 0.789, respectively. Similarly, on the Movies dataset,
CL-BGAD maintained its superior performance with AUC-PR
values of 0.741, 0.772, and 0.717 across the same three anomaly
types. The baseline models, such as FRAUDAR and Isolation
Forest, demonstrated much lower performance, particularly on
the Reddit and Wikipedia datasets, where CL-BGAD’s AUC-
PR values surpassed all other models, confirming its robust- (a) (b)
ness in handling diverse datasets with imbalanced anomaly
distributions.
 Fig. 3 presents the AUC-ROC curves of CL-BGAD and other
baseline models across the four datasets. CL-BGAD consistently outperformed all baselines, with its AUC-ROC scores
ranging from 0.91 to 0.96. The steep ascent of CL-BGAD’s
ROC curves, particularly on the Finefoods and Wikipedia
datasets, illustrates its superior ability to detect anomalies with (c) (d)
few false positives. For example, CL-BGAD’s AUC-ROC values on the Movies and Reddit datasets also clearly show its
 Fig. 3. Comparison of ROC curves for the proposed model and baseline
capacity to distinguish between anomalous and normal in- models. (a) Finefoods. (b) Movies. (c) Reddit. (d) Wikipedia.
stances, significantly outperforming models like ADONE and
AnomalyDAE, which struggled to achieve the same level of
separation. In contrast, the baseline models, such as ADONE (PRU : 0.304, PRV : 0.273, PRE : 0.254), which exhibits highly
and FRAUDAR, showed much lower AUC-ROC values across skewed degree distributions and significant feature heterogenedatasets, with ADONE performing particularly poorly on the ity between editors and articles. These performance variations
Wikipedia dataset, where it failed to effectively distinguish be- can be attributed to a key aspect of our model design. The node
tween normal and anomalous samples. Similarly, FRAUDAR’s attention mechanism in our encoder works most effectively
AUC-ROC performance on the Reddit dataset was markedly when node degrees are relatively balanced, as it can better
lower, emphasizing the limitations of these baseline models in capture the relative importance of different interactions.
handling the complexities of edge anomalies. Overall, the combination of high AUC-ROC and AUC-PR
 Through experimental analysis, we can observe that CL- values demonstrates CL-BGAD’s robustness and reliability
BGAD achieves varying performance across different datasets. across diverse and challenging datasets. The model excels in
The model performs best on the Finefoods dataset (PRU : capturing both node and edge anomalies, even in scenarios
0.961, PRV : 0.898, PRE : 0.984) and Movies dataset (PRU : with imbalanced data distributions, making it an effective and
0.741, PRV : 0.772, PRE : 0.717), where user–item interactions practical tool for real-world anomaly detection applications.
are well structured with moderate average node degrees (3.8
 D. Ablation Study
and 5.2, respectively) and clear normal-anomalous patterns.
However, performance decreases on the Reddit dataset (PRU : The ablation study results indicate the critical impact of each
0.513, PRV : 0.520, PRE : 0.513) with its higher average node component of the CL-BGAD model on its overall anomaly
degree (15.7) and complex user participation patterns. The detection performance. As shown in Table III, the full CLmodel shows limited effectiveness on the Wikipedia dataset BGAD model demonstrates the highest performance across all
ZHOU et al.: BIPARTITE GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 5373

 TABLE III
 ABLATION STUDY RESULTS FOR CL-BGAD MODEL ON FOUR DATASETS

 Finefoods Movies Reddit Wikipedia
 Model
 P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE P RU P RV P RE
 full CL-BGAD 0.961 0.898 0.984 0.741 0.772 0.717 0.513 0.520 0.513 0.304 0.273 0.254
 w/o contrastive learning 0.854 0.838 0.884 0.696 0.687 0.676 0.491 0.489 0.478 0.296 0.271 0.261
 w/o node attention 0.829 0.817 0.839 0.637 0.621 0.613 0.465 0.437 0.441 0.201 0.265 0.259
 w/o attention and contrastive 0.786 0.767 0.789 0.569 0.573 0.596 0.332 0.351 0.349 0.297 0.258 0.265
Note: The bold values indicate the best performance for each metric.

datasets, with PRU , PRV , and PRE scores consistently higher normal from anomalous patterns. This combination enables
than the ablated variants. On the Finefoods dataset, the full precise anomaly detection at both node and edge levels, which is
model achieves PRU of 0.961, PRV of 0.898, and PRE of essential for identifying subtle high-impact anomalies in secure
0.984, reflecting the effectiveness of the node attention mech- social fintech applications. While showing promise for realanism and contrastive learning module in capturing both node time fraud detection in social fintech platforms, CL-BGAD
and edge anomalies. When the contrastive learning module in faces challenges in handling rapidly evolving fraud patterns and
the structure decoder is removed, performance declines, with computational scalability. Experiments on several real-world
precision dropping across all anomaly types and datasets. On datasets, spanning e-commerce and financial networks, validate
the Movies dataset, PRE decreases from 0.717 in the full model CL-BGAD’s effectiveness in detecting complex anomalies, outto 0.676, and similar trends are observed in the other datasets. performing current methods. Future work will focus on extend-
This emphasizes the role of contrastive learning in distinguish- ing CL-BGAD to handle more complex k-partite graphs and
ing between positive and negative samples, especially for edge different domain applications. This extension will broaden its
anomaly detection. applicability to multientity financial systems and recommenda-
 Similarly, the removal of the node attention mechanism from tion platforms where anomaly detection is crucial.
the encoder results in a significant drop in performance, particularly for node anomalies. For example, on the Reddit dataset, REFERENCES
PRU drops from 0.513 in the full model to 0.465 without node [1] L. Cao, Q. Yang, and P. S. Yu, “Data science and AI in FinTech: An
 overview,” Int. J. Data Sci. Analytics, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 81–99, 2021.
attention. This highlights the importance of attention in effec- [2] Y. Song, H. Ye, M. Li, and F. Cao, “Deep multi-graph neural networks
tively capturing dependencies between nodes, which is crucial with attention fusion for recommendation,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 191,
for detecting node anomalies. The baseline model, which ex- 2022, Art. no. 116240.
 [3] Y. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Kong, and Y. Zhu, “Learning node embeddings
cludes both the node attention mechanism and contrastive learn- in interaction graphs,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2017,
ing, performs the worst. Across all datasets, this variant records pp. 397–406.
the lowest precision scores. On the Wikipedia dataset, PRU [4] X. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Yu, C. Chen, X. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Bipartite
 graph capsule network,” World Wide Web, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 421–440,
drops to 0.297, compared to 0.304 for the full model. These 2023.
findings underscore the synergy between the node attention and [5] J. Ren, F. Xia, I. Lee, A. Noori Hoshyar, and C. Aggarwal, “Graph learncontrastive learning modules in boosting the model’s ability to ing for anomaly analytics: Algorithms, applications, and challenges,”
 ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–29, 2023.
detect anomalies. [6] T. Pourhabibi, K.-L. Ong, B. H. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detec-
 The ablation study results conclusively show that both the tion: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection
node attention mechanism and the contrastive learning mod- approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, 2020, Art. no. 113303.
 [7] A. Mutemi and F. Bacao, “E-commerce fraud detection based on
ule are essential components of the CL-BGAD framework, machine learning techniques: Systematic literature review,” Big Data
enabling the model to achieve robust and accurate anomaly Mining Anal., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 419–444, 2024.
detection across various datasets and anomaly types. [8] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no.
 5, pp. 4027–4035, 2021.
 VI. CONCLUSION [9] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What
 makes for good views for contrastive learning?” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Anomaly detection in bipartite graphs is crucial for enhanc- Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6827–6839.
ing the security and reliability of AI-driven applications, partic- [10] C.-Y. Zhang, W.-P. Fang, H.-C. Cai, C. P. Chen, and Y.-N. Lin, “Sparse
ularly within social fintech, where early detection of fraudulent graph transformer with contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Computat.
 Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 892–904, Feb. 2022.
activities is essential for maintaining trust and social responsi- [11] Y. Zhao et al., “Can one embedding fit all? A multi-interest learning
bility. This study introduced a specialized anomaly detection paradigm towards improving user interest diversity fairness,” in Proc.
framework for bipartite graphs called CL-BGAD, which ad- ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1237–1248.
 [12] J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, L. Cui, and Q. V. H. Nguyen, “Are
dresses the unique challenges in financial and social network graph augmentations necessary? Simple graph contrastive learning for
domains. The framework includes a powerful encoder with recommendation,” in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
node attention mechanisms to capture detailed interactions, a Retrieval, 2022, pp. 1294–1303.
 [13] J. Robinson, C.-Y. Chuang, S. Sra, and S. Jegelka, “Contrastive learning
feature decoder to reconstruct node and edge features, and with hard negative samples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021,
a structure decoder with contrastive learning to differentiate pp. 1–29.
5374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[14] A. Nesvijevskaia, S. Ouillade, P. Guilmin, and J.-D. Zucker, “The [40] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings
 accuracy versus interpretability trade-off in fraud detection model,” Data using siamese BERT-networks,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods
 Policy, vol. 3, p. e12, 2021. Natural Lang. Process.; 9th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process.,
[15] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for 2019, pp. 3980–3990.
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. [41] V. G. Raju, K. P. Lakshmi, V. M. Jain, A. Kalidindi, and V. Padma,
 1–38, 2021. “Study the influence of normalization/transformation process on the
[16] S. Thudumu, P. Branch, J. Jin, and J. Singh, “A comprehensive survey accuracy of supervised classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart Syst.
 of anomaly detection techniques for high dimensional big data,” J. Big Inventive Technol., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2020, pp. 729–735.
 Data, vol. 7, pp. 1–30, 2020. [42] R. Kruse, S. Mostaghim, C. Borgelt, C. Braune, and M. Steinbrecher,
[17] D. A. Reynolds et al., “Gaussian mixture models,” in Encyclopedia of “Multi-layer perceptrons,” in Computational Intelligence: A Method-
 Biometrics, vol. 741. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 659–663. ological Introduction. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 53–124.
[18] D. A. Pisner and D. M. Schnyer, “Support vector machine,” in Machine [43] N. Khare, P. S. Thakur, P. Khanna, and A. Ojha, “Analysis of loss
 Learning. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, 2020, pp. 101–121. functions for image reconstruction using convolutional autoencoder,”
[19] F. Wu, A. Souza, T. Zhang, C. Fifty, T. Yu, and K. Weinberger, in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Image Process., Cham, Switzerland:
 “Simplifying graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Springer, 2021, pp. 338–349.
 Learn., PMLR, 2019, pp. 6861–6871. [44] B. Hooi, H. A. Song, A. Beutel, N. Shah, K. Shin, and C. Faloutsos,
[20] P. Velickovic et al., “Graph attention networks,” Stat, vol. 1050, no. 20, “FRAUDAR: Bounding graph fraud in the face of camouflage,” in Proc.
 pp. 10–48, 2017. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2016, pp.
[21] C. Sun et al., “Attention-based graph neural networks: A survey,” Artif. 895–904.
 Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. Suppl 2, pp. 2263–2310, 2023. [45] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
[22] I. Chami, S. Abu-El-Haija, B. Perozzi, C. Ré, and K. Murphy, “Machine attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, Philadellearning on graphs: A model and comprehensive taxonomy,” J. Mach. phia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2019, pp. 594–602.
 Learn. Res., vol. 23, no. 89, pp. 1–64, 2022. [46] S. Bandyopadhyay, L. N. S. V. Vivek, and M. N. Murty, “Outlier resistant
[23] A. Li, B. Yang, H. Huo, F. K. Hussain, and G. Xu, “Structure-and logic- unsupervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,” in
 aware heterogeneous graph learning for recommendation,” in Proc. IEEE Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2020, pp. 25–33.
 Int. Conf. Data Eng., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2024, pp. 544–556. [47] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “AnomalyDAE: Dual autoencoder for
[24] S. Khodabandehlou and A. H. Golpayegani, “FiFrauD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 financial fraud detection in dynamic graph streams,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2020, pp.
 Discovery Data, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1–29, 2024. 5685–5689.
[25] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning [48] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. Int.
 of social representations,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Conf. Data Mining, Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 Discovery Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710. [49] A. R. Rachakonda and A. Bhatnagar, “Aratio: Extending area under the
[26] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for roc curve for probabilistic labels,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 150, pp.
 networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery 265–271, 2021.
 Data Mining, 2016, pp. 855–864.
[27] Y. Dong, N. V. Chawla, and A. Swami, “metapath2vec: Scalable representation learning for heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2017, pp. 135–144. Pinlyu Zhou received the B.S. degree in computer
[28] Y. Fang et al., “Metagraph-based learning on heterogeneous graphs,” science from Shandong University of Finance and
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 154–168, Jan. 2021. Economics, Jinan, China, in 2023. She is currently
[29] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection working toward the master’s degree in cyberspace
 and description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 29, pp. security with the College of Cyber Security, Jinan
 626–688, 2015. University, Guangzhou, China.
[30] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi, Her research interests include data mining and
 “CARLA: Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for time artificial intelligence.
 series anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 157, 2025, Art. no.
 110874.
[31] J. Cao, X. Lin, S. Guo, L. Liu, T. Liu, and B. Wang, “Bipartite graph
 embedding via mutual information maximization,” in Proc. ACM Int.
 Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2021, pp. 635–643.
 Jiayang Wu received the B.S. degree in elec-
[32] B. Jing, Y. Yan, Y. Zhu, and H. Tong, “COIN: Co-cluster infomax for
 tronic information engineering from Guangdong
 bipartite graphs,” in Proc. NeurIPS Workshop New Front. Graph Learn.,
 Ocean University, Zhanjiang, China, in 2023. He
 2022, pp. 1–15.
 is currently working toward the master’s degree
[33] A. Parulekar, L. Collins, K. Shanmugam, A. Mokhtari, and S. Shakkotin cyberspace security with the College of Cyber
 tai, “InfoNCE loss provably learns cluster-preserving representations,”
 Security, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
 in Proc. Annu. Conf. Learn. Theory, PMLR, 2023, pp. 1914–1961.
 He has published several research papers in peer-
[34] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
 reviewed journals and conferences. His research
 network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. Pacificinterests include artificial intelligence and data
 Asia Conf. Knowledge Discovery Data Mining, Cham, Switzerland:
 mining.
 Springer, 2022, pp. 444–457.
[35] Y. Jiang, C. Huang, and L. Huang, “Adaptive graph contrastive learning
 for recommendation,” in Proc. SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 Mining, 2023, pp. 4252–4261.
[36] N. Saunshi et al., “Understanding contrastive learning requires incorpo- Wensheng Gan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 rating inductive biases,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022, degree in computer science from the South China
 pp. 19250–19286. Normal University, Guangzhou, China, in 2013,
[37] M. Chen, Z. Wei, Z. Huang, B. Ding, and Y. Li, “Simple and deep graph and the Ph.D. degree in computer science and
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, technology from Harbin Institute of Technology
 pp. 1725–1735. (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China, in 2019.
[38] Z. Niu, G. Zhong, and H. Yu, “A review on the attention mechanism of Currently, he is an Associate Professor with
 deep learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 452, pp. 48–62, 2021. the College of Cyber Security, Jinan University,
[39] R. Fathony, J. Ng, and J. Chen, “Interaction-focused anomaly de- Guangzhou. He has published more than 200 retection on bipartite node-and-edge-attributed graphs,” in Proc. Int. search papers in peer-reviewed journals and inter-
 Joint Conf. Neural Netw., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE, 2023, national conferences. His research interests include
 pp. 1–10. data mining, artificial intelligence, and cybersecurity.