1760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 Boosting Encrypted Traffic Classification Using
 Feature-Enhanced Recurrent Neural Network
 With Angle Constraint
 Gongxun Miao , Guohua Wu, Zhen Zhang, Yongjie Tong, and Bing Lu

 Abstract—With the surge in various types of network traffic and in the network environment is constantly increasing, gradually
the widespread application of encryption technology, the classifi- becoming an integral component of network traffic [1], [2].
cation of encrypted traffic plays an increasingly important role in Big data technology offers new possibilities for addressing this
ensuring network security, enhancing quality of service, and managing network traffic. However, most existing methods often suffer challenge. By applying Big Data analytics methods, such as data
from issues such as excessive reliance on manual feature extraction mining, machine learning, and deep learning, we can extract
and expert knowledge, unstable classification performance, and valuable information from massive amounts of encrypted traffic
lack of transfer learning capabilities. To address these challenges, data, enabling more accurate traffic classification. This is of
this paper proposes a high-performance hybrid encrypted traffic
 significant importance for ensuring network security, optimizing
classification framework, FERNN-AC. It directly extracts features
from raw traffic and fully explores and utilizes the spatiotemporal network resource utilization, and improving QoS. By mining
information of traffic data by integrating specially designed feature large-scale historical data and processing real-time streaming
enhancement module and temporal feature extraction module in data, we can establish more intelligent and dynamic encrypted
a reasonable manner. It introduces angle constraints and can be traffic classification models that adapt to the ever-changing
combined with meta-learning, thereby improving classification pernetwork environment and emerging encryption technologies.
formance while possessing certain transfer learning capabilities.
The experiments are conducted on three datasets, and the results For traffic classification, researchers have proposed various
shows that compare with relevant baseline methods, FERNN-AC classification methods. For instance, methods based on port lists
has excellent and stable classification performance. or payload analysis of data packets are used to identify appli-
 Index Terms—Angle constraint, encrypted traffic classification, cation types, but these methods are unable to handle encrypted
feature enhancement, few-shot learning, LSTM. traffic [3]. Statistical-based approaches involve manual feature
 extraction followed by the utilization of traditional machine
 learning classifiers for classification [4]. While these methods
 I. INTRODUCTION achieve high accuracy rates, they heavily rely on expert knowl-
 S INTERNET technology advances, the increasingly di- edge and manual feature extraction. As the complexity of real
A verse range of network applications has brought convenience to people’s work and daily lives. However, the accompanetwork traffic increases, the cost of manual feature extraction
 becomes prohibitive. Deep learning-based methods can directly
nying surge in various types of network traffic has brought about use raw traffic as input, offering automatic feature extraction adnumerous issues, such as network security threats and a decline vantages and highly complex nonlinear fitting capabilities. This
in the network quality of service (QoS). Meanwhile, with the rise eliminates the reliance on expert experience during the manual
of awareness about network security and the widespread applica- feature extraction process and is more suitable for handling
tion of encryption technology, the proportion of encrypted traffic increasingly complex encrypted traffic, making it a hot topic in
 traffic classification research in recent years [5], [6]. However,
 Received 8 May 2024; revised 14 September 2024; accepted 16 October these methods still struggle with adapting to uneven sample
2024. Date of publication 22 October 2024; date of current version 11 July distributions and distinguishing samples with high similarity
2025. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” across different categories but low similarity within the same
Research and Development Program of Zhejiang under Grant 2023C03203,
Grant 2023C03180, and Grant 2022C03174. Recommended for acceptance by category, and lack transfer learning capabilities for new types of
P. D’Urso. (Corresponding author: Gongxun Miao.) samples.
 Gongxun Miao is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi Univer- To address the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes
sity, Hangzhou 310018, China, and also with the Zhongfu Information Company,
Ltd., Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: miaogx@hdu.edu.cn). an encrypted traffic classification model, FERNN-AC, based
 Guohua Wu is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, on feature-enhanced recurrent neural network framework with
Hangzhou 310018, China, and also with the School of Intelligent Science, angle constraints. FERNN-AC comprises three main modules:
Technology, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou 310018, China
(e-mail: wugh@hdu.edu.cn). feature enhancement, temporal feature extraction, and classi-
 Zhen Zhang is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, fication. The feature enhancement and temporal feature ex-
Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: zhangzhen@hdu.edu.cn). traction modules fully exploit and utilize the spatiotemporal
 Yongjie Tong and Bing Lu are with the Zhongfu Information Company, Ltd.,
Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: tongyongjie@zhongfu.net; lubing@zhongfu.net). information of traffic data, enabling the model to obtain effective
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBDATA.2024.3484674 representations. The classification module imposes constraints
 2332-7790 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1761

 TABLE I
 ABBREVIATION EXPLANATIONS

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON OF RELATED WORKS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

on the angle in the embedded space and can be combined with Section III; Section IV provides a detailed description to the
few-shot learning methods, thus achieving high-performance theoretical framework of FERNN-AC; Section V presents the
classification of traffic and certain transfer learning capabilities. experimental details, including datasets, experimental settings,
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows, and analysis of experimental results; Finally, we conclude this
 r A hybrid high-performance encrypted traffic classification paper in Section VI.
 framework, FERNN-AC, is proposed, which makes full
 use of the spatiotemporal information of traffic data and II. RELATED WORK
 imposes angle constraints on the embedding vector, realizing the high performance classification of traffic data. In this section, we review previous researches on enr A unique feature enhancement module is designed, which crypted traffic classification, including statistical-based methintegrates one-dimensional pointwise convolution with the ods, deep learning-based methods and few-shot learning meth-
 Squeeze & Excitation mechanism, effectively utilizing the ods. The professional terms and their corresponding abbreviafeatures of the traffic data and improving the model’s tions mentioned throughout this article are shown in Table I. In
 capability to the nonlinear representation. Table II, a comparison between the state-of-the-art techniques
 r By aggregating all temporal step information of the recur- and the method proposed in this paper was conducted across
 rent neural network, the global information of encrypted four characteristics: spatiotemporal information, transfer learntraffic flows are retained, which effectively enhances the ing, stability, and computational complexity. The comparison
 model’s the representation ability. is represented as follows, indicates a significant advantage,
 r The introduction of L2 normalization and angular con- indicates a moderate advantage, and indicates no advanstraints enforces closer proximity between samples of tage.
 the same type and greater separation between samples
 of different types, thereby improving classification per- A. Statistical-Based Methods
 formance. Additionally, the model can be combined with These methods manually extract a feature set from the traffic
 meta-learning, enabling transfer learning with few-shot based on prior knowledge, then use data containing these feature
 case. sets to train traditional machine learning models such as decision
 We conducted extensive experiments on three real network trees, random forests, Bayesian classifiers, k-nearest neighbors,
traffic datasets, and the results demonstrate that FERNN-AC etc., to achieve classification. The selected traffic features can
exhibits outstanding classification performance and stability be divided into two categories: packet features and network flow
across different datasets. features. Packet features include packet size, packet inter-arrival
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II time, packet header length, etc.; network flow features include
reviews related work in the field of traffic classification; The flow duration, up/downstream byte counts, flow bit rate per
concepts and problem definitions in the article are described in second, number of packets, etc. For example, Leroux et al. [7]
1762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

extracted features such as packet size, arrival time, burst time, and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic
burst size, etc. from encrypted flows, and then used naive Bayes, classification, called I 2 RNN. Unlike traditional classification
logistic regression, and random forests to predict traffic types model training methods, this model aims to learn independent
passing through IPsec or TOR tunnels. Obasi et al. [8] proposed fingerprints for different types of samples, allowing it to handle
an ensemble learning model CARD-B, which stacked multiple imbalanced samples and support rapid training of new sample
technical components using random forests and achieved an types. I 2 RNN exhibited stable and effective performance on
overall accuracy of 96% and an AUC value of 98% on the two public datasets while also providing reliable interpretability.
ISCXVPN2016 dataset. Draper-Gil et al. [9] studied the time- However, the model’s hyperparameters rely on expert experience
related characteristics of flow-based VPN traffic detection and and face the risk of fingerprint database obsolescence. Similarly,
classified encrypted traffic into categories such as web pages and Cerasuolo et al. [19] proposed an incremental learning model
streaming media. The above methods have achieved satisfactory based on fine-tuning techniques, named MEMENTO. Through
results in encrypted traffic classification tasks, but the extraction its memory management module, the model incorporates old
of feature sets heavily relies on expert knowledge, and model sample information when updating training on new samples,
training typically requires large-scale labeled samples. significantly improving classification performance for new application types while maintaining stable classification accuracy
 for old application types.
B. Deep Learning-Based Methods
 These methods typically involve automatic feature learning
 C. Few-Shot Learning Methods.
from ample labeled data, thereby effectively circumventing the
manual feature extraction process. For instance, Wang et al. [10] Few-shot learning aims to learn general patterns or rules
proposed an end-to-end one-dimensional Convolutional Neu- from limited data to achieve effective generalization to unseen
ral Network (CNN) model for encrypted traffic classification, samples. Methods based on few-shot learning include data
achieving a 17% reduction in false positive rate on the IS- augmentation, generative models, and meta-learning. Among
CXVPN2016 dataset. Liu et al. [11] introduced an end-to-end them, meta-learning methods, as an efficient few-shot learn-
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) traffic classification model ing approach, have made significant progress in the field of
called FS-NET. This model took packet length sequences as image classification, such as Relation Net [20], Prototypical
input and utilized bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) Network (ProtoNet) [21], and Model Agnostic Meta Learning
to learn traffic feature representations, achieving a recall rate (MAML) [22]. With their special architecture, these methods
of 99.14% on a real dataset containing 18 applications. Hu can learn a universal learning strategy by learning shared patterns
et al. [12] combined CNN and Long Short-Term Memory and structures across tasks, thereby achieving the effect of trans-
(LSTM) layers to improve the classification performance of un- fer learning. Xu et al. [23] were the first to apply meta-learning
known encrypted network traffic. Akbari et al. [13] designed fea- to network intrusion detection. They used raw traffic bytes as
tures with good generalization and combined stacked LSTM lay- input and achieved few-shot traffic classification by training
ers with CNN to learn encrypted protocols. Lotfollahi et al. [14] on meta-tasks. Yang et al. [24] proposed an improved traffic
proposed a Deep-Packet encrypted traffic classification model, classification model, FS-IDS, which enhanced the performance
which combines CNN with stacked autoencoders to classify of the model in few-shot classification by integrating raw traffic
traffic applications by analyzing packet payloads. Shi et al. [15] and traffic statistical features. Shi et al. [25] introduced the
proposed a Byte Feature Convolutional Network (BFCN) al- “Learned to Forget” (L2F) mechanism into MAML for the
gorithm based on BERT and CNN for encrypted traffic, which first time. L2F dynamically controlled task conflicts during the
demonstrated significant improvements in recall, precision, and initialization process of MAML, thereby improved the con-
F1-score. The BFCN integrated a transformer-based packet en- vergence speed of the model. Shirekar et al. [26] proposed a
coder and a CNN module to capture both global traffic charac- method called “Class-Cognizant Contrastive Learning” (C3 LR),
teristics and byte-level local features. Similarly, Lin et al. [16] which introduced class-level awareness and modified contrastive
proposed ET-BERT. The model utilized a transformer encoder loss to learn class-level global structures, thereby enhanced the
to learn feature representations of raw traffic data streams and performance of few-shot classification.
packets, and it employed unsupervised pre-training and super- Horowicz et al. [27] proposed a few-shot classification
vised fine-tuning techniques for training and testing. ET-BERT method called mini-FlowPics. This method is based on Flowcould adapt to multiple downstream tasks with limited labeled Pic [28] and significantly reduces the dimensions of twosamples and achieved state-of-the-art performance across five dimensional images by aggregating the time and number of
encrypted traffic classification tasks. packets. While mini-FlowPics reduces training costs and im-
 Yang et al. [17] proposed a customized deep learning tech- proves classification performance, it is limited to classification
nique based on gradient backpropagation (GradBP) and applied tasks within predefined classes and cannot detect unknown
it to zero-day application detection. As a commercial-grade traf- samples. Bovenzi et al. [29], [30] explored the use of few-shot
fic classification model, GradBP demonstrated excellent perfor- learning in mobile applications and IoT traffic classification
mance in both accuracy and computational cost when classifying tasks. They compared various few-shot learning methods, anknown types and detecting unknown types on a dataset with over alyzed the sensitivity of the Number of Ways and Number of
200 application labels. Song et al. [18] introduced an incremental Shots, the relationship between embedding functions or the size
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1763

 TABLE III
 NOTATIONS

of the few-shot set and classification performance, and provided B. Meta Learning
directions for optimizing few-shot learning. Zhang et al. [31]
 The form of traffic data can be represented as D =
proposed a few-shot malicious traffic classification method that
 {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}, where xi ∈ RD and yi ∈
combines knowledge transfer and neural architecture search {1, 2, . . . , M } respectively denote samples and their corre-
(NAS). This approach not only overcomes the dependency on
 sponding labels. The dataset is divided into two parts, the
labeled data and the manual selection of network architec- meta-training set Dtrain and the meta-test set Dtest . In this
ture parameters but also significantly reduces time costs. Zhao paper, the label sets of Dtrain and the label sets of Dtest have no
et al. [32] introduced a few-shot classification method for IoT
 intersection. The meta-learning process consists of two phases,
traffic, named Festic. This model uses a meta-learning strategy meta-training and meta-testing, each of which comprises multito extract sample representations and employs an integrated ple episodes. Each episode contains one or more meta-tasks.
similarity comparison module to compute a composite score
 Meta-task is the basic unit of meta-learning, which can be
for the samples to be classified, achieving the final few-shot defined as Ti . In meta-training phase, Ti randomly selects a
classification task. Additionally, Festic incorporates a detection subset of labels from Dtrain , with each label having a few
module with a threshold, enabling the identification of unknown
 samples randomly selected to form the support set and the query
samples. set. In meta-testing, meta-task Ti are generated from Dtest in the
 same manner as during the meta-training phase.

 III. PROBLEM DEFINITION IV. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

 This section introduces several concepts and definitions. This section provides a detailed explanation of the FERNN-
Table III outlines the notations used in the paper along with AC and its design principles. The detailed structure is shown
their corresponding descriptions. in Fig. 1, which includes three molules, Feature Enhancement,
 Temporal Feature Extraction, and Classification in a bottom-up
 manner. First, the Feature Enhancement is used to extract spatial
 information of the data and obtain multidimensional features.
A. Classification Tasks Then, the output from the previous step is reorganized, and
 multiple features at each time step are sequentially input into
 The purpose of encrypted traffic classification is to categorize LSTM cell according to the temporal order. The hidden layer
network traffic according to specific granularities, which helps information of the LSTM is fused and dimensionally reduced
improve the quality of service and precise control of network to obtain a representation vector of a sample. Finally, the repretraffic. Before performing encrypted traffic classification tasks, sentation vector is projected onto a hypersphere, and the angle
it is necessary to first determine the granularity of traffic division. constraint method is used for training. The following is a detailed
There are mainly five granularities for network traffic division: description of each module.
1) Encrypted traffic identification, which determines whether
the traffic is encrypted or not. 2) Protocol classification, which
categorizes traffic based on encryption protocols (such as SSL, A. Feature Enhancement
SSH, IPSec protocols, etc.). 3) Application classification, which We reprocessed each traffic data into a sequence of length
classifies traffic according to the associated applications (such L, as described in Section V-B. First, we organize the data
as YouKu, WeChat, Skype, QQ, etc.). 4) Service classification, into a single-channel one-dimensional grayscale image (format:
which categorizes traffic based on the type of service (such as 1 × L). Typically, single-channel data means that each position
streaming media, instant messaging, etc.). 5) Web page classifi- point has only one feature. This feature is considered shallow
cation, which identifies web browsing under the HTTPS protocol and limited in quantity, making it unable to represent the deep
(such as Baidu search, Taobao, Sohu, etc.). This paper conducts features of the samples. Therefore, to enhance the model’s
research on encrypted traffic classification using applications or representational capacity and its ability to decouple information
services as the classification granularity. from the raw data, this paper applies one-dimensional pointwise
1764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 Fig. 2. Structure of SE module.

 corresponding feature map in the original feature maps, resulting
 in the weighted feature maps.
Fig. 1. The overview of FERNN-AC framework. In Fig. 2, r represents the reduction ratio, which is usually
 an integer greater than 1 that can divide C2 . PReLU refers to
 a parameterized nonlinear operation similar to leakyReLU, but
 with different learnable slope parameters for the negative part of
convolution and performs channel number transformation to
 the activation, which vary across different neurons (for detailed
achieve this objective. The convolution involves using a 1 × 1
 explanation, refer to [37]). The “Scale” operation multiplies the
convolution kernel, and its convolution operation is represented
 feature map of each channel with the corresponding weights
by (1).
 obtained from the SE module.
  
 
 pi = f 1 wc xi,c (1) B. Temporal Feature Extraction
 c Despite the fact that traffic data can be treated as a image and
 convolutional operations can be applied to extract features, its
 Here wc represents the convolution kernel parameters, xi,c
 essence lies in being a sequence, thus temporal characteristics
denotes the input data, i is the position index, and c is the
 should be taken into consideration. In this paper, LSTM is emchannel index. f1 is a non-linear function, and ReLU is used
 ployed as the temporal feature extraction module, where the data
here. The stride is set to 1 during the process. We set up two
 processed by the feature enhancement module are sequentially
layers of the aforementioned convolutional layers. The first layer
 fed into the LSTM, as shown in Fig. 1. The obtained hidden
employs C1 convolutional kernels, while the second layer uses
 vectors at each time step are as follows:
C2 convolutional kernels. The final output is the convolution  
p ∈ RC2 ×L . ht = LST M pt , ht−1 (2)
 In general, if a data point consists of multiple features, differ-
 It is worth noting that when we input data into the LSTM,
ent features may contribute differently to the classification task.
 we do not directly feed the outputs from feature enhancement
Inspired by the work of [36], this paper introduces the Squeezemodule in different channels. Instead, the data is first organized
and-Excitation mechanism (SE). Through simple pooling and
 into feature vectors at different time steps. Since the features
fully connected operations, the SE mechanism adaptively alloat the same time step contain the characteristics of different
cates importance weights to each channel, enhancing the model’s
 channels, the feature vector pt at any time step t is arranged as
ability to utilize different channel features.
 [pt1 , pt2 , . . . , ptC2 ], where C2 represents the number of channels
 The specific structure of the SE module is illustrated in
 output by the convolutional operation. Then, the feature vectors
Fig. 2, which consists of two steps: squeeze and excitation. In
 at each time step are sequentially input into the corresponding
the squeeze step, global average pooling is performed on each
 time steps of the LSTM in chronological order.
channel, which squeeze the feature maps of each channel into a
 After obtaining the hidden vectors ht at each time step,
single value. In the excitation step, two fully connected layers,
 they are concatenated to form a representation vector h̃ that
a dimension reduction layer and a dimension expansion layer
 contains global information, where h̃ = h1 ⊕ h2 . . . . ⊕ hL and
(as shown in the second and third boxes of the right branch in
 ht ∈ RD . Then, a fully connected layer is applied to fuse and
Fig. 2) are utilized to learn the weights for each channel. These
 reduce the dimensionality of h̃.
weights represent the importance of each channel’s feature maps.
Finally, each learned weight is multiplied element-wise with the h = Wh̃ · h̃ (3)
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1765

 
 Where h̃ ∈ RL·D , and Wh̃ ∈ RD ×(L·D) . Here, D and D rep- TABLE IV
 SUMMARY OF THE DATASET USED FOR EXPERIMENT
resent the dimensions of the hidden vector’s and the embedding
vector’s dimensions respectively.

C. Classification
 After the processing in Sections IV-A and IV-B, each traffic
data is transformed into an embedding vector in a latent space.
Traditional classification methods often involve using a simple hi = fφ (xi ). In the experiments conducted in Section V, we
fully connected layer and softmax loss for classification, where will compare and evaluate the performance of the classification
the classification matrix W and bias term b are adjusted through matrix generated using these two different approaches.
training data. However, for certain traffic data, there are great dif- According to the research [42], the paper introduces an addiferences among samples from same type, and great similarities tive angular margin penalty in the cosine space to impose certain
among different types of samples. This results in suboptimal constraints on the distribution of data’s representation vectors
classification performance for some classes. Moreover, with on the hypersphere, which enhances intra-class compactness
the increasing diversity of applications and advancements in and inter-class discrepancy simultaneously(this method is called
encryption techniques, newly generated traffic may exhibits ArcMargin). The final model’s loss function can be written as
certain differences from the past, and some types of traffic may follows,
be insufficient in quantity, leading to insufficient generalization ⎛ ⎞
 NB s cos(θyi +m)
of models trained solely on historical data. 1  e
 Inspired by articles [38], [39], We alleviate the above issues by L=− log ⎝ ⎠
 NB i=1 es cos(θyi +m) + K es cos θj
 j=1,j=yi
introducing angle constraints into the embedded space. Without
considering the bias term b, each row of the classification matrix (5)
W can be viewed as a vector representing the class-specific fea- Where θyi is the angle between the sample and the class
tures (referred to as “class representation vectors” and denoted representation vector it belongs to, NB is the number of samples
as lj , where Wj = ljT ). The process of classifying a data point in a batch during the training process, K is the number of classes,
can be seen as taking the dot product between its embedding s is the scaling factor, and m is the additive angle margin.
vector and the class representation vectors, and selecting the
class with the highest dot product as the predicted class for this D. Complexity Analysis
data point. To enhance the stability of the model’s classification, The computational complexity of two-layer convolution
we eliminate the influence of feature scale differences [40], and SE module are O(L · C1 · C2 ) and O(C22 /r), respec-
[41] by applying L2 normalization to both the embedding vec- tively. LSTM and fully connected layer need complexity
tors and the class representation vectors. Specifically, Wj hi = O(L · (C2 · D + D2 )) and O(L · D · D ), respectively. The
Wj hi cosθj , and applying L2 normalization to Wj and hi classfication layer costs O(D · M ). D and C2 are much
allows Wj  = hi  = 1. We then scale it with a factor s, so smaller than D . C2 /r is less than C1 . M significantly
that all embedding vectors and class representation vectors lie smaller than L · D. Thus, the overall time complexity is
on the surface of a sphere with a radius of s. O(L · C1 · C2 + L · D · D ).
 The classification matrix W can be randomly initialized and
learned through training, similar to traditional methods. How- V. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
ever, it can also be made to rely not only on the training data but
also on external memory, which can partially address the issues A. Datasets
of limited generalization and lack of transfer learning ability In order to validate the performance of the proposed method,
caused by the scarcity of certain types of data in real-world sce- experiments were conducted on three datasets: ISCXVPN2016,
narios. Specifically, drawing from the idea of meta-learning [20], USTC-TFC2016, and App60. Table IV shows the number of
[21], we generate the class representation vectors in real-time samples and types after preprocessing for the three datasets.
based on the data included in the current task. In each batch, Descriptions of the datasets are as follows,
a certain number of data samples are selected for each class r ISCXVPN2016: It consists of encrypted traffic data comto form the class representation vectors, following the process prising both Virtual Private Network (VPN) and non-VPN
outlined below: traffic [9]. This dataset comprises pcap files correspond-
  ing to 17 types of applications, including Skype, Email,
 lj = fφ (xi ) (4)
 Facebook, Gmail, and others. Among these, the SCP, Tor,
 xi ∈Sj
 and Gmail applications only contain non-VPN packets,
 Here, lj represents the class representation vector for the j-th while the remaining 14 application types contain both VPN
class, Sj denotes the set of data belonging to class j, and the and non-VPN packets. The application types are further
number of samples extracted from Sj for each class is denoted categorized into 12 classes based on the specific activities
as nj . fφ refers to the embedding model (i.e., the process de- involved in the packets of each application, such as voice
scribed in Sections IV-A and IV-B), where the embedding vector calls, chats, etc.
1766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 r USTC-TFC2016: It consists of encrypted traffic containing TABLE V
 EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS
 both malicious software and benign applications [43]. This
 dataset comprises 20 categories of application flows, with
 10 categories for benign applications and 10 for malicious
 ones. The malicious software traffic was collected by CTU
 researchers from real network environments, while the normal software traffic was collected using traffic simulation
 device. The dataset size is 3.71 GB.
 r App60: The dataset is collected from 60 mobile applica- Mtest and Ntest are respectively the number of categories and
 tions (such as YouKu, QQ, PPTV, Douyin, Gmail, etc.) the number of samples in the test.
 using the Monkey tool to trigger specified applications on
 Android devices from Google Play [44]. The dataset has a
 total size of 32.3 GB and consists of raw traffic and flow D. Experimental Setup
 files.
 During training, we applied additive angular margin penalty
B. Data Preprocessing to the angle between the samples and their corresponding class
 representation vectors. During testing, we directly performed
 The characteristic information of network traffic data is typ- dot product between the normalized representation vectors of
ically reflected at the application layer (L7) of the OSI model. the samples and the class representation vectors to obtain the
For instance, the SMTP protocol represents email traffic, and classification results. This paper conducted experiments on conthe HTTP protocol represents browser traffic. According to the ventional classification (Experiment 1), i.e., training on a large
research in [45], using information from application layer can dataset containing numerous samples and then testing on a
effectively avoid biased input and improve the generalization test set (with the same class set as the training set). As class
ability of the model. Therefore, this paper utilizes “Session+L7” representation vectors can be generated from real-time data,
of raw traffic as the representation for each traffic sample, where this paper combined the model with a meta-learning framework
“Session” denotes the bidirectional flow of traffic, and “L7” and conducted experiments on transfer learning under few-shot
denotes application layer of traffic. scenarios (Experiment 2).
 The method described in article [43] was adopted for data r Experiment 1: In this type of experiment, we set up trainpreprocessing in this study. First, the raw traffic was divided ing and testing sets similar to conventional classification
into sessions, with each session representing a sample. Second, methods. The samples in the training and testing sets
the first L bytes were extracted from each session, and if the are different, but their set of classes is exactly the same.
total number of bytes in a session was less than L, padding with There is no scenario involving transfer learning. In this
zeros was performed. Therefore, each sample was organized into experiment, we configured the model in two ways: one
a sequence of length L. Finally, these hexadecimal bytes were where class representation vectors are randomly generated
converted into decimal values, ranging from 0 to 255. by the system and trainable, denoted as FERNN-AC(GT);
 and another where class representation vectors are sourced
C. Evaluation Metrics from external memory, i.e., generated from a few number
 This paper employs precision (P), recall (R), accuracy (Acc), of real-time data or standardized data, denoted as FERNNand F1 score (F1) to evaluate the performance of the model. The AC(EM). We selected R, P , F1 and Acc as evaluation
evaluation metrics are defined as (6)–(9), metrics for this experiment.
 r Experiment 2: In this type of experiment, the set of classes
 1 
 P = Pi (6) in the training differ from those in the testing. Additionally,
 Mtest i due to the limited number of samples available for classi-
 1  fying new types during testing, this type of classification
 R= Ri (7) can be considered as transfer learning based on few-shot
 Mtest i
 sizes. For ISCXVPN2016, USTC-TFC2016, and App60,
 1  the numbers of classes in the training and testing sets were
 F1 = F 1i (8)
 Mtest i chosen as (7, 5), (12, 8), and (45, 15), respectively, with
 no intersection between them. They respectively contain
 M
  7 12 45
 1 test combinations of C12 , C20 and C60 . For each dataset, we
 Acc = T Pi (9) randomly selected 10 combinations and conducted 5-shot
 Ntest i=1 5-way tests, averaging the Acc and F1 scores over all
where, Pi = T PTi +F Pi T Pi 2Pi ·Ri
 Pi , Ri = T Pi +F Ni , F 1i = Pi +Ri reprecombinations of the testing sets as the evaluation metrics
sent the precision, recall and F 1 score of the i-th class sample for this experiment.
respectively. T P i represents the number of i-th class samples
 r Parameter Settings: The detailed explanation of the paidentified as the i-th class, F Pi represents the number of non-i-th rameters is given in Table V, where the three values of
class samples identified as the i-th class, and F Ni represents m respectively represent the settings on ISCXVPN2016,
the number of i-th class samples identified as non-i-th class. USTC-TFC2016 and App60.
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1767

 TABLE VI
 COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION RESULTS BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND ALL BASELINE METHODS

 accuracy. The main reason is that it uses BERT architecture, which undergoes extensive pre-training on massive
 amounts of traffic data containing diverse types, enabling
 it to acquire more effective representations of traffic data.
 Subsequently, fine-tuning is performed on downstream
 tasks on various datasets, making it more adaptable to each
 classification task.
 r ST-CasualConvNet*: This model achieves generally better
 results across all three datasets. It is based on a causal
 convolution structure, which possesses the characteristic of
Fig. 3. Acc on three datasets.
 obtaining a larger receptive field with the same parameters,
 thus increasing its ability to perceive sequence characteristics. Additionally, to fully utilize global sequence infor-
E. Results Analysis.
 mation, we modified the original structure of the model to
 1) Analysis of Experiment 1: In this section, we compare fuse and utilize all information from the last convolutional
the proposed method with relevant baseline methods on three layer, rather than just that from the last neuron (The label
datasets and conduct analysis. The results are shown in Table VI. “*” represents this modification). These two aspects may
 r RF/XGBoost: These two methods, based on statisti- be the main reasons for its outstanding performance.
 cal approaches, show moderate performance on the IS- r FERNN-AC(EM)/(GT): This model achieves the best re-
 CXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016. But on the App60, sults across all metrics on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-
 RF and XGBoost performs pooly. Overall, XGBoost out- TFC2016. It is on par with ET-BERT on the App60. The
 performs RF. Their inputs consist of 80-dimensional flow main reason for its performance lies in its design tailored
 features extracted by CICFlowMeter, with the selection of to the characteristics of traffic data. First, It employs a
 these features requiring domain expertise. feature enhancement module that maximizes the utilization
 r 1D-CNN: This method performs moderately on the IS- of data features. And then it utilizes LSTM to extract and
 CXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 but poorly on the fuse the temporal features of the data, obtaining a glob-
 App60. It adopts a one-dimensional LeNet structure, which ally perceptive embedding vector. Finally, by employing
 despite considering the temporal aspects of traffic data and angular margin penalty, the model enhances intra-class
 potentially enhancing classification accuracy, falls short compactness and inter-class discrepancy simultaneously.
 in capturing comprehensive sequence features due to its In the comparison between versions GT and EM of the
 simple convolutional stacking. With datasets containing model, on the ISCXVPN2016, FERNN-AC(EM) performs
 a larger variety of types, it struggles to obtain effective better, while on the USTC-TFC2016 and App60, FERNNrepresentations, resulting in significant performance dis- AC(GT) achieves better results. This indicates that the
 crepancies across different datasets. FERNN-AC(EM) excels at handling data with fewer types,
 r DeepPacket: This method yields the poorest performance while the FERNN-AC(GT) method has an advantage on
 across the three datasets, likely due to the characteristics datasets with a greater variety of types.
 of the data. As only the application layer information of We compare Acc on three datasets, as shown in Fig. 3. On the
 the packets was retained and the first 1500 bytes of each ISCXVPN2016, compared with all baselines, FERNN-AC(EM)
 packet were extracted, a significant portion of the sample achieves the best results, surpassing RF by 14.52%, XGBoost
 sequences contained zero values. These sequences lack by 12.25%, ET-BERT by 0.07% and ST-CasualConvNet* by
 sufficient informative content, resulting in class represen- 0.88%, respectively. On the USTC-TFC2016, RERNN-AC(GT)
 tations that are not adequately representative. is on par with ET-BERT, surpassing XGboost by 6.47%,
 r ET-BERT: This model demonstrates excellent and stable 1D-CNN by 6.88%, and ST-CasualConvNet* by 1.02%. On
 performance across all metrics on the three datasets. Es- App60, FERNN-AC(GT) shows significant advantages, surpecially on App60, it achieve best results in recall and passing XGboost by 28.05%, 1D-CNN by 30.22%, ET-BERT by
1768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

Fig. 4. F1 scores of FERNN-AC and baseline methods across different types on ISCXVPN2016.

 TABLE VII
 THE ACC AND F1 SCORES OF THE ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON THE THREE
 DATASETS

Fig. 5. Comparison of training time and the number of trainable parameter
between FERNN-AC and related baseline methods on three datasets.
 ET-Bert and ST-CasualConvNet*. On ISCXVPN2016, USTC-
 TFC2016 and App60, FERNN-AC (GT) is 13.59%, 16.03%
 and 22.73% of ET-Bert’s training time, respectively. In terms
 of the number of trainable parameters, FERNN-AC (GT/EM)
0.07% and ST-CasualConvNet* by 7.04%, respectively. Over- also has the lowest count. Compared to ST-CasualConvNet*,
all, the proposed model demonstrats consistently outstanding FERNN-AC has higher overall classification performance and
classification performance. fewer parameters. ET-Bert has classification performance sim-
 In addition, to analyze the specific classification details of ilar to FERNN-AC, but the number of trainable parameters far
FERNN-AC and baselines for different types of traffic, we exceeds that of FERNN-AC, being over 15 times more than
take the example of ISCXVPN2016 (includes 12 classes) and FERNN-AC on three datasets.
display the F1 score of each class for all methods, as shown in In addition, we conducted ablation experiments by comparing
Fig. 4, where different colors represent different types. It can two versions of the FERNN-AC method with their respective
be observed that although RF, XGBoost, 1D-CNN, and Deep- counterparts lacking the AC enhancement (without AC) and
Packet show good discriminative capabilities in few classes, their lacking the SE enhancement (without SE) from Table VII.
overall performance varies greatly across different categories. On the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016, FERNN-AC(GT)
ET-BERT, ST-CasualConvNet* and FERNN-AC perform ex- demonstrates improvements of over 1.6% in Acc compared to
ceptionally well in all categories except for chat and email, the scenario without AC, while showing only marginal gains in
possibly due to the lack of distinctiveness in these two categories comparison to the scenario without SE. On the App60, FERNNcaused by the traffic’s L7 layer features. Overall, FERNN-AC AC(GT) achieves an approximately 5% increase in both Acc
(EM) achieves the best results, surpassing RF, XGBoost, ET- and F1 scores over the scenario without AC, and around 1.3%
BERT, and ST-CasualConvNet* by 19.64%, 17.49%, 0.30%, improvement compared to the scenario without SE.
and 1.30%, respectively. Compared to the scenario without AC, FERNN-AC(EM)
 Based on the above analysis, it can be observed that the per- achieves notable gains in both Acc and F1 scores across all
formance of ET-Bert, ST-CasualConvNet*, and FERNN-AC far datasets, with over an 80% increase on the App60. In comparexceeds that of RF, XGBoost, 1D-CNN and DeepPacket. There- ison to the scenario without SE, the improvements were less
fore, we compare and analyze the training time and the number pronounced, with the highest increase in Acc at 2.3% and in F1
of trainable parameters of ET-Bert, ST-CasualConvNet*, and at 0.4%. Overall, these improvements contribute positively to
FERNN-AC. As shown in Fig. 5, the upper and lower graphs enhancing the model’s performance.
represent the training time and the number of trainable parame- 2) Analysis of Experiment 2: In this section, we analyze the
ters of these methods on three datasets. It can be seen that in terms performance of the model on few-shot classification across three
of training time, FERNN-AC has a significant advantage over datasets, as shown in Table VIII.
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1769

 TABLE VIII
 THE FEW-SHOT CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE THREE DATASETS

 r C3 LR: It performs moderately on ISCXVPN2016 and are highly dependent on training data. As a result, the
 USTC-TFC2016, and poorly on App60. One possible ex- model may lack generalization ability when faced with
 planation for this is that it ignores the sequential features new data from a large number of categories. In addiof the data and its pretraining approach is not suitable for tion, the model did not implement data augmentation protraffic data. As a result, the model fails to acquire effective cessing like ProtoNet, which could also be a reason for
 representations on traffic data. this.
 r ProtoNet: This method demonstrates consistently excellent Overall, FERNN-AC(FS) shows better performance comperformance on all three datasets, especially achieving the pared to the baseline methods. It outperforms the second-best
 best results on the App60 dataset. The main reasons for this model by 0.42% on ISCXVPN2016 and 1.91% on USTCmay be that data augmentation processing is implemented TFC2016in terms of Acc. This indicates that the proposed
 before inputting the data into the model, and the model method not only performs significantly well in conventional
 represents class’s features using prototype vectors and is classification tasks but also exhibits some transfer learning
 trained using a loss based on euclidean distance. This capabilities.
 allows the model to rely more on the characteristics of
 the real-time data itself rather than the model parameters
 obtained on the training data, thus enabling the model to VI. CONCLUSION
 be more suitable for datasets that include a greater variety
 of categories. The rapid and accurate classification of encrypted traffic is of
 r FC-Net: Due to the inability to preprocess the IS- great importance for ensuring network security and enhancing
 CXVPN2016 dataset, this method was only experimented network service quality. Based on the nature of encrypted traffic
 with on the USTC-TFC2016 and App60 datasets. It doesn’t data, this paper proposes a high-performance encrypted traffic
 demonstrate superior performance, primarily because it classification framework called FERNN-AC. First, the framerelies on a data format that requires truncating a portion work employs the feature enhancement module to extract feature
 of bytes for each packet. For some datasets, this approach of traffic data. The module uses the pointwise convolutional laymay overlook important features for classification, making ers to increase the model’s non-linear representation capability
 it difficult for the model to obtain effective representations. and obtain multidimensional features, and leverage SE modules
 r NAS-based FS-MTC: This method shows moderate per- to adaptively learn an importance weight for each channel, enformance across all datasets. The main issue is that it hancing the model’s ability to utilize different features. Next, the
 uses a convolutional neural network structure, which only framework employs LSTM to capture the temporal characteriscaptures the spatial structure of traffic data and overlooks tics of the data and performs feature fusion and dimensionality
 important temporal features. reduction, obtaining an effective embedding vector. Finally, by
 r Festic: This method performs poorly across all three using additive angular loss, the framework makes the data in
 datasets, which may primarily be attributed to its corre- the embedding space more compact within the same class and
 sponding preprocessing approach. The application layer further apart between different classes, thereby improving the
 data in the first N packets is either too short or nonexistent, classification performance. In this process, the framework can
 resulting in many zero values in the extracted sequences, also combine with external memory, so that it can adapt to unmaking it difficult to learn effective class representations. even distribution or conduct transfer learning based on few-shot
 This also indicates that the method is highly affected by case. In this paper, experiments are performed on three datasets,
 the data. and the results show that compared with the baseline methods,
 r FERNN-AC(FS): The proposed model achieves the best re- FERNN-AC has excellent and stable classification performance.
 sults on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 datasets, However, the method proposed in this paper also has some
 and performs better on App60. The main reason could be limitations, 1) The model’s adaptability and scalability are weak;
 that although the data, dealt with feature enhancement and 2) The model lacks interpretability. The nature of network traffic
 processed by recurrent neural networks, largely preserves typically changes rapidly over time, requiring models to have
 the spatial and temporal characteristics of the data, this stronger adaptability. Deep learning-based traffic classification
 processing relies heavily on network parameters, which models often exhibit a “black box” nature, leading to a lack
1770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

of a certain degree of trustworthiness in the classification re- [18] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural
sults. Therefore, in future work, we will focus primarily on network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
 Secure Comput., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
enhancing the model’s adaptability and interpretability. With the [19] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class increcontinuous development of artificial intelligence and computing mental learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, 2024,
power, we will continue to explore AI-powered network traffic Art. no. 110374.
 [20] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. Torr, and T. M.
classification models to achieve adaptive enhanced training and Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot
dynamic analysis of the factors influencing classification perfor- learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
mance. pp. 1199–1208.
 [21] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
 learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4080–4090.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [22] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
 adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR,
 Support for this project is provided by Guohua Wu. The 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
 [23] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
authors thank the anonymous engineers for their support with detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
the software. Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 [24] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework for
 intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 122,
 REFERENCES 2022, Art. no. 102899.
 [25] Z. Shi, M. Xing, J. Zhang, and B. H. Wu, “Few-shot network intrusion
 [1] Z. ThreatLabz, “Zscaler threatlabz 2023 state of encrypted attacks detection based on model-agnostic meta-learning with L2F method,” in
 report,” Zscaler, Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://resources. Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–6.
 wisdominterface.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/threatlabz-2023- [26] O. K. Shirekar and H. Jamali-Rad, “Self-supervised class-cognizant
 state-of-encrypted-attacks-report.pdf few-shot classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., 2022,
 [2] Google, “Iittps encryption on the web – google transparency report,” pp. 976–980.
 2024. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/ [27] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classificaoverview tion: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 [3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
 traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan./Feb. 2012. [28] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
 [4] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S. C. Bagui, and J. Sheehan, “Com- encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
 parison of machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN network Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232,
 traffic flow using time-related features,” J. Cyber Secur. Technol., vol. 1, Jun. 2021.
 no. 2, pp. 108–126, 2017. [29] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 [5] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification “Few shot learning approaches for classifying rare mobile-app encrypted
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term traffic samples,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2023,
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022. pp. 1–6.
 [6] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noise- [30] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
 resistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, “Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learning,”
 no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019. J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 83, 2024, Art. no. 103762.
 [7] S. Leroux, S. Bohez, P.-J. Maenhaut, N. Meheus, P. Simoens, and B. [31] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classi-
 Dhoedt, “Fingerprinting encrypted network traffic types using machine fication via integrating knowledge transfer with neural archilearning,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2018, tecture search,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
 pp. 1–5. pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
 [8] T. Obasi and M. O. Shafiq, “CARD-B: A stacked ensemble learning tech- [32] Z. Zhao, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, W. Jia, and H. He, “A few-shot learning based
 nique for classification of encrypted network traffic,” Comput. Commun., approach to IoT traffic classification,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3,
 vol. 190, pp. 110–125, 2022. pp. 537–541, Mar. 2022.
 [9] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, [33] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” in [34] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in
 Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414. Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
[10] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted pp. 785–794.
 traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” [35] L. Zhang, J. Na, J. Zhu, Z. Shi, C. Zou, and L. Yang, “Spatiotempoin Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat., 2017, pp. 43–48. ral causal convolutional network for forecasting hourly PM2. 5 con-
[11] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence centrations in Beijing, China,” Comput. Geosciences, vol. 155, 2021,
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Art. no. 104869.
 Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179. [36] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
[12] X. Hu, C. Gu, and F. Wei, “CLD-net: A network combining CNN and IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
 LSTM for internet encrypted traffic classification,” Secur. Commun. Netw., [37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
 vol. 2021, pp. 1–15, 2021. Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proc.
[13] I. Akbari et al., “Traffic classification in an increasingly encrypted web,” IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
 Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 75–83, 2022. [38] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face
[14] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and M. recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
 Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classi- pp. 5265–5274.
 fication using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, [39] F. Wang, X. Xiang, J. Cheng, and A. L. Yuille, “NormFace: L2 hypersphere
 2020. embedding for face verification,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
[15] Z. Shi, N. Luktarhan, Y. Song, and G. Tian, “BFCN: A novel classification 2017, pp. 1041–1049.
 method of encrypted traffic based on BERT and CNN,” Electronics, vol. 12, [40] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, M. Li, B. Raj, and L. Song, “SphereFace: Deep hyno. 3, 2023, Art. no. 516. persphere embedding for face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
[16] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A contextual- Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 212–220.
 ized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted [41] R. Ranjan, C. D. Castillo, and R. Chellappa, “L2-constrained softmax loss
 traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. for discriminative face verification,” 2017, arXiv:arXiv: 1703.09507.
[17] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day [42] J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular
 traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,” margin loss for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118, Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 4690–4699.
 Dec. 2021.
MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE 1771

[43] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classi- Yongjie Tong received the MS degree from the
 fication using convolutional neural network for representation learning,” School of Physics, Nankai University, Tianjin, China,
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717. in 2019. He has been engaged in the work of data min-
[44] J. Shi, C. Yang, Q. Yang, J. Zhang, M. Cui, and G. Xiong, “SpBiSeq: ing from 2019 to now. He is currently a data-mining
 An early-stage fingerprint generation method with high robustness for engineer with Zhongfu Information Company, LTD,
 encrypted mobile application traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Comput. Jinan, China. His research interests include machine
 Commun. Eng. Technol., 2021, pp. 185–193. learning and optimization, graph mining and cyber
[45] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted security.
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons
 learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage., vol. 16, no. 2,
 pp. 445–458, 2019.

 Bing Lu received the BEng and MS degrees from
 the College of Computer Science and Technology,
 Gongxun Miao received the MS degree from the Wuhan University of Technology, China, in 2015
 School of Computer Science and Technology, Shan- and 2017. He is currently data-mining engineer of
 dong University of Technology, Zibo, China, in 2018. Zhongfu Information Company, LTD, Jinan, China.
 He is currently working toward the PhD degree with His research interests include machine learning and
 the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi Univer- its application, data mining and information security.
 sity, Hangzhou, China. His current research interests
 include computer cyber security, information system,
 data mining and information security.

 Guohua Wu received the BS degree from the Shandong University of Technology, Jinan, China, in 1992,
 the MS degree from the National Institute of Metrology, Beijing, China, in 1995, and the PhD degree from
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1998. He is
 currently a professor with the School of Cyberspace,
 Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
 China. He is also an executive director with the Information Security Laboratory. His current research
 interests include information system, model driven
 architecture, data mining, and digital heath.

 Zhen Zhang received the graduate degree from the
 Zhejiang University of Computer Science, in 2005.
 Now he is an associate professor with the School
 of Cyberspace in Hangzhou Dianzi University. His
 current research interests include information visualization, information security, information hiding,
 confidential technology, etc.