10434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 CELEST: Federated Learning for Globally
 Coordinated Threat Detection
 Talha Ongun , Simona Boboila , Alina Oprea , Member, IEEE, Tina Eliassi-Rad, Jason Hiser,
 and Jack Davidson , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The cyber-threat landscape has evolved tremen- prevalent communication protocols for malware dissemination
dously in recent years, with new threat variants emerging daily [3]. To the attackers’ advantage, malicious communication
and large-scale coordinated campaigns becoming more prevalent. over the HTTP protocol can easily blend in with the large
In this study, we propose CELEST (CollaborativE LEarning
for Scalable Threat detection), a federated machine learning volumes of benign traffic and is rarely blocked. Existing
framework for global threat detection over HTTP, which is one of defenses against HTTP malware include network intrusion
the most commonly used protocols for malware dissemination and detection systems, as well as machine learning (ML) methods
communication. CELEST leverages federated learning in order applied to domain names [4], [5], URLs [6], [7] or HTTP
to collaboratively train a global model across multiple clients logs [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. However, these methods
who keep their data locally. Through a novel active learning
component integrated with the federated learning technique, our are usually used within a single organizational network and
system continuously discovers and learns the behavior of new, have limited capability to detect attacks not seen at training
evolving, and globally-coordinated cyber threats. We show that time.
CELEST is able to expose attacks that are largely invisible to An important open question for thwarting global malware
individual organizations. For instance, in one challenging attack on the Internet is how to leverage defender collaboration
scenario with data exfiltration malware, the global model achieves
a three-fold increase in Precision-Recall AUC compared to the and enable coordinated cyber defenses. To date, interlocal model. We also design a poisoning detection and mitigation organizational cooperation has been used primarily to share
method, DTrust, for federated learning in the collaborative threat intelligence in the form of Indicators of Compromise
threat detection domain. We deploy CELEST on two university (IoC), such as IP addresses, domain names, and URL patterns
networks and show that it is able to detect the malicious HTTP used during an attack [14], [15]. However, this approach has
communication with high precision and low false positive rates.
Furthermore, during its deployment, CELEST detected a set well-known limitations as it relies on detection of ongoing
of 42 previously unknown malicious URLs and 20 malicious attacks and their associated IoCs, while attackers can change
domains in one day, which were confirmed to be malicious by their infrastructure and behavior to make the detected IoCs
VirusTotal. obsolete [16], [17], [18]. This observation leads to the ques-
 Index Terms—Federated learning network security, intrusion tion: Are there other, more proactive and reliable approaches
detection, machine learning (ML). to global defense coordination that could be effective against
 evolving, sophisticated cyber threats?
 I. I NTRODUCTION In this work, we answer the above question affirmatively by

M ODERN cyber attacks have become sophisticated,
 coordinated, and operate on a global scale. We have
witnessed globally-coordinated campaigns with the ability to
 presenting CELEST, a federated machine learning framework
 for global HTTP-based threat detection. CELEST enables
 collaboration among defenders to globally train neural netspread to hundreds of thousands of victim machines on the work models for HTTP malware detection. The main goal
Internet [1], [2]. While attackers exploit a wide range of vul- in designing CELEST is to facilitate knowledge transfer
nerabilities in various protocols, HTTP has become one of the between participants through a collectively trained model. A
 Received 9 June 2024; revised 8 June 2025 and 2 August 2025;
 global machine learning model captures data diversity and
accepted 15 September 2025. Date of publication 29 September 2025; date of thus becomes a powerful tool for uncovering a wider range
current version 9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the U.S. of malware behavior characteristics. This approach enables
Army Contracting Command-Aberdeen Proving Ground (ACC-APG) under clients to detect malware seen for the first time in their
Contract W911NF-18-C0019, in part by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) under Grant W911NF-21-10322, in part by the networks, which a locally trained ML model cannot identify.
U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research In real-world deployments of ML threat detection systems,
Laboratory [ARL Cyber Security Cyber Research Alliance (CRA)] under
Agreement W911NF-13-2-0045, and in part by NSF under Grant CNSthe vast majority of data is unlabeled, and ground-truth labels
1717634. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and for malicious samples are limited. In addition, supervised
approving it for publication was Prof. Fengwei Zhang. (Corresponding author: defenses often fail to detect novel attacks that have not
Talha Ongun.) been previously encountered in training, and it is difficult
 Talha Ongun, Simona Boboila, Alina Oprea, and Tina Eliassi-Rad
are with Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail: to obtain accurate labels of malicious activity on a network.
ongun.t@northeastern.edu). To address these concerns, we propose the design of a new
 Jason Hiser and Jack Davidson are with the University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA.
 active learning component as part of the CELEST federated
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3614442 learning framework with the goal of increasing the labeled
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10435

set during the training phase and, eventually, enhancing the ation with high precision, and with false positive rates lower
global model’s detection capabilities. In our design, we use than 3.3×10−5 on both networks. Moreover, the model trained
active learning to identify a small set of anomalous samples in the first experiment maintained strong performance during
for investigation in each round of training, and augment the an evasive attack exercise conducted four months later. In
training set with maliciously labeled samples. addition, CELEST detected a set of 42 previously unknown
 We evaluate CELEST using a large dataset of HTTP logs malicious URLs and 20 domains on the two networks, which
collected at the borders of two university networks. We also were confirmed malicious by VirusTotal. To summarize, our
use three public datasets from different malware families contributions are:
(Mirai, Gafgyt, and the data exfiltration malware dataset • Federated learning for global cyber defense: We design
from [9]), as well as attack recreation data generated on the CELEST, a scalable and privacy-preserving framework
university networks. We show that, across all the malware for federated training of global neural network models,
families we considered, the global model outperforms local which enables early-stage HTTP malware detection at
models trained on a single client’s data. The improvements participating organizations.
obtained by global models are significant. For instance, the • Active learning for limited ground truth: We introduce
global model is able to detect a data exfiltration malware a novel active learning component in our federated design,
family with three times higher Precision-Recall AUC (PR- which selects samples for investigation and labeling
AUC) than the local model. Importantly, global defenses using an anomaly detection module, and thus enables
enable clients to detect new malware in their environments the discovery of completely new attacks. To the best
(i.e., malware that they have not seen in training), which is of our knowledge, this is the first exploration of active
learned from the models shared by other clients participating learning within the federated threat detection domain. It
in the federated protocol. We further demonstrate that, with combines rare-class discovery with the ranking of the
active learning enabled, CELEST can detect entirely new global classifier, enabling the detection and learning of
malware for which no labels are available in the training data attacks that were not observed locally.
of any client. In particular, the key intuition to enable new • Poisoning mitigation: We design DTrust, a new poisonmalware discovery is to include an anomaly detection module ing detection and mitigation method specifically designed
trained on each client network with the goal of detecting and for federated learning in the collaborative threat detection
labeling anomalies in the network. Often, new attack instances domain. The main innovation of DTrust is having the
will result in anomalous traffic relative to the benign traffic. clients bootstrap (publicly verifiable) trust; this is in
Once the anomalies are confirmed as attack instances, they contrast to previous approaches that rely solely on the
are added to the next round of federated learning training, server to detect poisoning attacks.
and the global model will learn to recognize these newly • Comprehensive evaluation: We evaluate CELEST using
discovered attacks. One of the most important threats against large-scale datasets from two university networks, public
federated learning is adversarial manipulation by malicious or traces from three malware families, and three attack
compromised clients to poison the model [19], [20], [21], [22], recreation exercises. We show that global models trained
[23]. We design a new defense technique specific to threat in CELEST have high precision and recall, and low false
detection called DTrust (Distributed Trust), with the goal of positive rates, improving significantly upon local models.
training in the presence of poisoning attacks by identifying and We further demonstrate the impact of poisoning attacks
removing the malicious clients. The benign clients evaluate and effective mitigation with DTrust, which outperforms
locally whether the global model received from the server a poisoning defense based on weight clipping.
can be trusted, and notify the server if a large performance • Deployment and detection of unknown malware: We
degradation is observed. The server investigation consists of deploy CELEST on two university networks and find
inspecting individual model updates and identifying the clients instances of previously unknown malware (42 malicious
that sent “bad” updates to remediate the attack. DTrust relies URLs and 20 malicious domains).
on the insight that most client organizations in a collaborative
threat detection system act in good faith, and that they are II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND T HREAT M ODEL
incentivized to actively participate in defense and validate the In this section, we discuss the problem of HTTP malware
model during the training process to protect against poisoning detection along with the limitations of existing solutions, and
attacks. We evaluate DTrust in three poisoning scenarios in introduce our system requirements and threat model.
which a number of compromised clients inject different attack HTTP-based malware. HTTP is one of the protocols most
patterns to be misclassified by the global model. In one widely used by adversaries to perpetrate malicious activiscenario, the global model’s PR-AUC degrades from 0.93 to ties, such as data exfiltration [24], vulnerability exploitation
0.11 when no defense is deployed, but DTrust restores the [25], and covert channel communication [26]. Command-
PR-AUC to 0.93 after identifying the malicious clients and and-control (C2) servers often use HTTP to send commands
removing them from training. to compromised systems and receive stolen data [27]. Prior
 Finally, we deploy CELEST on two university networks work proposed a variety of methods for detecting malicious
using three attack recreation exercises performed at inter- network activity over HTTP, including URL-based detection
vals of several months. We show that CELEST detects the [7], [28], detection using web-proxy logs [8], [10], [11], [12],
malicious communication carried out during the attack recre- [13], and application fingerprinting [9], [29], [30]. We focus
10436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

on malicious activity detection using HTTP logs for several Third, most existing systems for HTTP malware detection
reasons. First, while malicious URL detection has been shown employ some form of aggregation of events from multiple
to be successful in mitigating certain attacks (e.g., phishing), logs. For instance, beaconing detection methods apply time
HTTP-based detection methods are able to address a variety series analysis on multiple communication events to the C2
of attack surfaces used by different malware families. Second, server to detect periodic communication [10]. It is challenging
the HTTP-based methods avoid deep inspection of the payload to detect malicious HTTP communication in real time, as it
which could be obfuscated by attackers, and rely only on the requires generating a prediction on individual log events.
HTTP headers for increased scalability and lower computation Threat Model. We aim to design a globally coordinated
costs. Lastly, these approaches utilize common logs collected system with multiple participating clients for detection of
by web proxies installed at the border of enterprise networks, malicious activity over the HTTP protocol. The malicious
which most enterprises use as part of their perimeter control. communication could be part of multiple stages of a malware
 Most of the existing machine learning detection techniques campaign, including malware delivery, the C2 communication
on HTTP logs attempt to detect malware activity within a with the malicious server, and data exfiltration activities. We
single network by training local models on labeled data avail- assume that the attacker compromises one or several victim
able in that network [8], [10], [12], [13]. As attackers employ machines within the participating networks. Hosts in the netvarious techniques to evade detection, such as changing the C2 work can be infected in a variety of ways, such as vulnerability
protocol, or changing the domain names and the IP addresses exploits, social engineering, and drive-by download attacks.
of the C2 infrastructures, local models will fail at detecting The infection vector might not occur over HTTP, and therefore
these. In this work, we address the problem of designing global our system might not be able to detect the initial infection.
detection of HTTP malware through coordination among mul- However, our goal is to detect any subsequent malicious
tiple participating organizations. We believe that collaboration communication over HTTP, which is a common communiamong multiple defenders is critical to enable a better and cation channel once attackers have established a foothold in a
more resilient cyber defense strategy and will lead to more network.
effective threat detection methods. Unfortunately, the state of Our system analyzes HTTP logs collected at the borders
the art in collaboration among multiple defenders is based of the monitored networks. The participating organizational
on threat intelligence sharing platforms, which enable sharing networks run local computation on the collected logs for
of indicators of compromise (IoCs) after attacks are detected. training local models, and share those with a central server
IoCs have limited utility at detecting cyber threats, particu- that aggregates a global model. We assume that the central
larly as IoCs become stale with small changes to attackers’ aggregator correctly follows the protocol for aggregating the
malicious infrastructures or communication protocols. We are local updates into a global model. However, the clients parinterested in more proactive, coordinated approaches among ticipating in the protocol might be subject to data poisoning
defenders that can resist evolving cyber attacks. attacks (in which the logs they collect are under the control
 In designing our system, we identified several requirements of an adversary), or model poisoning attacks (in which the
for real-world deployment in participating organizations: adversary controls the updates sent to the central aggregator).
 • Globally coordinated detection: We are interested in Our goal is to train models that identify the malicious activity
 global methods that expose attacks promptly, when they over HTTP, while providing resilience against poisoning.
 are still largely invisible to individual organizations.
 • Real-time processing: We require real-time processing of
 III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW AND M ETHODOLOGY
 HTTP logs to generate predictions on individual HTTP
 logs when the model is deployed. This enables early-stage In this section, we present an overview of CELEST, folattack detection and thus minimizes the damage. lowed by a detailed description of each system component.
 • Scalability: We would need to run the system on multiple CELEST is a federated framework for cyber defense, where
 networks with large volumes of logs. a set of participating clients collaboratively learn a global
 • Log privacy: The system should require minimal data model G from HTTP logs collected at their network border.
 sharing across participating clients, in order to ensure the The goal of the global model is to learn a classifier that
 privacy of sensitive security logs. generates predictions regarding whether individual HTTP logs
 • High accuracy: To be used in production, the system are Malicious or Benign. We consider the cross-silo federated
 should have high accuracy, precision, and recall, as well learning setting, suitable for a relatively small number of
 as low false positive rates across different classes of clients, in which all clients participate in each round of training
 HTTP-based malware attacks. [32]. Following the federated learning paradigm [33], in a
 Challenges. Detecting malicious communication over the training iteration t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, each client i ∈ {1, . . . , n}
HTTP protocol is challenging for multiple reasons: First, the locally trains a local model Wit based on the previous global
malicious traffic transmitted on the HTTP protocol blends model Gt−1 , by performing stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
in with large volumes of legitimate traffic generated by updates on a subset of its local data, Dti . The clients send their
users, making detection very difficult. Second, there is a high local model updates to the server, which aggregates them to
imbalance between malicious and benign samples on a single produce the updated global model Gt and distribute it to the
network, making it challenging to train supervised learning clients. The process continues iteratively until the global model
methods with high accuracy and low false positive rates [31]. converges.
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10437

Fig. 1. Overview of the CELEST federated learning framework. The system is designed to train a global model for HTTP malware detection where multiple
networks participate as clients in the FL protocol. The system uses an embedding model for feature extraction, and local model updates are aggregated at
a central server to build a global model that is capable of detecting malicious behavior across the networks. New attack discovery using an active learning
component is integrated to augment the labeled instances through anomaly-based sample selection.

 The training data (HTTP logs) Di maintained by each client to generate additional ground truth for the global supervised
i locally is labeled as malicious or benign. We discuss in model.
Section IV how we generate ground truth for data labeling. Figure 1 illustrates the overview of the system. We detail
Before training, the data undergoes a feature extraction phase each component of CELEST in the following sections.
where individual HTTP logs are processed to generate a set
of 5862 features across three categories – embedded, numer- A. Feature Representation
ical and categorical (Section III-A). We propose the use of Our system is unique in its requirement for real-time
embedded features from text-based HTTP fields (URL, domain processing of HTTP log events. Thus, timing features and
and web referer), adapting word embedding representations aggregated features over multiple HTTP logs or flows are
from natural language processing (NLP). Word embeddings not applicable to our setting. We leverage all the available
are generated with deep learning models such as Word2Vec fields in HTTP logs, except the source IP address (since
[34] and FastText [35], which are trained to capture contextual our detection methods are not specific to the host machine)
and semantic similarities in the text, ensuring that similar and source port (which does not carry information related
words are positioned closer in the embedding vector space. to our detection task). We include three feature categories:
 CELEST uses federated learning techniques for two tasks: (1) embedding features for domain, URL, and web referer
(1) generating embedded feature representations, and (2) train- representation, (2) categorical features for external IP subnet,
ing a neural network classifier for detection of malicious HTTP port, user agent string, method, status code, and content type,
traffic. For the first task, we introduce a federated method in and (3) numerical features for request and response size,
which each client updates sequentially a shared embedding transaction depth, and browser version.
model using their own data corpus. For the second task, clients URLs are one of the HTTP fields particularly susceptible
use their local HTTP feature vectors to collectively train a to adversarial manipulation; they are often used by malware
global model that is able to detect various attack patterns. to communicate information with C2 servers through various
CELEST introduces a novel active learning component that parts of the URLs, including sub-domain, parameters, query
uses a local anomaly detection module to augment the ground string, file name, and fragment. Hence, it is important to
truth of malicious activities through sample selection (Section have an effective, semantics-aware feature representation of
III-B). In addition, CELEST employs a novel distributed URLs. Unlike prior work on URL feature representation [6],
defense mechanism against poisoning attacks, in which the [7], [36], [37], [38], [39], we propose an embedding model
clients themselves help identify malicious attempts to corrupt that preserves the semantic structure of the URL, handles new
the global model (Section III-C). tokens at deployment time, and can be trained in a federated
 We emphasize the challenge of designing threat detection fashion.
systems that achieve high accuracy while maintaining low Embedding model design. In Figure 2, we present our
false positive rates. To this end, our framework leverages design for creating the embedding representation in a federated
multiple inter-connected machine learning components: (1) an unsupervised manner. Initially, we parse the URLs into tokens
unsupervised federated embedding model for URL represen- representing different categories (e.g., domain, path, query
tation; (2) a supervised federated learning model for global string) to preserve the structure of a URL. Each token is
threat detection; (3) an active learning component that uses an considered a word, and each URL is viewed as a sentence
unsupervised anomaly detector for sample selection in order of words.
10438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. Federated embedding model training for URL representation. We generate embedded features for URL, Domain and Referer. In addition to embedded
features, we also include numerical features and categorical features.

 We considered several approaches for generating URL these dictionaries are constructed and indexed consistently,
embeddings. The first option is a centralized training of the embedding training can proceed in a distributed manner. This
word models using either Word2Vec or FastText architectures, design is practical in domains such as URL-based tasks, where
where the training of the embedding model is carried out on common substrings are prevalent, and it eliminates the need
the server using the data collected from all the clients. Thus, for clients to share local word dictionaries.
a single entity (i.e., the server) has access to all the data, and FastText has the additional advantage of supporting new
uses it to learn the vector embeddings from the URLs (or tokens not observed at training time by generating n-gram
domain, referer). This approach suffers from scalability and representations for them. This property is important because
privacy issues, as all the raw URL data has to be collected in adversaries can change parts of the URLs to evade deteca central server to perform the training. We are interested in a tion (e.g., the query string, path, and parameters can be
more privacy-preserving and scalable approach for distributed easily updated). As we show in our evaluation, FastText
training of the embeddings among multiple participants. It is and Word2Vec achieve similar performance (and have higher
possible to apply the Federated Averaging algorithm to train performance than lexical features, as expected). For these rea-
Word2Vec or FastText models. However, in practice, Federated sons, we select federated FastText as the preferred embedding
Averaging for Word2Vec has been shown to exhibit slow method for URL representation.
convergence due to the large size of updates sent in each
iteration [40]. Based on these considerations, we developed a
distributed approach using integrated sequential client updates. B. Active Federated Learning
In this approach, each client has access to its own data and In this work, we employ the commonly used Federated
updates the global embedding model locally, using its entire Averaging (FedAvg) [33] training method, where the client
corpus. The client sends the updated global model back to the models are weighted by their dataset size and averaged to
 Pn ||Dti ||
server, which acts as a trusted central coordinator. The clients update the globalPn model as follows: G t = t
 i=1 ||D || × W t
 i,
apply their updates sequentially, in a round robin fashion, over where ||D || =
 t t
 i=1 ||Di ||. The local training on each client
multiple iterations. This method still requires a common word is carried out using a Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFNN)
(i.e., token) vocabulary. To address this, clients send their model based on our feature representation.
token frequencies to the trusted server in a pre-processing Training supervised models such as FFNN requires labeled
phase. The server aggregates these frequencies, determines a data, a known challenge in cyber security [31] where the
lower bound (e.g., all tokens appearing more than once), and vast majority of data available in real-world deployments is
returns the resulting global vocabulary to each client. unlabeled. Furthermore, existing defenses that might work well
 To avoid the need for vocabulary sharing, FastText embed- on previously seen attacks often fail at detecting new emerging
dings can be used instead of Word2Vec. FastText represents threats, making it particularly challenging to get accurate
tokens as character n-grams (i.e., sequences of n characters), labels of malicious activity on a network. To address these conwhich can be constructed independently by any participant, cerns, we integrate an active learning component into CELEST
including the server, from publicly available datasets to pre- with the goal of augmenting the ground truth of malicious
serve privacy. In this approach, the set of n-grams is derived activities incrementally at each iteration of the training phase.
deterministically from a predefined public corpus, and both Thus, the global model’s detection capabilities improve in a
the server and clients apply the same preprocessing proce- streaming fashion, similar to online learning where true class
dure to generate an identical n-gram vocabulary and aligned labels of new incoming samples are usually unknown [41].
embedding indices prior to training. Alternatively, the central This approach fits particularly well with federated learning,
server can generate the vocabulary and indices from the corpus which is designed for continuous training over time, and thus
and distribute them to clients to ensure consistency. Once can account for malware evolution over time. To the best of our
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10439

 stealthy attacks. We assume the human analysts make the
 correct labeling decision, and note that learning from noisy
 labels is an extensively studied ML topic on its own, not
 specific to our system [46], [47].
 We demonstrate in our evaluation section that active federated learning can be very powerful in some scenarios, even
 when starting the FL training process with zero labels. Our
 anomaly detection module uses the well-known Isolation Forest algorithm [48]; however other anomaly detection methods
 such as local outlier factor (LOF) [49], one-class support
 vector machines (SVM) [50], and clustering [51] can also
 be employed. To increase resilience, we train an ensemble
 of Isolation Forest models on multiple time windows, where
 each time window corresponds to one FL iteration (time step).
Fig. 3. The Active Federated Learning framework. At time step t, the global Specifically, given a client i, the anomaly detector is trained
model Gt is used to rank the unlabeled data of client i. In addition, an anomaly on unlabeled data from the previous k time windows (i.e., the
detector is used to rank the remaining unlabeled data samples by their anomaly
 i , . . . Di ), while anomaly detection is carried out
 datasets Dt−k t−1
score. The top-ranked samples are investigated and labeled by a human expert
and used in the next iterations. on the current time window t (i.e., the dataset Dti ). For instance,
 a good trade-off between speed and performance was reached
 in our experiments at k = 3.
knowledge, CELEST is the first threat detection system using
active learning in a federated method of training with limited C. Resiliency to Poisoning Attacks
labeled data. Several strategies for selecting instances to be Due to its distributed nature, federated learning is vulnerable
labeled in active learning have been previously explored, such to adversarial manipulation by malicious or compromised
as random sampling, uncertainty sampling [42], expected error clients. Poisoning attacks that corrupt the training data [52] or
reduction [43], and variance reduction [44]. In our case, we are the client model updates [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] have been
interested in expanding the malicious ground truth, therefore an important attack vector studied in recent years. CELEST
we combine both uncertainty sampling and anomaly detection might be vulnerable to either data poisoning attacks, in which
in a hybrid approach for sampling the most suspicious HTTP the logs collected by compromised clients are under adversarlog events to be investigated, as proposed by prior work [45]. ial control, or model poisoning attacks, in which malicious
 Figure 3 illustrates the Active Federated Learning mecha- clients might send arbitrary model updates to the central
nism. At time step t, the global model Gt is used to rank the aggregator.
unlabeled data of client i. In addition, an anomaly detector is Existing defenses against poisoning attacks in federated
used to rank the remaining unlabeled data samples by their learning can be classified as: (i) defenses that limit the
anomaly score. The top-ranked samples are investigated and contribution of each client to the global model [20] or perform
labeled by a security analyst and used in the next iterations. anomaly detection to remove specific client updates [53], [54],
In real deployments, the labeling can be partially automated [55]; (ii) defenses against backdoor poisoning that detect and
using threat intelligence to reduce the workload on human mitigate the presence of a trigger backdoor [56], [57]; (iii)
experts. We consider a small budget b of samples that are defenses that leverage a trusted dataset at the server to filter
investigated and labeled by a human expert at one of the malicious updates [58]. We are interested in developing a
participating organizations i, and time step t. The first strategy general defense against both data and model poisoning attacks
consists of using the global model Gt , represented by a Feed- that leverages the specifics of our threat detection setting.
Forward Neural Network classifier, to evaluate and rank the 1) DTrust Design: We propose a novel defense algorithm
unlabeled dataset; the most suspicious b/2 samples are then called DTrust (Distributed Trust), with the goal of training a
investigated and labeled by a security analyst. These are likely resilient federated model in the presence of poisoning attacks.
similar to previously seen malicious samples. The second We introduce a novel distributed scheme of bootstrapping
strategy consists of using a local anomaly detection module trust, in which the clients take an active role in detecting
to rank the remaining unlabeled data according to an anomaly poisoning attacks. This approach is particularly suited for
scoring method; the most anomalous b/2 samples are then our threat model, where the clients are organizations (rather
investigated and labeled by a security analyst. The second than IoT devices or individual machines), and therefore have
strategy identifies anomalous logs that could augment the enough resources to actively participate in defense. DTrust
ground truth with new attack samples not seen in training fully exploits the distributed nature of FL, in contrast to
before. The combination of the two strategies is critical for previous trust-based schemes that rely on the server to detect
CELEST’s ability to detect attacks with very limited ground adversarial attempts, such as ERR, LFR [21], and FLTrust
truth. The samples labeled malicious are added back to the [58].
training dataset of client i and used in the next iterations of Each client i interested in participating in CELEST’s DTrust
federated learning. We focus on labeling malicious samples defense maintains a small dataset DTi rust called the trust
only, as some adversarial actions might look benign during dataset. Multiple clients use their locally available data DTi rust ,
10440 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

which includes locally collected and verified malicious and a) Leave one client m out and aggregate a global
benign samples covering a variety of attack behavior. Each model G0 without m’s latest updates after tbest .
client tracks the global model performance on this dataset, b) Evaluate the global model G0 on the trust dataset.
and shares it with the server upon detecting performance c) Compute the loss impact caused by client m as
 L−L0 0
degradation. The server leverages publicly available tools (e.g., L0 , where L, L represent the loss of the global
VirusTotal, third-party threat intelligence platforms, etc.) to model with and without client m, respectively.
ensure that the trust datasets are clean. For instance, the d) If the loss impact exceeds a certain threshold,
trust dataset could contain command-and-control traffic to conclude that client m may be poisoned, remove
a domain that has a high score on VirusTotal. Such tools it from the set of clients, and revert the model to
may not be readily available in other application domains exclude its updates. Communicate the observation
(e.g., image classification, human activity recognition, etc.) with client m to investigate the incident.
[58], making this approach particularly feasible for our cyber
security setting. IV. E VALUATION
 DTrust addresses major challenges present in our setting Datasets. We evaluate our system on several data sources.
through a series of design choices. We next describe potential Each client organization participating in CELEST maintains a
challenges and key insights that ensure DTrust’s correct and labeled set of malicious and benign samples. We use traffic
efficient operation: from the two university networks as benign data and employ
 various malicious data sources for different experiments, as
 • Malicious clients reporting false information: To counter
 explained below. Similar to previous research using data
 false reporting, the server ensures that the trust dataset is
 reduction [10], [12], we filter the datasets based on domain
 “clean”, i.e., verifiable via publicly available tools.
 popularity using Tranco [59] to exclude top 10,000 domains.
 • Attacker gradually shifting the model: The server main-
 This filtering is not expected to affect the detection results,
 tains a history of intermediary global models and
 since the malicious connections from the malware datasets had
 compares the potentially malicious model against the
 no matches in Tranco’s most popular domains.
 history. The server is thus able to detect repeated model
 (A) University Network Dataset: We obtained access to
 shifts that cumulatively push the performance degrada-
 HTTP logs from two large university networks. The networks
 tion, and roll back to earlier versions. This approach
 contain an average of 20 and 9 million HTTP log events
 increases DTrust’s resilience to stealthy poisoning attacks
 per day, respectively, and were used actively during the data
 that happen across multiple training time steps.
 collection period. Sensitive fields in the logs (such as internal
 • Performance impact: The impact is minimal, as the server
 IP addresses and URL parameter values) are anonymized in a
 maintains a history of intermediary models, and does not
 consistent manner to protect users’ personal information. We
 re-train upon detection.
 performed all our analysis on servers within the university
 2) DTrust Algorithm: When a client receives the global network. The IRB office at one of the universities reviewed
model Gt from the server, it evaluates the model on its trust our data collection process and determined that this research
dataset. In our implementation, we use the cross-entropy loss does not qualify as Human Subject Research. However, our
metric L, although other performance metrics could also be team members participated in IRB training and used best
used (e.g., error rate, PR-AUC score, F1-score). The loss practices to handle network data. We remove the most popular
impact at client i is defined as L−L Tranco [59] domains and external domains contacted more
 Lmin , where L, Lmin are the
 min

current loss and the minimum loss across previous iterations, than 10,000 times from this dataset. Both sets of domains are
respectively. If the loss impact exceeds a threshold T , then the unlikely to serve malware, and a similar methodology was
client notifies the server and sends: (1) the iteration number used in previous work for data reduction [10], [12]. After
tbest of the previous best-performing global model, and (2) its filtering the traffic, we have between 1,900 and 31,000 logs
trust dataset DTi rust . per 30-minute time interval.
 The server maintains a history database H, containing: (1) We used several methods to ensure that the university
the previous global models G1 , . . ., Gt−1 , and (2) the most datasets are largely benign. Both institutions had operational
recent k model updates Wit−k , · · · , Wit−1 received from each Security Operations Centers (SOCs), network IDS and monclient i. When the server is notified of a large performance itoring tools in place at the time of data collection to detect
degradation by client i, it uses i’s trust dataset to investigate and respond to threats. In collaboration with their IT teams,
whose client updates have caused a significant performance we reviewed security alerts and excluded any traffic associated
drop, as follows: with known incidents from the dataset. We also queried Virus-
 Total for samples identified with anomaly detection during
 1) Confirm that the trust dataset DTi rust sent by client i is experimentation to remove known malicious samples from the
 legitimate, i.e., that it contains malicious samples that dataset. We acknowledge the possibility that some undetected
 can be verified using threat intelligence tools. malicious activity may remain in the unlabeled data. However,
 2) Validate that the global model at tbest , i.e., Gtbest , performs this reflects the realities of operational environments, where
 well on the trust dataset, whereas the current model is datasets are rarely perfectly clean. Our evaluation focuses on
 significantly worse. assessing detection performance across specific attack classes,
 3) Run the following loop to investigate each client m: which remains valid even under these conditions.
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10441

 (B) Network IDS logs (NIDS) In one of the university to the federated FastText method. This result implies that the
networks, a commercial off-the-shelf network IDS is available, embedding method generalizes better at detecting a larger
and alerts for potentially malicious events are collected in number of malware samples, which can evade the lexical
real time. We have access to the historical samples, and features. We further demonstrate the benefit of additional
we collect malicious domains and IP addresses from the features (e.g., the IP address, referer and user agent) extracted
malware-callback alerts. We process 28,985 alerts, containing from HTTP logs to augment the URL embeddings.
9,124 unique requests and 687 unique hosts (domain and IP
addresses). We use the collected indicators to match and label A. Federated Models Vs Local and Centralized Models
connections in each network as malicious during the training In this section, we investigate how a network can benefit
period. from federated training when a new malware has been pre-
 (C) IoT Malware Dataset (Mirai, Gafgyt) We collect a viously detected in one of the collaborating networks, but is
dataset of IoT malware (Mirai and Gafgyt) from CyberI- seen locally for the first time. We design experiments to use
oCs, VirusTotal, VirusShare, and malicious samples shared by different malware families in the two networks during training,
Alrawi et al. [60]. We build a dynamic analysis framework to and show how the global model helps with detection of a
execute the malware in a sandboxed environment in order to malware family seen for the first time in one of the networks.
collect the HTTP logs for each malware family. In total, we In particular, we generate a set of controlled experiments with
use 300 malware samples from each family, containing 20,627 the two university networks as clients. We merge malware
and 13,889 HTTP events. traces from the three families (Mirai, Gafgyt, and DEM) in
 (D) Data Exfiltration Malware Dataset (DEM) Borto- both networks to determine the performance of the local and
lameotti et al. [9] collected HTTP logs for data exfiltration global models under multiple scenarios. We split each malware
malware samples in a sandbox and released the dataset. This family into 80% samples for training and 20% for testing, and
dataset contains multiple malware families: Shakti, FareIT, distribute them to the networks across rounds.
CosmicDuke, Ursnif, Pony, Spyware, and SpyEye, and has 1) Knowledge Transfer Performance: Table I shows the
more variability. We use a total of 79 malware samples PR-AUC of the global models trained with federated learning
containing 8,843 HTTP events from this dataset. Over the and the local model in various settings. The results show
course of several experiments, we merge the traffic of IoT and the improvements achieved by the global model, which suc-
DEM malware at training and testing time to create controlled cessfully transfers the detection from one network to other
experiments with known ground truth of malicious activities. participating clients. For example, when Mirai and DEM
 Implementation. We implemented the system in Python malware families are used for training at UNI-1 and UNI-
3.8, and used Keras [61] and TensorFlow Federated [62] for 2, respectively, the federated model achieves a PR-AUC of
federated training. We use the Gensim framework [63] for 0.75 at detecting DEM in UNI-1, a significant improvement
training embedding models. over the local model’s 0.26 PR-AUC. Similarly, at UNI-2, the
 Hyper-parameters. The neural network hyper-parameters global model achieves a PR-AUC of 0.87, compared to the
are selected after a grid search. We use a single hidden layer of local model’s PR-AUC of 0.54 at detecting Mirai. In other
size 128, and a dropout layer with rate 0.1 and learning rate of cases, malware families share some common characteristics,
0.01. Federated learning updates happen within rounds, and we which aids with local detection. In the case of Mirai and
set the duration of a round to t = 30 minutes worth of data. At Gafgyt, a local model that trains on Mirai and later attempts
this frequency, we expect less impact from the communication to detect Gafgyt (or the other way around) performs relatively
overhead. In real-world deployments, communication costs well (at 0.87-0.9 PR-AUC). Nonetheless, the global model
can vary significantly depending on factors such as network outperforms it consistently, achieving a PR-AUC of about
infrastructure, client hardware, and bandwidth availability. We 0.93-0.95. We also present the false positive rate, an important
recognize the importance of this trade-off. In future work, metric in any detection system in a high-volume domain such
a real-world deployment scenario could be used to assess as network traffic, where investigating a high number of alerts
the impact of varying the communication frequency on both is costly. With a recall of 0.9, the global model maintains
performance and efficiency. consistently low false positive rates, ranging from 0.002 to
 Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate our system using Preci- 0.01.
sion and Recall metrics, as our dataset is also imbalanced. We 2) Learning Progress Over Rounds of Training: Figure 4
measure the performance with Precision-Recall Area Under shows the progress during federated training for two of the
Curve (PR-AUC), a single metric that captures the perfor- experiments. As more training data is consumed, the PRmance across all thresholds. We also use False Positive Rate AUC steadily improves and the global model outperforms
(FPR) as an important metric for the models to be deployed the local model in less than 10 iterations (5 hours worth of
in a real-world setting. data), illustrating a clear performance gain with the federated
 Feature Set Investigation. We compare different URL rep- model. This demonstrates a clear advantage in leveraging
resentation methods: embeddings-based features constructed federated learning despite non-IID client data. Network traffic
in federated and centralized settings, as well as lexical features distributions also fluctuate on each client over time; however,
[7]. Federated embedding models provide similar performance the model continually improves until convergence.
to the centralized models, and the lexical feature representation 3) Comparison With Centralized Training: In addition, we
performs worse on our data, with 10% lower recall compared performed experiments to compare the federated model’s
10442 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF THE F EDERATED M ODEL AND THE L OCALLY T RAINED M ODELS FOR D ETECTING M ALWARE FAMILIES IN M ULTIPLE S CENARIOS W ITH
 D IFFERENT T RAINING S ETS . E ACH ROW S HOWS THE T RAINING M ALWARE FAMILY IN E ACH N ETWORK , AND THE PR-AUC FOR D ETECTING
 THE M ALWARE T HAT I S N OT L OCALLY S EEN D URING T RAINING . T HE R ESULTS S HOW THE PR-AUC I MPROVEMENTS OF THE G LOBAL
 M ODELS C OMPARED TO L OCALLY T RAINED M ODELS AND THE L OW FPR OF THE G LOBAL M ODELS

 TABLE II
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN THE C ENTRALIZED
 M ODEL T RAINED ON AGGREGATED DATA F ROM B OTH U NIVER -
 SITY N ETWORKS AND THE F EDERATED MODEL . T HE F EDERATED
 M ODEL ACHIEVES P ERFORMANCE C LOSE TO THE C EN -
 TRALIZED BASELINE . B OTH M ODELS S HOW S IGNIFICANT
 I MPROVEMENT OVER THE L OCALLY T RAINED M ODEL
 T HAT R ELIES ON DATA F ROM A S INGLE N ETWORK
 (UNI-2)

Fig. 4. Federated model progress for detecting malware families over multiple
iterations evaluated on the two networks. The two sites are seeing a new model will not detect a completely new attack that has not been
malware for the first time (DEM at UNI-1 and Gafgyt at UNI-2) and attempt
to detect it with their own local model and with the federated model. Each
 observed in either of the participating clients in training. To
iteration processes 30 minutes of data, and the global model exceeds the local overcome this challenge, we propose extending the federated
model’s performance in less than 10 iterations. learning framework with an active learning component that
 integrates a local anomaly detection module (Section III-B).
accuracy to a centralized model that used the training We design a challenging scenario to test the detection
data from both networks. We observed similar performance capabilities of active federated learning. The two university
between the federated model and the centralized model in mul- networks start training the global model using NIDS alerts
tiple scenarios, with a slight edge for the centralized model, as known to be malicious, but without using the malicious labels
expected. For instance, in one scenario, the federated model’s to simulate a situation when clients are infected with unknown
PR-AUC was 0.95, while the centralized model had 0.97 PR- malware. Thus, we merge the unlabeled malware logs from
AUC. Table II shows the detection performance comparison the three malware families (Mirai, Gafgyt, and DEM) into
between the centralized model trained on aggregated data from the client networks. We test whether the anomaly detection
the client networks and the federated model. Both models module identifies some of the malicious samples in the local
improve strongly on the locally trained model relying on a networks, and, furthermore, if the federated model with active
single network. We also include the maximum F1 score in learning is able to detect these unknown malware attacks when
our evaluation, to reflect the best possible trade-off between no labeled data from these families is initially available in
precision and recall. We acknowledge that the choice of training. For the anomaly detection module, we train Isolation
threshold used to calculate the F1 score may vary depending Forest models on HTTP logs on k previous time windows of 30
on the investigation resources available to each organization minutes each, and use an ensemble of these models to detect
and the desired balance between precision and recall. anomalies within the current time window. We set k = 3, after
 experimenting with multiple values of k. We vary the budget
 used in investigation between 0 (which results in the federated
B. Active Federated Learning model without active learning) and 500.
 We showed how federated learning can transfer knowledge Table III shows the PR-AUC of detecting each of the three
about malware observed in some networks to detect attacks malware families as a function of the investigation budget.
seen for the first time in other networks. However, the global As expected, for a budget of 0, the global model performs
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10443

 TABLE III
ACTIVE F EDERATED L EARNING AT D IFFERENT B UDGETS F ROM 0 TO
 500 IN A C HALLENGING S CENARIO W HERE N ONE OF THE M ALWARE
 FAMILIES I S L ABELED IN T RAINING . W E S HOW THE PR-AUC
 FOR D ETECTING E ACH M ALWARE FAMILY AT E ACH U NI -
 VERSITY N ETWORK . T HE F EDERATED M ODEL W ITHOUT
 ACTIVE L EARNING (B UDGET 0) C ANNOT I DENTIFY
 N EW M ALWARE (T OP ROW ). T HE ACTIVE L EARN -
 ING C OMPONENT ACHIEVES H IGHER PR-AUC AT
 L ARGER B UDGETS , AND G ETS C LOSE TO THE
 M ODEL T RAINED W ITH A LL L ABELED
 DATA (L AST ROW )
 Fig. 5. Poisoning Attacks: Global model performance progress with various
 attack strategies, and no defense. We compare the ‘no poisoning’ baseline, the
 label flipping attack with m malicious clients, and a stronger ‘weight boosting’
 attack. Poisoning starts at iteration 20. Increasing the number of helper clients
 h improves detection: h = 1 (left) and h = 5 (right).

 state-of-the-art model poisoning attacks via boosting [19],
 [20], [64], which amplify or boost the weight updates of the
 poisoned clients to maximize the attack impact. The model
 poisoning attack is much stronger than data poisoning, as it
 allows the malicious clients to control the model updates. We
 study three poisoning scenarios with specific HTTP attacks:
 (1) Data exfiltration activity to the C2 server from Cosmicpoorly at detecting these completely new malware families
 Duke (part of our DEM dataset) [65]; (2) ThinkPHP exploit
(e.g., PR-AUC 0.19 at detecting Mirai at UNI-1) without
 observed in Mirai [66]; and (3) a home-router attack with
active learning. Active learning used in federated training
 device update behavior from Gafgyt [67]. In these experisignificantly helps detect new malware; as we increase the
 ments, we consider a total of c = 30 clients, and vary the
budget for investigation, the PR-AUC also increases, and with
 number m of malicious clients, as well as the number h of
a budget of 500 samples it reaches a PR-AUC of 0.87 in the
 helper clients. We run the training for 48 iterations (one day
same experiment for detecting Mirai.
 of data, with 30-min long iterations), and start the poisoning
 We also trained the active learning system with sample
 activity at the 20th iteration.
selection using only the anomaly detection module (without
 In Figure 5, we show the impact of poisoning during the data
the classifier). This setup identified fewer samples per round
 exfiltration attack, when no defense is employed. We make the
(since it did not incorporate any samples selected by the
 following observations: First, we note that the success of the
classifier), and the detection performance was slightly worse.
 label flipping attack increases with more poisoning clients m,
For instance, using both anomaly detection and the highly
 as expected. Second, the global model is more resilient against
ranked samples generated by the classifier resulted in an
 poisoning attacks when more helper clients are contributing
increase of 11% PR-AUC compared to using only the anomaly
 with locally seen attack patterns. With only one helper, a
detection module for detecting DEM. This result shows that
 single malicious client is sufficient to decrease model accuracy
both components for sample selection contribute to the success
 substantially over time (left figure, with boosting); however,
of active federated learning.
 when five helpers participate in the global model, the attacker
 needs to compromise as many as five clients for an equivalent
C. Resiliency Against Poisoning performance degradation (right figure, with boosting). Third,
 In this section, we evaluate CELEST’s resiliency against we note that model boosting attacks are significantly more
poisoning attacks, where a number of malicious clients try effective than label flipping attacks, reaching a PR-AUC of
to impact the global model to evade detection of a specific 0.11 in both experimental settings (i.e., left and right figures)
malware pattern. In our threat model, clients belong to one in only 10 and 6 iterations (after poisoning had started),
of the following three categories: (1) poisoning clients that respectively.
try to inject a specific malicious pattern; (2) helper clients, In Figure 6, we explore possible defenses against the model
which have observed this specific malicious behavior before; boosting attack; we showed in Figure 5 how this attack is
their dataset contains correctly labeled data related to the particularly damaging, due to its ability to directly manipulate
malicious patterns; (3) other benign clients that have not seen the model weights. We compare the ‘no defense’ baseline with:
the specific poisoning activity before. The helper clients are (1) the weight clipping technique, a state-of-the-art defense
instrumental in sharing their knowledge through the global where the model updates are reduced to the clipping norm
model to increase resilience against adversarial actions. [19], [20], [64]; (2) our DTrust algorithm; and (3) a hybrid
 We compare the ‘no poisoning’ baseline with: (1) a data defense consisting of DTrust + weight clipping. We used clean
poisoning attack based on label flipping, where a number training updates to determine the clipping bound parameter
of malicious clients m change the label of malicious data as 0.1, after observing that lower values significantly hinder
to benign while computing the local model updates, and (2) the main task accuracy. The plot on the right (m = 5, h = 5)
10444 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
 W E C OMPARE THE RUNTIME P ERFORMANCE OF L OCALLY TRAINED ,
 CENTRALIZED , AND F EDERATED M ODELS OVER A F ULL DAY OF
 TRAINING , C OMPRISING 48 ROUNDS IN THE F EDERATED SETUP.
 F EDERATED T RAINING P ROVES M ORE E FFICIENT T HAN C EN -
 TRALIZED TRAINING . W HILE THE A DDITION OF THE
 DT RUST D EFENSE I NCREASES C OMPUTATIONAL OVER -
 HEAD , I TS RUNTIME R EMAINS C OMPARABLE TO
 T HAT OF THE C ENTRALIZED MODEL

Fig. 6. Defenses: Global model performance progress when various defenses
have been employed against the strongest attack from Figure 5 (weight boosting). DTrust successfully recovers from the poisoning attack, outperforming
the ‘no defense’ baseline and the ‘clipping’ defense significantly.

 TABLE IV
OVERVIEW OF THE P OISONING E XPERIMENTS FOR T HREE S CENARIOS
 A FTER O NE DAY OF T RAINING IN A 30-C LIENT S ETTING .T HE T RAIN -
 ING FAMILY I S THE M AIN TASK T HAT A LL C LIENTS T RAIN ON . W E
 RUN THE W EIGHT B OOSTING ATTACK W ITH m = 5 M ALICIOUS
 round processes data collected over a fixed 30-minute window.
 C LIENTS , AND h = 5 H ELPERS .O UR DT RUST D EFENSE Clients prepare and train on their local datasets during this
 R EACHES PR-AUC S CORES C LOSE TO THE C LEAN interval, then send updates to the server at the end of the
 M ODEL BY D ETECTING THE P OISONING ACTIVITY IN
 L ESS T HAN 4 I TERATIONS IN A LL T HREE C ASES
 round. This design standardizes timing across clients and
 provides a consistent approximation of real-world computational demand. In multi-client settings, dataset preparation,
 which includes data loading and feature extraction, can be
 parallelized to reduce overall runtime. Regarding the defense
 mechanism against data poisoning, we observed minimal (8%)
 computational overhead overall. The defense involves clients
 performing inference on the global model using a fixed evaluademonstrates that the clipping technique alone is not sufficient tion set, without additional training. Server-side cost increases
to mitigate the impact of poisoning, as the PR-AUC still drops only when a poisoning investigation is triggered, in which case
to 0.11 eventually during this strong attack. Our proposed the server runs inference for each client. Given the limited
defense, DTrust, starts to investigate the client updates after the number of participating clients in our setup, this added cost
global model PR-AUC deteriorates by more than 10%. DTrust remains negligible. However, this cost may be significant in
identifies the malicious clients and removes their updates from other applications of federated learning scenarios involving a
the global model. The training continues with the benign large number of devices. Overall, our implementation mainclients, and the performance recovers over time. Eventually, tains computational efficiency while integrating defenses, and
DTrust reaches 0.93 PR-AUC, similar to the ‘no poisoning’ we believe the added overhead is minimal and scalable in
case. DTrust can be used as a standalone defense, or in small-to-medium federated deployments.
combination with clipping (with similar results). CELEST
is also effective in other poisoning scenarios with different
 V. D ISCUSSION AND E XTENSIONS
HTTP attacks. Table IV summarizes the poisoning impact for
the three attacks after one day of training, and presents the In this paper, we showed that global models that leverage
mitigation results. DTrust detects the poisoning activity in less coordinated detection across multiple participating organizathan 4 iterations in each case. Furthermore, DTrust enables tions perform better at detecting malware threats compared to
poisoned models to recover and reach close to the accuracy local models that only rely on limited local data. Federated
of the models trained on clean data. learning is often able to expose new attacks, which are
 In Table V, we compare the runtime performance of locally largely invisible to individual organizations. FL is particularly
trained, centralized, and federated models over a full day effective when used in conjunction with active learning, which
of training, comprising 48 rounds in the federated setup on progressively enhances the labeled dataset used in training
a single server. Centralized aggregation of multiple datasets with new malicious samples. When deployed on two university
leads to higher data preparation and training times compared networks, CELEST was able to detect new malicious activity
to federated training. In federated learning experiments, the and identify evasive adversarial activity in real time.
computational cost is primarily on the client side. The server Real-world Deployment. Active learning adds a major
performs only simple model weight aggregation, contributing boost to the malware detection capabilities of a federated
minimally to the total training time. Local training and dataset learning framework. Through the anomaly detection module
preparation dominate the computation cost. We use the Tensor- integrated with the classifier that progressively improves its
Flow Federated framework, which simulates federated learning detection, CELEST can discover and learn the behavior of
without modeling actual network latency. While communica- completely new attacks for which no labeled data is available.
tion overhead is a critical factor in real-world deployments, Our current framework uses a generic anomaly detector (Isoit is not captured in our simulations. Each federated learning lation Forest); however, in order to tap into its full potential,
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10445

a more sophisticated anomaly detector specifically designed patterns, while maintaining high accuracy on clean data. Such
for HTTP logs can be used. We showed in the evaluation attacks have been shown to be feasible in both federated
that active learning can be effective even at small budgets learning [19], [75] and centralized malware classifiers [76],
of samples investigated and labeled by security analysts. We often bypassing standard defenses. In the case of DTrust,
note that periodic training is necessary in order to learn the defense relies on each client’s trusted validation dataset
changing patterns in background traffic, as well as to discover to evaluate global model updates. If these datasets lack the
and incorporate new attack behaviors in the model. Another specific trigger pattern, a backdoor may evade detection. We
interesting extension is to support P2P architectures, where leave the experimental evaluation of stealthy backdoor attacks
a group of autonomous peers jointly train a common model in federated malware-URL detection as an important direction
without using a trusted server. A decentralized FL approach for future work.
avoids having a single point-of-failure and several designs Resilience to Evasion. We performed a case study designed
have been proposed [68], [69], [70]. In addition, differential to emulate an adversarial evasion strategy, in which the
privacy techniques can be applied for the federated setting adversary rotates both its C2 domain and IP infrastructure
[71] to further protect client updates and mitigate the risk of to evade detection. We showed that CELEST is still able
information leakage. to detect the malware attack when faced with this evasion
 HTTPS traffic. While CELEST is designed to detect method. CELEST’s resilience can be attributed to two main
HTTP malicious communication, an interesting challenge is factors: the large number of features used for training the
encrypted malicious communication over HTTPS. Currently, federated model, and the participation of multiple clients. Still,
HTTPS is not utilized by most malware due to the additional a motivated attacker might be able to coordinate its behavior
complexity in managing the certificates [72], but we expect and generate traffic that looks normal across all participating
that HTTPS usage will increase in the future. There are sev- clients to evade detection. We believe evasion is more difficult
eral avenues for handling malicious encrypted communication in a federated setting than in a local system trained within a
in CELEST. First, security proxies are commonly used in single organization.
enterprise networks and CDNs to decrypt communication over
HTTPS [73]. These proxies act as man-in-the-middle agents
in TLS communication, making it possible to decrypt and VI. R ELATED W ORK
inspect otherwise encrypted data in order to detect malware,
data breaches, and policy violations. For such cases, CELEST A. Malicious URL And Domain Detection
will have access to all the fields available in the decrypted A large body of work has looked at URL-based detection
traffic, and can operate seamlessly. Second, if the traffic is not [6], [7], [38], [39], [77], [78], [79] and domain-based detection
decrypted by proxies, CELEST would have access to limited [4], [5], [80], [81], [82] of malicious traffic. Some of these
information, but we verified that the system still performs well studies focus on one type of malware like phishing [78]
when only a subset of features is available. The overall system or spam [77], [79] in social media contexts, while others
architecture is still applicable with a reduced feature set, and attempt to capture a larger set of malware behaviors, e.g,
incorporating other types of security logs (e.g., DNS logs, Mamun et al. [7] group malicious URLs into categories like
connection logs, firewalls logs) would be beneficial to expand spam, phishing, malware, and defacement URLs using public
the feature list. We leave a detailed investigation of HTTPS datasets. Previous studies employ various techniques to detect
communication detection as future work. malicious URL and domains. These include lexical features
 Other types of malware. While our current implementation generated from bag-of-words representation [6], behavioral
is tailored to detecting HTTP-based malicious activity, the analysis [77], DNS data analysis [4], [82], webpage content
underlying framework is modular and can be adapted to analysis combined with some URL and domain properties
analyze other types of network traffic or malware behaviors, [79], [80], and deep learning methods [7], [38], [39], [78],
such as those using different protocols or operating in different [81].
domains. Extending the framework would mainly involve
adjusting the feature extraction process to accommodate the
characteristics of new types of traffic or malware classes.
 Resilience to Poisoning. Other studies have proposed to use B. Malicious Http-Based Detection
a trust dataset [58] which resides on the server and is used Efforts on malware detection in this area have focused on
to remove outlier updates or correct the model. In contrast, HTTP-based detection using web-proxy logs [8], [10], [11],
we employ a distributed trust bootstrapping approach where [12], [13], [28] and HTTP-based application fingerprinting [9],
each client has its own trust dataset and actively participates [29], [30]. Machine learning detection methods on HTTP logs
in defense. We note that federated learning with privacy- attempt to detect malware activity within a single network
preserving aggregation does not allow inspection of individual by training supervised classification models locally on labeled
updates from the clients [74]. Our defense can be modified data available in that network [8], [10], [12], [13]. In other
to simply revert to a previous model, but identification of approaches, Nelms et al. [11] use control protocol templates
malicious clients would not be possible in this case. derived from labeled samples to detect new C2 domain names,
 Another important class of threats in our setting is stealthy while Bortolameotti et al. [9] use application fingerprinting
backdoor attacks where an adversary embeds targeted mis- techniques for clustering HTTP connections in order to detect
classification behavior triggered by rare or carefully crafted anomalous traffic.
10446 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

C. Federated Learning For Cyber Security Development Command Army Research Laboratory or the
 Federated learning has been proposed for enhancing cyber U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to
security in various settings including mobile phones [83], reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes
Internet-Of-Things [84], [85], and cloud ecosystems [86]. notwithstanding any copyright notation here on. This project
Khramtsova et al. [37] study federated learning approaches was also funded by NSF under grant CNS-1717634.
to malicious URL detection in order to show the benefit of
sharing information about local detections. Zhao et al. [87] R EFERENCES
propose multi-task network anomaly detection using federated
learning. Fereidooni et al. [16] propose federated learning [1] Symantec. (2017). What You Need to Know About the WannaCry Ransomware. [Online]. Available: https://symantec-blogs.broadcom.com/
to enable effective cyber-risk intelligence sharing for mobile blogs/threat-intelligence/wannacry-ransomware-attack
devices. Several studies have looked at poisoning attacks [2] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th
against federated learning [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [52], USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1093–1110.
 [3] L. Invernizzi et al., “Nazca: Detecting malware distribution in large-
[75], [88], [89], [90]. Fang et al. [21] proposed a general scale networks,” in Proc. 21st Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.
framework of local model poisoning attacks, which can be (NDSS), 2014, pp. 688–703.
applied to optimize the attacks for any given aggregation rule. [4] L. Bilge, S. Sen, D. Balzarotti, E. Kirda, and C. Kruegel, “Exposure: A
 passive DNS analysis service to detect and report malicious domains,”
Bagdasaryan et al. [19] have formulated adversarial poisoning ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1–28, Apr. 2014.
as a two-task optimization problem that has high accuracy [5] R. D. Silva, M. Nabeel, C. Elvitigala, I. Khalil, T. Yu, and C. Keppion both the main and backdoor tasks. Previously proposed tiyagama, “Compromised or attacker-owned: A large scale classification
 and study of hosting domains of malicious URLs,” in Proc. 30th
defenses against poisoning in FL perform anomaly detection USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3721–3738.
on client updates [53], [54], [55], are specific to backdoor [6] J. Ma, L. K. Saul, S. Savage, and G. M. Voelker, “Beyond blacklists:
attacks [56], [57], or leverage a trusted dataset at the server Learning to detect malicious Web sites from suspicious URLs,” in Proc.
 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jun.
[58]. 2009, pp. 1245–1254.
 [7] M. S. I. Mamun, M. A. Rathore, A. H. Lashkari, N. Stakhanova, and
 VII. C ONCLUSION A. A. Ghorbani, “Detecting malicious URLs using lexical analysis,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2016, pp. 467–482.
 In this paper, we present CELEST, a federated learning [8] K. Bartos, M. Sofka, and V. Franc, “Optimized invariant representation
framework for collaborative threat detection. CELEST lever- of network traffic for detecting unseen malware variants,” in Proc. 25th
ages a distributed machine learning architecture in which USENIX Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 807–822.
 [9] R. Bortolameotti et al., “DECANTeR: Detection of anomalous outbound
multiple participating organizations train a global model used HTTP traffic by passive application fingerprinting,” in Proc. 33rd Annu.
for HTTP-based malware detection. Using a novel active learn- Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2017, pp. 373–386.
ing component, CELEST progressively improves its detection [10] X. Hu et al., “BAYWATCH: Robust beaconing detection to idencapabilities. In addition, we propose DTrust, a new resilient tify infected hosts in large-scale enterprise networks,” in Proc. 46th
 Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw. (DSN), Aug. 2016,
algorithm aimed at defending against data and model poi- pp. 479–490.
soning attacks in distributed settings. We evaluate our system [11] T. Nelms, R. Perdisci, and M. Ahamad, “ExecScent: Mining for
using a variety of malware datasets and demonstrate the power new C&C domains in live networks with adaptive control protocol
 templates,” in Proc. 22nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2013, pp. 589–604.
of knowledge transfer through the globally trained model, [12] A. Oprea, Z. Li, R. Norris, and K. Bowers, “MADE: Security analytics
which enables individual organizations to detect attacks that for enterprise threat detection,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
were largely invisible locally. We deploy the model on two Conf. (ACSAC), Dec. 2018, pp. 124–136.
 [13] A. Oprea, Z. Li, T.-F. Yen, S. H. Chin, and S. Alrwais, “Detection of
large university networks and show that CELEST is able early-stage enterprise infection by mining large-scale log data,” in Proc.
to detect real-world malicious traffic (42 malicious URLs 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., Rio de Janeiro,
and 20 malicious domains). Overall, CELEST is a scalable Brazil, Jun. 2015, pp. 45–56.
 [14] C. Johnson, L. Badger, D. Waltermire, J. Snyder, and C. Skorupka,
and effective proactive threat detection solution that leverages Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, Standard 800-150, National
collaboration across multiple networks to detect emerging Institute of Standards and Technology, Oct. 2016.
cyber threats. [15] C. Wagner, A. Dulaunoy, G. Wagener, and A. Iklody, “MISP: The
 design and implementation of a collaborative threat intelligence sharing
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT platform,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Inf. Sharing Collaborative Security
 (WISCS), 2016, pp. 49–56.
 The authors would like to thank Afsah Anwar, Alastair [16] H. Fereidooni, A. Dmitrienko, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, A.-R. Sadeghi,
Nottingham, Molly Buchanan, Mark Gardner, Jeffry Lang, and F. Madlener, “FedCRI: Federated mobile cyber-risk intelligence,”
 in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–16.
and Jeffrey Collyer for their help throughout the project. [17] V. Mavroeidis and S. Bromander, “Cyber threat intelligence model: An
This research was sponsored by contract number W911NF-18- evaluation of taxonomies, sharing standards, and ontologies within cyber
C0019 with the U.S. Army Contracting Command-Aberdeen threat intelligence,” in Proc. Eur. Intell. Secur. Informat. Conf. (EISIC),
 Sep. 2017, pp. 91–98.
Proving Ground (ACC-APG) and the Defense Advanced [18] W. Tounsi and H. Rais, “A survey on technical threat intelligence
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), W911NF-21-10322, in the age of sophisticated cyber attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 72,
and by the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development pp. 212–233, Jan. 2018.
 [19] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
Command Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
Agreement Number W911NF-13-2-0045 (ARL Cyber Secu- 2020, pp. 2938–2948.
rity CRA (Cyber Research Alliance)). The views contained in [20] Z. Sun, P. Kairouz, A. Theertha Suresh, and H. Brendan McMahan, “Can
 you really backdoor federated learning?,” 2019, arXiv:1911.07963.
this document are those of the authors and should not be inter- [21] S. Lu, R. Li, X. Chen, and Y. Ma, “Defense against local model
preted as representing the official policies, either expressed poisoning attacks to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” Frontiers
or implied, of the ACC-APG, DARPA, Combat Capabilities Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1605–1622, Dec. 2022.
ONGUN et al.: : FEDERATED LEARNING FOR GLOBALLY COORDINATED THREAT DETECTION 10447

[22] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the Byzantine: Opti- [47] J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on classifying big
 mizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning,” in data with label noise,” J. Data Inf. Qual., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1–48, Dec.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1278–1295. 2022.
[23] H. Wang et al., “Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can backdoor [48] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
 federated learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Jun. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 2020, pp. 16070–16084. [49] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identi-
[24] Azeria Labs. (2025). Data Exfiltration Techniques. [Online]. Available: fying density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
 https://azeria-labs.com/data-exfiltration/ pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000.
[25] A. Remillano II and J. Urbanec. (May 2019). New Mirai Variant Uses [50] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
 Multiple Exploits to Target Routers and Other Devices. [Online]. Avail- R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional
 able: https://www.trendmicro.com/enus/research/19/e/new-mirai-variant- distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul. 2001.
 uses-multiple-exploits-to-target-routers-and-other-devices.html [51] R. J. G. B. Campello, D. Moulavi, A. Zimek, and J. Sander,
[26] The Hacker News. (May 2020). HTTP Status Codes Command This “Hierarchical density estimates for data clustering, visualization, and
 Malware How to Control Hacked Systems. [Online]. Available: https:// outlier detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data, vol. 10,
 thehackernews.com/2020/05/malware-http-codes.html no. 1, pp. 1–51, Jul. 2015.
[27] A. K. Sood, S. Zeadally, and R. J. Enbody, “An empirical study [52] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gürsoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
 of HTTP-based financial botnets,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. 25th Eur. Symp.
 Comput., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 236–251, Mar. 2016. Res. Comput. Secur. (ESORICS), 2020, pp. 480–501.
[28] J. McGahagan, D. Bhansali, M. Gratian, and M. Cukier, “A compre- [53] P. Blanchard, E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
 hensive evaluation of HTTP header features for detecting malicious learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in Proc.
 websites,” in Proc. 15th Eur. Dependable Comput. Conf. (EDCC), 2019, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017, pp. 118–128.
 pp. 75–82. [54] E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and S. Rouault, “The hidden vulner-
[29] R. Bortolameotti et al., “HeadPrint: Detecting anomalous communica- ability of distributed learning in byzantium,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf.
 tions through header-based application fingerprinting,” in Proc. 35th Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2018, pp. 3521–3530.
 Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., Mar. 2020, pp. 1696–1705. [55] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust dis-
[30] R. Perdisci, W. Lee, and N. Feamster, “Behavioral clustering of tributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 HTTP-based malware and signature generation using malicious network Mach. Learn., Jul. 2018, pp. 5650–5659.
 traces,” in Proc. 7th USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Design Implement. [56] P. Rieger, T. Duc Nguyen, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DeepSight:
 (NSDI), 2010, p. 26. Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated learning through deep model
[31] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine inspection,” 2022, arXiv:2201.00763.
 learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. [57] T. D. Nguyen {et al.}, “FLAME: Taming backdoors in federated
 Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316. learning,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security),
[32] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,” 2022, pp. 1415–1432.
 Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–210, 2021. [58] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “FLTrust: Byzantine-robust
[33] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in Proc. 28th Annu. Netw.
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2021, pp. 1260–1277.
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, A. Singh [59] V. Le Pochat, T. Van Goethem, S. Tajalizadehkhoob, M. Korczynski,
 and J.Zhu., Eds., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. and W. Joosen, “Tranco: A research-oriented top sites ranking hardened
 against manipulation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2019,
[34] J. Bhatta, D. Shrestha, S. Nepal, S. Pandey, and S. Koirala, “Efficient
 pp. 1–15.
 estimation of nepali word representations in vector space,” J. Innov. Eng.
 [60] O. Alrawi et al., “The circle of life: A large-scale study of the IoT
 Educ., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 71–77, Mar. 2020.
 malware lifecycle,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
[35] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word
 Security). Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2021, pp.
 vectors with subword information,” Trans. Assoc. for Comput. Linguis-
 3505–3522org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/alrawi-circle.
 tics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146, Dec. 2017.
 [61] Keras Team. (2015). Keras. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io
[36] A. Blum, B. Wardman, T. Solorio, and G. Warner, “Lexical feature
 [62] TensorFlow Federated Team. (2019). TensorFlow Federated:
 based phishing URL detection using online learning,” in Proc. 3rd ACM
 Machine Learning on Decentralized Data. [Online]. Available:
 Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur., Oct. 2010, pp. 54–60.
 https://www.tensorflow.org/federated
[37] E. Khramtsova, C. Hammerschmidt, S. Lagraa, and R. State, “Federated [63] R. Řehåřek and P. Sojka, “Software framework for topic modelling
 learning for cyber security: SOC collaboration for malicious URL with large corpora,” in Proc. LREC Workshop New Challenges NLP
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), Frameworks, May 2010, pp. 45–50.
 Nov. 2020, pp. 1316–1321. [64] A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. P. Mittal, and S. Calp, “Analyzing
[38] J. Saxe and K. Berlin, “EXpose: A character-level convolutional neural federated learning through an adversarial lens,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf.
 network with embeddings for detecting malicious URLs, file paths and Mach. Learn., May 2019, pp. 634–643.
 registry keys,” 2017, arXiv:1702.08568. [65] CYFIRMA Malware Research Team. (Jun. 2023). CosmicDuke Mal-
[39] H. Le, Q. Pham, D. Sahoo, and S. C. H. Hoi, “URLNet: Learning a ware Analysis Report. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyfirma.com/
 URL representation with deep learning for malicious URL detection,” outofband/cosmicduke-malware-analysis/
 2018, arXiv:1802.03162. [66] A. Remillano. (Jan. 2019). ThinkPHP Vulnerability
[40] D. Garcia Bernal, L. Giaretta, S. Girdzijauskas, and M. Sahlgren, Abused By Botnets Hakai and Yowai. [Online]. Available:
 “Federated Word2 Vec: Leveraging federated learning to encourage https://www.trendmicro.com/enus/research/19/a/thinkphp-vulnerabilitycollaborative representation learning,” 2021, arXiv:2105.00831. abused-by-botnets-hakai-and-yowai.html
[41] E. Lughofer, “Single-pass active learning with conflict and ignorance,” [67] SonicWall Capture Labs Threat Research Team. (Jul. 2019). New Wave
 Evolving Syst., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 251–271, Dec. 2012. of Attacks Attempting to Exploit Huawei Home Routers. [Online]. Avail-
[42] D. D. Lewis and W. A. Gale, “A sequential algorithm for training text able: https://www.sonicwall.com/blog/new-wave-of-attacks-attemptingclassifiers,” in Proc. Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., 1994, pp. 3–12. to-exploit-huawei-home-routers
[43] N. Roy and A. McCallum, “Toward optimal active learning through [68] L. Chou, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, and A. Shrivastava, “Efficient and less centralsampling estimation of error reduction,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Mach. ized federated learning,” in Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
 Learn. (ICML), 2001, pp. 441–448. in Databases: Research Track, vol. 12975. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
[44] D. A. Cohn, Z. Ghahramani, and M. I. Jordan, “Active learning with 2021.
 statistical models,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 4, pp. 129–145, Mar. 1996. [69] A. Gholami, N. Torkzaban, and J. S. Baras, “Trusted decentralized
[45] J. W. Stokes, J. Platt, J. Kravis, and M. Shilman, “Aladin: Active federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf.
 learning of anomalies to detect intrusions,” Microsoft Res., Redmond, (CCNC), Mar. 2022, pp. 1–6.
 WA, USA, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2008-24, 2008, Mar. 2008. [Online]. [70] T. Wink and Z. Nochta, “An approach for peer-to-peer federated
 Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/aladin- learning,” in Proc. 51st Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
 active-learning-ofanomalies-to-detect-intrusions/ Netw. Workshops (DSN-W), Jun. 2021, pp. 150–157.
[46] B. Frenay and M. Verleysen, “Classification in the presence of label [71] K. Wei et al., “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms
 noise: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15,
 pp. 845–869, May 2014. pp. 3454–3469, 2020.
10448 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[72] Sophos. (Apr. 2021). Nearly Half of Malware Now Use [81] Y. Li, K. Xiong, T. Chin, and C. Hu, “A machine learning framework for
 TLS to Conceal Communications. [Online]. Available: domain generation algorithm-based malware detection,” IEEE Access,
 https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2021/04/21/nearly-half-of-malware- vol. 7, pp. 32765–32782, 2019.
 now-use-tls-to-conceal-communications [82] Y. Zhauniarovich, I. Khalil, T. Yu, and M. Dacier, “A survey on
[73] E. Bursztein. (Jul. 2017). Understanding the Prevalence of Web malicious domains detection through DNS data analysis,” ACM Comput.
 Traffic Interception. [Online]. Available: https://elie.net/blog/security/ Surveys, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–36, Jul. 2019.
 understanding-the-prevalence-of-web-traffic-interception [83] R. Gálvez, V. Moonsamy, and C. Diaz, “Less is more: A
[74] K. Bonawitz et al., “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving privacy-respecting Android malware classifier using federated
 machine learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. learning,” Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2021, no. 4, pp. 96–116,
 Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1175–1191. Oct. 2021.
[75] C. Xie, K. Huang, P. Chen, and B. Li, “DBA: Distributed backdoor [84] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan,
 attacks against federated learning,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
 Represent. (ICLR), 2020. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst.
 forum?id=rkgyS0VFvr (ICDCS), Jul. 2019, pp. 756–767.
[76] D. T. Nguyen, N. N. Tran, T. T. Johnson, and K. Leach, “PBP: Post- [85] G. Thamilarasu and W. Schneble, “Attack detection using federated
 training backdoor purification for malware classifiers,” in Proc. Netw. learning in medical cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2025. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Aug. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[77] C. Cao and J. Caverlee, “Detecting spam URLs in social media via [86] J. Payne and A. Kundu, “Towards deep federated defenses against
 behavioral analysis,” in Proc. 37th Eur. Conf. Inf. Retr. (ECIR), Aug. malware in cloud ecosystems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Technol. Homeland
 2015, pp. 703–714. Secur. (TPS-ISA), Jan. 2019, pp. 92–100.
[78] H. Yuan, Z. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Li, and W. Liu, “URL2Vec: [87] Y. Zhao, J. Chen, D. Wu, J. Teng, and S. Yu, “Multi-task network
 URL modeling with character embeddings for fast and accu- anomaly detection using federated learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Symp.
 rate phishing website detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Par- Inf. Commun. Technol. (SoICT), Mar. 2019, pp. 273–279.
 allel Distrib. Process. Appl., Ubiquitous Comput. Commun., Big [88] P. Rieger, T. Krauß, M. Miettinen, A. Dmitrienko, and A.-R. Sadeghi,
 Data Cloud Comput., Social Comput. Netw., Sustain. Comput. “CrowdGuard: Federated backdoor detection in federated learning,” in
 Commun. (ISPA/IUCC/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), Dec. 2018, Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 1–18.
 pp. 265–272. [89] H. Fereidooni, A. Pegoraro, P. Rieger, A. Dmitrienko, and A.-R. Sadeghi,
[79] K. Thomas, C. Grier, J. Ma, V. Paxson, and D. Song, “Design and “FreqFed: A frequency analysis-based approach for mitigating poisoning
 evaluation of a real-time URL spam filtering service,” in Proc. 32nd attacks in federated learning,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (S&P), Sep. 2011, pp. 447–462. 2024, pp. 1–16.
[80] D. Canali, M. Cova, G. Vigna, and C. Kruegel, “Prophiler: A fast filter [90] K. Kumari, P. Rieger, H. Fereidooni, M. Jadliwala, and A.-R. Sadeghi,
 for the large-scale detection of malicious web pages,” in Proc. 20th Int. “BayBFed: Bayesian backdoor defense for federated learning,” in Proc.
 Conf. World Wide Web, Mar. 2011, pp. 197–206. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 737–754.