IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025 5514715

 CL-BioGAN: Biologically Inspired Cross-Domain
 Continual Learning for Hyperspectral
 Anomaly Detection
 Jianing Wang , Member, IEEE, Zheng Hua , Wan Zhang , Shengjia Hao, Yuqiong Yao,
 and Maoguo Gong , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— The memory stability and learning flexibility in
continual learning (CL) is a core challenge for cross-scene
hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) task. Biological neural
networks can actively forget history knowledge that conflicts with
the learning of new experiences by regulating learning-triggered
synaptic expansion and synaptic convergence. Inspired by this
phenomenon, we propose a novel biologically inspired CL
generative adversarial network (CL-BioGAN) for augmenting
continuous distribution fitting ability for cross-domain HAD
task, where CL bioinspired loss (CL-Bio Loss) and self-attention
generative adversarial network (BioGAN) are incorporated to
realize forgetting history knowledge as well as involving replay
strategy in the proposed BioGAN. Specifically, a novel bioinspired
loss composed with an active forgetting loss (AF Loss) and
 Fig. 1. Comparison of traditional DL training model and the CL method.
a CL loss is designed to realize parameters releasing and (a) Traditional DL method, which obtains OHAD results by a set of indeenhancing between new task and history tasks from a Bayesian pendent well-trained parameters. (b) Proposed CL method. The parameters of
perspective. Meanwhile, BioGAN loss with L 2 -norm enhances the model are continuously updated with the arrived tasks, but the updated
self-attention (SA) to further balance the stability and flexibility parameters will not forget the previous learned knowledge.
for better fitting background distribution for open-scenario
HAD (OHAD) tasks. Experimental results underscore that the
proposed CL-BioGAN can achieve more robust and satisfying materials [1]. As one of important research fields of hyperspecaccuracy for cross-domain HAD with fewer parameters and
 tral information processing, the main aim of open-scenario
computational cost. This dual contribution not only elevates CL
performance but also offers new insights into neural adaptation HAD (OHAD) task is to find pixels that are significantly
mechanisms in OHAD task. different from the background in terms of spectral signatures
 Index Terms— Active forgetting, continual learning (CL),
 without any prior knowledge of target [2]. Recent years,
generative adversarial network (GAN), hyperspectral anomaly various traditional deep learning (DL)-based algorithms have
detection (HAD). been proposed for OHAD tasks [3]. However, most existing DL-based methods mainly excel at acquiring knowledge
 I. I NTRODUCTION through generalized learning behavior based on solving spe-

H YPERSPECTRAL image (HSI) contains hundreds or
 even thousands of contiguous narrow spectral bands,
which makes possibilities for precisely distinguishing different
 cific scene task from a distinct training phase [4]. As shown
 in Fig. 1(a), traditional DL-based algorithms can only excel
 at specific task or current scenario because of the specific
 constructed parameters of network is incapable of dealing with
 Received 5 December 2024; revised 17 February 2025; accepted 17 March
2025. Date of publication 6 May 2025; date of current version 29 May new tasks or scenarios, which is liable to result in catastrophic
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science forgetting phenomenon. Whereas the network parameters of
Foundation of China under Grant 61801353 and in part by the Foundation CL can be automatically updated through customized loss
of Guangdong Testing Institute of Product Quality Supervision under Grant
2025zz01. (Jianing Wang and Zheng Hua contributed equally to this work.) functions or automatically updated exemplar set. After the
(Corresponding authors: Jianing Wang; Wan Zhang.) training for t different scenarios, the learned parameters of
 Jianing Wang and Wan Zhang are with the Key Laboratory of Collaborative the model contains the ability of OHAD for all the previous
Intelligence Systems, Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science
and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: circuit- tasks in open scenario circumstance, the procedure is briefly
wang@163.com; zhangwan2021@163.com). illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
 Zheng Hua, Shengjia Hao, and Yuqiong Yao are with the Key Laboratory Continual learning (CL) [5] (also known as lifelong learnof Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education
of China, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, ing [6] or incremental learning [7]) as a representative method
China (e-mail: HuaZheng79@163.com). for alleviating catastrophic forgetting phenomenon caused by
 Maoguo Gong is with the Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence varied conditions and scenarios [8], is gradually attracting
Systems, Ministry of Education, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
(e-mail: Gong@ieee.org). more and more attention in recent years [9]. Aim at learning
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3561174 knowledge and feature properties of current task while still
 1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2. Principles of active forgetting and learning in our proposed neural network. (a) Neural and protrusion function diagram. (b) Synaptic changes diagram
during the learning of a new task.

maintaining the knowledge information from previous train- Bayesian CL incorporate SA to actively forget the posterior
ing tasks, current methodologies in CL can be conceptually distribution, absorbing all information from the history tasks
grouped into three main categories: 1) adding regularization with a forgetting factor to better learn each new task for
terms with reference to the old model (regularization-based facilitating CL performance, which fully utilizes bioinspired
approach); 2) approximating and recovering the old data loss and replay strategy to mitigate the issue of catastrophic
distributions (replay-based approach); and 3) constructing forgetting. In addition, the potential spatial feature extraction
task-specific parameters with a properly designed architecture capability of L 2 -norm enhanced SA and the local feature
(architecture-based approach) [10], which have presented pro- extraction capability of CNN are designed through GAN
ficiencies in addressing numerous CL challenges. However, the structure to reconstruct the background pixels.
effectiveness of strategies varied significantly across different The main innovations and contributions of the proposed
experimental settings, such as task types and similarities, CL-BioGAN are summarized as follows.
input sizes, and training sample quantities [11]. Therefore, 1) A novel CL-BioGAN is proposed to elaborately intea significant gap exists between research advancements and grating CL bioinspired loss (CL-Bio Loss) and BioGAN
practical applications especially for OHAD tasks. structure, which can adaptively efficient releasing inef-
 Biological neural networks can effectively learn new knowl- fective parameters as well as strengthening robust
edge based on memorizing history knowledge, even if they parameters through local–global Transformer-based SA
conflict with each other. This advantage of memory flexibility learning. CL-BioGAN can provide a dual stable and
is achieved by actively forgetting history knowledge that flexible way from bioinspired network structure and
interferes with the learning of new experiences [12]. Inspired bio-inspired loss to achieve high accuracy with robust
by this biological properties, in order to alleviate catas- performance for cross-domain OHAD task.
trophic forgetting problem caused by traditional DL-based 2) The proposed BioGAN model is incorporated with a L 2
method, we explore CL from a biological learning perspective. local–global SA discriminator structure, which can effi-
As shown in Fig. 2(a), the biological active forgetting proper- ciently approximate the background distribution through
ties can regulate the learning-triggered synaptic expansion and alternating training with bioinspired encoder–decoder
synaptic convergence [13]. Specifically, biological synapses generator to acquire local–global representative backcan expand with additional functional connections to learn new ground spectral characteristics.
experiences with previously learned functional connections 3) A novel bioinspired loss is designed to integrate Bio-
(synaptic expansion), and then prune excrescent connections GAN loss, active forgetting loss (AF Loss) and CL
by transferring useful knowledge to the previously learned loss for balancing the memory stability and learning
synaptic connections (synaptic pruning). Driven by this phe- flexibility for OHAD. The BioGAN loss updates the
nomenon, the proposed biologically inspired CL generative parameters of network for current task and enhances
adversarial network (CL-BioGAN) can actively forget history the robustness of BioGAN. AF Loss is formulated with
knowledge which interferes with new learning tasks without the framework of Bayesian learning, and encourages the
significantly arousing catastrophic forgetting. We formulate model to improve the probability of learning each new
this process with the framework of Bayesian learning to task through attenuating old memories by a designed
well synthesize and model biological synaptic plasticity by forgetting rate. Meanwhile, the CL loss can automatitracking the probability distribution of synaptic weights under cally balance and maintain the stability of parameters in
dynamic sensory inputs [14], [15]. Specifically, we employ the learning procedure.
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

 The proposed CL-BioGAN can realize efficient generation new class [27]. Three contrastive learning losses are
and fitting ability to the varied background distribution, which designed to significantly improve the CL effect in the
presents satisfying detection accuracy and robust performance field of remote sensing images [28]. In [29], the elastic
for OHAD, and offers a novel approach to the application of weight-consolidated loss function is combined with a
DL for open scenarios remote sensing area. self-supervised network. Focusing on the CL model to
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. The related retain old knowledge while ensuring the model’s ability
work is introduced in Section II. The detail of the proposed to learn new knowledge, Kim et al. [30] proposed auxil-
CL-BioGAN framework is introduced in Section III. The iary network CL (ANCL). Regularization-based methods
related experiments are analyzed and presented in Section IV. can effectively avoid the storage of old tasks, therefore
The conclusion and future work are presented in Section V. it can avoid data leakage and the need for increased
 memory.
 II. R ELATED W ORKS 3) Architecture-Based Methods: In order to reduce forgetting performance, these methods mainly involve new
A. Continual Learning
 task-specific layers or structures for new tasks and activ-
 Modern machine learning often outperforms human intel- ities. Parameter masking [31] can learn binary masks on
ligence when it comes to developing robust models from existing networks to obtain a suitable neural network for
fixed datasets and fixed surroundings [16]. Traditional DL multiple tasks. Li et al. [32] proposed a method to use
techniques usually suffer from catastrophic forgetting phe- architecture search for the best structure of each task.
nomenon for forgetting what has been previously learned Meta-attention (MEAT) mechanism is designed to deterby overriding with new data [17]. Therefore, CL methods mine which image patches and parameters are needed to
address this issue by striking a balance between the stability be isolated by optimizing the binary mask [33]. In [34],
(ability to retain knowledge) and plasticity (ability to learn the network structure is divided into task-sharing componew concepts) of neural network models [18]. For DL-based nents and task-specific components, where task-specific
CL, similar to the learning of human, the learner typically components can be continuously expanded for new
encounters a nonstationary data stream through a series of coming tasks. This type of method is adept at dealing
learning episodes [19]. with increasing domain shift tasks. In addition, a rule-
 Numerous efforts have been devoted to preserving memory based model ensemble [35] is introduced by forming
stability to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in artificial neural a distributed architecture to manage high-dimensional
networks. The realization of existing CL methods can be data, where an adjustable weight vector is emphasized
roughly categorized into five mainstreams. by the role of correlation strategies in incremental
 1) Replay-Based Techniques: These approaches typically learning.
 create a replay pool in which features or samples 4) Optimization-Based Techniques: Optimization-based CL
 from earlier tasks are maintained to avoid catastrophic algorithms can be achieved by explicitly designing
 forgetting. Generative models is proposed to gener- and manipulating the optimization programs. A typical
 ate pseudo data for replay strategy [20], [21]. Cheng idea is to perform gradient projection. For instance,
 et al. [22] select the augmentation stability rehearsal AdamNSCL [36] instead projects candidate parameter
 (ASR) method by estimating the augmentation stability updates into the current null space approximated by the
 to select the most representative and discriminative uncentered feature covariance of the old tasks, while
 samples. Constructive noises is introduced in each AdNS [37] considers the shared part of the previous
 stage of constructive vision transformer (ViT) and an and the current null spaces. Another attractive idea
 exponential moving average of the working modal is meta-learning or learning-to-learn for CL, which
 is utilized to enforce consistency in predictions [23]. attempts to obtain a data-driven inductive bias for var-
 An exemplar-based CL method is introduced by using ious scenarios, rather than designing it manually [16].
 contrastive learning to learn a task-agnostic and continu- ARI [38] combines adversarial attacks with experience
 ously improved feature expression [24]. Rehearsal-based replay to obtain task-specific models, which are then
 methods aim at handling “stability–plasticity” dilemma fused together through metatraining. MARK [39] mainby maintaining an appropriate balance between learning tains a set of shared weights that are incrementally
 new information and retaining previous knowledge [25]. updated with metalearning and selectively masked to
 2) Regularization-Based Techniques: These techniques are solve specific tasks. Besides, some other works refine the
 mainly based on minimizing the catastrophic forgetting optimization process from a loss landscape perspective.
 through utilizing the regularization loss term to minimize Linear connector [40] adopts Adam-NSCL [36] and
 the model’s parameter distance in various tasks. A dual feature distillation to obtain respective solutions of the
 distillation training objectives is proposed to achieve old and new tasks connected by a linear path of low
 the combination of two independent models of old error, followed by linear averaging.
 classes and new classes [26]. Class similarity knowledge 5) Representation-Based Techniques: Have attempted to
 distillation (CSW-KD) method is proposed to perform incorporate the advantages of self-supervised learning
 semantic segmentation by extracting the knowledge of (SSL) and large-scale pretraining to improve the
 previous models of old classes which are similar to the representations in initialization and in CL. Based
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 on SSL strategy (basically with contrastive loss) for spatial constraints within spectral features combined
 CL, MinRed [41] further promotes the diversity of with the TV tensor-based HAD method [59].
 experience replay by decorrelating the stored old training 3) DL-Based HAD Approaches: Can learn complex data
 samples. CaSSLe [42] converts the self-supervised loss distribution even under the condition of lack of prior
 to a distillation strategy by mapping the current state of a information [60]; therefore, background estimation and
 representation to its previous state. Based on pretraining reconstruction are key issues in the implementation
 for downstream CL, representative strategies include of HAD. Based on the ability for hierarchical
 selecting the most relevant prompts from a prompt pool learning, abstraction, and high-level representation of
 (L2P [43]), optimizing a weighted summation of the autoencoder (AE), which provides an unsupervised
 prompt pool with attention factors (CODAPrompt [44]), manner for background reconstruction [61]. The
 using explicitly task-sharing and task-specific prompts background-guided deformable convolutional AE
 (DualPrompt [45]) or only task-specific prompts (DCAE) network is designed for HAD [62]. In [63],
 (SPrompts [46]), and progressive expansion of task- a weighted adaptive loss combined with AE is
 specific prompts (progressive prompts [47]). designed to suppress the reconstruction of abnormal
 samples. PASSNet [47] built a lightweight hybrid
 model, which ensembles the respective inductive bias
B. Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection from the convolutional neural network (CNN) and
 global receptive field from transformers with a designed
 HAD task aims at detecting the anomalies from background patch attention module (PAM) to extract spatial–spectral
samples through the significant difference between continuous features from multiple spatial perspectives by integrating
spectral signatures [48]. Existing HAD algorithms can be both CNNs and transformer blocks. In terms of feature
roughly divided into three mainstreams. representation capabilities and adversarial training
 1) Statistic-Based HAD Approaches: Mainly estimate the capabilities, generative adversarial network (GAN)
 probability of anomalous samples primarily by calculat- has been successfully used to estimate background
 ing the relationship difference between the background distribution and spectral domain features to achieve
 and the anomalous distribution by calculating differ- high-confidence background sample reconstruction [64],
 ences. Reed–Xiaoli (RX) [48] is proposed to detect [65]. Under the condition that the number of background
 anomalies by computing the mean and variance of samples is much larger than abnormal samples, the
 the entire image through comparing the Mahalanobis recognition error of abnormal pixels is higher than that
 distance between the test sample and the background of background pixels. Jiang et al. [66] only used the
 mean vector. Many variations based on RX, such as normal background samples to train the GAN to estimate
 kernel-based RX (KRX) algorithm [49], local RX (LRX) the background distribution to achieve the detection
 [50] have been gradually proposed. Meanwhile, a ten- of abnormal samples. Based on the visual attention
 sor RX (TRX) algorithm based on fractional Fourier Transformer model, a clustering module is introduced
 transform [51] and the recursive RX with extended to detect false background and abnormal samples
 multi-ttribute profiles [52] are designed to extract more in [67]. In [68], an HAD network based on variational
 image feature information. In [53], an adaptive reference background inference and generative adversarial
 correlation graph embedding (ARGE) is proposed to framework (VBIGAN-AD) is established based on the
 effectively obtain low-dimensional features and improve relationship between data samples and latent samples
 computational efficiency. To overcome the limitations of through two subnetworks to capture the data distribution.
 distributional assumptions in HAD, recent years have
 seen increased interest in.
 C. Bayesian CL
 2) Representation-Based HAD Approaches: The cooperative representation-based detector (CRD) [54] assumes CL needs to remember the old tasks and learn each new
 that background pixels can be minimized by enhancing task effectively. Therefore, considering a neural network with
 the L 2 -norm of the representation weight vector, approx- parameter θ continually learns two independent task t and task
 imately represented by a linear combination of its spatial t + 1 based on their training datasets Xtraint and Xtrain
 t+1 . All the
 neighbors. LRASR [55] assumes that backgrounds training datasets for each task is only available when learning
 present low-rank attributes and anomalies present sparse the task; therefore, the posterior distribution and the Bayesian
 attributes. Chang [56] proposed an effective anomaly CL can be represented as follows.
 space (EAS) to solve the problem of anomalies being 1) Bayesian Learning: After learning Xtrain t , the posterior
 sandwiched between the background and noise during distribution
 p Xtrain |θ p(θ )
 
 the background suppression (BS) process in HAD. The
 p θ|Xttrain t
 
 total variation (TV) representation model is introduced = (1)
 p Xtrain
 
 t
 into HAD [57], such as the new enhanced TV (ETV)
 of the endmember background dictionary (EBD) to incorporates the knowledge of task t. Then, we can get the
 represent the row vector of the coefficient matrix [58]. predictive distribution for the testing data of task t
 Feedback band group and variation low-rank sparse
 Z
 t |θ p θ|Xt
 test train
 p Xtest train
   
 model (FBGVLRS-AD) is proposed by utilizing local p Xt |Xt = dθ (2)
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

whereas the posterior p(θ|Xtrain t ) is generally intractable a) Spectral-based background selection strategy: Aim-
(except very special cases), we must resort to approx- ing to approximately obtain the background datasets, we calcuimation methods, such as the Laplace approximation or late the similarity value of neighboring spectral vectors based
other approaches of approximate inference [69]. Let us on SAM [70] for coarsely selecting the background sample
take Laplace approximation as an example. If p(θ|Xtrain t ) sets Bt for any HAD scenario Xt
is smooth and majorly peaked around the mode θt∗ = xi · x j
 SAM xi , x j =
 
arg maxθ log p(θ|Xtraint ), we can approximate it with a Gaus- (6)
 ||xi || × x j
sian distribution whose mean is θt∗ and covariance is the (
 0, SAM xi , x j ≥ µ
 
inverse Hessian of the negative log posterior [13].
 si = (7)
 1, SAM xi , x j < µ
 
 2) Bayesian CL: Further for incorporating the new task into
the posterior, the posterior p(θ|Xtrain
 t ) is used as the prior of Bt = index(i) {si == 0} .
 
 (8)
the next task
 The threshold µ is defined to determine whether xi is
 t+1 |θ p θ|Xt
 p Xtrain train
  
 p θ|Xt , Xt+1 =
 train train
 . a background sample or an anomalous sample. The value
 
 (3)
 p Xtrain
 
 t+1 of si = 0 indicates that the current pixel is part of the
 background, where si = 1 indicates the current pixel is
 Then, we can test the performance of CL by evaluating
 abnormal pixel, where Bt ∈ Rn b ×C and n b represents the
 number of background.
 t , Xt+1 |Xt
 p Xtest , Xtrain
 test train
 
 t+1
 Z b) Spatial–spectral noise smoothing strategy: We develt , Xt+1 |θ p θ|Xt
 p Xtest , Xtrain
 test train
  
 = t+1 dθ. (4) oped SSNS to incorporate spatial pixel information into
 spectral data, which concatenate the original spectral vector
 , Xtrain values with the average value of the spectral vectors of the
 Similarly, p(θ|Xtrain t+1 ) can be approximated by a Gaust
sian using Laplace approximation whose mean is the mode of w × w local region around the center pixel (in the experiment,
the posterior we take w as 3), and compute the mean vector as follows:
 w 2

 θt,t+1
 ∗
 = arg max log p θ|Xtrain , Xtrain
  1 X r
 θ
 t t+1 x̄i = x (9)
 w × w r =1 i
 = arg max log p Xtrain train
  
 t+1 |θ + log p Xt |θ
 θ
 where r is the pixel’s index in the w × w region. The original
 t+1 .
 − log p Xtrain
 
 (5) spectral vector xi and the mean vector x̄i are merged to create
 | {z }
 const. the enhanced vector ei
 ei = xi ⊗ x̄i (10)
 III. M ETHOD
 where ei ∈ R2C and ⊗ represents the concatenating opera-
 In this section, we mainly introduce the proposed tion across the channel dimension. Therefore, the augmented
CL-BioGAN by combining knowledge learned from history spectral–spatial background sample sets Bt updated as follows:
and present tasks. The overall architecture of the proposed
 Bt ∈ Rn b ×2C = ei | index(i) {si == 0} .
 
CL-BioGAN is represented in Fig. 3, which is mainly com- (11)
posed of the CL structure and BioGAN networks.
 Suppose that there are T different scenario domains 2) Generator Module G: Further for improving recon-
X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT for OHAD task datasets, each Xt repre- struction performance of background pixels, we introduce an
sents the tth HAD scenario task. An HSI can be represented advanced encoder–decoder architecture, where the structure of
as Xt ∈ R M×N ×C = {xi ∈ RC }i=M×N , t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T , where G is shown in Fig. 3(b). The AE [71] has been widely used
 i=1
xi represents the ith spectral vector in Xt . in various applications such as HSI unmixing [72] and target
 detection [73] because of the simple and outstanding performance in feature extraction. For the simplest AE structure,
A. Structure of BioGAN in which the encoder and decoder are both fully connected
 layers. Therefore, for the arbitrary selected background input
 The whole BioGAN for OHAD mainly consists of three
 bi ⊂ Bt ∈ Rn b ×2C and the hidden layer zi ⊂ Zt ∈ Rn b ×L with
components: the background selection module (BSM), the
 L(L < 2C) dimensions, the reconstructed output b̂i ⊂ B̂t ∈
generator module G, and the discriminator module D.
 Rn b ×2C can be calculated as follows:
 1) Background Selection Module: BSM is shown in
Fig. 3(b), which consists of the two main processes: 1) zi = f (Wen bi + biasen ) (12)
spectral-based background selection strategy (SBSS) and 2) b̂i = f (Wde zi + biasde ) (13)
spatial–spectral noise smoothing strategy (SSNS). The pseudolabel for the background samples and anomalies are first where Wen and biasen and Wde and biasde denote the weights
coarsely selected through SBSS. Then, SSNS is used to and biases of the encoder and decoder, respectively, and f (·)
involve spatial information for better exploiting and enhancing is an inconclusive activation function. Based on the reality
spectral–spatial features for each vector. that the majority of pixels in HSIs belong to the background
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD. The left part represents the continual training phase, which is mainly composed of replay
strategy, BioGAN structure, and bioinspired loss (CL Loss, AF Loss, and recon Loss). The right part in the figure is the continual testing part, the well-trained
biogenerator is only used in the testing phase to detect the continually arrived HAD scenarios.

while only a few pixels are anomalies, AE mainly progres- between each input and all other inputs. Especially for HSIs,
sively emphasizes the background features during the training the SA can fully excavate more important spatial information
process, and finally reconstructed background pixels as the for background reconstruction.
inputs background pixels as similar as possible. Therefore, A linear full-connection layer is utilized for converting the
the training goal of the proposed BioGAN is to learn the intermediate feature dimension to the output feature dimension
features of the training dataset bi and reconstruct b̂i as similar 2C, after the completion of the L 2 SA computation. The
as possible. The reconstruction error of a well-trained AE can following final attention feature map is calculated as follows:
be used to calculate the final anomaly detection result.
 F̂ = FFN((Linear(SA) + F)) + (Linear(SA) + F) (16)
 3) Discriminator Module D: D is shown in Fig. 3(b), which
is used to learn more complicated spectral properties as well where F̂ ∈ Rn b ×2C and FFN represents feedforward neural netas support the training of G. D consists of two modules: work, which consists of dropout, linear, and the stable GELU
the multi-scale convolution (MSC) module for extracting mul- activation function. Then, F̂ is imported to the a multiple layer
tiscale features, and L 2 SA [L 2 norm self-attention (SA)] perception (MLP) to obtain the final discrimination result.
module for channel feature extraction and channel correlation.
Three multiscale spectral feature maps F have been generated B. Sample Replay Based on Clustering
by using 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 5 × 5 convolutional operations.
 After t task has been learned, in order to alleviate
Meanwhile, residual connection structure is utilized in L 2
 the catastrophic forgetting problem, an alternative sampling
SA module, and feature information in different levels can
 approach for sample replay selection is designed by involvbe extracted by concatenating the feature maps of several
 ing sample replay strategy to random choose and store
receptive fields together, and the spatial position embedding
 pixels from historical data. Suppose the background set
is introduced to capture the local discrimination details and
 Bt with totally Mt samples, we cluster the whole dataset
the general characteristic changes of the spectral information.
 into P groups by utilizing K -means technique. Overall,
For an arbitrary input B̂t ∈ Rn b ×2C , the corresponding output
 the expectation–maximization (EM) optimization algorithm
of an SA block can be formulated as follows:
 is used [74], and the optimization objective function is as
 Q = Wq F ∈ Rn b ×L follows:
 P X
 K = Wk F ∈ Rn b ×L X
 E= ∥x − µi ∥2 (17)
 n b ×L
 V = Wv F ∈ R (14) i=1 x∈Ci
 ||Q||2 ||K||2 T
  
 where Ci represents the set of all sample points of each
 SA = Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax √ V
 2C cluster, x denotes a sample point belonging to Ci , and µi
 (15) represents the center of the ith cluster. Each group will
 contain Mti (i = 1, 2, . . . , P) samples. We assume that each
where Wq ∈ R2C×L , Wk ∈ R2C×L , and Wv ∈ R2C×L are task adaptively selects N representative samples by taking
three predefined transformation matrices, respectively. ||·||2 into account memory restriction. We take the sum of one
represents the L 2 norm of SA ∈ Rn b ×L . We can observe percentPof Mti closest to the sample center in each cluster,
 i=1 (Mt × 100)/10 000 denoted by N . The specific
 P i
from (14) and (15) that the SA considers the relationships N =
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

value of N is detailed in Section IV. The sample replay a) AF Loss : Inspired by biological forgetting and
equation can be represented as follows: Bayesian CL, we introduce a forgetting factor β and replace
 P p(θ|Xtrain
 t ) that absorbs all the information of Xtraint with a
 N ∗ Mti
 [   
 k(Bt ) = K Means : (18) weighted product distribution
 i=1
 Mt (1−β)
 p θ|Xtrain p(θ )β
 p̂ θ|Xt , β =
 train t
 
where samples in K Means have been organized in ascending (26)
order based on their distance from each cluster’s center pixel, Z
and ((N ∗ Mti )/Mt ) is the picked data from each cluster sets. where we denote that p(θ|Xtrain t ) and p(θ ) are mixed to pro-
The computed representative sample set of the ith cluster duce the new distribution p̂. Z is the normalization value that
is represented by the symbol K Means [ : ⌊(N ∗ Mti )/Mt ⌋]. The depends on β, which keeps p̂(θ|Xtrain t , β) following a Gaussian
replay buffer may be modified as follows: distribution if p(θ|Xtrain
 t ) and p(θ ) are both Gaussian. When
 Rt ← Rt−1 ∪ k(Bt ), Rt−1 = φ, when t = 1. (19) p(θ ) → 0, p̂ will be dominated by p(θ|Xtrain t ) and remember
 all the information about task t, where p(θ ) → 1, p̂ will
 We may lessen the effects of the imbalanced data distribu- actively forget all the information about task t. By modifying
tion and increase the spectral anomaly detection algorithm’s (4), the new target becomes
resilience by using (19) for adaptive replay technique. Obvit , Xt+1 |Xt
 p Xtest t+1 , β
 , Xtrain
 test train
 
ously, abnormalities in various HSI sets may be continually
 Z
detected with better accuracy performance based on the clust , Xt+1 |θ p θ|Xt
 p Xtest t+1 , β dθ
 , Xtrain
 test train
  
 = (27)
tering sample replay in CL module.
 where β decides how much information from task t should be
C. CL-Bio Loss Function
 forgotten to maximize the probability of learning task t + 1.
 In this section, we mainly introduce the proposed bioin- A suitable β value should be defined as follows:
spired loss of CL based on the Bayesian learning framework,
 β ∗ = arg max p Xtrain train
 ,β
 
which hypothesized based on biological synaptic plasticity by t+1 |Xt
 β
tracking the probability distribution of synaptic weights under Z
 = arg max p Xtrain t+1 |θ p̂ θ|Xt , β dθ .
 train
  
dynamic sensory inputs [14]. The whole proposed CL-bio loss (28)
 β
function is composed with: 1) ACL loss L ACL and 2) the
BioGAN loss L BioGAN . The ACL loss is used to assure stability Here, β should be between 0 and 1, we make a grid search to
for detection and prevent catastrophic forgetting for cross- determine the optimal value for β. Next, p(θ|Xtrain t t+1 , β)
 , Xtrain
domain scenarios. BioGAN loss mainly ensures the training can also be estimated by the approximated Gaussian using
fidelity performance for background sample reconstruction. Laplace approximation, and the maximum a posteriori (MAP)
Therefore, we construct and summarize the whole loss func- estimation is
tion as follows:
 θt,t+1
 ∗
 = arg max log p θ|Xtrain t+1 , β
 , Xtrain
 
 t
 L = L BioGAN + L ACL (20) θ
 = arg max(1 − β) log p Xtrain
 
 L BioGAN = L G + L D + L recon (21) t+1 |θ
 θ
 L ACL = L CL + L AF . + log p θ|Xtrain + β log p θ|Xtrain
  
 (22) t t+1 + const.

 1) BioGAN Loss: The spatial–spectral background sets Bt (29)
and reconstruction background set B̂t = G(Bt ) is measured
 Then, we obtain the active forgetting AF Loss function by
by using the mean square error (mse) loss
 synaptic expansion-convergence (AF Loss)
 2
 L recon = B̂t − Bt . (23) X
 2
 L AF = λAF × (θc )2 (30)
 We performed differentiable data enhancement (Diff) on the c
data and pseudodata in the G and D to assure the training
 where θc represents the parameters of the current task.
stability of GAN without appearing feature shift phenomenon
 Fig. 2(b) indicates the implementation of active forgetting in
for brightness, saturation, and contrast information to realize
 a CL model.
better convergence results. Consequently, the adversarial prob) CL loss: This loss function minimizes the magnitude
cess allows G and D to be updated alternately as follows:
   of parameter updates by forcing the distance between the input
 L G = Ex∼ p(Bt ) log(1 − D(Diff(G(x)))) (24) data of task t and the reconstructed image of task t + 1 to get
 L D = −E x∼ p(Bt ∪B̂t ) log(D(x)) + log(1 − D(Diff(G(x)))) . closer to preserve stability for OHAD. We use a replay sample
  
 set Rt to reduce the distance between different task models for
 (25)
 stability protection in CL. Finally, the definition of the F-norm
 2) ACL Loss: ACL loss is composed of CL loss to prevent regularization loss for every task t is
weight drift caused by new knowledge and the AF Loss for
selectively converging the related parameter weights of the G t (Rt−1 )G t (Rt−1 )T
 L CL = λCL ×
network. Bb
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Algorithm 1 CL-BioGAN TABLE I
Input: The stream HSIs X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT for T tasks. D ETAILS OF THE ABU A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASET
Parameter: µ = 0.99, the number of clustering groups P = 3,
w = 3, the channel dimension C = dmin(X1 , . . . , XT ), λ AF = 0.1,
λC L = 0.9, lr = 0.00005.
Output: Amap,t .
 1: Initialize replay buffer R1 = φ, the model parameters θ1 .
 2: for t = 1 to T tasks do
 i=M×N
 3: Xt ∈ R M×N ×C = {x i ∈ RC }i=1 ;
 4: for H training epochs do
 5: generate si vector by (6) and (7);
 6: construct background samples set Bt by (11); TABLE II
 7: if t = 1 then D ETAILS OF THE HAD100 A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASET
 8: update θ1 by minimizing L G , L D and L r econ through
 equation (24), (25) and (23), as equation (30) L AF = 0,
 equation (31) L C L = 0;
 9: else
10: update θt by minimizing L G , L D and L r econ through
 equation (24), (25) and (23);
11: end if
12: apply K-Means to obtain Mi (i = 1, 2, 3) containing three
 groups exemplars respectively for the subset through (18);
13: if t = 1 then
14: update replay buffer by R1 ← k(Bt ); A. Experimental Setting
15: else
16: update replay buffer by Rt ← Rt−1 ∪ k(Bt ); 1) Datasets and Computing Infrastructure: We evaluated
17: end if our method on two types of datasets: ABU-Urban and ABU-
18: end for
 Beach (ABU) [75], as well as HAD100 for OHAD [76].
19: end for
20: Construct the detection for tasks through equation (20); For the ABU dataset, we select five different real HSIs
 to form the CL tasks: Los Angeles-1, Bay Champagne,
 Los Angeles-2, Cat Island, and San Diego. These HSIs are
 mask captured by the airborne visible/infrared imaging spectrometer
 X G t (Rt−1,mask )G t (Rt−1,mask )T
 + −I . (AVIRIS) sensor under different scenarios with distinct spatial
 i, j
 P resolutions, channels, spatial size, and spectral bands. The
 F
 (31) detailed information of these datasets is illustrated in Table I.
 Meanwhile, we randomly select five different areas from
 Among them, Bb stands for batch size, P denotes the the HAD100 dataset as shown in the table as HAD10Data
number of pixel in mask. I stands for the identity matrix, as ang20170821t183707_91, ang20170821t183707_100,
∥•∥F represents the matrix’s Fibonacci norm, and λCL rep- ang20191004t185054_24, ang20210614t141018_33,
resents the balancing parameter. The CL loss will gradually ang20170908t225309_40, are, respectively, denoted by
update the parameters of the generator in accordance with the HAD100_91, HAD100_100, HAD100_24, HAD100_33,
continuously coming tasks. and HAD100_40, which are all captured by Airborne
 Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer-next generation
D. Continual Anomaly Detection (AVIRIS-NG). The details of the HAD100 dataset are shown
 in Table II. All the experiments conducted under the hardware
 During the testing procedure in Fig. 3(c), the final proenvironment: Intel1 Xeon1 CPU at 2.30 GHz with 64-GB
jected anomaly probability map is obtained by subtracting the
 RAM and an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 2080 Ti graphical
continuous data Y1 , . . . , Yt , . . . , YT from the reconstructed
 processing unit (GPU) with 11-GB RAM, and a 64-bit
background pixel Ŷ1 = G(X1 ), . . . , Ŷt = G(Xt ), . . . , ŶT =
 Windows 10 system and the Pytorch 1.10.2 DL frameworks.
G(XT ) by our proposed well-trained CL-BioGAN
 2) Methods: In order to demonstrate the superiority of
 2
 Amap,t = Ŷt − Yt 2 . (32) our proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD, we select the most
 representative methods from each paradigm to establish the
 The detailed pseudocode for the proposed CL-BioGAN is benchmark. These training methods include DL-based joint
introduced in Algorithm 1. (J ) training for OHAD, fine-tune (FT)-based OHAD, and
 CL-based algorithm MAS [77], EWC [17], OWM [78], and
 IV. E XPERIMENTS CL-CaGAN [79].
 In this section, we mainly assess the proposed CL-BioGAN 3) Metrics: In this article, we mainly utilize receiver operfor the open scenario OHAD on five cross domain distinct ating characteristics (ROCs) [80] and the area under the ROC
hyperspectral datasets. In the following section, we will curve (AUC) [81] to quantitatively assess the performance of
introduce and analyze the performance of the proposed detectors. The ROC curve illustrates the relationship between
CL-BioGAN from experimental setting, detection results, and
ablation experiments under open scenario circumstances. 1 Registered trademark.
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

true positive rate (PD ) and false positive rate (PF ). A 3-D TABLE III
ROC curve can be generated by a triplet parameter vector N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN E ACH C LUSTER (T OTAL N UMBER AND
 S ELECTED N UMBER ) AND THE S PECIFIC VALUE OF N IN THE
specified by (PD , PF , and τ ), or by three 2-D ROC curves S AMPLE R EPLAY
of (PD and PF ), (PD and τ ), and (PF and τ ) and their AUC
values expressed as AUC(D,F) , AUC(D,τ ) , and AUC(F,τ ) . In the
experiments, we use AUC(F,τ ) and AUCBS [82] to represent
the BS rate, and AUC(D,F) is used to evaluate the performance
of the detector. AUCBS can be computed by AUC(D,F) and
AUC(F,τ )
 AUCBS = AUC(D,F) − AUC(F,τ ) . (33)
 The accuracy (ACC) as the average test AUC(D,F) of all
tasks is utilized to better assess the capacity of CL to identify
anomalies. Meanwhile, backward transfer (BWT) represents
the average forgetting measure of the model after completing
T tasks. In order to explore the learning plasticity of new
tasks in OHAD, we also use the forward transfer (FWT) to
continuously estimate the learning ability for the new task. OHAD for Los Angeles-1 and Bay Champagne, task 5 means
The following are the formulas of ACC, BWT, and FWT: the CL-based OHAD from Los Angeles-1 to San Diego.
 T
 We mainly analyze CL-based strategies and the backbone
 1 X effect between BioGAN and CaGAN. The results in Table IV
 ACC = AUC(D,F)T,i (34)
 T i=1 indicate that our proposed method CL-BioGAN presents the
 T −1 best ACC for most of the OHAD tasks, i.e., tasks 3–5.
 1 X 
 Specifically, this result not only displays the high ACC of
 BWT = AUC(D,F)T,i − AUC(D,F)T −1,i (35)
 T − 1 i=1 CL-BioGAN in processing continuous tasks, but also indicates
 T the satisfying stability and robustness ability to avoid forget-
 1 X
 AUC(D,F)T,i − AUC∗ (D,F)i .
 
 FWT = (36) ting old tasks when learning new tasks. Parameter comparison
 T − 1 i=2 further demonstrates that our method achieves high accuracy
 AUC∗ (D,F)i represents the result of training on the ith task. with fewer parameters while maintaining robust accuracy
The AUC(D,F)T,i represents the ith task after learning the T th improvement for learning new tasks. The testing results of
task, where T represents the total number of tasks, and i refers catastrophic forgetting performance on previous tasks are
to the ith task being evaluated. During the inference procedure, shown in Fig. 4, which demonstrates that CL-BioGAN is
we evaluate the model after training on all tasks. capable of retaining important knowledge from previous tasks
 4) Number of N : For the sample replay strategy, the number while learning new tasks, thereby presenting more stable
of samples in each cluster is P = 1, P = 2, and P = 3, and AUC for each task. From ACC, BWT and FWT perforthe specific value of the total replay samples N is selected mance presented in Fig. 5, we can observe that our proposed
adaptively, which is shown in Table III. CL-BioGAN indicates more robustness and reliability for all
 the tasks 5 in terms of involved transformer structure and
 biological-inspired AF Loss, and exhibits potential practical
B. Main Results applications for the proposed CL strategy. Fig. 6 further
 To verify the accuracy improvements and the robustness demonstrates that our method exhibits more stable detection
of our proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD tasks under open capabilities across different AUC curves. In addition, the BS
scenario circumstances, we conducted comprehensive eval- rates are illustrated in Table V as new tasks are learned, where
uations of the aforementioned six comparable methods on the larger the BS rate means the better the discrepancy between
five OHAD datasets. CL-CaGAN is a comparable SOTA anomalies and backgrounds.
method for unsupervised continual OHAD. MAS and EWC are For the HAD100 dataset, we compared the CL-CaGAN
two representative strategies for regular, continuous learning and CL-BioGAN methods, as shown in Table VI. The ACC,
method for traditional RGB images, respectively. We change BWT, FWT, and Avg BS are valued after continual anomaly
the application form to the OHAD task to verify the effective- detection on the five HAD100 datasets. The experiments
ness. Intuitively, these two methods appear to be better suited cover different tasks combinations from tasks 2 to tasks 5. For
for the CL scenario. Furthermore, OWM is a representative instance, tasks 2 means the CL-based OHAD for HAD100_91
method of gradient orthogonality in the CL family. Therefore, and HAD100_100, tasks 5 means the CL-based OHAD from
we mainly use these CL-based algorithm to evaluate and HAD100_91 to HAD100_40. It can be clearly observed
demonstrate the effect and performance in this article. that CL-BioGAN achieves a better balance between memory
 1) Quantitative Analysis: As shown in Table IV, we eval- stability and plasticity, resulting in less forgetting. Meanwhile,
uate the performance of these methods for OHAD tasks, the Average BS values further reinforce the conclusion that
and the experiments cover different task combinations from CL-BioGAN exhibits strong stability in continual anomaly
tasks 2 to tasks 5. For instance, task 2 means the CL-based detection.
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 TABLE IV
 CL FOR OHAD P ERFORMANCE W ITH T HREE E VALUATION M ETRICS

Fig. 4. Catastrophic forgetting performance evaluation for open scenario OHAD on previous tasks. (a) AUC value for tasks 1 and 2 after training on the
second task. (b) AUC value for tasks 1–3 after training on the third task. (c) AUC value for tasks 1–4 after training on the fourth task. (d) AUC value for
tasks 1–5 after training on the fifth task.

Fig. 5. ACC, BWT, and FWT Performance evaluation for OHAD of different methods. (a) Variation of ACC for tasks 1–5. (b) Variation of BWT for OHAD
tasks 1–5. (c) Variation of FWT for OHAD tasks 1–5.

Fig. 6. AUC testing results of different methods on the previous task after learning the fifth task are shown as follows. The first column (a) represents the
AUC(D,F) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5. The second column (b) represents the AUC(D,τ ) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5.
The third column (c) represents the AUC(F,τ ) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5. (d) 3-D ROC value on Los Angeles-2 for tasks 1–5 after
completing training on the fifth task.

 2) Visual Detection Results: As illustrated in Fig. 7, does not affected by surrounding noisy pixels. Compared
CL-BioGAN demonstrates more stable detection capacity to CL-CaGAN, we can observe from Fig. 7(h) and (i) that
for the previous detection scenes/tasks after learning the our method exhibits more robust detection performance for
knowledge of multiple scenes/tasks, the detection performance different anomalies. Meanwhile, CL-BioGAN can minimize
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

Fig. 7. Visualization for five OHAD results after learning tasks 1–5. The dataset from top to bottom is Los Angeles-1, Cat Island, Los Angeles-2, San Diego,
and Bay Champagne, respectively. (a) False color image of HAD. (b) Ground-truth map. (c) J-BioGAN. (d) FT-BioGAN. (e) MAS-BioGAN. (f) EWC-BioGAN.
(g) OWM-BioGAN (h) CL-CaGAN. (i) CL-BioGAN.

 TABLE V TABLE VI
AUC BS I MPACT A NALYSES OF D IFFERENT CL S TRATEGIES . BS R EP - CL FOR OHAD P ERFORMANCE W ITH T HREE E VALUATION M ETRICS AND
 RESENT THE VALUE OF AUC BS , THE L ARGER VALUE M EANS THE AVERAGE AUC BS IN HAD100 DATASET. AVG BS R EPRESENT THE
 B ETTER P ERFORMANCE . AVG R EPRESENTS THE M EAN VALUE OF VALUE OF AVERAGE AUC BS
 BS. T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 C. Ablation Experiment
 1) Effect Analysis of λAF and λCL : A detailed effect and
 assessment of CL performance for the proportions of λAF and
 λCL is illustrated in Fig. 8. We can observe that the network
 stability is enhanced with the addition of AF Loss, which
 helps to learn new knowledge more effectively when new tasks
 arrive. The results proves that the proposed AF Loss and CL
 loss can efficiently alleviate the issue of catastrophic forgetting
 in CL. We selected the optimal λAF and λCL value for the
 following experiments.
 2) Effect Analysis for BSM: The comparison between the
 number of selected pixels and the real background pixels is
 shown in Table VII. We can note that background selection
 based on the SAM strategy indicates more accurate backthe false positives of anomalies in terms of the local-global ground pixel selection in most cases, which also provides
attention mechanism involved in the transformer structure with the basic information for the generator to accurately learn
a designed AF Loss for efficient BS. reconstruction features of the background pixel.
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 TABLE IX
 ACC AND BWT I MPACT A NALYSES FOR D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF
 THE P ROPOSED CL-B IO GAN. W / O R M EANS E XCLUDE OF R EPLAY,
 W / O T M EANS E XCLUDE OF L 2 SA, W / O L AF M EANS E XCLUDE OF
 AF L OSS , W / O L CL M EANS E XCLUDE OF CL L OSS , AND O URS
 M EANS CL-B IO GAN. AUC R EPRESENT THE VALUE OF
 AUC(D,F) . T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED
 IN B OLD

Fig. 8. Varied parameter proportions of λAF and λCL for the detection
ACC. (a) Individual impact of λAF and λCL on the experimental results and
(b) impact of λAF and λCL on the experimental results within a certain range
of values.
 TABLE VII
R ESULT OF I DENTICAL P IXELS TO THE T OTAL N UMBER OF P IXELS
 (R ATIO 1) AND C ORRECTLY I DENTIFIED BACKGROUND P IXELS TO THE
 ACTUAL BACKGROUND P IXEL C OUNT (R ATIO 2) FOR E UCLIDEAN
 D ISTANCE (ED) AND SAM IN ROUND P IXELS IN G ROUND
 T RUTH

 TABLE VIII
A NALYZING THE I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF C LUSTERING G ROUPS FOR
 CL-B IO GAN. AUC M EANS THE VALUE OF AUC(D,F) . T HE O PTIMAL
 R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD
 performance across all task configurations. Therefore, the
 choice of P = 3 represents an optimal balance between ACC
 and BWT. Although other P values exhibit minor advantages
 in individual metrics, P = 3 delivers the optimal or suboptimal
 performance across all principal indicators.
 4) Other Ablation Effect Experiment: We mainly evaluate
 and analyze the impact of the L2 SA structure in D, the
 replay strategy, the AF Loss, and the CL loss for OHAD
 performance across five different scenario tasks. The effect
 of above mentioned components utilized in our proposed
 CL-BioGAN is illustrated in Table IX, respectively. We can
 observe that CL-BioGAN with all above mentioned components presents the optimal ACC and BWT results in most cases
 especially after CL from the second task. For the modal of
 CL-BioGAN without AF Loss, it exhibits unstable changes
 in ACC and significant fluctuations in BWT when learning
 new scenario tasks. In contrast, CL-BioGAN demonstrates
 more stable learning of new tasks while effectively preventing catastrophic forgetting issues. Particularly, after learning
 the third scenario, the CL-BioGAN demonstrates beneficial
 3) Effect Analysis of the Number of Clustering Group: retention of knowledge for previous scenarios, which indicates
Table VIII provides an insightful analysis of the impact of that AF Loss enhances sustained detection performance while
varying cluster numbers P in the K -means algorithm for CL increasing the robustness and stability of the model.
OHAD task performance within the sample replay strategy Table X reflects the AUCBS impact analyses for different
framework. Across the range of cluster numbers studied from components of the proposed CL-BioGAN. As new tasks are
P = 2 to P = 6, we can notice that the configuration with learned, AF Loss may degrade the BS performance in certain
P = 3 consistently yields the highest accuracy. While config- scenarios, while AF Loss ensures the stability of BS. While for
urations with P = 5 and P = 6 indicate a slightly increasing the CL-BioGAN Without AF Loss, it exhibits significant fluc-
BWT in certain tasks, P = 3 provides a more consistent tuations as new knowledge is incorporated. This performance
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

 TABLE X R EFERENCES
AUC BS I MPACT A NALYSES FOR D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF CL-
 B IO GAN. T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD
 [1] Y. Duan, C. Chen, M. Fu, Y. Li, X. Gong, and F. Luo, “Dimensionality
 reduction via multiple neighborhood-aware nonlinear collaborative analysis for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
 Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 9356–9370, Oct. 2024.
 [2] Z. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection for spectral anomaly targets via spatial and spectral constraints,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 Art. no. 5511515, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3091156.
 [3] J. Li, X. Wang, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “One-step detection
 paradigm for hyperspectral anomaly detection via spectral deviation
 relationship learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
 Art. no. 5517515, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3392189.
 [4] L. Song, Z. Feng, S. Yang, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Interactive spectral–
 spatial transformer for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8589–8601, Sep. 2024.
 [5] G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter, “Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review,” Neural Netw.,
 vol. 113, pp. 54–71, May 2019.
 [6] M. De Lange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in
 classification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44,
 no. 7, pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022.
 [7] M. Masana, X. Liu, B. Twardowski, M. Menta, A. D. Bagdanov,
 and J. van de Weijer, “Class-incremental learning: Survey and performance evaluation on image classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5513–5533, May 2023.
 [8] M. McCloskey and N. J. Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem,” in Psychology
 of Learning and Motivation, vol. 24. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
 Elsevier, 1989, pp. 109–165.
 [9] S. Dohare, J. F. Hernandez-Garcia, Q. Lan, P. Rahman, A. R. Mahmood,
 and R. S. Sutton, “Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning,” Nature,
indicates that AF Loss is a key component for sustaining vol. 632, no. 8026, pp. 768–774, Aug. 2024.
CL ability and serves as a stabilizer for BS. The similar [10] L. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “A comprehensive survey
 of continual learning: Theory, method and application,” IEEE Trans.
results between AUC(D,F) in Table IX and AUCBS in Table X Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5362–5383, Aug. 2024.
indicate that CL-BioGAN reduces false positives in AUC(D,F) [11] K. Li, H. Chen, J. Wan, and S. Yu, “ESDB: Expand the shrinking
as well as enhances the AUCBS performance, which further decision boundary via one-to-many information matching for continual
demonstrates the proposed CL-BioGAN can facilitate better learning with small memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
 vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 7328–7343, Aug. 2024.
generation for pseudobackground pixels in OHAD. [12] L. Wang et al., “Incorporating neuro-inspired adaptability for continual
 learning in artificial intelligence,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 5, no. 12,
 pp. 1356–1368, Nov. 2023.
 V. C ONCLUSION [13] L. Wang et al., “AFEC: Active forgetting of negative transfer in
 continual learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021,
 In this study, in order to mitigate catastrophic forget- pp. 22379–22391.
ting as well as adapt to new endless tasks coming in the [14] L. Aitchison, J. Jegminat, J. A. Menendez, J.-P. Pfister, A. Pouget,
 and P. E. Latham, “Synaptic plasticity as Bayesian inference,” Nature
cross-domain OHAD, a novel CL-BioGAN is proposed to Neurosci., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 565–571, Apr. 2021.
improve the detection accuracy and robustness through a [15] S. Schug, F. Benzing, and A. Steger, “Presynaptic stochasticity improves
designed bioinspired AF Loss and SA-based GAN structure. energy efficiency and helps alleviate the stability-plasticity dilemma,”
 eLife, vol. 10, p. 69884, Oct. 2021.
The proposed CL-BioGAN incorporates a continuous replay [16] R. Hadsell, D. Rao, A. A. Rusu, and R. Pascanu, “Embracing change:
strategy by CL-Bio loss to preserve historical knowledge Continual learning in deep neural networks,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 24,
and adapt to new tasks in an open scenario circumstance. no. 12, pp. 1028–1040, Dec. 2020.
 [17] K. James et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,”
AF Loss is designed to balance stability and plasticity by Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526, Mar. 2017.
modulating the forgetting rate of previous knowledge, which [18] C. I. Tang, L. Qendro, D. Spathis, F. Kawsar, C. Mascolo, and A. Mathur,
is functionally consistent with the advantage of biological “Kaizen: Practical self-supervised continual learning with continual finetuning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
forgetting in memory flexibility. This connection provides a Jan. 2024, pp. 2829–2838.
underlying mechanism theoretical explanation for the conflict [19] Y. Zhang, L. Charlin, R. Zemel, and M. Ren, “Integrating present and
between biological active forgetting and continually learning past in unsupervised continual learning,” 2024, arXiv:2404.19132.
experiences. In addition, CL-BioGAN achieves an end-to-end [20] Z. Huang et al., “Learning prompt with distribution-based feature replay
 for few-shot class-incremental learning,” 2024, arXiv:2401.01598.
reconstruction by the synergistic integration of a generator [21] X. Li, H. Li, and L. Ma, “Continual learning of medical image
and an L 2 SA discriminator within a GAN framework for classification based on feature replay,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf.
effectively learning representative spectral characteristics of Signal Process. (ICSP), vol. 1, Oct. 2022, pp. 426–430.
 [22] H. Cheng, H. Wen, X. Zhang, H. Qiu, L. Wang, and H. Li, “Conbackground distribution through differentiable data augmenta- trastive continuity on augmentation stability rehearsal for continual
tion. Our experiments on five cross-domain OHAD datasets self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
indicate that CL-BioGAN significantly offers more stable (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 5684–5694.
 [23] K. Jeeveswaran, P. Bhat, B. Zonooz, and E. Arani, “BiRT: Bio-
OHAD performance while maintaining a balance between inspired replay in vision transformers for continual learning,” 2023,
historical and new tasks. arXiv:2305.04769.
5514715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[24] S. Chen, M. Zhang, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Exemplar-based continual [47] A. Razdaibiedina, Y. Mao, R. Hou, M. Khabsa, M. Lewis, and
 learning via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 7, A. Almahairi, “Progressive prompts: Continual learning for language
 pp. 3313–3324, Jul. 2024. models,” 2023, arXiv:2301.12314.
[25] Q. Wang et al., “Relational experience replay: Continual learning [48] M. Imani, “RX anomaly detector with rectified background,” IEEE
 by adaptively tuning task-wise relationship,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1313–1317, Aug. 2017.
 vol. 26, pp. 9683–9698, 2024. [49] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
[26] J. Zhang et al., “Class-incremental learning via deep model consol- anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 idation,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
 Mar. 2020, pp. 1120–1129. [50] S. Matteoli, T. Veracini, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A locally adaptive
[27] M. H. Phan, T.-A. Ta, S. L. Phung, L. Tran-Thanh, and A. Bouzerdoum, background density estimator: An evolution for RX-based anomaly
 “Class similarity weighted knowledge distillation for continual semantic detectors,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 323–327,
 segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Jan. 2014.
 (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 16866–16875. [51] L. Zhang, J. Ma, B. Cheng, and F. Lin, “Fractional Fourier transform-
[28] A. S. Alakooz and N. Ammour, “A contrastive continual learning for based tensor RX for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens.,
 the classification of remote sensing imagery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. vol. 14, no. 3, p. 797, Feb. 2022.
 Remote Sens. Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 7902–7905. [52] F. He et al., “Recursive RX with extended multi-attribute profiles for
[29] V. Marsocci and S. Scardapane, “Continual barlow twins: Continual hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 589,
 self-supervised learning for remote sensing semantic segmentation,” Jan. 2023.
 [53] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
 IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16,
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 pp. 5049–5060, 2023.
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3249344.
[30] S. Kim, L. Noci, A. Orvieto, and T. Hofmann, “Achieving a better [54] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
 stability-plasticity trade-off via auxiliary networks in continual learning,” anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
 Jun. 2023, pp. 11930–11939. [55] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
[31] A. Mallya, D. Davis, and S. Lazebnik, “Piggyback: Adapting a single hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
 network to multiple tasks by learning to mask weights,” in Proc. Eur. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 67–82. Apr. 2016.
[32] X. Li, Y. Zhou, T. Wu, R. Socher, and C. Xiong, “Learn to grow: [56] C.-I. Chang, “Effective anomaly space for hyperspectral anomaly
 A continual structure learning framework for overcoming catastrophic detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 forgetting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 3925–3934. Art. no. 5526624, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3161632.
[33] M. Xue, H. Zhang, J. Song, and M. Song, “Meta-attention for ViT- [57] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang,
 backed continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. “Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,”
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 150–159. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016,
[34] S. Ebrahimi, F. Meier, R. Calandra, T. Darrell, and M. Rohrbach, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3249748.
 “Adversarial continual learning,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2020, [58] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
 A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, and J.-M. Frahm, Eds., Cham, Switzer- tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
 land: Springer, 2020, pp. 386–402. IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
[35] Y. Cui, W. Pedrycz, and Z. Li, “Design of distributed rule-based models [59] C. Zhao, C. Li, S. Feng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced total variation regularin the presence of large data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, ized representation model with endmember background dictionary for
 pp. 2479–2486, Jul. 2023. hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[36] S. Wang, X. Li, J. Sun, and Z. Xu, “Training networks in null space vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5518312, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3128183.
 of feature covariance for continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [60] S. Mohla, S. Pande, B. Banerjee, and S. Chaudhuri, “FusAtNet: Dual
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 184–193. attention based SpectroSpatial multimodal fusion network for hyperspec-
[37] Y. Kong, L. Liu, Z. Wang, and D. Tao, “Balancing stability and plasticity tral and LiDAR classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 through advanced null space in continual learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 92–93.
 Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 219–236. [61] L. Gao, J. Li, K. Zheng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced autoencoders with
[38] R. Wang, Y. Bao, B. Zhang, J. Liu, W. Zhu, and G. Guo, “Anti- attention-embedded degradation learning for unsupervised hyperspectral
 retroactive interference for lifelong learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
 Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 163–178. Apr. 2023, Art. no. 5509417.
[39] J. Hurtado, A. Raymond-Sáez, and Á. Soto, “Optimizing reusable [62] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder
 knowledge for continual learning via metalearning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021, pp. 14150–14162. vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3334562.
 [63] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
[40] G. Lin, H. Chu, and H. Lai, “Towards better plasticity-stability tradehyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convoluoff in incremental learning: A simple linear connector,” in Proc.
 tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 Art. no. 5503314.
 pp. 89–98. [64] S. Arisoy, N. M. Nasrabadi, and K. Kayabol, “GAN-based hyper-
[41] S. Purushwalkam, P. Morgado, and A. Gupta, “The challenges of spectral anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th Eur. Signal Process. Conf.
 continuous self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (EUSIPCO), Jan. 2021, pp. 1891–1895.
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022, pp. 702–721. [65] J. Wang, S. Guo, R. Huang, L. Li, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Dual-
[42] E. Fini, V. G. T. Da Costa, X. Alameda-Pineda, E. Ricci, K. Alahari, channel capsule generation adversarial network for hyperspectral image
 and J. Mairal, “Self-supervised models are continual learners,” in classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, Art. no. 5501016, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2020.3044312.
 pp. 9621–9630. [66] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised
[43] Z. Wang et al., “Learning to prompt for continual learning,” in Proc. spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
 pp. 139–149. pp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020.
[44] J. S. Smith et al., “CODA-Prompt: Continual decomposed attention- [67] Z. He, D. He, M. Xiao, A. Lou, and G. Lai, “Convolutional transformerbased prompting for rehearsal-free continual learning,” in Proc. inspired autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
 pp. 11909–11919. [68] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu,
[45] Z. Wang et al., “DualPrompt: Complementary prompting for rehearsal- “Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on variational background
 free continual learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, inference and generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recog-
 Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 631–648. nit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109795. [Online]. Available:
[46] Y. Wang, Z. Huang, and X. Hong, “S-prompts learning with pre-trained https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320323004934
 transformers: An occam’s Razor for domain incremental learning,” in [69] C. V. Nguyen, Y. Li, T. D. Bui, and R. E. Turner, “Variational continual
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 5682–5695. learning,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10628.
WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING 5514715

[70] R. H. Yuhas, A. Goetz, and J. Boardman, “Discrimination among semi- Wan Zhang received the bachelor’s degree from
 arid landscape endmembers using the spectral angle mapper (SAM) Intelligent Science and Technology, Jiangsu Noralgorithm,” in Proc. JPL, Summaries 3rd Annu. JPL Airborne Geosci. mal University, Xuzhou, China, in 2024. She is
 Workshop, vol. 1. AVIRIS Workshop, 1992. currently pursuing the master’s degree in com-
[71] G. E. Hinton and R. S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description puter science and technology with Xidian University,
 length and Helmholtz free energy,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Xi’an, China.
 Syst., vol. 6, Nov. 1993, pp. 3–10. Her research interests include continual learning,
[72] Q. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Mei, and J. Ma, “TANet: An unsupervised prompt learning, hyperspectral large models, and
 two-stream autoencoder network for hyperspectral unmixing,” IEEE image processing.
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5506215,
 doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3094884.
[73] Y. Li, Y. Shi, K. Wang, B. Xi, J. Li, and P. Gamba, “Target detection
 with unconstrained linear mixture model and hierarchical denoising
 autoencoder in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 vol. 31, pp. 1418–1432, 2022.
[74] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, “Maximum likelihood
 from incomplete data via the EM algorithm,” J. Royal Stat. Soc. B, Shengjia Hao received the bachelor’s degree from
 Methodol., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 1977. Digital Media Technology, Xi’an University of Tech-
[75] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyper- nology, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
 spectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,” pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611, and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
 Oct. 2017. Her research interests include point cloud clas-
[76] Z. Li et L., “You only train once: Learning a general anomaly enhance- sification, point cloud segmentation, 3-D object
 ment network with random masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” detection, 3-D vision, and multimodal learning.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718,
 doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3258067.
[77] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars,
 “Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,” in Proc. Eur.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 139–154.
[78] G. Zeng, Y. Chen, B. Cui, and S. Yu, “Continual learning of contextdependent processing in neural networks,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 1,
 no. 8, pp. 364–372, Aug. 2019.
[79] J. Wang et al., “CL-CaGAN: Capsule differential adversarial con- Yuqiong Yao received the bachelor’s degree from
 tinual learning for cross-domain hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Data Science and Big Data Technology, Shanxi
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5517315, University, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
 doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3388426. pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
[80] M. H. Zweig and G. Campbell, “Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
 plots: A fundamental evaluation tool in clinical medicine,” Clin. Chem., Her research interests include video action recogvol. 39, no. 4, pp. 561–577, Apr. 1993. nition, video action detection, and prompt learning.
[81] C. Ferri, J. Hernndez-Orallo, and P. Flach, “A coherent interpretation of
 AUC as a measure of aggregated classification performance,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2011, pp. 657–664.
[82] S. Chen, C.-I. Chang, and X. Li, “Component decomposition analysis
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5516222, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3117765.

 Jianing Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 and M.S. degrees in circuit and system from Maoguo Gong (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
 Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China, in 2005 and and Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an,
 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Xidian China, in 2003 and 2009, respectively.
 University, Xi’an, China, in 2016. Since 2006, he has been a Teacher with Xidian
 She worked with China Aerospace Science and University, where he was promoted to an Asso-
 Technology Corporation, Xi’an. She is currently ciate Professor and a Full Professor in 2008 and
 an Associate Professor and a member of the Key 2010, respectively, both with exceptional admission.
 Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image He has published more than 100 papers in journals
 Understanding, Ministry of Education of China, and conferences, and holds more than 20 granted
 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian patents as the first inventor. He is leading or has
University. Her research interests include image processing, machine learning, completed more than 20 projects as the Principle
artificial intelligent algorithm and applications, big data processing, embedded Investigator, funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the
algorithms for intelligent model compression methods, pattern recognition and National Key Research and Development Program of China, and others. His
artificial intelligence, video data processing, analysis and content understand, research interests are broadly in the area of computational intelligence, with
and continual learning. applications to optimization, learning, data mining, and image understanding.
 Dr. Gong was a recipient of the prestigious National Program for Support of
 the Leading Innovative Talents from the Central Organization Department of
 Zheng Hua received the bachelor’s degree from
 China, the Leading Innovative Talent in the Science and Technology from the
 Digital Media Technology, Xi’an Engineering Uni-
 Ministry of Science and Technology of China, the Excellent Young Scientist
 versity, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
 Foundation from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the
 pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
 New Century Excellent Talent from the Ministry of Education of China,
 and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
 and the National Natural Science Award of China. He is the Executive
 Her research interests include continual learning,
 Committee Member of Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence, a Senior
 incremental learning, hyperspectral anomaly detec-
 Member of Chinese Computer Federation, and an Associate Editor or Editorial
 tion, and image processing.
 Board Member for over five journals, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 E VOLUTIONARY C OMPUTATION and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL
 N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS.