IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025 1955

 Class Incremental Website Fingerprinting Attack
 Based on Dynamic Expansion Architecture
 Yali Yuan , Yangyang Du , and Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Encrypted traffic on anonymizing networks is still at technique that identifies a specific website a user is visiting
risk of being exposed to the Website Fingerprinting (WF) attack. by monitoring the user’s Internet traffic. Even if the traffic
This attack can seriously threaten the online privacy of users of is encrypted, an attacker can infer which website a user is
anonymity networks such as Tor. While deep-learning-based WF
attacks achieve high accuracy in controlled experimental settings, visiting by the patterns and characteristics of the traffic.
they cannot continuously learn after deployment. In real-world WF attacks are essentially multi-classification tasks.
environments, new websites are constantly emerging, requiring Attackers collect traffic traces for each website, analyze
attackers to expand their monitoring scope continuously. This features, and train classifiers. Traditional methods for WF
necessitates attack models capable of continuous learning and attacks rely on manual feature extraction [8], [9], [10], [11],
expanding classification capabilities. In this paper, we explore
how attackers can leverage incremental class learning techniques requiring researchers to identify critical Web traffic features for
to continuously learn new classes while retaining the ability to training classifiers. These manual methods are time-consuming
distinguish old ones. This approach mitigates the catastrophic and do not cover all possible features, limiting their usability in
forgetting problem in dynamic, open-world scenarios. We intro- practical applications. In contrast, deep learning methods [12],
duce a new WF attack, Class Incremental Fingerprinting (CIF), [13], [14], [15] can automatically learn feature representations
which employs a scalable architecture enabling Class Incremental
Learning (CIL) with limited resources. We evaluate this attack in from data without manual feature selection and adjustment,
various scenarios, such as learning 100, 200, and 500 monitored providing greater flexibility and improved generalization.
website classes across 5 and 10 incremental tasks, achieving an Deep learning-based WF attacks have achieved high
average accuracy of 97.8% and above. Additionally, we assess performance in classical experimental scenarios. However,
the CIF attack’s effectiveness in open-world multi-classification they still face challenges in practical applications, and their
scenarios and test it in few-shot settings using the proposed
data augmentation method, Mixtam, achieving an average task real-world effectiveness has been questioned by some critiaccuracy of 87.6% and above with only 30 samples per class. cisms [16], [17], [18]. Enhancing the real-world applicability
 of WF attacks and reducing reliance on idealized conditions
 Index Terms—Tor, privacy, website fingerprinting, deep learning, class incremental learning. have emerged as critical focal points for research. Multi-tab
 WF attacks [16], [19], [20] aim to overcome the single-page
 assumption by addressing scenarios where users open multiple
 I. I NTRODUCTION tabs within a short period, generating overlapping traffic traces.
 ITH the rapid development of the Internet, the privacy Few-shot WF attacks [21], [22], [23] address the dependency
W protection of users has become increasingly important.
Over the past few decades, various anonymous communication
 on large training datasets. Some related researches [24], [25]
 focus on enhancing the robustness of the model to real-world
systems have emerged, among which Onion Routing (Tor) [1] challenges.
is the most popular. According to Tor’s metrics [2], three to According to the Tor Metric [26], the official metric tool
five million active users utilize Tor to protect their privacy of the Tor Project, approximately 30,000 hidden services are
every day. The Tor network employs multi-layer encryption published to the Tor network daily. As the number of weband relay switching to protect user privacy. User data passes sites a victim may visit increases, attackers must frequently
through multiple relay nodes in the Tor network, each of expand their monitored websites, requiring WF attacks to
which can only decrypt a single layer of information, making demonstrate continuous learning capabilities. However, current
user identity and activities difficult to trace. However, the research has not addressed how to enhance WF attack models’
Website Fingerprinting (WF) attack [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] is a continuous learning and adaptation in real-world open-world
 settings, especially when adapting to new websites under
 Received 13 May 2024; revised 4 November 2024 and 29 January 2025; limited computational and storage resources. Conventional
accepted 31 January 2025. Date of publication 20 February 2025; date of
current version 22 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the
 deep learning-based WF attacks [12], [13], [15] use pre-
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. SBK2023041256) collected data from a large set of target websites to train
and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant a complex model capable of recognizing all sample classes
No. 62302097). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was M. Conti. (Corresponding author: Guang
 simultaneously. However, such a model can only generalize to
Cheng.) known classes.
 The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Updating the model with data from new classes results in
Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (e-mail: chengguang@
seu.edu.cn).
 catastrophic forgetting [27], which erodes the discriminative
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3538895 power of previously learned classes. Re-training the model
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1956 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

from scratch incurs significant time and storage costs. Class
incremental learning (CIL) in deep learning is uniquely suited
to processing continuous information streams in real-world
scenarios. It effectively absorbs new knowledge while adeptly
retaining and optimizing previously acquired knowledge. With
CIL, the attack model can acquire the ability to categorize
 Fig. 1. The threat model of WF attacks.
traffic from new websites without compromising its discriminative power over existing website classes. as well as information about related work in Section III. We
 In this paper, we based on a dynamically scaling archi- describe the proposed method in detail in Section IV and evaltecture [28], [29], [30], [31] propose a new WF attack uate the proposed method experimentally in multiple scenarios
method, Class Incremental Fingerprinting (CIF). Our method- in Section V. In Section VI, we discuss the limitations of
ology enables attackers to enhance their attack model’s the study as well as future directions. Finally, the work is
generalization capacity progressively. By retraining on new summarized in Section VII.
class traffic samples without retaining complete datasets of
previous classes, this process prevents catastrophic forgetting II. T HREAT M ODEL
of previously learned knowledge. Consequently, the model can
adapt effectively to real-world, open, and evolving network Tor is a widely used anonymous communication network.
environments, even under limited computational and storage Users access the Onion Network through the free Onion
resources. Browser to browse websites while protecting their personal
 Previous WF studies have not considered dynamically information. However, attackers can still compromise users’
expanding site set scenarios. These methods are generally privacy by collecting traffic from monitored websites and
evaluated in closed-world and open-world settings, neither utilizing Website Fingerprinting (WF) attack techniques to
of which can simulate the dynamic, open-world environ- identify the websites users visit. As depicted in Fig. 1, akin to
ments of real-world scenarios or evaluate the incremental site earlier WF attacks [8], [13], [32], within this threat model, the
fingerprinting attack methods we propose. In response, we attacker is regarded as a localized passive observer. Positioned
introduce two novel scenario settings: dynamic closed-world between the Tor client and the Tor ingress node (the access
and dynamic open-world. point to the Tor network), this attacker is capable of monitoring
 The main contributions of our work are: and logging network traffic without making any modifications
 • We investigate the problem of WF attacks lacking
 or injections. The attacker’s goal is to identify the specific
 continuous expansion learning capabilities in real open websites visited by Tor users. Although traffic is encrypted
 environments. To address this issue, we introduced through multiple layers of the Tor network, a WF attacker can
 a class incremental learning method to enhance the still infer user behavior by analyzing features like timestamps
 attack model’s practical application ability. This approach and packet sizes using machine learning.
 enables attackers to continuously expand their monitoring Closed-world and open-world scenarios are frequently
 scope across target websites without triggering catas- employed to evaluate WF attack methods [12], [32], [33]. The
 trophic forgetting, while simultaneously not requiring a closed-world scenario restricts the user’s access to a subset of
 significant increase in computational or memory resource websites defined by the attacker, constituting the monitored
 consumption. sites. This scenario significantly differs from real-world con-
 • We propose two new and more challenging scenarios
 ditions, but it provides a simplified and effective environment
 for evaluating CIF attacks: Dynamic closed-world and for analyzing and evaluating WF attack capabilities. The open-
 Dynamic open-world. In these scenarios, the attacker can world scenario is more realistic, assuming a user can access
 continuously expand the set of monitored sites to update both the monitored sites and those outside the attacker’s
 the model’s identification and classification capabilities. scope, which form a substantial set of non-monitored sites. In
 • We propose a new attack, Class Incremental
 the open-world multi-classification scenario, the attacker must
 Fingerprinting (CIF), for more realistic scenario determine if a traffic trace is part of the monitored set. If so, the
 applications. Our attack employs the Dynamic Extension attacker must pinpoint the specific site within the monitored
 Architecture (DEA) for CIL, which achieves an average set that the trace matches.
 of 97.8% and above accuracy in dynamic closed-world Neither scenario allows dynamic scaling of monitored
 incremental learning tasks and demonstrates effectiveness websites to simulate a real open environment. Therefore,
 in open-world environments. we propose two scenarios, dynamic closed-world, and open-
 • We evaluated the performance of the CIF attack through
 world, to evaluate evolving WF attack scenarios.
 a series of experiments. The experimental results show
 that the CIF attack not only remains effective in dynamic III. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
 open-world scenarios but also effectively addresses the In the Tor network, messages are transmitted in fixed-size
 challenge of few-shot incremental learning by combining units (512 bytes) and are padded with zeros if insufficient
 with our proposed Mixtam data augmentation method. data is available [15], [16]. An attacker can analyze Tor’s
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we introduce traffic patterns and extract features such as interval time
the threat model in Section II and provide background and (IPD), direction, and packet size. These extracted features
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1957

can then serve as inputs for training classifiers to identify then used to train a k-NN classifier for WF classification.
the websites visited by users. Broadly, WF attack methods Experimental results demonstrate that the method performs
discussed in the literature are categorized into two groups well with limited data and is transferable by re-training the
based on feature extraction techniques: traditional WF attacks k-NN classifier with a new dataset. Zhou et al. [23] proposed
that involve manual feature extraction and WF attacks that the Clustered WF Attack (CWFA) method, which utilizes the
utilize deep learning for automated feature extraction. cluster assumption to efficiently perform the attack in the
 Traditional website fingerprinting attack methods. presence of limited training data. NetCLR [39] employs self-
The earliest related research was conducted by Herrmann supervised contrastive learning to augment Tor network traces,
et al. (2009) [34], achieving an accuracy of merely 2.96%. achieving robust WF accuracy and high transferability without
Wang et al. [11] proposed a WF attack based on a man- relying on extensive labeled data.
ually extracted feature set, applying a k-NN classifier with Data augmentation techniques can also reduce reliance on
feature weighting to emphasize the most important features. large labeled datasets. Chen et al. [22] put forward a harmo-
Pachinko et al. [33] introduced the CUMUL method, which nized data augmentation (HDA) method. This method utilizes
accumulates Tor unit-sampling features and uses a Support both within-sample and between-sample transformations to
Vector Machine (SVM) classifier to achieve a higher accuracy expand small training datasets. Additionally, Chen et al.
( 91.38%) in a closed-world setting. Moreover, Hayes and [40] introduced the TForm-RF algorithm, which generates
Danezis [32] created the k-fingerprinting ( k-FP) technique. augmented traffic traces by extracting and randomizing traffic
This technique integrates a random decision forest and a patterns from cell sequences, outperforming HDA in effectivekkk-nearest neighbor k-NN classifier to make use of a substan- ness.
tial collection of statistical features, showing high accuracy. Several studies have explicitly addressed the challenge of
While these traditional approaches based on machine learning mixing multi-Web page traffic in WF attacks. These works
techniques, such as SVM, (k-NN), and Random Forest, have [6], [19], [20], [41], [42] propose methods for segmenting and
achieved notable success, their reliance on hand-designed identifying traffic that combines tags from multiple Web pages.
features and the lack of effective interaction between feature Additionally, Cherubin et al. [18] introduced a novel threat
representation and classifier models have constrained their model that evaluates the practical effectiveness of WF attacks
overall performance. on the Tor network. This model leverages real Tor exit node
 Deep website fingerprinting attack methods. Researchers traffic data and employs the TF approach to simulate more
have explored applying deep learning to WF attacks, inspired realistic attack scenarios.
by its success in computer vision, natural language process- Website fingerprinting Defenses. In addressing the chaling, and other fields. Deep learning methods enable direct lenge of WF attacks, the research community has explored and
end-to-end feature learning from raw data, removing the developed a variety of defense methods [3], [35], [43], [44],
need for manual feature engineering. Rimmer et al. [12] [45], [46], [47].
employed only directional sequences from traffic traces as One defense strategy actively modifies the temporal and
inputs and utilized three types of deep networks (SDAE, quantitative characteristics of communication traffic to com-
CNN, and LSTM) to achieve 96% classification accuracy plicate the correlation with specific website activities. Early
in a closed-world scenario. Sirinam et al. [13] put forward attempts, such as BuFLO [48], CS-BuFLO [46], and Tamaraw
the Deep Fingerprinting (DF) attack approach relying on a [3], were effective in creating barriers to WF attacks but
more intricate CNN structure DF also used only directional incurred significant bandwidth and time overheads due to
sequences as inputs, achieving 98% accuracy in closed-world fixed-rate packet delivery, adversely affecting user experience.
scenarios and effectively bypassing WTF-PAD defenses [35]. Subsequent research has sought to balance overhead reduc-
Bhat et al. [36] developed the Var-CNN model using Dilated tion with defense effectiveness. For example, WTF-PAD [35]
Causal Convolutions on ResNets, demonstrating superior utilizes an adaptive approach to insert virtual packets during
performance with few-shot training samples compared to DF. natural gaps in the actual data transmission, achieving a
Deng et al. [37] proposed Holmes, a model using tempo- defense with zero time overhead. Front [49] also employs
ral and spatial distribution analysis to enhance WF attacks a zero-latency design that utilizes timestamps generated by
on partial traffic, achieving notable improvements in early- the Rayleigh distribution to guide the embedding of the
stage traffic recognition under dynamic network conditions. virtual packets. Walkie-Talkie [50] innovatively employs a
Attarian et al. [38] proposed a method that focuses on the first half-duplex communication model, where the target-site data
part of the tracked packets, achieving high preprocessing and packets are mixed with non-target-site data, increasing the
classification efficiency while highlighting the critical role of difficulty of identification for attackers. RegulaTor [51] minidirectional information in website detection. mizes time and bandwidth overheads through a well-designed
 Few-shot website fingerprinting attack methods. Many packet-peaking adjustment strategy while maintaining defense
researchers have proposed few-shot learning methods to efficiency. TrafficSliver [52] offers another approach by
overcome the limitation of requiring large labeled training reconfiguring network architecture or employing client-side
datasets and enhance the effectiveness of WF attacks in real- multiplexing, which reduces traffic exposure at single obserworld scenarios. Siriam proposed the Triplet Fingerprinting vation points without directly consuming bandwidth or time
(TF) [21] attack, which first trains a CNN model for feature resources. More recent defenses, such as Surakav [53] and
extraction using a large dataset. The extracted features are Palette [54], enhance protection by leveraging dynamic traffic
1958 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

patterns and clustering techniques. Surakav employs GANs to the label sets at different steps are mutually exclusive, i.e.,
generate adaptive, realistic traffic patterns, while Palette clus- Wi ∩ Wj = ∅ for any i = j . The model learns all class
ters similar traffic patterns into uniform groups, obfuscating knowledge over T steps. At step T, the incoming training
traffic within each cluster and reducing identification risks. dataset is Dt = {(x1t , y1t ), . . . , (xnt , ynt )}, where xit denotes the
 In addition to these traffic obfuscation approaches, adversar- i-th input traffic trace, yit ∈ Wt is its corresponding label, and
ial perturbations present another class of defense mechanisms. n is the number of training samples. The goal of the model is
By introducing carefully crafted noise into the data, these to accurately predict all classes in W. This requires learning
methods aim to mislead deep learning models and hinder new class knowledge from step T data Dt while retaining
accurate classification. Typically, they [55], [56], [57], [58], previously learned knowledge from {D1 , . . . , Dt−1 }.
[59] employ specialized loss functions to reshape distances in To achieve this, our approach adopts a rehearsal stratthe feature space, offering alternative insights into the design egy [27], [74], which saves representative class samples as a
of effective defenses. However, such approaches often require memory Mt within a fixed-size budget for subsequent training
full trace data to compute the necessary perturbations and tasks. An iterative method selects samples based on the mean
have shown limited effectiveness against adversarially trained of the class feature space, ensuring an even distribution across
models [60]. the dataset and retaining representative samples for each class.
 Class incremental learning. Class incremental learn- In contrast, the non-rehearsal setting prohibits using data from
ing (CIL) is a crucial branch of artificial intelligence that previous tasks.
addresses the challenges of learning new classes. This
approach ensures continuous knowledge accumulation without B. Class Incremental Learning Architecture
forgetting previous information. In recent years, incremental
 We propose a model architecture tailored for increlearning has achieved remarkable results in diverse fields,
 mental learning of WF attacks, inspired by previous
including computer vision [61], [62], [63], natural language
 works [28], [29], [30]. The dynamic expansion framework
processing [64], [65], and robotics [66], [67]. With rapid
 (CIF) incrementally adds feature extractors and classifiers to
development, numerous approaches have emerged and can be
 handle progressively increasing classification tasks. At each
classified into three categories: data-centric, model-centric, and
 incremental learning stage, feature extractors generate feature
algorithm-centric.
 maps, which are enhanced through a fusion module employing
 Data-centric approaches for mitigating forgetting rely heavthe SE (Squeeze and Excitation) mechanism to highlight
ily on additional data. For instance, GDumb [68] enables
 critical features selectively. To address forgetting, CIF employs
data replay to retain previous knowledge, while EWC [69]
 knowledge distillation to integrate newly learned and existing
applies regularization to restrict parameter updates and
 knowledge. Furthermore, CIF uses a re-scoring mechanism
ensure retention of learned tasks. FOSTER [70] uses model
 to dynamically adjust classifier outputs, ensuring balanced
extension strategies, dynamically adding new modules to
 performance between new and old classes. Finally, the loss
slow catastrophic forgetting, while integrating methods to
 function combines cross-entropy loss, knowledge distillation
reduce redundancy. Parameter regularization techniques like
 loss, and re-scoring loss to ensure effective learning of new
LWF [71] maintain performance on old tasks while acquiring
 tasks while retaining previously acquired knowledge.
new knowledge through customized loss functions.
 It is shown in Fig. 2. The architecture is roughly divided
 Algorithm-centric approaches focus on knowledge transfer
 into two phases in each CIL step:
and model-tuning techniques. LUCIR [72] uses old model
 • First phase. The data for the current task is input into
predictions as soft labels for knowledge distillation, reducing
 the feature extractor to generate the corresponding feature
forgetting. In contrast, DER++ [73] combines replay buffermaps. During subsequent learning steps, these feature
ing and knowledge distillation to optimize the update process,
 maps are fused with those produced by the old feature
significantly suppressing forgetting.
 extractor. This fusion effectively integrates new and old
 task knowledge, ensuring a comprehensive representation
 IV. CIF ATTACK M ETHOD that supports subsequent classification and recognition
 This section details the proposed CIF attack. We first tasks.
introduce the WF CIL problem setup and provide an overview • Second phase. Feature maps are processed by the SE
of the methodology. Next, we describe the dynamic extension attention model, which automatically learns feature chanarchitecture for CIL, including the feature extractor, attention nel weights to enhance informative features and suppress
module, and knowledge distillation mechanism. Finally, we irrelevant ones. Following this, the classifier re-scoring
explain the data enhancement technique used in the few-shot mechanism refines the ordering and scores of the clas-
CIL scenario. sifier outputs, improving the model’s output quality and
 adaptability to diverse task requirements.
 Basic Architecture. The initial feature extractor F1 and
A. Problem Setup and Method Overview classifier Clf1 are trained on CIF following standard incremen-
 In the WF scenario, the CIL process assumes T batches of tal learning methods [28], [75]. During the first step, only the
traffic fingerprint data {D1 , . . . , DT }. The label space of the classification loss Lclf , computed using cross-entropy, is used
model at step T is defined as W t = t Wi , where Wi to train both the feature extractor and the classifier. Assuming a
 i=1
represents all labels in the dataset Di at step i. Additionally, total of n CIL steps, at each incremental step t ∈ {2, . . . , N }, a
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1959

Fig. 2. An illustrative framework of the proposed CIF. It incrementally adds task-specific feature extractors and classifiers, enhances features using the SE
mechanism, and balances new and old task performance via knowledge distillation and a re-scoring mechanism.

new feature extractor Ft and classifier Clft are introduced. The the arg max function is used to select the website class label
parameters of the existing feature extractors {F1 , . . . , Ft−1 } with the highest probability as the prediction result ŷ.
and the previous classifier Clft−1 remain unchanged, while Knowledge Distillation (KD). Knowledge distillation
Clft is initialized using Clft−1 . (KD) [29], [76] is an effective technique for supporting incre-
 For each incremental step, the newly added feature extractor mental learning tasks. In our approach, KD is applied to
Ft learns knowledge from the current training data Dt and prevent catastrophic forgetting of previously acquired knowlthe fused features vt−1 derived at step t−1 via knowledge edge while accommodating new information, thus facilitating
distillation. Specifically, the fusion feature vt for traffic trace the accumulation and integration of knowledge across distinct
x (where x ∈ {D1 , . . . , Dt }) is obtained by concatenating fea- tasks. KD consists of two components: feature-level and logitture vectors from all feature extractors. For a given x, features level knowledge distillation. These components are applied
are extracted from all feature extractors and concatenated to to the new feature extractor Ft and classifier Clft at each
produce vt , as shown below: incremental step to help them better differentiate between old
 and new classes and consolidate knowledge from previous
 vt = [F1 (x ), . . . , Ft (x )]. (1) tasks.
 Feature-level knowledge distillation guides the training of
 For the fused features vt , the feature fusion module St , the new feature extractor Ft by using the traffic trace and the
based on the SE attention mechanism, enhances significant old feature extractor Ft−1 in the retained sample memory Mt
features to obtain a stronger feature representation ftse . This as the teacher model. This strategy minimizes the difference
enhanced representation is passed into the new classifier Clft , between the output features of Ft−1 and Ft , enabling Ft
which produces the output logits lt (x ). During this process, to capture critical feature representations related to previous
knowledge distillation guides Clft in preserving knowledge of tasks, rather than relying solely on data from new tasks. We
the old classes. calculate the distance between the output features of Ft−1 and
 A classifier re-scoring module is employed to avoid the Ft as the feature-level knowledge distillation loss:
possibility that the newly introduced classifier Clft may be
biased against the old classes during inference (since it is 
  d 
primarily trained using samples from the new class). This  (j ) 2
 L (x ) = 
 (j )
 f F (x ) − F (x ) .
 t t−1 (3)
module mitigates class imbalance by adjusting the weight
 j =1
distributions between old and new classes at the end of each
training step.
 Finally, the re-scored logits lt (x ) are passed through a Logit-level knowledge distillation is performed by comsoftmax function to produce the final classification result ŷ for paring, for each traffic trace, the logits outputs lt (x ) and
the traffic trace x. lt−1 (x ) from the classifiers Clft and Clft−1 , respectively. The
 Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [76] is employed to measure
 ŷ = arg max(Softmax(lt (x ))), (2) the discrepancy between the outputs of the two classifiers,
1960 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

acting as the loss function to be minimized Excitation operation), which is achieved by utilizing the ReLU
 activation function and another fully connected layer:
 W̃t−1
  pw (x )
 Ll (x ) = pw (x ) log , (4) Fex (z , W ) = σ(W2 δ(W1 z )), (7)
 qw (x )
 w =1
 l̂w (x )/T lw (x )/T
 where W1 and W2 are the weight matrices of the MLP, δ
where, qw (x ) = ŵet−1 l̂ (x )/T , pw (x ) = ŵet−1 l (x )/T , represents the ReLU activation function, and σ denotes the
 j =1 ej j =1 ej
 sigmoid activation function.
T is the temperature scalar, which controls the decision-
 Finally, the output feature map is weighted by channel-wise
making process of the model so that it balances between
 multiplication through the sigmoid function and combined
determinism and stochasticity. l̂w (x ) is an component
 with the original input feature map using a residual structure.
of lt−1 (x ). The vector lt−1 (x ) defined as lt−1 (x ) =
 The overall feature fusion process of the SE attention module
(l̂1 (x ), . . . , l̂w̃t−1 (x ))T , represents the logits of the clasis described as:
sifier Clft−1 . lw (x ) is an element of lt (x ), lt (x ) =
(l1 (x ), . . . , lw̃t−1 (x ), lw̃t−1 +1 (x ), . . . , lw̃t (x ))T denotes the fse (ut ) = σ(W2 δ(W1 z )) ⊗ ut + ut , (8)
logits of the classifier Clft .
 This process encourages Clft to closely replicate the proba- where ⊗ represents element-wise multiplication.
bility distribution of the old class outputs generated by Clft−1 . The SE module enables the class incremental architecture
By achieving this, knowledge transfer from the old tasks is to adaptively adjust the response of each channel, effectively
facilitated, and the retention of previously learned knowledge enhancing the representation of useful features while suppressis preserved, effectively mitigating the effects of catastrophic ing irrelevant ones. This improves the feature expression and
forgetting. Consequently, a feature-level knowledge distillation the ability to generalize the class incremental architecture.
loss Lf (x ) and a logit-level knowledge distillation loss Ll (x ) Classifier Re-scoring (CR). In incremental learning, the
are introduced, forming the overall dynamically balanced model tends to focus excessively on novel classes, resulting
knowledge distillation loss Ld−kd : in output logits biased towards these newer classes. This bias
  adversely impacts the model’s generalizability and its ability
 epoch
 Ld-kd = w1 Lf (x ) × min 1, to effectively transfer knowledge. To mitigate this issue, we
 wwarm up employ the Classifier Re-scoring approach [78] to adjust the
 x ∈R
 
 +w2 Ll (x ), (5) scores assigned to both old and new classes. This mechanism
 x ∈R∪Dt
 begins by computing the weight norms of the classifier for
 existing and newly introduced classes:
where epoch denotes the current training epoch, and wwarmup   
defines the duration of the warm-up phase. The feature-based    
loss Lf (x ) increases in importance as training progresses, normold = tr θ1 θ1 , . . . , tr θW θ
 t−1 Wt−1
 ,
with its contribution controlled by a dynamic weighting  
mechanism that adjusts its influence based on the training normnew = 
 tr θW θ ,...,
epoch. In contrast, the logit-based loss Ll (x ) is applied t−1 +1 Wt−1 +1

consistently throughout the training process, ensuring stability   
in knowledge transfer across both current and past tasks. tr  θ
 θW , (9)
 t Wt
This combined loss function updates the parameters of the
feature extractors and classifiers during training, facilitating
 Using the above norms, we compute the reweighting coefinformation propagation between old and new tasks. It enables
 ficient γ for classifier re-scoring:
the model to better distinguish the differences between classes
in both the old and new tasks. Mean(normold )
 γ= , (10)
 SE Module (Squeeze-and-Excitation). Considering that Mean(normnew )
the old feature extractor {F1 , . . . , Ft−1 }, trained before the
new learning step, cannot effectively extract features for traffic where Mean(·) represents the mean value of the elements in
traces from the new step {t, . . . , T }, the quality of extracted the vector. By applying the reweighting factor γ, the logits
features is affected. To address this issue, we adopt the SE are adjusted to align the mean norm of the novel classes with
attention module [77] to optimize the feature representation. that of the old classes. The logits l(x) of Clft are expressed
Given the fused feature map ut ∈ RC ×H ×W as input, the SE as l (x ) = (lt−1 (x), lt (x)[W̃t−1 + 1, . . . , W̃t ]). The rectified
attention mechanism first applies global average pooling (i.e., logits lre (x ) are then given by:
the Squeeze operation) to compress the spatial dimensions and
 lre (x ) = (lold (x ), γ · lnew (x )). (11)
obtain the compressed feature vector z:
 z = AvgPool(ut ). (6) Loss Function. The total training loss for WF CIL consists
 of three components: the classification loss Lclf , computed
 The compressed feature vector undergoes processing via using cross-entropy, the dynamically balanced knowledge
a fully connected layer (MLP) to reduce its dimensionality. distillation loss Ld-kd , and the multi-class auxiliary loss LMH .
This is succeeded by dimensionality enhancement (namely the The auxiliary loss LMH is inspired by previous CIL work [28]
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1961

and is specifically designed to distinguish between old and
new classes. It is defined as follows:
   
 1  exp w y  · Ft (x )
 LMH = − log |Y |+1 . (12)
 |Dt | t
 exp(w · Ft (x ))
 x ∈Dt k =1 k

 This formula guides the feature extractor Ft (x ) to learn
discriminative features for both new and old classes. Here,
Dt is the current training dataset, combining new data and Fig. 3. Mixtam Data Augmentation Workflow for Few-shot CIL Scenarios.
memory data. The weight vector w y  corresponds to the
adjusted label y  , where new classes retain their original labels D. Feature Extractor
and old classes are mapped to a unified old class label. We use RF [25] as a feature extractor in a dynamically scal-
The Softmax normalization term in the denominator ensures able architecture for WF attacks. The RF model is specifically
the output is probabilistic. This loss term helps mitigate designed based on the CNN architecture, targeting the TAM
catastrophic forgetting by encouraging the feature extractor to traffic representation method. Leveraging the construction of
preserve knowledge from previous tasks while adapting to new TAM and a multi-level convolutional network structure, the
ones. model effectively extracts local features in both the temporal
 The total loss is formulated as: and spatial dimensions of the traffic flow. Furthermore, it
 L = Lclf + Ld-kd + LMH . (13) refines robust features capable of resisting various defense
 strategies.
 Convolutional Blocks. In the model, 2D convolutional
C. Data Representation blocks are initially applied to process the two-dimensional
 Our approach utilizes a Traffic Aggregation Matrix input data, namely the TAM. The TAM contains information
(TAM) [25], which differs from most prior deep learning- about the number of data packets in different directions
based WF attack methods that primarily focus on sequences (upload, download) within time slots during network comof direction information in Tor traffic data. TAM aggregates munication, reflecting the interaction between clients and
multidimensional information, including direction, volume, servers and the variability of traffic patterns. Through two
and timing, providing a more comprehensive and robust set of 2D convolutional layers, the model captures and extracts local
features. and intermediate spatiotemporal features. These layers are
 The network traffic trace related to a website visit can be combined with the ReLU activation function to enhance nonexpressed as w = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sl ), where l denotes the length linear expressiveness, BatchNormalization layers to ensure
of the trace. We set l = +∞ to account for all packets. Let stable convergence during training and prevent overfitting, and
si = ti , di be a pair consisting of the packet timestamp and MaxPooling layers for downsampling. The TAM is then fused
its direction. Here, ti and di signify the arrival time and the into a 1D feature map using a 2×2 maximum pooling layer,
direction of the i-th packet, respectively. It should be noted that further reducing the feature dimensionality while preserving
di ∈ {±1, 0}, with +1 denoting the outgoing packet direction essential information. To extract higher-level features, the
and −1 representing the incoming packet direction. model reduces the number of channels and reshapes the
 The specific implementation of TAM involves partitioning output to expand the feature map size, followed by two 1D
the network traffic into multiple fixed-length time slots and convolutional blocks for deeper feature mining.
counting the number of outgoing and incoming packets within Global Average Pooling (GAP). To avoid overfitting
each slot. Let M be the TAM of trace W, with N being the caused by the excessive number of parameters introduced
count of time slots taken into account in the TAM. Given by traditional fully connected layers, the model adopts the
that the length of each time slot is s, the maximum load time GAP [79] layer as an alternative. The GAP layer does not
T encompassed by a trace can be computed as T/s. In the introduce additional parameters but directly computes the
resulting two-dimensional matrix M, each row represents the average of each feature map, reducing the model’s complexity
packet counts for either the outgoing or incoming direction, and enhancing its generalization ability. Finally, by flattening
while the columns correspond to different time windows. Each the vector obtained from averaging each feature map and
element mij records the cumulative count of packets in the passing it through the softmax function, the model generates a
respective direction within the time interval from (j − 1) × s probability distribution for different website classes, completto j × s seconds. ing the classification task.
 TAM captures intermediate granularity information by
aggregating outgoing and incoming packet counts per time
slot, thereby enhancing robustness against various defense E. Data Augmentation
mechanisms. Furthermore, compared to using direction In practical WF attack scenarios, obtaining sufficient websequences alone as a traffic representation, TAM captures site traffic samples for model training can be challenging,
a richer set of traffic characteristics, improving the model’s particularly in rapidly evolving network environments where
generalization capabilities. This aids in maintaining model timely collection of large volumes of data for model updates
performance during incremental learning processes. becomes an issue [21], [22], [40], [80]. In the few-shot
1962 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

CIL scenario, we have devised a novel data augmentation various experimental scenarios. Traditional deep learning
technique, Mixtam, tailored for the TAM matrix-based repre- methods [12], [13], [14], [15], [36], [38] must be retrained
sentation of website traffic. from scratch to satisfy the attacker’s need to dynamically
 Mixtam employs a stochastic mixing [81], [82] enhance- expand the set of monitoring sites. Moreover, no prior WF
ment mechanism based on random sampling from a Beta attack methods have considered similar scenarios for experidistribution. Specifically, this method selects two distinct mental evaluation. Recent WF attack methods [19], [22], [23],
samples from within the same category label of multiple traffic [24], [25], [40], [85], [86] also fail to address the lack of
sequences. It then linearly interpolates these paired samples continuous learning capability in attack models, making them
using a mixing coefficient λ drawn from a Beta distribution. unsuitable for CIL scenarios.
This fusion process generates new, mixed traffic samples. As In the absence of methods specifically designed for increillustrated in Fig. 3, a linear interpolation method is applied mental learning in WF attacks, we conduct comparative
to two samples T  o1 and T o2 of the same website to compute experiments using TF [21], DF [13], Var-CNN [36], and
the new virtual sample seed T  oi : NetCLR [39] under the same experimental setup. As a classic
 T oi = λT o1 + (1 − λ)T o2 , (14) few-shot WF attack method, the TF attack exhibits certain
 transfer properties, enabling classification on an expanded
where λ is chosen as in [81], using a random variable drawn set of websites by retraining the k-NN classifier. Similarly,
from a Beta distribution β(α, α), with α set to 0.1 after several NetCLR leverages fine-tuning to adapt to new website sets,
tests. demonstrating transferability across different data distribu-
 If the relative change introduced by this mixing exceeds tions.
a predefined threshold, it indicates that data within that time The deep learning-based WF attack model Var-CNN [36]
window requires adjustment. Upon detecting deviations above achieves superior performance compared to DF [13] by
this threshold, our approach probabilistically decides—based employing extended causal convolution but lacks direct supon the inherent characteristics of the raw data—whether to port for incremental learning. To address this, we modified
retain the augmented data values or revert to the original data both DF and Var-CNN by incorporating a k-NN classifier,
values for filling. Let the original traffic TAM be represented enabling them to classify an expanded set of websites through
by O, and the enhanced, synthetically generated TAM be retraining. These modified models are referred to as DF* and
designated as T. For each arbitrary time slot indexed by i, we Var-CNN*, respectively. Although TF, DF*, Var-CNN*, and
determine the rates of change in the number of outgoing data NetCLR can adapt to classification tasks on new website sets,
packets and the volume of incoming traffic, yielding values they lack support for direct incremental learning. Each requires
Δin and Δout . These derived rates are then compared against fine-tuning with data from both new and stored old classes,
a predetermined local variation threshold δ: making them sensitive to the distribution similarity between
 |T (i ) − Oin (i )| the pre-training and test datasets. To evaluate these methods
 Δin (i ) = in (15)
 |Oin (i )| + 1 under different data distributions, we set up experiments
 |Tout (i ) − Oout (i )| comparing TF-Syn vs. DF-Syn and TF-Div vs. DF-Div. For
 Δout (i ) = . (16) Var-CNN* and NetCLR, results are presented based on pre-
 |Oout (i )| + 1
 training and fine-tuning within the same data distribution.
 The Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test [83], [84] is then uti- We conduct CIF evaluations under four settings:
lized to assess whether the augmented data (Tam ) statistically dynamic closed-world, dynamic open-world, few-shot Class
conforms to the distribution of the original data (Otam ). It Incremental Learning, and adversarial defense measures.
computes the K-S statistic and its corresponding p-value for
the two sample sets:
 D = sup|Tor (x ) − Tau (x )|. (17) A. Dataset
 x The Wang dataset [11], AWF dataset [12], and DF
 If the p-value falls below a predetermined significance level dataset [13], which are publicly available, are used for experof 0.05, this suggests a significant difference between the imental evaluation of CIF attacks. The following provides an
distributions of the augmented and original datasets. In such overview of these datasets:
cases, the augmented samples undergo further randomized Wang dataset. Referred to as Wang100, this dataset is
adjustments to better align their distribution with the original composed of a group of websites chosen from a list of sites
data. that are blocked in several countries. Each website within it
 In few-shot CIL, we utilize the Mixtam algorithm to has 90 examples.
generate virtual trace samples and combine these virtual AWF dataset. Built in 2016, the AWF dataset comprises
samples with the original samples to form a training set, both monitored and unmonitored websites, all of which are
thereby enhancing the model’s robustness in situations where picked from the top-ranked sites in the Alexa rankings. The
collecting a significant amount of training samples is not following subsets are involved in our experiments:
feasible. • AWF 100: Comprises the top 100 monitored websites in
 the Alexa rankings, and each of these websites supplies
 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATIONS 2500 data instances.
 In this section, we conduct a series of experimental eval- • AWF 200: Contains an additional 200 monitored webuations to investigate the performance of CIF attacks under sites, with each having 2500 instances.
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1963

 TABLE I TABLE III
 H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION FOR CIF M ODEL T HE I MPACT OF M AX T RAFFIC T RACE L ENGTH ON CIF ACCURACY (%)

 TABLE II
 T HE I MPACT OF TAM T IME S LOT ( MS ) ON CIF ACCURACY (%)

 Fig. 4. Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 100
 Websites.

 • AWF 775: Includes 775 more monitored websites, and
 each provides 2500 instances. 5,000. Additionally, previous studies on website fingerprint-
 • AWF 400K: An open-world dataset containing 9000 ing [12], [21], [36] commonly set the maximum length to
 unmonitored websites selected from the Alexa rankings, 5,000. Therefore, we adopt a maximum length of 5,000.
 with one example per website. Training Epochs. We set the training epochs to 100 and
 DF dataset. The DF dataset consists of websites selected employed early stopping to prevent overfitting. The validation
from the top Alexa rankings. It includes both undefended loss is monitored, with the initial best loss set to infinity and
and defense-protected traffic traces for 95 monitored websites. a patience value of 5. If the current loss is lower than the best
Each website provides 1000 examples. loss, we update the best loss and reset the counter; otherwise,
 we increment it. Early stopping is triggered when the counter
 reaches 5, terminating the training.
B. Hyperparameter of CIF
 To select our model’s hyperparameters, we searched within C. Dynamic Closed-World Scenario
the hyperparameter space, tuning parameters for both the We first evaluate CIF attacks in a dynamic closed-world
dynamic closed-world and adversarial defense scenarios, using scenario, where attackers can dynamically add new websites
average accuracy as the performance metric. The search ranges of interest to the set of monitored websites. Unlike the
and final values of the primary hyperparameters are summa- traditional closed-world setting, where a fixed training dataset
rized in Table I. We also investigate key CIF hyperparameters, of monitored websites is used to train the model, the number
including the maximum length of traffic traces, the time slot of monitored websites in the dynamic closed-world gradually
of TAM, and the number of training epochs. increases. This requires the gradual input of training data
 Time Slot of TAM. Table II shows the impact of time slot from different website classes into the model for training.
duration on accuracy in the dynamic closed-world and under We tested the CIL scheme in three scenarios, with the total
adversarial defenses such as WTF-PAD, Front, and Walkie- number of dynamically monitored sites set to 100, 200, and
Talkie. The results indicate that accuracy initially increases 500, respectively.
with larger time slots, then declines. A small time slot makes Performance Metric. The experiments for the CIL
the TAM too sparse for effective feature extraction, while a scheme [28], [29], [87] evaluate the model’s performance
large time slot reduces the TAM’s ability to represent the based on changes in accuracy over the incremental learning
website loading process in detail. Balancing space efficiency steps, including the First, Last, and average accuracy per
and accuracy, we set the time slot to 44 ms. step. These metrics are used consistently as evaluation criteria
 Maximum Length. Longer website traffic traces generally across all scenarios in our experiments.
contain more information, enhancing WF attack performance. Experimental Setup. We conducted incremental learning
As shown in Table III, accuracy improves with increased experiments using the AWF100, AWF200, and AWF775
maximum length, although the growth plateaus beyond datasets. For each dataset, we trained all classes from scratch
1964 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 5. Accuracy Changes in 10-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 100 Fig. 7. Accuracy Changes in 10-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 200
Websites. Websites.

 TABLE IV
 ACCURACY AT F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACROSS 5 AND 10
 I NCREMENTAL TASKS IN DYNAMIC C LOSED -W ORLD W ITH 100
 M ONITORED W EBSITES

Fig. 6. Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 200
Websites.

with task splits in two incremental learning steps of 5 and
10. Samples from each website were partitioned into training,
validation, and test data at 80%, 10%, and 10%, respectively.
 For both TF and NetCLR, the AWF775 dataset was used for
model pre-training, followed by fine-tuning with new website
traffic traces from the current task. DF* and Var-CNN* follow
a similar approach to TF, where the k-NN classifier is retrained
with new traffic traces to adapt to the updated set of monitored
websites. Specifically, for TF and DF, we evaluated two
scenarios: (1) dynamic monitoring datasets with distributions
similar to AWF775 for retraining, labeled as TF-Syn and DF- Fig. 8. Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 500
Syn; and (2) datasets with differing distributions, labeled as Websites.
TF-Div and DF-Div.
 Results. Figs. 3–4, 5–6, and 7–8 present accuracy variation
curves for incremental steps of 5 and 10 in tasks with 100, 500 monitored websites, CIF’s average accuracy surpasses that
200, and 500 monitored websites, respectively. Tables IV, V, of TF, DF*, and Var-CNN* by over 3% and maintains this
and VI summarize accuracy for First, Last, and Average steps lead in the final incremental phase. In scenarios with five
in CIL. Results demonstrate that the CIF attack is highly incremental tasks, CIF consistently outperforms NetCLR. For
effective in dynamic closed-world scenarios, achieving an ten tasks, CIF’s final accuracy is slightly lower than NetCLR,
average accuracy exceeding 97.8% across all settings. For but the gap diminishes as the number of monitored websites
100 monitored websites with 5 incremental tasks, CIF achieves grows.
an average accuracy of 99.35%, maintaining 99.04% accuracy TF exhibits the lowest performance due to its reliance on
in the final step. complex pairing and ternary constructions, limiting its ability
 In all incremental learning scenarios, CIF consistently to utilize large training datasets effectively. TF-Syn and DFoutperforms TF, DF*, Var-CNN*, and NetCLR in terms of Syn perform significantly better than TF-Div and DF-Div,
average accuracy. As the total number of monitored web- highlighting the impact of distributional differences between
sites increases, CIF’s advantage becomes more evident. For pre-training and target task datasets. Additionally, TF, DF*,
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1965

 TABLE VII
 ACCURACY AT F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACROSS TASKS IN
 F EW-S HOT CIL W ITH AND W ITHOUT P RE -T RAINING
 AND M IXTAM AUGMENTATION

Fig. 9. Accuracy Changes in 10-Step CIL for dynamic Closed-World 500
Websites.

 TABLE V
 ACCURACY AT F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACROSS
 5 AND 10 I NCREMENTAL TASKS IN DYNAMIC C LOSED -W ORLD
 W ITH 200 M ONITORED W EBSITES

 Fig. 10. No Pre-training: Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL with Few-shot
 Samples, with and without Mixtam Augmentation.

 TABLE VI to evaluate its effectiveness in few-shot CIL tasks across 100
 ACCURACY AT F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACROSS
 5 AND 10 I NCREMENTAL TASKS IN DYNAMIC C LOSED -W ORLD dynamically monitored websites.
 W ITH 500 M ONITORED W EBSITES Experimental Setup. The AWF100 dataset was used as the
 experimental data. In addition to conducting the same 5-step
 incremental learning experiments as in the dynamic closedworld scenario, we also designed a pre-training scenario for
 limited samples. In the pre-training scenario, the model was
 first trained on 50 classes, with the remaining 50 classes
 divided into 5 and 10-step incremental learning tasks. In realworld environments, attackers may have abundant training data
 for the initial set of monitored websites but lack sufficient
 time to collect data for newly monitored websites. Therefore,
 the pre-trained model’s initial 50 classes were trained using
 sufficient data, selecting 800 samples per website. For the
 remaining classes, few-shot samples (10, 20, or 30 per website)
Var-CNN*, and NetCLR require all samples of each category were selected and expanded to 1,500 samples using the
for retraining, along with retaining all prior samples, making Mixtam algorithm.
them less suitable for resource-constrained scenarios. Results. To evaluate Mixtam’s impact on CIF performance,
 we conducted comparative experiments under conditions with
 and without Mixtam augmentation, denoted by AU-FS and FS,
D. Few-Shot Class Incremental Learning respectively. Figs. 10 and 11 illustrate the accuracy variation
 In real-world WF attacks, attackers may not always be able over CIL steps for scenarios without and with pre-training.
to fully collect training data from each website. Frequently, Table VII presents the first, last, and per-step average accurathe attacker needs to update the attack model promptly but cies under both conditions.
lacks sufficient time to gather enough training data. In such In the no-pre-training scenario, CIF performance without
cases, the model must perform effectively with only a few-shot Mixtam resulted in an average accuracy below 10% for 10-
sample. shot settings and approximately 20% for 30-shot settings.
 We tested both CIL scenarios, with and without pre- With Mixtam augmentation, average accuracies increased to
training, employing the Mixtam data augmentation algorithm 56.76%, 83.75%, and 87.60% for 10, 20, and 30 samples,
1966 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE VIII
 BANDWIDTH AND T IME OVERHEAD OF D EFENSES M ETHODS (PART 1)

 TABLE IX
 BANDWIDTH AND T IME OVERHEAD OF D EFENSES M ETHODS (PART 2)

Fig. 11. With Pre-training: Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL with Few-shot
Samples, with and without Mixtam Augmentation. TABLE X
 ACCURACY C HANGES OF CIF AND VAR -CNN* ACROSS 5 I NCREMENTAL
 TASKS ON D EFENDED T RAFFIC T RACES

respectively, achieving a maximum improvement of over
66%. In the pre-training scenario, CIF accuracies for 20-shot
and 30-shot settings were 63.56% and 71.00%, respectively,
without Mixtam. When Mixtam was applied, these accuracies
increased to 91.47% and 93.51%, representing improvements
exceeding 20%.
 These results demonstrate that Mixtam data augmentation
significantly enhances CIF attack accuracy, especially in cases
with limited training samples.

E. CIF Attack Against Defense
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
CIF model on defense-processed traffic traces. For this
experiment, we selected several defense methods, including WTF-PAD [35], Walkie-Talkie [50], TrafficSliver [52],
FRONT [49], RegulaTor [51], Surakav [53], and Palette [54],
to assess the performance of WF attacks on defended traffic. incremental learning steps (5 and 10 steps, respectively). For
We conducted comparative experiments with Var-CNN* for TrafficSliver [52], we selected the two best network layer
this evaluation. splitting strategies: By Direction (BD) and Batched Weighted
 The selected defense methods employ various techniques Random (BWR). The bandwidth and time overhead settings
to disrupt traffic patterns. WTF-PAD (WTP) and FRONT for each defense are shown in Table VIII and Table IX.
insert virtual packets to alter traffic patterns, leveraging natural Results. Tables X and XI illustrate the accuracy variation
gaps and Rayleigh distribution timing, respectively, to enhance curves for the two incremental steps (5 and 10), while
anonymity. Walkie-Talkie (WT) introduces half-duplex com- Table XII shows the accuracy for the first, last, and average
munication to increase obfuscation and strengthen the defense steps in each configuration. The results are based on experieffect. RegulaTor (RegTor) controls packet transmission to ments using Var-CNN* (denoted as Var-) and CIF (denoted as
maintain high efficiency while limiting resource consumption, CIF-) for each configuration.
creating barriers to traffic tracking. Palette standardizes traffic The results indicate that CIF maintains strong performance
patterns within the same cluster to prevent attackers from even under multiple defenses such as WTF-PAD (WTP),
identifying specific websites based on distinct traffic features. Walkie-Talkie (WT), Splitting-Traffic-BD (BD), and Front.
Surakav utilizes GANs to diversify transmission patterns and For both incremental learning steps, the average accuracy
modulate data transmission, effectively resisting WF attacks. exceeds 90%. Compared to Var-CNN*, our CIF method
TrafficSliver focuses on traffic segmentation, dispersing data demonstrates significant advantages. CIF leverages TAM to
flows through network architecture adjustments to reduce the effectively capture traffic features, enabling it to count the
risk of single-point monitoring information leakage. number of incoming and outgoing packets at finer time
 Experimental Setup. For the closed-world evaluation, we intervals. This preserves key characteristics and outperforms
used the DF95 dataset, which contains 95 websites, each traditional sequence- or burst-based defenses (e.g., WTF-PAD
with 1,000 undefended traces. The corresponding defense and Walkie-Talkie).
traces were generated using scripts and simulators provided The Front strategy introduces more bandwidth overhead on
by the defense authors. We tested two scenarios, where the the Tor connection, significantly reducing Var-CNN* accuracy,
task division of all classes was trained from scratch in two but CIF maintains high accuracy. Traffic-Sliver-BD utilizes
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1967

 TABLE XI
 ACCURACY C HANGES OF CIF AND VAR -CNN* ACROSS 10 I NCREMENTAL TASKS ON D EFENDED T RAFFIC T RACE

 TABLE XII
separate circuits for packet reception and transmission, allow- F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACCURACY ACROSS 5 AND 10
ing attackers to capture packets in only one direction. Both I NCREMENTAL TASKS AGAINST T RAFFIC D EFENSES
Var-CNN* and CIF can leverage packet timing characteristics,
resulting in minimal accuracy degradation. BWR employs a
weighting strategy to select protection nodes for Tor messages,
increasing the time intervals between message batches and
reducing inter-message correlation. In contrast, Surakav uses
GANs to generate diversified transmission patterns, combining
burst adjustments and random responses to effectively minimize the leakage of timing and packet features. Under both
defenses, CIF still achieves an average accuracy of nearly 80%,
significantly higher than Var-CNN*‘s 30%.
 Palette introduces traffic feature obfuscation and randomness, making it difficult for both Var-CNN* and CIF to extract
stable features, leading to a significant drop in accuracy for
both models.

F. Dynamic Open-World Scenario
 In previous experiments, we investigated the impact of TABLE XIII
CIF attacks on performance in multiple scenarios within the ACCURACY AT F IRST S TEP, L AST S TEP, AND AVERAGE ACROSS 5 AND 10
 I NCREMENTAL TASKS IN DYNAMIC O PEN -W ORLD
dynamic closed-world. However, real-world network environments often involve users visiting websites beyond the
monitored ones. To address this, we evaluated the CIF attack in
a more realistic dynamic open-world setting. This evaluation
involves classifying whether a traffic trace belongs to the set of
monitored websites and, if so, further identifying the specific
website within the monitored set.
 Experimental Setup. We conduct experimental tests in a
fairly large open-world environment, a scenario in which users
have access to 100,000 non-monitored sites in addition to the
websites in the monitored sites. We take 99 monitored websites
in the AWF100 dataset as the 99 classes in the open-world
multi-classification, with 1,500 samples per website. We take class of non-monitored websites to be the same as the total
the 100,000 non-monitored websites in the AWF400K dataset number of samples in the test set for all the remaining classes.
as a class of non-monitored websites in the Open-World multi- In this scenario, we compared CIF with TF, DF*, Varclassification, with one sample per website. For these 100 CNN*, and NetCLR [39]. Due to minimal performance
websites, we consider CIL in two steps (5 and 10). For this differences in TF across datasets with similar distributions,
scenario, we set the number of samples in the test set for the only one result for TF is presented.
1968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 VI. D ISCUSSION
 In this section, we explore the proposed CIF attack and
 suggest potential directions for future work.
 The CIF model, leveraging a dynamic scaling architecture, is capable of continuously acquiring new information
 from emerging website classes without the need for complete retraining, thereby exhibiting remarkable scalability. This
 innovative CIF attack approach addresses the limitations of
 prior WF attack methods, which lacked continuous learning
 capabilities in open environments. As a result, CIF effectively
 satisfies the requirements of attackers for expanding surveillance scopes and updating models in dynamic settings.
Fig. 12. Accuracy Changes in 5-Step CIL for dynamic Open-World. While our designs, including DF*, Var-CNN*, and TF,
 can be adapted for website expansion tasks through classifier retraining, their performance is heavily constrained by
 the similarity of dataset distributions. Significant discrepancies between pre-trained data and new task data often lead
 to pronounced declines in accuracy. Furthermore, TF and
 NetCLR exhibit severe performance degradation under highly
 dynamic open-world scenarios. Unlike CIF, these methods
 rely on the continuous storage of all samples across classes
 and necessitate the reprocessing of the entire dataset during
 each retraining cycle, making them impractical for resourceconstrained environments.
 CIF has consistently demonstrated outstanding performance
 across a variety of experimental scenarios. Nonetheless, further
 research is essential to address the complexities inherent in
Fig. 13. Accuracy Changes in 10-Step CIL for dynamic Open-World.
 more challenging real-world applications.
 Higher Few-shot Performance. Facing the rapidly chang-
 Results. Figs. 12 and 13 depict the accuracy curves for 5 ing network environment, attackers must efficiently collect the
and 10 incremental steps, respectively. Table XIII summarizes latest network traffic traces and promptly update their attack
the accuracy in the First, Last, and Average across steps. models. This requirement highlights the necessity for CIF
 The results demonstrate that the CIF attack remains effective attacks to possess robust few-shot learning capabilities. In real
in open-world scenarios, achieving an average accuracy of over scenarios, we may only be able to collect limited data for some
96.7%. For the 5-step incremental setup, it achieves an average websites in a short period (e.g., less than 10 training samples
accuracy of 98.31% and maintains 97.88% accuracy in the last per class). Therefore, in addition to the data enhancement
step, exceeding the performance of other methods by more methods already designed, we need to explore how we can
than 6%. In the 10-step setup, CIF maintains a performance better adapt to the few-shot scenario in the CIF framework
advantage of over 4% in the last step compared to the other species.
methods. Fine-Grained website fingerprinting. Current research on
 Notably, the CIF attack exhibits a more pronounced WF attacks often focuses exclusively on the homepage traffic
performance advantage in the dynamic open-world compared of a website as a representative identifier for the entire site.
to the dynamic closed-world. In the open-world, TF, DF*, This simplification overlooks the diversity of subpages, which
and Var-CNN* are more susceptible to factors such as uneven is inconsistent with the complexity of real-world Web browsdata distribution, feature space variation, and inter-class sim- ing environments. Subpages of the same website typically
ilarity. In contrast, CIF’s dynamic tuning and memorization share similar layout structures, follow consistent encryption
mechanisms are better equipped to handle these challenges. protocols, and use comparable parameter configurations. These
TF and NetCLR, in particular, perform poorly in this sce- similarities result in high convergence in the characteristics
nario. TF struggles with effectively utilizing the extensive and client-server interaction patterns of the Web traffic they
training data from non-monitored classes, leading to severe generate.
class imbalance and reduced accuracy. Similarly, NetCLR’s Exploring fine-grained Web fingerprinting techniques is
reliance on NETAUGMENT and contrastive learning makes essential for accurately modeling real-world scenarios and
it vulnerable to disruptions from the diverse traffic data in uncovering more profound insights into user privacy. Our
the non-monitored category, degrading the quality of its initial research will focus on advancing the development of finelearning and subsequent fine-tuning, resulting in significant grained CIF attack techniques to better align with the practical
accuracy drops. demands of real-world applications.
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1969

 VII. C ONCLUSION [10] J. Yan and J. Kaur, “Feature selection for website fingerprinting,” in
 Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., 2018, pp. 200–219. [Online]. Available:
 In this study, we investigate implementing WF attack meth- https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:46940494
ods with continuous learning capability through incremental [11] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg,
class learning. This approach addresses the limitations of “Effective attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in
 Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2014, pp. 143–157. [Online]. Available:
existing attack models, which lack continuous learning for https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1208527
more challenging real-world application scenarios. We propose [12] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. van Goethem,
CIF attacks based on a dynamically scaling architecture that and W. Joosen. “Automated website fingerprinting
 through deep learning.” 2017. [Online]. Available:
continuously learns knowledge from new classes without https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263798765
catastrophic forgetting. This design enables the attack model to [13] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juárez, and M. K. Wright, “Deep
scale and adapt to dynamically open real-world environments. fingerprinting: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses
To gain insight into the performance of CIF attacks in reality, with deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Security, 2018, pp. 1928–1943. [Online]. Available:
we have recently set up dynamic closed-world and open-world https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:44736663
scenarios. The experimental results indicate that the CIF attack [14] S. E. Oh, S. Sunkam, and N. Hopper, “p1-FP: Extraction, classification,
achieves high accuracy during the CIL process, maintaining and prediction of website fingerprints with deep learning,” in Proc.
 Privacy Enhanc. Technol., 2017, pp. 191–209. [Online]. Available:
an average accuracy above 97.8% in the dynamic closed- https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4542558
world and remaining effective in the dynamic open-world with [15] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and
an average accuracy exceeding 96.7%. In addition, we also M. K. Wright, “TIK-TOK: The utility of packet timing in website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., 2019, pp. 5–24.
demonstrate that the CIF attack achieves good performance [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:62841503
when faced with few-shot scenarios. According to these [16] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “On realistically attacking ToR with website
findings, attackers can utilize new data update models to cope fingerprinting,” in Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., 2016, pp. 21–36.
with dynamically open real-world environments with limited [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264
 13501
resources. [17] M. Juárez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Díaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A
 critical evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2014, pp. 263–274. [Online].
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5762455
 [18] G. Cherubin, R. Jansen, and C. Troncoso, “Online website fingerprinting:
 The authors thank their shepherd and the anonymous Evaluating website fingerprinting attacks on ToR in the real world,” in
reviewers for their constructive comments. Based on their Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2022, pp. 753–770. [Online]. Available:
suggestions, this paper was greatly improved. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252972246
 [19] X. Deng et al., “Robust multi-tab website fingerprinting
 attacks in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
 Privacy (SP), 2023, pp. 1005–1022. [Online]. Available:
 R EFERENCES https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260002990
 [20] Q. Yin et al., “An automated multi-tab website fingerprinting
 [1] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. F. Syverson,
 attack,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19,
 “ToR: The second-generation onion router,” in Proc.
 no. 6, pp. 3656–3670, Nov./Dec. 2022. [Online]. Available:
 USENIX Security Symp., 2004, p. 12. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:238790397
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263541988
 [2] “Users—ToR metrics.” 2023. [Online]. Available: [21] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. K. Wright,
 https://metrics.torproject.org/userstats-relay-country.html “Triplet fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with N-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 [3] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg,
 Comput. Commun. Security, 2019, pp. 1131–1148. [Online]. Available:
 “A systematic approach to developing and evaluating website
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:207960329
 fingerprinting defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Security, 2014, pp. 227–238. [Online]. Available: [22] M. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5725039 fingerprinting attack with data augmentation,” Security Commun.
 [4] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, Netw., vol. 2021, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 2840289. [Online]. Available:
 “Characterization of ToR traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:238585994
 Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. [Online]. Available: [23] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, and T. Lu, “Few-shot website
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:38122314 fingerprinting attack with cluster adaptation,” Comput. Netw.,
 [5] S. Chen, R. Wang, X. Wang, and K. Zhang, “Side-channel leaks in vol. 229, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109780. [Online]. Available:
 Web applications: A reality today, a challenge tomorrow,” in Proc. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258297158
 IEEE Symp. Security Privacy, 2010, pp. 191–206. [Online]. Available: [24] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “SNWF: Website
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7918770 fingerprinting attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE
 [6] A. Kwon, M. Alsabah, D. Lazar, M. Dacier, and S. Devadas, “Circuit fin- Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, 2022. [Online].
 gerprinting attacks: Passive deanonymization of ToR hidden services,” in Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247374010
 Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2015, pp. 287–302. [Online]. Available: [25] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7444216 website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in
 [7] W. Cui, T. Chen, C. Fields, J. Chen, A. Sierra, Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624. [Online]. Available:
 and E. Chan-Tin, “Revisiting assumptions for website https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260777568
 fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. [26] “Servers—ToR metrics.” 2023. [Online]. Available:
 Commun. Security, 2019, pp. 328–339. [Online]. Available: https://metrics.torproject.org/networksize.html
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:195848639 [27] G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter,
 [8] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a dis- “Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review,” J. Int.
 tance: Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Neural Netw. Soc., vol. 113, pp. 54–71, May 2019. [Online]. Available:
 Comput. Commun. Security, 2012, pp. 605–616. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:73497737
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2465850 [28] S. Yan, J. Xie, and X. He, “DER: Dynamically expandable representation
 [9] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on ToR,” in for class incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Proc. 12th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2013, pp. 201–212. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2021, pp. 3013–3022. [Online]. Available:
 [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7411247 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:232427923
1970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

[29] B. Huang, Z. Chen, P. Zhou, J. Chen, and Z. Wu, “Resolving task [48] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a-boo, i
 confusion in dynamic expansion architectures for class incremental still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” Proc.
 learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 908–916. [Online]. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy, 2012, pp. 332–346. [Online]. Available:
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:255340983 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:861248
[30] K. Zhu, W. Zhai, Y. Cao, J. Luo, and Z. Zha, “Self-sustaining [49] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses
 representation expansion for non-exemplar class-incremental against website fingerprinting,” in Proc. USENIX
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Security Symp., 2020, pp. 717–734. [Online]. Available:
 Recognit. (CVPR), 2022, pp. 9286–9295. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211569921
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247447482 [50] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie–talkie: An efficient defense
[31] Z. Li, C. Zhong, S. Liu, R. Wang, and W. Zheng, “Preserving earlier against passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. USENIX
 knowledge in continual learning with the help of all previous feature Security Symp., 2017, pp. 1375–1390. [Online]. Available:
 extractors,” 2021, arxiv.abs/2104.13614. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12311676
[32] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k -fingerprinting: A robust [51] J. K. Holland and N. Hopper, “RegulaTor: A straightscalable website fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. USENIX forward website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. Privacy
 Security Symp., 2015, pp. 1187–1203. [Online]. Available: Enhanc. Technol., 2022, pp. 344–362. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2119577 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235359233
[33] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc. [52] W. D. la Cadena et al., “TrafficSliver: Fighting website fingerprint-
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp., 2016, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available: ing attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15302617 Comput. Commun. Security, 2020, pp. 1971–1985. [Online]. Available:
[34] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:222244849
 fingerprinting: Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies [53] J. Gong et al., “SuraKAV: Generating realistic traces for a
 with the multinomial Naïve Bayes classifier,” in Proc. Cloud strong website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
 Comput. Security Workshop, 2009, pp. 1–8. [Online]. Available: Security Privacy (SP), 2022, pp. 1558–1573. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8479479 https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833722
[35] M. Juárez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, and M. K. Wright, “WTF- [54] M. Shen et al., “Real-time website fingerprinting
 PAD: Toward an efficient website fingerprinting defense for ToR,” 2015, defense via traffic cluster anonymization,” in Proc.
 arxiv.abs/1512.00524. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2024, pp. 263–263.
[36] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data- [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP54263.2024.
 efficient website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” in Proc. 00247
 Privacy Enhanc. Technol., 2019, pp. 292–310. [Online]. Available: [55] M. Jiang, B. Cui, J. Fu, T. Wang, L. Yao, and B. K. Bhargava,
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:198229348 “RUDOLF: An efficient and adaptive defense approach against web-
[37] X. Deng, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Robust and reliable early-stage website site fingerprinting attacks based on soft actor–critic algorithm,” IEEE
 fingerprinting attacks via spatial–temporal distribution analysis,” 2024, Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 7794–7809, 2024. [Online].
 arxiv.abs/2407.00918. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271658360
[38] R. Attarian and A. Keshavarz-Haddad, “Effective website finger-
 [56] D. Li, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, and J. Wang, “Minipatch: Undermining DNNprinting attack based on the first packet direction only,” Comput.
 based website fingerprinting with adversarial patches,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Netw., vol. 231, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 109811. [Online]. Available:
 Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2437–2451, 2022. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258655562
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:250321282
[39] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website fin-
 [57] Z. Ling, G. Xiao, W. Wu, X. Gu, M. Yang, and X. Fu,
 gerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 “Towards an efficient defense against deep learning based
 Comput. Commun. Security, 2023, pp. 1035–1049. [Online]. Available:
 website fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3576915.361663
 (IEEE INFOCOM), 2022, pp. 310–319. [Online]. Available:
[40] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Luo, and M. Chen, “TFormhttps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249909706
 RF: An efficient data augmentation for website fingerprinting
 attack,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. [58] M. S. Rahman, M. Imani, N. Mathews, and M. K. Wright,
 Conf. (IPCCC), 2022, pp. 169–178. [Online]. Available: “MockingBird: Defending against deep-learning-based website finhttps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252891854 gerprinting attacks with adversarial traces,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
[41] Z. Jin, T. Lu, S. Luo, and J. Shang, “Transformer-based model for Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 1594–1609, 2019. [Online]. Available:
 multi-tab website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:158047102
 Comput. Commun. Security, 2023, pp. 1050–1064. [Online]. Available: [59] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, B. Tajali, and R. Jalili, “AWA:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265352560 Adversarial website adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
[42] Z. Guan, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, M. Cui, and C. Liu, Security, vol. 16, pp. 3109–3122, 2020. [Online]. Available:
 “BAPM: Block attention profiling model for multi-tab website https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:229340376
 fingerprinting attacks on ToR,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Comput. [60] N. Mathews, J. K. Holland, S. E. Oh, M. S. Rahman,
 Security Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 248–259. [Online]. Available: N. Hopper, and M. K. Wright, “SoK: A critical evaluation of
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244910441 efficient website fingerprinting defenses,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
[43] A. A. Abusnaina, R. Jang, A. Khormali, D. Nyang, and D. A. Mohaisen, Security Privacy (SP), 2023, pp. 969–986. [Online]. Available:
 “DFD: Adversarial learning-based approach to defend against https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254587110
 website fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. [61] B. Pfülb and A. R. T. Gepperth, “A comprehensive, application-oriented
 (IEEE INFOCOM), 2020, pp. 2459–2468. [Online]. Available: study of catastrophic forgetting in DNNs,” 2019, arxiv.abs/1905.08101.
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:216077208 [62] J.-M. Pérez-Rúa, X. Zhu, T. M. Hospedales, and T. Xiang, “Incremental
[44] K. Al-Naami et al., “BiMorphing: A bi-directional bursting defense few-shot object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 against website fingerprinting attacks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2020, pp. 13843–13852. [Online]. Available:
 Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 505–517, Mar./Apr. 2021. [Online]. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:212645695
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:226861280 [63] F. Cermelli, M. Mancini, S. R. Bulò, E. Ricci, and B. Caputo,
[45] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Defeating DNN-based “Modeling the background for incremental learning in semantic
 traffic analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial perturbations,” segmentation,” Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 in Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2021, p. 12. [Online]. Available: Recognit. (CVPR), 2020, pp. 9230–9239. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231878132 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211011110
[46] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, and R. Johnson, “CS-BuFLO: A congestion [64] F.-K. Sun, C.-H. Ho, and H. Y. Lee, “LAMOL: Language
 sensitive website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. 13th Workshop modeling for lifelong language learning,” in Proc. Int.
 Privacy Electron. Soc., 2014, pp. 121–130. [Online]. Available: Conf. Learn. Rep., 2019, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16029997 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:209475822
[47] M. Jiang, B. Cui, J. Fu, T. Wang, and Z. Wang, “KimeraPAD: A novel [65] P. Gupta, Y. Chaudhary, T. A. Runkler, and H. Schütze,
 low-overhead real-time defense against website fingerprinting attacks “Neural topic modeling with continual lifelong learning,” in
 based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, p. 9. [Online]. Available:
 Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2944–2961, Jun. 2024. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219955694
YUAN et al.: CLASS INCREMENTAL WF ATTACK BASED ON DYNAMIC EXPANSION ARCHITECTURE 1971

[66] T. Lesort, V. Lomonaco, A. Stoian, D. Maltoni, D. Filliat, and Yali Yuan received the Ph.D. degree from Göttingen
 N. Díaz-Rodríguez, “Continual learning for robotics: Definition, frame- University, Göttingen, Germany, in 2018. She joined
 work, learning strategies, opportunities and challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 58, pp. 52–68, Jun. 2020. Southeast University, Nanjing, China, as an Assistant
[67] R. C. Julian, B. Swanson, G. S. Sukhatme, S. Levine, C. Finn, and Professor in 2021. Her research interests include
 K. Hausman, “Efficient adaptation for end-to-end vision-based robotic network traffic security analysis, network attack and
 manipulation,” 2020, arxiv.2004.10190. defense, and privacy protection.
[68] A. Prabhu, P. H. S. Torr, and P. K. Dokania, “GDumb: A simple
 approach that questions our progress in continual learning,” in Proc.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 524–540. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:221088423
[69] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
 networks,” in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, 2016, pp. 3521–3526.
 [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4704285
[70] F. L. Wang, D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, and D. C. Zhan, “FOSTER:
 Feature boosting and compression for class-incremental learning,” 2022,
 arxiv.abs/2204.04662.
[71] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018. [Online].
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4853851
[72] S. Hou, X. Pan, C. C. Loy, Z. Wang, and D. Lin, “Learning a unified
 classifier incrementally via rebalancing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 831–839. [Online].
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:195453293
[73] P. Buzzega, M. Boschini, A. Porrello, D. Abati, and S. Calderara, “Dark
 experience for general continual learning: A strong, simple baseline,”
 2020, arxiv.abs/2004.07211.
[74] M. D. Lange et al., “Continual learning: A comparative study on how
 to defy forgetting in classification tasks,” 2019, arxiv.abs/1909.08383.
[75] P. Dhar, R. V. Singh, K.-C. Peng, Z. Wu, and R. Chellappa,
 “Learning without memorizing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2018, pp. 5133–5141. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53776855 Yangyang Du received the bachelor’s degree in
[76] N. Passalis, M. Tzelepi, and A. Tefas, “Probabilistic knowledge transfer information security from Zhengzhou University in
 for lightweight deep representation learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2022. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree
 Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 2030–2039, May 2021. [Online]. with the School of Cyberspace Security, Southeast
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219169868 University. His research interests include traffic anal-
[77] J. Hu, L. Shen, S. Albanie, G. Sun, and E. Wu, “Squeeze-and- ysis and privacy protection.
 excitation networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 7132–7141. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:140309863
[78] B. Zhao, X. Xiao, G. Gan, B. Zhang, and S. Xia,
 “Maintaining discrimination and fairness in class incremental
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 13205–13214. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:208139404
[79] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” 2013,
 arxiv.abs/1312.4400.
[80] M. Chen, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website
 fingerprinting attack with Meta-bias learning,” Pattern Recognit.,
 vol. 130, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108739. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248487907
[81] H. Zhang, M. Cissé, Y. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “MIXUP: Beyond
 empirical risk minimization,” 2017, arxiv.abs/1710.09412.
[82] L. Zhang, Z. Deng, K. Kawaguchi, A. Ghorbani, and J. Y. Zou,
 “How does mixup help with robustness and generalization?” 2020,
 arxiv.abs/2010.04819.
[83] A. Kolmogorov-Smirnov, A. N. Kolmogorov, and
 M. Kolmogorov. “Sulla determinazione empírica di
 uma legge di distribuzione.” 1933. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:222427298
[84] N. V. Smirnov, “Table for estimating the goodness of fit of empirical distributions,” Ann. Math. Stat., vol. 19, pp. 279–281, Jun. 1948. [Online].
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:120842954
[85] B. Gulmezoglu, “XAI-based microarchitectural side-channel Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
 analysis for website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
 IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. University, Nanjing, China, in 1994, the M.S. degree
 6, pp. 4039–4051, Nov./Dec. 2022. [Online]. Available: in computer application from the Hefei University
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244323044 of Technology in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in
[86] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang, “Adaptive fingerprinting: computer network from Southeast University in
 Website fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 11th ACM 2003, where he is a Full Professor with the School
 Conf. Data Appl. Security Privacy, 2021, pp. 149–160. [Online]. of Cyber Science and Engineering. He has authored
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:233194725 or co-authored seven monographs and more than
[87] A. Douillard, M. Cord, C. Ollion, T. Robert, and E. Valle, “PODNet: 100 technical papers, including top journals and top
 Pooled outputs distillation for small-tasks incremental learning,” in conferences. His research interests include network
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 86–102. [Online]. Available: security, network measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a Senior
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:220665451 Member of CCF.