1672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 CLEAR: Spatial-Temporal Traffic Data
 Representation Learning for Traffic Prediction
 James Jianqiao Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Xinwei Fang , Shiyao Zhang , Member, IEEE,
 and Yuxin Ma , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In the evolving field of urban development, precise I. INTRODUCTION
traffic prediction is essential for optimizing traffic and mitigating
congestion. While traditional graph learning-based models effec- In the ever-evolving landscape of urban development and
tively exploit complex spatial-temporal correlations, their reliance mobility management, the analysis and prediction of traffic data
on trivially generated graph structures or deeply intertwined adja- play essential roles [1], [2]. Accurate traffic predictions allow
cency learning without supervised loss significantly impedes their city planners, traffic management systems, and navigation serefficiency. This paper presents Contrastive Learning of spatialtEmporal trAffic data Representations (CLEAR) framework, a
 vices to anticipate and mitigate traffic issues, thereby enhancing
comprehensive approach to spatial-temporal traffic data repre- urban mobility [3]. By leveraging historical and real-time traffic
sentation learning aimed at enhancing the accuracy of traffic pre- data, predictive models can forecast traffic dynamics, enabling
dictions. Employing self-supervised contrastive learning, CLEAR online monitoring of the transportation system and proactive
strategically extracts discriminative embeddings from both traffic measures to traffic management [4].
time-series and graph-structured data. The framework applies
weak and strong data augmentations to facilitate subsequent ex-
 In recent years, graph learning-based traffic predictors have
ploitations of intrinsic spatial-temporal correlations that are crit- emerged as a dominant approach in the field of traffic data
ical for accurate prediction. Additionally, CLEAR incorporates analysis [2]. These models utilize the natural graph structure of
advanced representation learning models that transmute these transportation networks, where intersections and road segments
dynamics into compact, semantic-rich embeddings, thereby elevat- are represented as nodes and edges, respectively. The strength of
ing downstream models’ prediction accuracy. By integrating with
existing traffic predictors, CLEAR boosts predicting performance
 graph-based models lies in their ability to capture the complex
and accelerates the training process by effectively decoupling ad- spatial-temporal dependencies between these nodes, facilitating
jacency learning from correlation learning. Comprehensive exper- more accurate and granular traffic predictions. By integrating
iments validate that CLEAR can robustly enhance the capabilities techniques such as Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [5],
of existing graph learning-based traffic predictors and provide these models can effectively process and learn from the vast
superior traffic predictions with a straightforward representation
decoder. This investigation highlights the potential of contrastive
 amounts of spatial-temporal data generated by traffic systems,
representation learning in developing robust traffic data represen- thus significantly enhancing traffic prediction accuracy [6].
tations for traffic prediction. Despite their advantages, graph learning-based traffic predictors face significant challenges that impede their efficacy. The
 Index Terms—Traffic prediction, spatial-temporal data,
contrastive learning, representation learning, self-supervised first major challenge arises from the conventional method of
learning. constructing graph node connectivity. Typically, these graphs
 are formed based on geographic distances or traffic connectivity, ignoring the contextual relationships between nodes or the
 temporal dynamics of traffic flow [7]. Static topology graphs do
 Received 17 April 2024; revised 29 December 2024; accepted 26 January not reflect the real-time, dynamic nature of traffic, which can
2025. Date of publication 3 February 2025; date of current version 7 March 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of vary significantly due to various time-dependent factors such
China under Grant 62202217, in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic as peak-valley flows [8]. There exists research on capturing
Research Foundation under Grant 2023A1515012889, and in part by Guangdong dynamic spatial correlations in spatiotemporal data by using
Key Program under Grant 2021QN02X794. Recommended for acceptance by
T. Weninger. (Corresponding authors: Shiyao Zhang; Yuxin Ma.) a learnt 3-D tensor [9]. Nonetheless, the number of additional
 James Jianqiao Yu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, trainable parameters (e.g., the learnable adjacency matrix re-
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with the quires approx. 120M parameters for 1000-node 1-hour lookback
Department of Computer Science, University of York, YO10 5GH York, U.K.
(e-mail: jqyu@ieee.org). forecast) may overwhelm the model training process.
 Xinwei Fang is with the Department of Computer Science, University of York, The second challenge pertains to the strong coupling of ad-
YO10 5GH York, U.K. (e-mail: xinwei.fang@york.ac.uk). jacency and data correlation learnings during model training
 Shiyao Zhang is with the School of Engineering, Great Bay University,
Dongguan 523000, China, and also with the Great Bay Institute for Advanced process used in these models. Except for static adjacency ma-
Study (GBIAS), Dongguan 523000, China (e-mail: zhangshiyao@gbu.edu.cn). trices, there are other traffic predictors utilizing one or more
 Yuxin Ma is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineer- learnable matrices to adaptively learn the adjacency relationing, Southern University of Science and Technolgy, Shenzhen 518055, China
(e-mail: mayx@sustech.edu.cn). ships between nodes [10]. However, this method couples the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3536009 learning of adjacency information with that of the intrinsic

 1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1673

data correlation, leading to a complex bi-level optimization learn robust features from diverse traffic patterns, thereby
problem. Such complexity increases the computational inten- improving the generalizability of the learned models.
sity of the training process, requesting notably more data and r Representation Learning Models: We devises comprehencomputation to achieve optimal performance according to the sive representation learning models for both time-series
scaling law [11]. What makes the situation worse is that the and graph-structured traffic data. These models are caformer typically does not have supervised loss information to pable of encoding crucial traffic dynamics into compact,
facilitate a guided search [12]. The complexity not only makes information-rich embeddings, which are essential for acthe training process more challenging but also increases the risk curately predicting traffic conditions.
of overfitting or underfitting, thereby potentially reducing the r Traffic Predictor Based on Representations: We propose a
model’s overall effectiveness and adaptability to new data or simple-yet-effective traffic predictor that benefits from the
environments [13]. representations learned by CLEAR. This predictor utilizes
 To bridge the research gap, we propose a novel CLEAR frame- the embeddings to predict future traffic conditions, demonwork (Contrastive Learning of spatial-tEmporal trAffic data strating how learned representations can achieve accurate
Representations) specifically designed to address the aforemen- traffic predictions.
tioned challenges in traffic prediction. CLEAR utilizes the power r Bootstrapping Graph Learning-Based Predictors: We
of self-supervised contrastive learning [14], [15], [16] to extract present novel bootstrapping techniques that integrate
discriminative embeddings from both traffic time-series and CLEAR with existing graph learning-based predictors.
graph-structured data. The core principle of CLEAR revolves These techniques leverage the rich semantic embeddings
around capturing intrinsic spatial and temporal correlations in- from CLEAR to bootstrap existing traffic prediction modherent in traffic data, leveraging these learned representations for els for performance improvements.
accurate traffic prediction, and facilitating seamless integration The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
with existing graph learning-based traffic predictors. CLEAR reviews related work in graph learning-based traffic predictors
employs a strategy of using weak and strong data augmentation and contrastive representation learning. Section III outlines the
techniques to facilitate the contrastive representation learning preliminary definitions and problem formulation specific to this
process, which enhances the model’s ability to understand di- study. Section IV details the CLEAR framework, including
verse traffic patterns and respond to dynamic changes in the our proposed data augmentation strategies and representation
network [17]. This approach allows CLEAR to dynamically learning models, and discusses the integration of CLEAR with
generate and update adjacency information that reflects the existing graph learning-based predictors. Section V describes
real-time contextual relationships and connectivity changes over the experimental setup and presents a comprehensive evaluation
time, effectively addressing the first challenge. of CLEAR’s performance across various datasets. Section VI
 Moreover, by learning robust representations that encode es- concludes the paper, summarizing our contributions and sugsential traffic information and substituting the input data and/or gesting avenues for future research.
internal modules, CLEAR greatly simplifies the training process and difficulty of existing graph learning-based predictors. II. RELATED WORK
Principally, CLEAR decouples the adjacency learning from data
 In this section, we briefly review the related work on graph
correlation, thus mitigating the bi-level optimization complexity
 learning-based traffic predictors and contrastive representation
associated with these models. The training of integrated modlearning. The audience are referred to [6], [19], [20], [21] for
els becomes more straightforward as CLEAR eliminates the
 more thorough discussions and analyses.
need for additional representation extraction steps during model
training [18]. By incorporating these representations, existing
predictors can also benefit from the rich semantic information A. Graph Learning-Based Traffic Predictors
captured through self-supervised contrastive learning, thereby Graph deep learning has emerged as a transformative apenhancing their ability to model complex spatial and temporal proach in traffic prediction, utilizing the rich spatial intercondependencies within traffic data, directly tackling the second nections within traffic systems to significantly enhance predicchallenge. tion accuracy [6]. This evolution from traditional time-series
 The contributions of this paper are multifaceted: models to complex graph-based approaches has catalyzed the
 r Design of the CLEAR Framework: We introduce CLEAR, a development of more sophisticated predictive tools, capable of
 novel learning framework that utilizes contrastive learning understanding the intricate dynamics of traffic flow that are critto extract detailed and discriminative representations from ical for accurate real-time traffic prediction. Given the extensive
 spatial-temporal traffic data. This framework is designed body of related work in this field, this section focuses on a few
 to capture intrinsic correlations within traffic data to de- pivotal models due to page limits.
 velop semantic-rich data representations for downstream One of the pioneering models in this domain is Graph
 applications, e.g., traffic prediction. WaveNet [10], which ingeniously combines graph neural netr Data Augmentation Strategies: We develop specialized works with WaveNet’s temporal convolutional approach. This
 data augmentation strategies that involve weak and strong model is designed to capture spatial dependencies through
 manipulation techniques. These strategies are critical for graph convolutions while utilizing dilated causal convolutions
 enriching the training data and enabling the model to to handle temporal sequences efficiently. By integrating these
1674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

two mechanisms, Graph WaveNet addresses both spatial and local smoothness of time series to establish temporally stationary
temporal aspects of traffic data, leading to improved accuracy neighborhoods. Further, the STEP algorithm introduces a prein short-term traffic prediction. Its ability to model dynamic training model to spatial-temporal graph neural networks [18],
spatial structures without predefined adjacency matrices sets it utilizing long-term historical data to enhance the contextual
apart, allowing it to adapt to various traffic scenarios and predict understanding essential for accurate multivariate time-series
potential congestions with higher precision. forecasting. Additionally, the Contrastive Seasonal-Trend repre-
 Another exemplary model is the Dynamic Graph Convolu- sentation learning framework (CoST) innovatively applies contional Recurrent Network (DGCRN) [22], which introduces an trastive learning to disentangle seasonal and trend components of
innovative approach to traffic prediction by addressing the dy- time series data [28]. By incorporating both time and frequency
namic nature of road network correlations. Unlike static models, domain contrastive losses, CoST effectively learns discrimina-
DGCRN uses hyper-networks to capture dynamic characteristics tive features that significantly outperform traditional methods on
from node attributes, updating the parameters of its filters at multivariate time series prediction, underscoring its robustness
each time step to reflect ongoing changes. This allows for the across different neural architectures and regression models.
creation of a dynamic graph that integrates with a pre-defined While the aforementioned representation learning approaches
static graph, offering a more accurate representation of real-time achieve satisfactory results in general time-series tasks, their
traffic conditions. capability of bootstrapping arbitrary graph learning-based traffic
 Recently, the introduction of Transformers in traffic predic- preditors generally remains unknown. This is among the primary
tion like the Spatio-Temporal Adaptive Embedding Transformer objectives of CLEAR.
(STAEformer) has brought new dimensions to this field [23]. When confining the graph-structured data into grid-based
The STAEformer leverages the Transformer architecture known presentations, self-supervised learning approaches have been
for its effectiveness in natural language processing to the realm applied to learn spatial-temporal representations. Notable past
of traffic prediction. It utilizes a novel spatio-temporal adaptive efforts include [29] and [30]. In the former, the proposed ST-SSL
embedding that enhances the model’s ability to capture complex framework utilizes an integrated module with temporal and spaspatio-temporal relationships. STAEformer highlights the effec- tial convolutions to encode information across space and time.
tiveness of combining advanced embedding techniques with the It employs adaptive augmentation on traffic flow data and incorself-attention mechanism of transformers, providing a powerful porates two self-supervised learning auxiliary tasks to enhance
tool for traffic prediction that surpasses many traditional and the main traffic prediction task with spatial and temporal hetgraph-based methods. erogeneity awareness. Further, the method in [30] introduces a
 Despite these advancements, the field of graph deep learning contrastive self-supervision approach to predict fine-grained urfor traffic prediction faces several challenges. The (semi-)static ban flows by leveraging correlated spatial and temporal patterns.
nature of many graph constructions does not reflect the dynamic It employs self-supervised tasks to extract high-level representachanges in real-world traffic conditions over time. Further, the tions from flow data and utilizes a fine-tuning network combined
computational intensity of these models, especially those based with three pre-trained encoder networks for enhanced perforon transformers, poses difficulties for efficient model training mance. While both methods achieved promising results in their
on large-scale networks. respective tasks, they are limited to grid-based traffic data and
 require non-trivial effort to adapt to graph-structured traffic data.
B. Contrastive Representation Learning
 III. PRELIMINARIES
 Contrastive representation learning develops an embedding
 In this section, we first introduce the definitions and notations
space where similar instances are grouped together and dissimito be used in this paper. Then, we define the spatial-temporal
lar ones are separated. This approach is employed across various
 traffic data representation learning and prediction problem.
fields including natural language processing, computer vision,
and time-series analysis. InfoNCE loss [24], SimCLR [15], and
 A. Definitions
MoCo [25] are among the general and classical contrastive
representation learning models that utilize pairs of positive and Definition 1 (Traffic Network): In this work, the traffic netnegative examples to refine this space, achieving robust results work is conceptualized as a directed graph G(V, E), where V
and setting the foundation for more sophisticated methods. represents the set of traffic data sensing locations, such as induc-
 While contrastive representation learning for traffic data is tion loops and surveillance cameras. The nodal connectivity, E,
relatively scarce, recent years have witnessed advancements is typically defined by geographical adjacency, which informs
on contrastive time-series representation learning. For example, the creation of the adjacency matrix A. We contend that this
the Time-Series representation learning framework via Tempo- conventional approach to defining E and A fails to adequately
ral and Contextual Contrasting (TS-TCC) represents a signifi- capture the complexities of traffic dynamics. To address this,
cant advancement in exploiting unlabeled time-series data [26]. we advocate for the use of representation learning to develop
TS-TCC utilizes dual view augmentations to transform raw semantically rich embeddings that enhance our construction of
time-series into correlated views, employing a novel temporal adjacency information.
contrasting module that challenges the model with a cross-view Definition 2 (Spatial-temporal Traffic Data): A set of spatialprediction task. Another innovative approach is the Temporal temporal traffic data comprises multiple time-dependent vari-
Neighborhood Coding (TNC) [27], which leverages the inherent ables captured from traffic sensors distributed across V. This
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1675

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of the proposed CLEAR framework. In the illustration, “T-S.” and “G. D.” denotes “time-series” and “graph data”, respectively.
“Feat. Proj.” means “Feature Projection”.

data is represented as X = {xi,t } within a real number space IV. CONTRASTIVE LEARNING OF SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC
R|V|×|T |×F , where T indicates the discrete time horizon of the DATA REPRESENTATIONS
examined traffic data, and F denotes the types of data observed, In this section, we present CLEAR (Contrastive Learning of
such as speed and flow. Notably, the traffic datasets used in spatial-tEmporal trAffic data Representations), a novel learning
subsequent experiments are univariate (i.e., F = 1); thus, we framework designed to extract rich representations of spatial and
omit this dimension in subsequent discussions for clarity. temporal traffic data. The design principle of CLEAR revolves
 around capturing intrinsic spatial and temporal correlations inherent in traffic data, leveraging these learned representations for
B. Problem Formulation accurate traffic prediction, and facilitating seamless integration
 with existing graph learning-based traffic predictors.
 Definition 3 (Traffic Data Representation Learning): The
objective of representation learning in traffic data analysis is
to identify low-dimensional representations for the time-series A. Overview
data of each traffic sensor and for the graph-structured data Fig. 1 presents an overview to the architecture of the proencompassing all sensors at any given time. Specifically, an posed CLEAR framework. CLEAR employs self-supervised
embedding function ω : RT → RD maps the past T traffic ob- contrastive learning to extract discriminative embeddings from
servations at node i ∈ V into a D-dimensional vector in a com- both traffic time-series and graph data, following the SimCLR
pact latent space, where D is significantly less than |V| × |T |, contrastive training architecture [15]. By applying composioptimizing for computational efficiency and model simplicity. tion strategies of weak and strong data augmentation strate-
Another embedding function ϑ : R|V| → RD translates all traffic gies, CLEAR learns robust representations that encode essenobservations across V at any arbitrary point in time into a simi- tial information regarding traffic flow, congestion patterns, and
larly concise D-dimensional embedding. These two embedding anomaly detection, enabling comprehensive analysis and modfunctions are crafted to encapsulate the most informative and eling of transportation systems. For time-series representation,
compact features of both traffic time-series and graph data. CLEAR utilizes a series of Transformer encoders to capture
 Definition 4 (Traffic Prediction): Traffic prediction aims to long-range dependencies and develop latent representations.
forecast H-dimensional future traffic conditions based on X Similarly, for spatial data, CLEAR employs a graph-embedded
by projecting the next L time steps of traffic data across all Transformer encoder architecture to process graph-structured
sensors, denoted by X̂ ∈ R|V|×L×H . Drawing parallels to X, data and extract spatial representations. Both are then fed into
for the traffic datasets focused on speed and flow, predictions a traffic predicting decoder to generate predictions for future
are typically univariate, thus H = 1 is maintained throughout time steps.
subsequent experiments to simplify the notations. Further, the CLEAR-learned representations can be lever-
 Definition 5 (Traffic Predictor Bootstrapping): Current aged to enhance or replace the spatial and temporal correlation
graph-based traffic predictors leverage spatial-temporal corre- learning components of existing graph-based predictors, thus
lations in diverse ways. Traffic predictor bootstrapping centers seamlessly integrated with these predictors for performance
on utilizing representations derived from the well-trained em- improvements. By incorporating these representations, existbedding functions ω and ϑ. These representations replace certain ing predictors can benefit from the rich semantic information
input components and/or internal modules within the predictors, captured through self-supervised contrastive learning, thereby
thereby enhancing prediction accuracy and streamlining model enhancing their ability to model complex spatial and temporal
training. dependencies within traffic data. The training of integrated
1676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

models becomes more straightforward as CLEAR eliminates
the need for additional representation extraction steps during
model training. Note that when integrating CLEAR with existing
predictors, only the Transformer-powered time-series and graph
data encoders are adopted. The contrastive learning components,
namely, the data augmentation strategies and the contrastive loss,
are used to train the encoder parameters.
 In the following sub-sections, we delve into the methodology
of CLEAR, detailing the process of representation learning
(Section IV-B and IV-C), its direct application in traffic prediction (Section IV-D), and its integration with existing traffic
predictors equipped with various spatial-temporal correlation
mining strategies (Section IV-E).

B. Traffic Time-Series Representation Learning
 Understanding the temporal dynamics within traffic data is
essential for its comprehensive analysis and effective modeling.
These temporal dynamics encapsulate crucial information regarding the evolution of traffic flow, congestion patterns, and Fig. 2. An example of the source and augmented time-series.
anomaly detection, which are fundamental for devising efficient
transportation strategies and intelligent traffic management systems. Additionally, each traffic sensor possesses a time-series,
which, in the context of transportation graph G, can be regarded
as its nodal data feature. Node representations can be thereupon learnt from the corresponding time-series by adopting a
time-series encoder f T (·), and subsequently used to explore the
spatial correlation among nodes across the graph.
 CLEAR utilizes self-supervised contrastive learning to construct the discriminative embedding space for traffic time-series.
Contrastive learning operates on the principle of maximizing agreement between similar instances (positive samples)
while minimizing agreement between dissimilar ones (negative samples) within a latent space. At an arbitrary time t,
each node i ∈ V has a historical traffic data feature xi,t =
{xi,t , xi,t−1 , . . . , xi,t−T +1 } ∈ RT . We employ the approach of
applying weak and strong augmentations to this time-series as
shown in Fig. 2 and perform cross-view contrastive learning to
learn robust nodal representations. Particularly, the weak augmentation is achieved by a moving-average-and-jitter strategy,
where the moving average of length M is calculated on xi,t and
the result is further perturbed by Gaussian noise N (0, σ 2 ):
 2
 i,t = MA(xi,t ; M ) + N (0, σ ),
 x̃w (1)
where MA(·; M ) is the moving-average function with padding. Fig. 3. CLEAR time-series encoder.
Further, the strong augmentation is done by a probablistic-swapand-jitter strategy for a more significant perturbation to the timeseries. We first divide the original time-series xi,t into chunks effective representation learning. Both augmented time-series
xi,t [c] of length C. Then, we randomly select half of all chunks are then passed to the time-series encoder f T to calculate their
to form a set C and apply a random permutation function π(·) latent space embeddings.
over the set. The result is subsequently perturbed by Gaussian As depicted in Fig. 3, encoder f T of CLEAR utilizes the
noise N (0, σ 2 ) to construct the strongly augmented time-series: Transformer encoder architecture to capture long-range time-
  series dependencies from the augmented data. f T starts with an
 xi,t [π(c)] + N (0, σ 2 ) if c ∈ C
 x̃i,t [c] =
 s
 . (2) input 1 × 1 convolution layer to first project the traffic timexi,t [c] + N (0, σ 2 ) otherwise
 series, typically univariate or in low dimensions, into a higher-
As empirically demonstrated in [15], applying compositions of dimensional context space, which is subsequently superimposed
data augmentation operations (principle of (1), (2)) is critical for with a learnable positional encoding p. As the semantics of
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1677

time-series are generally more straightforward than languages C. Traffic Graph Data Representation Learning
for which Transformer was originally designed for, we apply
 The aforementioned time-series encoder f T (·) is not sufficient
three Transformer encoders over the projected input: in identifying the temporal correlation within traffic data. Rather,
 (0)
 hi,t = Conv1×1 (x̃i,t ) + p, (3a) it essentially embeds time-series corresponding to traffic nodes
    in transportation networks, and the result indeed illustrates the
 (l) (l−1) (l−1)
 h̃i,t = MHA BN hi,t + hi,t , 1 ≤ l ≤ 3, (3b) inter-nodal dependency, i.e., spatial correlation. The missed is
    a graph data encoder f G (·) that takes the traffic data at an
 (l) (l) (l)
 hi,t = MLP BN h̃i,t + h̃i,t , 1 ≤ l ≤ 3, (3c) arbitrary time to compute their embeddings, so that multiple
    time instances can develop their correlation with these numerical
 (3) representations. Further, such embeddings intrinsically capture
 hi,t = FC MeanPool hi,t , (3d)
 the spatial dependency among traffic nodes in the condensed repwhere Conv1×1 (·) is the 1 × 1 convolution, MHA(·) is resentation without confined by explicit geographical adjacency
the multi-headed self-attention1 , MLP(·) is the multi-layer information, thereby dynamically exploits the spatial correlaperceptron with two fully-connected layers of 2048 neurons tion for traffic prediction. In CLEAR, we employ a contrastive
and a non-linear ReLU activation function, BN(·) is the batch learning-based representation learning paradigm to establish the
normalization operation, FC(·) is the fully-connected layer, graph data encoder, aiming at projecting traffic graph data into
and MeanPool(·) is the mean pooling operation, respectively. a semantic-rich embedding space.
Notably, a learnable positional encoding is adopted over the Following the same contrastive sample augmentation princicanonical sinosoidal ones in favor of the former’s capability ple of spatial data representation learning, traffic data feature
in maintaining time-series’ periodic feature and the better ex- ut = {xi,t | ∀i ∈ V} ∈ R|V| at an arbitrary time t is augmented
perimental performance to be demonstrated in Section V-E. by a periodic-average-and-jitter strategy as the weak one and
Additionally, pre-norm residual links are adopted to produce a one-hop-average-and-jitter strategy as the strong one. Parmore stable gradient values during model training [32]. The ticularly, the former first calculates the average traffic data at
final hi,t ∈ RD is the learnt D-dimensional representation of t and that of the same time-of-day and day-of-week in the
the input augmented time-series x̃i,t ∈ {x̃w i,t , x̃i,t }.
 s last week (denoted by t − 1wk), with a further Gaussian noise
 Given an arbitrary t, there are in total |V| number of xi,t perturbation:
samples in the dataset, leading to 2 × |V| augmented time-series, 2
 t = (ut + ut−1wk )/2 + N (0, σ ).
 ũw (5)
weakly or strongly done. We use f T (x̃w i,t ) and f (x̃i,t ) as a
 T s

pair of positive samples, and the other augmented time-series The latter aggregates the values of one-hop neighboring nodes
as negative samples. In order to further preserve the semantic for any arbitrary node, and use the Gaussian noise-perturbed
information in representations developed from f T , we concate- average value as the strongly augmented data:
nate the encoder with a concluding time-series feature projection 
 ũst = usi,t | ∀i ∈ V , (6a)
head g T (·) before training the model with contrastive loss, which
   
can be accordingly formulated as follows: usi,t = xj,t / Vt1 (i; At ) + N (0, σ 2 ), (6b)
 ⎛   j∈V 1 (i;At )
  exp sim zw i,t , zi,t /τ
 s
  =
 T ⎝− log    
 k=i where Vt1 (·; At ) is the self-containing one-hop neighboring
 k∈V exp sim zi,t , zk,t /τ
 w s
 i∈V t∈T
 function of an input node on the graph according to the adjacency
   ⎞ defined by At ∈ B|V|×|V| . When augmenting ut , we propose to
 exp sim zsi,t , zw /τ
 − log   i,t   ⎠ , (4) employ the previous spatial data representations after feature
 k=i
 exp sim z s , zw
 i,t /τ projection zi,t to construct preliminary nodal adjacency as folk∈V k,t
 lows
where sim(a, b) = aT b/a · b is the cosine similarity cal-   
 at,ij = sim g T f T (xi,t ) , g T f T (xj,t ) , (7a)
culation, zi,t = g T (hi,t ) = W(2) ReLU(W(1) hi,t ), and τ de-
 
notes a temperature parameter. Principally, each weakly aug- 1 if at,ij is among top − λ in{at,ik | ∀k ∈ V}
 At [i, j] = ,
mented time-series is contrastively tested against all strongly 0 otherwise
augmented time-series, and vice versa. As the contrastive loss (7b)
in (4) forces the model to learn data transformation-agnostic
projections zi,t , information useful for downstream traffic tasks instead of using geographical adjacency as defined in E. Hymay be removed in the process [15]. The perceptron feature pothetically, the projected representation embeds more semanprojection head g T (·) is introduced to isolate this transformation- tic information about traffic dynamics than the road network
invariant training step and maintain more context in hi,t . This connectivity and facilitates better data augmentation on ut . We
hypothesis is empirically verified in Section V-E by testing the present empirical studies in Section V-E supporting this claim.
 With the two augmented graph data samples (ũw t and ũt
 s
performance of including hi,t in (4), stand-alone or jointly.
 with adjacency At ), we further adopt a variant of Transformer
 1 Following [31], we adopt eight heads in each multi-headed self-attention architecture to process the graph-structured data, depicted in
calculation. Fig. 4. Three encoder layers are adopted after an input 1 × 1
1678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 relationships within the input data, ultimately enabling it to
 generate rich representations. The final qt ∈ RD is the learnt
 representation of the input augmented graph data ũt ∈ {ũw t , ũt }.
 s

 The contrastive loss of f (·) follows a similar principle of
 G

 f T (·). Given a traffic dataset, there are |T | graph data samples
 U = {ut | t ∈ T }. The loss is accordingly defined as (c.f. (4)):
 
  exp (sim(vtw , vts )/τ )
 G = − log r=t
 r∈U exp (sim(vt , vr )/τ )
 w s
 t∈T
 
 exp (sim(vts , vtw )/τ )
 − log r=t , (9)
 r∈U exp (sim(vt , vr )/τ )
 s w

 where vt = g G (qt ) is the graph feature projection head with two
 sequential graph convolution operations and a non-linear ReLU
 in-between. By this design, CLEAR is capable of adaptively
 capturing the dynamic spatial correlations within traffic graph
 slices independently across time steps. This flexibility allows
 the spatial correlation to be different over time and relaxes the
 reliance on a fixed or predefined spatial structure. Furthermore,
 the framework’s ability to autonomously learn spatial relation-
Fig. 4. CLEAR graph data encoder. The feature projection shares the same ships from data aligns with the concept of adaptability seen in
structure as that in Fig. 3 with the linear transformations replaced by graph
convolutions.
 advanced traffic prediction models like Graph WaveNet.

 D. Traffic Prediction With Traffic Data Representations
convolution layer for feature projection: In the previous sub-sections, we introduced two self-
 (0) supervised representation learning models for generating taskqt = Conv1×1 (ũt ) , (8a)
 agnostic traffic data embeddings. These representations can be
    
 (l) (l−1) (l) (l−1) utilized in downstream traffic data mining tasks, where traffic
 q̇t = BN qt , q̈t = BN At qt , (8b)
 prediction is among the most prominent ones. The objective of
  
 (l) (l) (l) the task is to develop a prediction function f : R|V|×T → R|V|×L
 q̄t = MHA q̇t + q̇t , 1 ≤ l ≤ 3, (8c)
 that takes the historical traffic data as input and develop those
   for the next L time instances.
 (l) (l) (l) (l) (l)
 q̃t = MHA q̄t , q̈t , q̈t + q̄t , 1 ≤ l ≤ 3, (8d)
 Given the original traffic data X ∈ R|V|×|T | and xi,t ⊂
   X, qt ⊂ X, CLEAR extracts the latent time-series and graph
 (l) (l) (l)
 qt = MLP BN(q̃t ) + q̃t , 1 ≤ l ≤ 3, (8e) data representations at current time t with data encoders
   
 (3) (3)
 qt = FC MeanPool qt At qt , (8f) hi,t = f T (xi,t ), qt = f G (ut ), (10)

where we abuse the notation of MHA(·, ·, ·) to use the first respectively. Subsequently, a traffic predicting decoder f F (·)
input as the query of multi-head self-attention and the latter develops the predicted values. We follow the principle of Graph
two as the key and value [31], respectively. Comparing (8) Attention neTwork (GAT) [33] and devise to use the nodal relawith the standard Transformer encoder in (3), we highlight the tionship defined by hi,t to aggregate traffic data representations
introduction of an additional inter-layer attention in (8d). The by graph convolution defined as follows:2
model incorporates both intra-level attention (8c) and inter-level 
 h̄i = hT
 i,t hj,t W (hi,t qt ) , (11)
attention (8d) mechanisms to effectively capture dependencies j∈V 1 (i;At )
and relationships within and across different levels of abstraction
in the input graph-structured. Intra-level attention facilitates where W ∈ RD ×2D is a trainable weight matrix. Following
the exchange of information between nodes within the same the graph convolution, f F (·) adopts two convolutional layers
level of the graph hierarchy, enabling nodes to update their with kernel sizes of 1 × D and 1 × 1 and a ReLU activation
embeddings based on their local neighborhoods. On the other in-between, and the final output channel number is L. After
hand, inter-level attention allows nodes to exchange information decoding, the output matrix X̂ ∈ R|V|×L corresponds to the
with neighboring nodes across different levels of abstraction, L-step traffic prediction of each node in V. The decoder is
facilitating the understanding of the global graph structure. After
 (3)
the stacking encoders, the resulting output qt is passed to 2 The presented GAT-based model is among many possible choices for the
a two-layer graph pooling MLP to generate the embedding. predictor. Simpler structures like MLP or more complex ones like Transformer
The model thereby efficiently processes and learns complex can also be adopted.
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1679

trained with mean absolute error between the predicted X̂ and where matrix Ht ∈ R|V|×D is constructed by stacking hi,t , ∀i ∈
the ground truth: V as rows.
 C3: Spatial and temporal attention. Besides using an adja-
 L
   cency matrix to capture the spatial data correlation, attention
 F = |x̂i,t+Δ − xi,t+Δ | . (12) mechanism is another approach to represent the data dependency
 i∈V t∈T Δ=1
 within either the spatial domain or the temporal domain, or both.
 Typically, the attention values are still derived from trainable
E. Bootstrapping Existing Graph Learning-Based Predictors nodal or temporal representations, e.g., in [36], [37], which can
 In addition to empowering downstream traffic data mining be substituted by CLEAR-generated ones:
tasks, the learned representations from CLEAR possess versatility beyond standalone prediction models. These embeddings   
 α = {αi,j } = softmax ReLU (Ht W1 ) (Ht W2 )T w ,
can also integrate with existing graph learning-based traffic
predictors, replacing or enhancing their spatial and temporal (15a)
correlation learning components. The merit lies on a recognition   
that the integration of graph structure learning and data correla- β = {βt,τ } = softmax ReLU (QW3 ) (QW4 )T ,
tion mining often presents a tightly coupled scenario, where the (15b)
learning task becomes a complex bilevel optimization problem
due to the absence of supervised loss information for graph where α and β are the attention matrices between nodes and
structure learning. This interplay underscores the importance between timestamps, respectively, and matrix Q ∈ R|T |×D is
of devising strategies that effectively leverage learned repre- constructed by stacking all qt of input timestamps as rows.
sentations to complement or bootstrap existing graph-based C4: Spatial and temporal representation learning. There are
predictors, decoupling the adjacency matrix learning from the also graph learning-based traffic predictors that comprehenspatial-temporal data prediction task. The former is outsourced sively utilize learnt spatial and temporal representations for
and preprocessed by the prepositional representation learning, prediction, [23], [38] for examples. For such models, we may
so that the predictors can focus on training the forecast model directly utilize hi,t as the representation for node i, qt as the repwithout concerning on another learning task. resentation for time t, and hi,t qt if the representation for node
 Current graph learning-based predictors can be broadly cate- i at time t is required, respectively. One thing that may sounds
gorized into four patterns based on how spatial-temporal corre- counter-intuitive is that we uses “time-series representation” hi,t
lation is defined or mined. By examining these patterns, we can for node embedding and vice versa, yet the principle is grounded
effectively illustrate how the representations learned by CLEAR on the fact that each node i corresponds to a hi,t at an arbitrary
can be integrated with and enhance existing predictors. Each cat- time t, making it effectively representing the semantic context
egory represents a distinct strategy for capturing and exploiting of a node, i.e., node representation. The same applies for graph
spatial-temporal correlations within traffic data, offering unique data representation qt , which encapsulates context of all nodes
opportunities for integration with learned representations. in the graph at time t into a dense numerical representation.
 Category 1 (C1): Static adjacency matrix based on geo- While the aforementioned bootstrapping methods apply to a
adjacency. Using a statically defined adjacency matrix based wide range of graph learning-based traffic predictors, it is eson nodal distance for G is arguably the most straightforward sential to acknowledge that these patterns may not exhaustively
approach for integrating domain knowledge on the spatial cor- capture all strategies employed in the literature. However, their
relation. Example usages are presented in [34], [35]. For this underlying principles provide a foundation upon which both
pattern, we can directly replace the original adjacency matrix, existing and future graph learning-based traffic predictors can
commonly denoted by A, with At as defined in (7) to score an be built. Each pattern offers unique opportunities for leveragintuitive-yet-effective performance improvement: ing learned representations to enhance predictor performance,
 demonstrating the adaptability and versatility of the CLEAR
 A ← At , (13)
 framework in traffic data analysis and prediction.
where the current timestamp of prediction is adopted as the t in
At .
 C2: Adaptive adjacency matrix based on representation V. EXPERIMENTS
learning. Another commonly adopted strategy is to employ two In this section, we present a series of comprehensive experlearnable node embedding matrices (e.g., E1 and E2 as in [10]), iments on four real-world datasets to show the effectiveness
whose softmax-ed multiplication softmax(ReLU(E1 ET 2 )) is of CLEAR on traffic prediction and bootstrapping other graph
considered as the spatial dependency weights Ãadp between pairs learning-based predictors. We first introduce the experimenof nodes. For this pattern, we can also intuitively replace the tal configurations, including the datasets, baseline methods,
learnable weights by the time-series representations hi,t learnt performance evaluation metrics, and implementation details
by CLEAR: of CLEAR. Subsequently, we answer the following research
   questions (RQs) by demonstrating and discussing the simulation
 Ãadp ← softmax ReLU Ht HT t , (14) results:
1680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 TABLE I r Vector Auto-Regression (VAR) models capture the depen-
 STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF DATASETS
 dencies between multiple time series variables, making
 predictions based on their own lagged values and the lagged
 values of other variables in the system.
 r Support Vector Regressor (SVR) utilizes training data to
 estimate a regression function that generalizes well to
 unseen data points.
 r Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) is
 widely used for time-series prediction by modeling the rer RQ1: Can the traffic data representations learnt by CLEAR lationship between an observation and a number of lagged
 observations and error terms.
 provide outstanding traffic predicting accuracy compared r ASTGCN [35] proposes an attribute-augmented spatiotemto state-of-the-art baselines?
 r RQ2: Can CLEAR bootstrap existing graph learning-based poral graph convolutional network to enhance spatiotemporal accuracy in predicting traffic by integrating extertraffic predictors?
 r RQ3: How does representations by CLEAR perform in nal factors as dynamic and static attributes into the model
 through an attribute-augmented unit.
 multi-step traffic prediction?
 r RQ4: How does CLEAR improve model training effi- r STSGCN [34] captures localized spatial-temporal correlations through synchronous modeling mechanisms and
 ciency?
 r RQ5: How do the implementation details of CLEAR affect accommodating heterogeneities with multiple modules for
 different time periods.
 bootstrapping performance? r STGODE [41] captures spatial-temporal dynamics through
 tensor-based ordinary differential equations, facilitating
A. Experimental Setup deeper networks and synchronous utilization of spatial-
 1) Datasets: In this work, we conduct experiments on four temporal features, while employing a well-designed temsmall-to-large-scale traffic prediction datasets: poral dilated convolution structure.
 r Beijing is a traffic speed dataset collected by [39] from the r Graph WaveNet [10] introduces a graph neural network
 major roads in Beijing, China. The dataset contains speed architecture designed for spatial-temporal graph modeling,
 values of 3126 sensors from May 12, 2022 to July 25, 2022. effectively capturing hidden spatial dependencies and han-
 Traffic speed is recorded every five minutes. dling long sequences with a stacked dilated 1D convolution
 r NI-SH is a traffic speed dataset collected by NavInfo from component.
 selected roads in Shanghai, China. The dataset contains r AGCRN [42] proposes adaptive modules, including a node
 speed values of 1830 sensors from January 2, 2019 to June adaptive parameter learning one and data adaptive graph
 15, 2019. Traffic speed is recorded every five minutes. generation one,to enhance graph convolutional network
 r PeMS04 is a traffic flow dataset collected by California capabilities for capturing fine-grained spatial and temporal
 Transportation Agencies Performance Measurement Sys- correlations in traffic series automatically.
 tem in the Bay Area of United States. The dataset contains r GMAN [37] utilizes an encoder-decoder architecture with
 flow volumes of 307 sensors from January 1, 2018 to spatio-temporal attention blocks to model the impact of
 February 28, 2018. Traffic volume is recorded every five spatio-temporal factors on traffic conditions.
 minutes. r STWave+ [36] mitigates distribution shift with a
 r METR-LA is a traffic speed dataset collected from the disentangle-fusion framework, employing a dual-channel
 loop-detectors on the Los Angeles County road network spatio-temporal network to model trends and events sepof United States. The dataset contains flow volumes of arately, and incorporating self-supervised learning and
 207 sensors from March 1, 2012 to June 27, 2012. Traffic multi-scale graph wavelet positional encoding for efficient
 volume is recorded every five minutes. dynamic spatial correlation modeling.
 All four datasets are collected by different agencies. Their r STAEFormer [43] introduces a spatio-temporal adaptive
statistical information is summarized in Table I. For a fair com- embedding, enhancing vanilla transformers for superior
parison, we adopt the chronological 7/1/2 split to generate the performance in traffic prediction by effectively capturing
training, validation, and testing data. Bayesian Gaussian CAN- intrinsic spatio-temporal relations and chronological infor-
DECOMP/PPARAFAC tensor decomposition model [40] is em- mation in traffic time series.
ployed to interpolate the missing values in all datasets. Z-score r GMSDR [38] introduces a multi-step dependency relation
normalization is adopted to improve the model training stability. scheme in recurrent neural networks, seamlessly integrat-
 2) Baselines: → + CLEAR ing with graph-based neural networks for spatial-temporal
 We select a wealth of state-of-the-art traffic prediction base- prediction.
line methods in the following experiments: r DGCRN [22] utilizes hyper-networks to extract dynamic
 r Historical Average (HA) predicts future traffic based on the characteristics from node attributes, generating dynamic
 historical average traffic volume at each spatial-temporal graphs at each time step and integrating them with prelocation. defined static graphs, with an efficient training strategy.
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1681

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of baselines, CLEAR-bootstrapped baselines, and the CLEAR Predictor.

 Among the baselines, HA, VAR, SVR, and ARIMA are predictors c.f. Section IV-E, Graph WaveNet and AGCRN are
statistical methods, while all others are state-of-the-art graph C2 predictors, GMAN and STWave+ are C3 predictors, STAElearning-based traffic predictors. Former, GMSDR, and DGCRN are C4 predictors. We test all
 3) Performance Metrics: We evaluate the performance of baselines, their CLEAR-bootstrapped variants (Section IV-E),
CLEAR and all baseline methods by three widely-adopted met- and the CLEAR predictor (Section IV-D) on all four datasets.
rics in traffic prediction [10], [23], [36], [37], namely, Mean The traffic predicting accuracy statistics are presented in Fig. 5
Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and and Table II. Each graph learning-based baselines has the results
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). from both its original model (denoted by its name) and the
 4) Implementation Details: We set the prediction horizon L corresponding CLEAR-bootstrapped variant, denoted by the
to 12. The length of time-series in generating their corresponding following line with the tag “ → + CLEAR”. Fig. 5 presents
representation T is set to the number of samples in one day, i.e., the comparison of all baselines, and their CLEAR-bootstrapped
288 at a 5min sampling interval. The dimensionality D of learnt variants, and the CLEAR predictor. Note that HA, VAR, SVR,
traffic data representations (hi,t and qt ) is 256. The moving- and ARIMA do not have CLEAR-bootstrapped variants, as
average horizon M in (1) is set to 12. The probablistic-swap they are not graph learning-based predictors. CLEAR predictor
length C in (2) is set to 2h. The nodal adjacency threshold λ in cannot be further bootstrapped. Additionally, Table II provides
(7) is empirically set to the total number of edges in each dataset’s the numerical results of the best-performing approaches for a
geographical adjacency matrix. The number of attention heads more precise comparison. In the table, top-3 performance from
in Transformer encoders is set to 8. We adopted the Adam all baselines and CLEAR predictor is underlined.
optimizer [44] with an initial learning rate of 5 × 10−4 and We first use Fig. 5 and Table II to answer RQ1, i.e., does the
weight decay of 10−4 . We applied a mini-batch size of 128. CLEAR predictor work well in traffic prediction when compared
CLEAR and baseline methods are implemented with Python and with state of the arts. The simulation results indicate that the
Pytorch. All experiments are conducted on the Viking cluster CLEAR predictor, even with a quite simplistic convolutional
provided by the University of York with NVIDIA H100 GPUs. representation decoder, can achieve the 3 rd best prediction performance in Beijing dataset, the 2nd in NI-SH, 4th in PeMS04,
 and 3 rd in METR-LA regarding MAE. While STAEFormer
B. Traffic Prediction Performance (RQ1, RQ2) develops better predicting results in the first three datasets over
 In this sub-section, we present empirical results on employ- CLEAR predictor, the MAE performance gap is not overwhelming the proposed CLEAR for traffic prediction and bootstrap- ing: 0.111km/h on Beijing, 0.047km/h on NI-SH, and 0.408vh
ping graph learning-based traffic predictors. Among the base- on PeMS04. Indeed, the best performing baseline on METR-LA,
line approaches, ASTGCN, STSGCN, and STGODE are C1 DGCRN, outperforms the CLEAR predictor by 0.029 km/h.
1682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 TABLE II
 NUMERICAL RESULTS OF BEST-PERFORMING BASELINES, CLEAR-BOOTSTRAPPED BASELINES, AND THE CLEAR PREDICTOR

 TABLE III the predicting accuracy of all graph learning-based predictor
 RELATIVE MAE IMPROVEMENT / DEGRADATION OF ADOPTING CLEAR TO
 BOOTSTRAP BASELINES
 baselines. The improvement is particularly notable on datasets
 with large and complex transportation networks (Beijing and
 NI-SH) and baselines with relatively straightforward spatialtemporal correlation mining strategies. Particularly, C1, C2, and
 C3 predictors experience an average 10.171% improvement on
 MAE. These results demonstrates the superiority of CLEAR
 representations on bootstraping graph learning-based traffic predictors for better spatial-temporal data correlation mining on
 large graphs. The other datasets, namely, PeMS04 and METR-
 LA have much smaller graphs and respectively noncomplex
 spatial-temporal correlation. Therefore, existing predictors are
 more likely to exhaustively exploit such correlation for traffic
 prediction. Nonetheless, CLEAR can still improve the predicting
 accuracy by approximately 3.832% for the first three categories.
 This can be attributed to the more semantic-rich time-variant
 adjacency matrix (C1), more robust representation-based adjacency matrix (C2), and better semantic-empowered attention
 scores (C3) developed by CLEAR.
 Moving forward to C4-type predictors, we figured that the
 2.518% improvements, while still statistically significant with
 node-wise Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, are not as remarkable
We credit the outstanding plain performance of STWave+ and as the first two categories. This observation is grounded on the
STAEFormer to their effective exploitation of traffic represen- nature of these baselines, which also explicitly extract spatial and
tations, which primarily relies on discrete wavelet transform temporal traffic data representations by learnable parameters.
and Transformer. In this context, the GAT-CNN-CNN structure As a result, well-trained baseline models, in principle, can learn
adopted by CLEAR Predictor c.f. Section IV-D is far from as semantic-rich embeddings for the downstream prediction task.
with efficacy, resulting in the performance gap. We further tested In the meantime, the incorporation of CLEAR relieves the trainoffline with a straightforward linear projection decoder head in ing difficulty by decoupling the graph structure learning (i.e.,
place of the GAT-CNN-CNN structure on Beijing dataset: MAE representation learning) from the main data correlation mining
performance minusculely drops to 3.238 at an approximately during model optimization. We may expect, and get verified in
0.56% relative degradation. Consequently, our answer to RQ1 Section V-D, that the computation burden and training time of
is, though not the best-performing method, the CLEAR predic- respective models can be non-trivially reduced. Datasets with
tor can provide outstanding and highly competitive predictions large graphs but less samples can benefit more from CLEAR
compared with the state-of-the-art baselines. bootstrapping, as the spatial-temporal correlation mining is more
 What makes CLEAR truly stand out is its superior bootstrap- challenging. Alongside being a computationally efficient repping capability. To make the statistics more comprehensible, resentation learning substitute for C4 predictors, CLEAR can
we summarize the relative MAE improvement/degradation of still obtain better prediction results due to the lighter training
adopting CLEAR to bootstrap graph learning-based predictors difficulty. Therefore, we conclude that CLEAR can bootstrap
in Table III. The table indicates that the traffic data represen- existing graph learning-based traffic predictors with notable
tations generated by CLEAR can almost consistently improve accuracy improvements (RQ2).
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1683

Fig. 6. Multi-step MAE performance of graph learning-based predictor baselines and their respective CLEAR-bootstrapped variants on the Beijing and PeMS04
datasets.

 TABLE IV
 RELATIVE PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT OF CONTRASTIVE
 REPRESENTATION FRAMEWORKS ON BEIJING DATASET

 Fig. 7. Visualization of CLEAR representations by principal component analysis.

 Lastly, we adopt the current art of contrastive representation
learning frameworks, namely, TS-TCC, TNC, and CoST, to in enhancing the predicting accuracy of graph learning-based
bootstrap the best-performing graph learning-based predictors predictors. We further visualize the representations learnt by
(STWave+ and STAEFormer). The publicly available source CLEAR on the Beijing dataset by principal component analysis
code of respective frameworks is utilized to generate repre- in Fig. 7. The graph data representations in Fig. 7(a) are colorsentations for traffic time-series, and the same bootstrapping coded by the time-of-day, and each point in Fig. 7(b) refers
strategies in Section IV-E is applied. Simulation results on to the traffic dynamics of a sensor. The scatter plots shows
Beijing dataset are presented in Table IV, indicating that CLEAR that the contrastive representation learning effectively groups
outperforms all contrastive representation learning frameworks similar traffic dynamics and repels opposite ones. We credit the
1684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

performance of CLEAR to its ability to effectively capture both bootstrapping strategies. The empirical results are presented in
temporal and spatial dependencies within traffic data, which are Table V. In this table, we also present the relative parameter and
essential for accurate traffic prediction but the latter is missing FLOPs reduction by introducing CLEAR as well as the relative
in compared frameworks. training time changed besides the raw data. Note that for the
 relative training time changed column, two values are presented
C. Multi-Step Prediction Performance (RQ3) where the former employs available CLEAR representations
 and the latter includes the CLEAR model training time over
 Multi-step traffic prediction also plays a pivotal role in the
 the respective base model’s.
efficacy of graph learning-based traffic predictors, as it enables
 The simulation result table clearly indicate that CLEAR can
insights into traffic trends and patterns over extended periods and
 effectively reduce the model size (# parameters) and complexity
allows for better downstream services. Therefore, investigating
 (# FLOPs) for C2, C3, and C4 baselines, thereby improves the
how representations by CLEAR perform in multi-step traffic
 model training efficiency. This can be credited to the decouprediction scenarios is essential for comprehensively evaluating
 pling of graph structure learning and the main data correlation
their effectiveness and applicability in real-world traffic predicmining, where the former is pre-achieved by CLEAR. Furtion tasks.
 ther, the semantic-rich adjacency matrices employed in C1-type
 In this sub-section, we extend the prediction horizon to
 baselines, while do not reduce the model footprint, help the
12 steps, i.e., 1h, on the Beijing and PeMS04 datasets for their
 model converge faster with efficacy. When we take the CLEAR
distinct network sizes, with all graph learning-based predictor
 model training time into account, Graph WaveNet experience a
baselines and their respective CLEAR-bootstrapped variants.
 non-negligible increase in the total training time. Nonetheless,
The simulation results are depicted in Fig. 6, where the horiconsidering its performance gain (+10.368% c.f. Table I) and
zontal axes denote the predicting horizon from one to twelve
 relative short base model training time (approx. 2.6h), we conand the vertical axes are the MAE values in km/h (Beijing)
 sider CLEAR still an effective bootstrapping method for Graph
and vh, respectively. From the plots, it can be observed that
 WaveNet.
the performance improvement of CLEAR over all baselins are
further enlarged with the expanding predicting horizon. On
the larger-scale Beijing dataset, the four types of predictors E. Ablation Study (RQ5)
embrace 13.342%, 12.566%, 10.519%, and 8.354% MAE im-
 In the design of CLEAR, we adopt a few structural designs
provements at the 12th predicting horizon, leading to an overall
 to improve model capacity and facilitate better performance.
average 11.126% performance boost c.f. 8.909% at the first step.
 Particularly, we employ a learnable positional encoding (Learn
The advancement persists on the smaller PeMS04 dataset with
 PE) for time-series in (3) substituting the more straightforthe corresponding type improvements at the 12th horizon to be
 ward sinusoidal encoding, pre-norm residual connections (Pre-N
6.764%, 5.595%, 5.009%, and 3.588%, overall an 5.226% up
 Res.) in (3), (8) instead of the post-norm connection proposed
from the first step 3.056%. The substantial gains achieved by
 in [31], and feature projection heads (Proj. Head) g T (·) and
CLEAR across multiple prediction steps underscore its effecg G (·) following [15]. Finally, we adopt the contrastive learning
tiveness in capturing and leveraging long-term temporal and
 paradigm to train the representation learning model.
spatial dependencies within traffic data, affirming its potential
 To verify their efficacy in the model performance, we conto significantly enhance the capabilities of graph learning-based
 struct a series of CLEAR ablations and test their performance
traffic predictors in real-world applications (RQ3).
 on the Beijing dataset with both the Graph WaveNet base model
 and the CLEAR predictor. We create a series of CLEAR variants
D. Model Training Efficiency (RQ4) with tags “A” to “G” to denote the ablation of the Learn PE,
 Efficiency in model training is a crucial aspect in the develop- Pre-N Res. and Proj. Head designs. Additionally, we remove the
ment and deployment of machine learning models, particularly contrastive learning parts in CLEAR, namely, data augmentation
in the context of large-scale traffic prediction tasks. With the and contrastive loss (replaced by reconstruction loss), to create
ever-increasing volume and complexity of traffic data, the com- the ablated model “CLEAR” with a variant “CLEAR-PH” that
putational resources required for training graph learning-based further removes the projection head layers. Note that Beijing
traffic predictors can become a bottleneck, hindering the scala- dataset is selected for its large-scale traffic network size. Table VI
bility and practicality of these models. Therefore, investigating presents the experimental results. Comparing the performance
how CLEAR improves model training efficiency is essential for metrics among different rows, an easy conclusion can be made
assessing its feasibility and effectiveness in real-world applica- that all the designs contribute to better CLEAR performance in
tions. terms of both traffic prediction and predictor bootstraping, and
 In this sub-section, we delve into a comprehensive analysis the contrastive learning paradigm plays a critical part in generatof the size, computational complexity, and training time of ing semantic-rich representations. The results generally accord
both baseline models and their CLEAR-bootstrapped variants. with previous studies on the respective designs, namely, [15],
Particularly, we calculate the number of trainable parameters, [32], [45]. One minor discrepancy lies in the performance boost
floating-point operations (FLOPs) for each forward pass cal- by projection heads, which lead to over 10% improvement rather
culation on the large-scale Beijing dataset, and measure the than the approximately 3% in Table VI. We hypothesize that the
relative model training time reduced without and with CLEAR information loss induced by the contrastive loss, conjectured
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1685

 TABLE V
 MODEL SIZE, COMPLEXITY, AND TRAINING TIME REDUCTION ON BEIJING DATASET

 TABLE VI
 ABLATION PERFORMANCE OF CLEAR ON BEIJING DATASET

in [15], is less significant on time-series and graph data than coupled learning in scenarios with abundant computational reimages as originally investigated. Despite this trivial difference, sources, training data, and carefully tailored models. Though the
the simulation results verify and agree with the literature that GAT-based predictor within CLEAR performs competitively,
the feature projection heads indeed introduces more robust and its relatively simple architecture does not outperform certain
semantic-rich data representations for downstream tasks, i.e., state-of-the-art predictors, emphasizing CLEAR’s role as a reptraffic prediction in this context. resentation learning framework over a standalone predictor.
 Despite these limitations, CLEAR’s ability to enhance the per-
F. Discussion on Limitations formance of existing graph-based predictors highlights its practicality and potential for impact. By decoupling adjacency matrix
 The proposed CLEAR framework demonstrates significant
 learning from spatial-temporal correlation extraction, CLEAR
advancements in spatial-temporal traffic data representation
 reduces the training complexity of integrated models and offers a
learning but is not without limitations. The complexity of the
 flexible, task-agnostic representation learning paradigm. Future
framework, particularly its reliance on dual-branch contrastive
 work could address these limitations by exploring data impulearning and Transformer-based encoders, introduces computation mechanisms, simplifying the architecture, and adapting
tational overhead that might limit its scalability in resource-
 CLEAR for a broader range of traffic analytics task decoders.
constrained environments. Additionally, CLEAR depends on
complete input data for representation extraction, which could
restrict its applicability to datasets with missing or noisy ob- VI. CONCLUSION
servations: further data imputation approaches are required as This paper introduces the CLEAR (Contrastive Learning of
pre-processors and they may undermine the representation learn- spatial-tEmporal trAffic data Representations) framework that
ing performance. Further, while CLEAR decouples adjacency leverages the power of self-supervised contrastive learning to
matrix learning from spatial-temporal correlation extraction, extract meaningful embeddings from both traffic time-series
this approach may not outperform the ideal case of tightly and graph-structured data, facilitating more accurate traffic
1686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

predictions. By employing both weak and strong data aug- [12] L. Franceschi, M. Niepert, M. Pontil, and X. He, “Learning discrete
mentation techniques, CLEAR enhances its robustness and structures for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 2019, pp. 1–20.
generalization in generating semantic-rich data representations [13] H. Lin, Y. Fan, J. Zhang, and B. Bai, “REST: Reciprocal framewithin diverse traffic datasets. Its specialized models capture work for spatiotemporal-coupled predictions,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
critical temporal and spatial dependencies, allowing seamless pp. 3136–3145.
 [14] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric disintegration with existing traffic prediction models, increasing criminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE Comput.
their accuracy and reducing model training complexity without Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2005, pp. 539–546.
significant modifications. [15] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Experimental evaluations across four real-world datasets val- Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
idate CLEAR’s superior ability to predict future traffic and [16] Y. Gong, T. He, M. Chen, B. Wang, L. Nie, and Y. Yin, “Spatio-temporal
bootstrap graph learning-based predictors. Multi-step prediction enhanced contrastive and contextual learning for weather forecasting,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 4260–4274, Aug. 2024.
tests and ablation studies confirm its robustness and the strategic [17] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What
efficacy of its design, and a thorough look into the model training makes for good views for contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
efficiency indicate its efficiency in decoupling the graph adja- Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6827–6839.
 [18] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatialcency learning and data correlation learning processes during temporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasttraining. These experiments substantiate the framework’s utility ing,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
in real-world applications, making it a promising approach to be pp. 1567–1577.
 [19] X. Luo, C. Zhu, D. Zhang, and Q. Li, “STG4Traffic: A survey and benchintegrated in traffic prediction methods. mark of spatial-temporal graph neural networks for traffic prediction,”
 Looking ahead, the CLEAR framework opens several avenues Jul. 2023, arXiv:2307.00495.
for further research. Future work could explore the extension [20] X. Ren, W. Wei, L. Xia, and C. Huang, “A comprehensive survey on selfsupervised learning for recommendation,” Apr. 2024, arXiv:2404.03354.
of this framework to other types of downstream intelligent [21] T. Uelwer et al., “A survey on self-supervised representation learning,”
transportation tasks. As the CLEAR framework is designed to Aug. 2023, arXiv:2308.11455.
be modular and flexible, it can be adapted to other traffic-related [22] F. Li et al., “Dynamic graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic
 prediction: Benchmark and solution,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data,
tasks with tailor-made representation decoders, somehow sim- vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 9:1–9:21, Feb. 2023.
ilar to the Traffic Prediction Decoder in Fig. 1. Additionally, [23] M. Liu, H. Huang, H. Feng, L. Sun, B. Du, and Y. Fu, “PriSTI: A
further refinement of the data augmentation and representation conditional diffusion framework for spatiotemporal imputation,” in Proc.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1927–1939.
learning techniques could yield even more robust models capa- [24] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
ble of handling increasingly complex datasets. contrastive predictive coding,” Jul. 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
 [25] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 REFERENCES Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
 [26] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 [1] S. Guo, Y. Lin, H. Wan, X. Li, and G. Cong, “Learning dynamics and contextual contrasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 heterogeneity of spatial-temporal graph data for traffic forecasting,” IEEE pp. 2352–2359.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 5415–5428, Nov. 2022. [27] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representa-
 [2] D. A. Tedjopurnomo, Z. Bao, B. Zheng, F. M. Choudhury, and A. K. Qin, tion learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in Proc.
 “A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic prediction: Trends, Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–17.
 methods and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 4, [28] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “CoST: Contrastive
 pp. 1544–1561, Apr. 2022. learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for time series
 [3] J. Liu et al., “Urban flow pattern mining based on multi-source heteroge- forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–17.
 neous data fusion and knowledge graph embedding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. [29] J. Ji et al., “Spatio-temporal self-supervised learning for traffic flow
 Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2133–2146, Feb. 2023. prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4356–4364.
 [4] L. Lin, J. Li, F. Chen, J. Ye, and J. Huai, “Road traffic speed prediction: A [30] H. Qu, Y. Gong, M. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and Y. Yin, “Forecasting
 probabilistic model fusing multi-source data,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data fine-grained urban flows via spatio-temporal contrastive self-supervision,”
 Eng., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1310–1323, Jul. 2018. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8008–8023, Aug. 2023.
 [5] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph con- [31] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 volutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
 France, 2017, pp. 1–14. [32] R. Xiong et al., “On layer normalization in the transformer architecture,”
 [6] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 10 524–10 533.
 networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. [33] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023. “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 [7] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent 2018, pp. 1–12.
 neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on [34] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous graph
 Learn. Representations, Vancouver, Canada, 2018, pp. 1–16. convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal network
 [8] J. J. Q. Yu, “Graph construction for traffic prediction: A data-driven data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 914–921.
 approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 15 015–15 [35] J. Zhu, Q. Wang, C. Tao, H. Deng, L. Zhao, and H. Li, “AST-GCN:
 027, Sep. 2022. Attribute-augmented spatiotemporal graph convolutional network for traf-
 [9] L. Han, B. Du, L. Sun, Y. Fu, Y. Lv, and H. Xiong, “Dynamic and multi- fic forecasting,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 35 973–35 983, 2021.
 faceted spatio-temporal deep learning for traffic speed forecasting,” in [36] Y. Fang et al., “When spatio-temporal meet wavelets: Disentangled traffic
 Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Singapore, 2021, forecasting via efficient spectral graph attention networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 pp. 547–555. Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 517–529.
[10] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph WaveNet for deep [37] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi-attention
 spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
 Macao, China, 2019, pp. 1907–1913. pp. 1234–1241.
[11] Y. Bahri, E. Dyer, J. Kaplan, J. Lee, and U. Sharma, “Explaining neural [38] N. Liu, X. Wang, D. Bo, C. Shi, and J. Pei, “Revisiting graph contrastive
 scaling laws,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 121, no. 27, Jun. 2024, learning from the perspective of graph spectrum,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Art. no. e2311878121. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–12.
YU et al.: CLEAR: SPATIAL-TEMPORAL TRAFFIC DATA REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TRAFFIC PREDICTION 1687

[39] Z. Cai et al., “MemDA: Forecasting urban time series with memory-based Xinwei Fang is a lecturer with the Department of
 drift adaptation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, Computer Science at the University of York, U.K. His
 pp. 193–202. research focuses on the design and development of
[40] X. Chen, Z. He, and L. Sun, “A Bayesian tensor decomposition approach trustworthy autonomous systems by understanding,
 for spatiotemporal traffic data imputation,” Transp. Res. Part C, Emerg. detecting, and mitigating uncertainties that may arise
 Technol., vol. 98, pp. 73–84, Jan. 2019. at various stages of these systems through meth-
[41] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE ods such as machine learning, model checking, and
 networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. statistical analysis.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 364–373.
[42] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 17 804–17 815.
[43] H. Liu et al., “Spatio-temporal adaptive embedding makes vanilla transformer SOTA for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Manage., 2023, pp. 4125–4129.
[44] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” Shiyao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the BS dein Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015, pp. 1–15. gree (Hons.) in electrical and computer engineering
[45] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in
 Transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation 2014, the MS degree in electrical engineering from
 learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, the University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
 2021, pp. 2114–2124. CA, USA, in 2016, and the PhD degree from the
 University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China,
 in 2020. He was a postdoctoral research fellow with
 the Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology
 from 2020 to 2022, and a research assistant professor
 with the Research Institute for Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, Southern
 James Jianqiao Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received University of Science and Technology from 2022 to 2024. He is currently
 the BEng and PhD degree in electrical and electronic an assistant professor with the School of Engineering, Great Bay University.
 engineering from the University of Hong Kong, Pok- His research interests include intelligent transportation systems, autonomous
 fulam, Hong Kong, in 2011 and 2015, respectively. driving, embodied AI, and transportation electrification.
 He is a professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen. He was a postdoctoral fellow with
 the University of Hong Kong from 2015 to 2018.
 He held professorship/lectureship with the Southern
 University of Science and Technology, China and Yuxin Ma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BEng
 University of York, U.K. from 2018 to 2024. His and PhD degrees from Zhejiang University, China. He
general research interests are in data mining, multi-modal learning, intelligent is a tenure-track associate professor with the Departtransportation systems, and embodied artificial intelligence. His work is now ment of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
mainly on spatial-temporal data mining, multi-modal foundation model, and University of Science and Technology (SUSTech),
forecasting and logistics of future transportation systems. He has published China. Before joining SUSTech, he worked as a postmore than 100 academic papers in top international journals and conferences, doctoral research associate in VADER Lab, CIDSE,
and representative papers have been selected as ESI highly cited papers. He was Arizona State University. His primary research interthe World’s Top 2% Scientists since 2020 and of career by Stanford University. ests are in the areas of visualization and visual ana-
He is an Editor of IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems and lytics, focusing on explainable AI, high-dimensional
IET Smart Cities. data, and spatiotemporal data.