5570 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 CLIP-Based Multi-Modal Feature Learning for
 Cloth-Changing Person Re-Identification
 Guoqing Zhang , Member, IEEE, Jieqiong Zhou, Lu Jiang, Yuhui Zheng , Member, IEEE,
 and Weisi Lin , Fellow, IEEE
 Abstract—Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
has achieved remarkable results in the field of person
re-identification (ReID) due to its excellent cross-modal understanding ability and high scalability. Since the text encoder of
CLIP mainly focuses on easy-to-describe attributes such as clothing, and clothing is the main interference factor that reduces the
recognition accuracy in cloth-changing person ReID (CC ReID).
Consequently, directly applying CLIP to cloth-changing scenario
may be difficult to adapt to such dynamic feature changes,
thereby affecting the precision of identification. To solve this
challenge, we propose a CLIP-based multi-modal feature learning
framework (CMFF) for CC ReID. Specifically, we first design
a pose-aware identity enhancement module (PIE) to enhance
the model’s perception of identity-intrinsic information. In this
branch, to weaken the interference of clothing information,
we apply a ranking loss to minimize the difference between
appearance and pose in the feature space. Secondly, we propose
a global-local hybrid attention module (GLHA), which fuses
head and global features through a cross-attention mechanism,
enhancing the global recognition ability of key head information.
Finally, considering that existing CLIP-based methods often
 Fig. 1. Retrieval examples for short-term (e.g., in a same day) person ReID.
ignore the potential importance of shallow features, we propose a graph-based multi-layer interactive enhancement module
(GMIE), which groups and integrates multi-layer features of the
image encoder, aiming to enhance the contextual awareness of illustrated in Fig. 1). During recent years, it has become
multi-scale features. Extensive experiments on multiple popular a crucial technique in various public safety and monipedestrian datasets validate the outstanding performance of our
proposed CMFF. toring, including criminal suspect tracking, missing person
 localization, and intelligent traffic management. However, in
 Index Terms—CC ReID, contrastive language-image pre- real-world scenarios, recognition accuracy is affected by many
training, graph attention network.
 factors, such as illumination changes, object occlusion, cross
 resolution, and modality differences. Therefore, researchers
 I. I NTRODUCTION have proposed a large number of methods to deal with the
 above challenges [1], [2], [3], [4]. For example, Zhang et al.
P ERSON re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve target
 pedestrians across non-overlapping camera networks (as
 [1] proposed a progressive difference elimination model that
 reduces the impact of cross-modal and intra-class differences
 Received 17 January 2025; revised 11 July 2025; accepted 21 August 2025. between visible light and infrared modalities on recognition
Date of publication 1 September 2025; date of current version 5 September by fusing visible and infrared stripes and generating high-
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science quality transitional modality images. Li et al. [2] achieved
Foundation of China under Grant 62172231, Grant 92470202, and Grant
U22B2056; and in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province resolution-invariant image representation through generative
of China under Grant BK20220107. The associate editor coordinating the adversarial networks, successfully recovering the lost details in
review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Liqiang Nie. low-resolution input images. Lin et al. [3] proposed a temporal
(Corresponding author: Yuhui Zheng.)
 Guoqing Zhang is with the College of Computer Science and Software camera contrast learning framework, aiming to reduce the
Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing 210098, China, and also with the intra-ID discrepancy caused by background shift in unsuper-
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and vised person re-identification and accurately extract invariant
Technology, Nanjing 211544, China (e-mail: guoqingzhang@nuist.edu.cn).
 Jieqiong Zhou and Lu Jiang are with the School of Computer Science, semantic cues in pedestrian images.
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing 211544, While these methods demonstrate promising results under
China (e-mail: jieqiongz1999@163.com; jianglu2024@nuist.edu.cn). controlled conditions, they fundamentally rely on the assump-
 Yuhui Zheng is with the Key Laboratory of Tibetan Information Processing,
Ministry of Education, Qinghai Normal University, Xining 810008, China tion of stable appearance features – an assumption frequently
(e-mail: zhengyh@vip.126.com). violated in practical long-term surveillance scenarios. As
 Weisi Lin is with the School of Computer Science and Engi- shown in Fig. 2, clothing changes over days or months
neering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail:
wslin@ntu.edu.sg). significantly alter pedestrian appearance, posing substantial
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2025.3602641 challenges for conventional appearance-based ReID systems.
 1941-0042 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5571

 Fig. 3. Example of traditional image-text person ReID, where yellow box
 represents correct matches and red boxes denote incorrect ones.

 directly to the CC ReID task; we use CLIP-ReID [18] as
 our backbone network and evaluating on the clothing dataset
 Celebreid [19]. The visual outcomes of some experiments are
 presented in Fig. 3, and it is evident that although CLIP is
Fig. 2. An example of correct matches of a pedestrian in clothing-changing
 able to generate text cues that are closely related to pedestrian
scenarios. clothing, its cross-modal capability does strengthen the connection between visual content and text descriptions. However,
 the model shows obvious deficiencies in handling identity
This limitation underscores the urgent need to develop information interference caused by clothing changes. This
clothing-invariant ReID methods that maintain robust perfor- limitation mainly stems from CLIP’s pre-training mechanism,
mance during long-term real-world deployment. which tends to emphasize salient features of visual elements
 To deal with the interference of clothing changes on identity such as clothing, while ignoring subtle features, such as facial
information, researchers have conducted in-depth studies in features or body posture that are critical to identity recognition.
the field of clothing-change ReID (CC ReID). Existing CC To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we put forward a
ReID methods can be primarily classified into two groups: CLIP-based multi-modal feature fusion network (CMFF) for
one focuses on mining clothing-independent biomodal infor- CC ReID, which combines image, text, and biological (head,
mation, such as body contour, gait and posture [5], [6], [7]. posture) modalities to enhance the model’s robustness. Firstly,
To mitigate the influence of clothing information, the other we propose a pose-aware identity enhancement module that
methods separate clothing from the non-clothing human parts leverages the pose estimation model HRNet [20] to capture
[8], [9], [10], [11] and focus on non-clothing parts to improve the detailed pose information of pedestrians. By combining the
recognition accuracy. However, methods that rely on auxiliary pose information with the global visual features obtained from
biological modalities will greatly limit identity features in CLIP, the model’s ability to perceive the inherent characterthe case of poor image quality (such as severe occlusion istics of pedestrian identities can be enhanced. Among them,
or low-light environment). In addition, merely removing the to minimize the impact of clothing changes on recognition
clothing part will not only damage the integrity of the non- accuracy, we use the ranking loss function to fine-tune the
clothing area, but also lead to the loss of crucial identity model to effectively narrow the semantic distance between
information. Recently, contrastive language-image pre-training posture and appearance features. Furthermore, given that the
[12] (CLIP) has attracted widespread attention due to its excel- head region contains richer identity information than other
lent zero-shot learning capabilities and has achieved superior body parts, we adopt an innovative global-local hybrid attenprogress in multiple computer vision fields such as object tion to promote the interaction between global features and
classification [13], anomaly detection [14], and semantic seg- head features. This fusion strategy not only allows to guide
mentation [15]. In the person ReID tasks, CLIP improves the and strengthen the emphasis on head information from a global
model’s capability to capture pedestrian identity features by perspective, but also enables head features to be contextually
analyzing the intricate semantic connection between images enhanced based on global information, aiming to significantly
and textual descriptions, thus boosting both the precision and improving feature representation capability. Finally, to enhance
textcolorbluerobustness of recognition. For instance, Yan et the information flow between features at each layer of the
al. [16] proposed a CLIP-driven framework CFine, which image encoder, we employ a graph attention structure to
aims to exploit the powerful multi-modal knowledge of CLIP carefully group and integrate features from multiple layers,
to mine fine-grained and discriminative details for effective thereby optimizing the semantic richness and discriminability
global alignment. In addition, to deal with the partial loss of of the overall feature hierarchy.
appearance details due to occlusion, Cui et al. [17] proposed a Our primary contributions are outlined in the following
prompt-guided feature disentanglement method (ProFD) that points.
generates robust local features through text prompt activation
and utilization of the rich knowledge pre-trained in the model. • We propose a CLIP-based multi-modal feature fusion
 Although the CLIP model demonstrates great potential in network (CMFF) for CC ReID that combines image, text,
multi-modal representation learning, it also encounters sig- and biological modalities information to strengthen the
nificant challenges that cannot be ignored when applying it model’s robustness in identity recognition.
5572 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 • We propose a posture-aware identity enhancement mod- 2) Clothing Decoupling Based Methods: Another mainule (PIE), designed to enhance the model’s capability stream methods is to decouple the clothing parts of the
 of perceiving inherent identity information of individuals human body from the non-clothing parts, enabling the model
 by fusing global appearance features with structural pose to concentrate on learning clothing-independent features [8],
 features. [9], [10], [11]. Eom et al. [8] proposed an identity shuffled
 • We propose a global-local hybrid attention module adversarial network that using only identity labels without
 (GLHA) to contextually enhance head features by lever- any auxiliary supervision signals to separate identity-related
 aging global information, aiming to guide and strengthen and irrelevant features from portraits. Zheng et al. [10]
 the attention on head information from a global perspec- proposed a joint learning framework that separates the appeartive. ance and shape features of each image and exchanges them
 • We propose a graph-based multi-layer interactive within and between identities to achieve data augmentation.
 enhancement module (GMIE) that applies a graph atten- SAVS [11] located the human body and clothing regions
 tion mechanism to finely group and fuse multi-layer through human semantic segmentation, masked clues related
 image encoder features, effectively enhancing the seman- to clothing appearance, and only focuses on visual semantic
 tic richness and discriminability at the feature level, knowledge that is insensitive to view/pose changes. However,
 significantly boosting the model’s overall performance. due to the lack of exact ground truth guidance, the entire
 feature decoupling process is performed implicitly, which
 II. R ELATED W ORKS makes the model inevitably disturbed by clothing features
A. Cloth-Changing Person Re-Identification when extracting clothing-independent features. In addition, the
 Person ReID aims to retrieve images of the same pedestrian high computational overhead incurred by these methods when
from different camera perspectives and plays a vital role in processing large-scale data remains a problem that needs to
public safety applications. However, most existing methods be optimized.
[21], [22] depend on clothing information as the primary
identifier, ignoring the fact that pedestrians clothing changes
 B. CLIP in Person Re-Identification Task
in real scenes. Consequently, cloth-changing person ReID has
attracted a large number of scholars to study as an emerging Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training [12] has demontopic, with its primary objective being to identify and learn strated remarkable zero-shot learning capabilities by adopting
stable identity features that are independent of clothing. a contrastive learning strategy on a large-scale multi-modal
 1) Auxiliary Biological Information Based Methods: dataset. Its core idea is to map images and descriptive text into
Thanks to the collection of multiple cloth-changing pedestrian the same vector space through contrastive learning, optimize
datasets [19], [23] [24], [25], CC ReID research has made the similarity between images and text and learn the represengreat progress. To reduce the visual interference caused by tation of the association between visual content and language
clothing changes, mainstream methods use auxiliary informa- descriptions. As a result, it is not limited to fixed datasets
tion such as gait [5], [26], silhouette/shape [6], [27], face [28], and predefined categories when processing visual tasks, but
[29] and posture [7] to learn clothing independent identity can also understand concepts or objects that have not been
features. Feng et al. [27] proposed AGS-Net, an attention- seen during training. This training strategy gives CLIP strong
guided two-stream framework that utilizes visual and contour generalization capabilities, enabling it to effectively perform
information from RGB images and silhouette sketches as zero-shot inference on a range of visual tasks, including finediscriminative features. This two-branch structure focuses on grained object classification [13], anomaly detection [14], and
identity-related features while minimizing sensitivity to cloth- semantic segmentation [15].
ing changes using an attention module. Nguyen et al. [7] Recently, researchers have explored the use of CLIP in
proposed a contrastive clothing and pose generation framework the domain of person ReID [18] and have made significant
(CCPG) to jointly learn clothing-independent features through progress in scenarios such as visible-infrared [30], occlusion
appearance and shape, and generate cross-identity clothing [31] and lifelong learning [31]. Acknowledging that highand pose transformation images to enrich training samples, level semantics of pedestrian appearance are consistent across
thereby supervising the learning of discriminative features. modalities, Yu et al. [30] proposed a CLIP-driven semantic
Wu et al. [28] recovered the lost facial details from the discovery network, which seeks to bridge the gap between
teacher network and propagate them to a smaller network, visible and infrared modalities by combining visual features
aiming to mine sensitive identity cues in faces. Compared with with high-level semantics. To address the challenge of crossshort-term ReID methods, these methods have significantly domain knowledge mismatch in lifelong person ReID under
improvements in clothing changing scenes, but they rely too different clothing states, LReID-Hybrid [32] leveraged the
much on the acquisition of auxiliary information, which limits consistency and generalization of the text space and introduced
the scalability and generalization of the model and also leads a framework that efficiently aligns, transfers, and accumulates
to a significant increase in computational costs. In addition, the knowledge, creating an image-text-image closed loop. He et
high requirements for image quality of this method mean that al. [31] designed a multi-granularity contrastive consistency
once pedestrians are blocked or in a dark light environment, alignment framework, aiming to semantically align occluded
the generated auxiliary information will inevitably contain visual effects and query text by leveraging intra-granular/internoise, affecting the stability of training. granular visual text representations.
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5573

Fig. 4. The CLIP-based multi-modal feature learning framework (CMFF) we proposed consists of two stages.The first training phase fixes the text encoder
and image encoder and optimizes a set of learnable text tags to generate text features. In the second stage, the visual encoder adopts a three-branch structure
to enhance the accuracy of identity recognition. Specifically, posture-aware identity enhancement module (PIE) improves the perception of identity features
by introducing posture information; global-local hybrid attention module (GLHA) targets crucial head information to boost global recognition; graph-based
multi-layer interactive enhancement (GMIE) module groups and integrates the image encoder’s multi-layer features to enhance the contextual awareness of
multi-scale features.

 Later, the CLIP model has also been explored for clothing- and !
changing scenarios, but this attempt has encountered some exp(s(Vi , T i ))
 Lt2i = − log PB , (2)
challenges that cannot be ignored: since the CLIP model tend
 a=1 exp(s(Va , T i ))
to emphasize visible and describable attributes during training,
which may lead to the model to over-focusing on clothing fea- where s(·, ·) denotes the cosine similarity, which is used to
tures in CC ReID scenarios, while ignoring intrinsic features calculate the similarity between image embedding Vi and text
that are more closely related to personal identity, such as the embedding T i in the cross-modal space. In addition, it is
head and pedestrian profile. also used to compare the similarity of Vi with other text
 To this end, we propose a CLIP-based multi-modal feature embeddings T a in the same batch.
learning framework (CMFF), which adopts a multi-branch In the second stage, we first fuse the pose information
structure to mine biological modalities such as posture and with global visual features extracted by CLIP to improve the
head to enhance the recognition of identity information. model’s capability to perceive the inherent characteristics of
Furthermore, we use the graph structure to fuse the multi- pedestrian identity. Then, we propose a global-local hybrid
layer features of the image encoder, enhancing the contextual attention module that emphasizes head information based on
understanding ability of multi-scale features. a global perspective and enhances head features in context
 through global information. Finally, we apply a graph attention
 III. M ETHOD mechanism to finely group and integrate multi-layer image
 encoder features to enhance the model’s contextual awareness
A. Overview and feature-level semantic richness.
 In our framework, we adopt CLIP-ReID [18] as the backbone network, which enhances the missing text information
 B. Posture-Aware Identity Enhancement Module
via a collection of pre-trained learnable text tags. The entire
method is split into two stages, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Since CLIP’s text encoder primarily focuses on easily
 In the initial training stage, we adopt learnable text tags describable attributes (e.g., clothing), it struggles to capture
associated with each identity to handle ambiguous text descrip- subtle but crucial identity-specific features such as body structions and ensure that these descriptions are unique for each ture and posture. To address this limitation and reduce the
ID. Specifically, the text description T (·) is formatted as a model’s dependency on clothing-related features, we propose
photo of a [X]1 [X]2 [X]3 . . . [X] M person”, where each [X]m a pose-aware identity enhancement module (PIE) that aims to
(m ∈ {1, . . . , M}) is a learnable text tag, and M repre- leverage the inherent body structure information of pedestrisents the total number of text tags. In this stage, we refine ans to enhance the model’s perception of persistent identity
model by image-to-text contrastive loss Li2t and text-to-image markers that remain stable across clothing variations.
contrastive loss Lt2i , aiming to enhance the consistency of Pedestrian posture plays a key role in embodying key
cross-modal representation: structural information about the human body, such as charac-
 ! teristics that remains invariant across changes in attire, lighting
 exp(s(Vi , T i )) conditions, and viewing perspectives. By combining it with
 Li2t = − log PB , (1)
 a=1 exp(s(Vi , T a ))
 global visual features, we aim to mitigate the influence of
5574 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 ID should be smaller than the distance between the global
 features and posture features (negative sample pairs) belonging
 to different IDs. Meanwhile, the distance between posture
 features of different IDs needs to be increased, which ensures
 that the model can focus more on the inherent characteristics of
 pedestrians rather than the changeable appearance information
 during the recognition process. Therefore, we propose the
 inter-class ranking loss Lcross and the intra-class ranking loss
 Lintra :

 Lcross
 N
Fig. 5. Visualization of the ranking loss, where the same color borders 1 X  
represent the same ID. The purpose of the loss is to make RGB-pose pairs of = max 0, δ1 + k fg,i
 a
 − f p,+j k2 − k fg,i
 a −
 − f p,t k2 , (6)
 N
the same identity closer and separate RGB-pose pairs of different identities. i=1
 Lintra
 N
clothing variations on global visual representations, thereby 1 X  
 = max 0, δ2 + k f p,i
 a
 − f p,+j k2 − k f p,i
 a −
 − f p,t k2 , (7)
enhancing the model’s stability and robustness under signifi- N
 i=1
cant changes in pedestrian appearance. Specifically, for a given
pedestrian image xi , we employ the pose estimation model where k · k2 represents the Euclidean distance, δ1 and δ2
HRNet [20] to locate the coordinates of K body key points. are preset interval thresholds, which are used to guarantee
Based on these coordinates, we generate individual heatmaps that the distance between the positive sample feature and the
Hk (k = 1, 2, . . . , K) as follows: anchor point is significantly less than the distance between
 the negative sample and the anchor point. Afterwards, we
 (x − xk )2 + (y − yk )2
  
 Hk (x, y) = exp − , (3) optimize the model performance by integrating Lcross and Lintra
 2σ2 losses into the total ranking loss function and using weight
where (x, y) represents the spatial coordinates of a point in coefficients λ1 and λ2 to adjust their weights in the total loss.
the heatmap, σ represents standard deviation of the Gaussian The specific formula is as follows:
kernel, controlling the spread of the distribution, and (xk , yk ) is
 Lrank = λ1 Lcross + λ2 Lintra . (8)
the location of the k-th key point in the image. Furthermore, we
aggregate all K individual heatmaps into a combined posture
heatmap Hm : C. Global-Local Hybrid Attention Module
 K
 Although CLIP is good at capturing the global features of
 X
 Hm = Hk , (4)
 k=1
 an image, it often ignores the importance of local regions,
 especially the head region, which usually contains more key
 W×H
where Hm ∈ R , with W and H denoting the width and and rich identity recognition features than other parts of the
height of the heatmap, respectively. To integrate local pose body. To overcome this limitation and enhance the model’s
information with global visual features, we first expand the ability to focus on key identity regions, we propose a globalglobal image features fg ∈ RD to match the spatial dimensions local hybrid attention module to enhance the model’s ability
of the posture heatmap Hm , and then perform element-wise to focus on head features by effectively fusing with global
multiplication to obtain the pose-enhanced features f p : information. For a given image xi , we first apply the pose
 f p = Hm Expand( fg , W, H), (5) estimation model [20] to accurately locate the key points of the
 human head and shoulders. Then, based on these key points,
where denotes element-wise multiplication, we use the advanced image segmentation algorithm Mask R-
Expand(·, W, H) is a function that reshapes the dimension of CNN to accurately extract the head and neck area from the
a feature to W ∗ H. The fusion process enriches the feature entire image. Next, we feed both full pedestrian image and
details and improves contextual relevance by combining pose its corresponding head image into image encoder separately.
and global visual information. Considering the difference in dimensions between the two
 Inspired by the contrastive loss based on silhouette sketches inputs, we perform adaptive pooling operations on the global
and RGB images in [6], we introduce a ranking loss Lrank , and head images in the global and head branches respectively,
which aims to reduce the dependence of appearance features thereby obtaining the global feature fg and head feature fh .
on clothing information by minimizing the distance between The global-local hybrid attention is shown in Fig. 6. We first
appearance features and pose features, thereby enhancing the perform different linear transformations on fg and fh to map
model’s attention to the core information of pedestrian identity. them into the form of query (Q), key (K) and value (V), respec-
The specific calculation process is shown in Fig. 5, and tively. Different from traditional self-attention mechanism, we
in a batch, there are N images and their corresponding N use the query vector of fg to pay attention to the key and value
posture heat maps. The distance between the RGB features and (V) vectors of fh , and vice versa. Then, we combine these
posture features (positive sample pairs) belonging to the same two weighted features through the concatenation operation
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5575

 to the low to high levels of Transformer. We empirically set
 the number of groups to t=3 as it provides an optimal balance
 between feature diversity and information completeness, which
 is further validated through ablation studies in Section IV. We
 then establish the relationship between nodes based on the
 features. The edge weight eit j is determined by the similarity
 between nodes, reflecting the relative importance of node i in
 relation to node j in t-th group, and the calculation formula
 of eit j is as follows:
 exp(sim(X̂t(i) , X̂t( j) ))
Fig. 6. Illustration of the global-local hybrid attention module (GLHA), which eit j = P (i) (q)
 , (15)
aims to enhance the importance of head information from global perspective. k∈Ni exp(sim( X̂t , X̂t ))

 where sim(·, ·) denotes cosine similarity between two nodes,
concat(·, ·) to form the final fused feature Fg−h . The detailed and Ni represents the set of neighbors of node i. Then, we
expression is provided below: calculate the attention coefficient αit j between the two nodes,
 which quantifies the influence of the neighboring node X̂t(i) on
 Qg KhT node X̂t( j) during the feature update process:
  
 Ag-h = softmax √ Vh , (9)
 d ! eit j exp(LeakyReLU(aT [Wti kWtj ]))
 Qh KgT αit j = P ij j q
 , (16)
 Ah-g = softmax √ Vg , (10) T
 q∈Ni et exp(LeakyReLU(a [Wt kWt ]))
 d
 where W is a learnable linear transformation matrix, a is a
 Fg−h = concat(Ag-h fg , Ah-g fh ). (11) learnable vector for calculating attention and k represents the
 In this way, our model can effectively capture the interde- concatenation of vectors. We then update the node features hit
pendence between head features and the global context of the with the adjusted attention coefficients:
whole body image.
 0 1
 X iq (i)
 hit = ReLU @ αt X̂t A , (17)
D. Graph-Based Multi-Layer Interactive Enhancement q∈Ni

Module where ReLU(·) represents nonlinear activation function. After-
 Most existing CLIP-based methods use the final layer wards, we aggregate each group of node features through
features of the image encoder (ViT) as the main visual maximum pooling to obtain the final feature ht of each group:
representation, which may ignore the valuable information
 ht = maxpooling(h1t , h2t , h3t , h4t ), t ∈ {1, 2, 3}. (18)
contained in the intermediate layers. To address this underutilization of multi-scale features and enhance the contextual Finally, we concatenate the outputs of each group processed
understanding ability of the model, we propose a graph-based by the graph attention network to construct the final feature
multi-layer interactive enhancement module (GMIE). representation Fgraph of GMIE, aiming to leverage features
 The detailed architecture of GMIE is shown in Fig. 7. of each layer in the image encoder to improve the model’s
Firstly, we extract the output features of each layer from the robustness in complex scenarios.
ViT model and denote X (l) ∈ RN×D as the output features of
the l th layer, where l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 12}, N and D represents E. Adaptive Fusion and Model Optimization
the sequence length and feature dimension. Prior to inputting
these features into the graph attention module, we perform 1) Adaptive Feature Fusion: To maximize the utilization
layer normalization on the output features of each layer: of information from different branches and optimize the final
 feature representation, we perform a adaptive fusion operations
 X (l) − µ(l) on the output features of the three branches. Specifically, we
 X̂ (l) = , (12)
  + σ(l) initialize the weights of each branch through fully connected
where  is a small constant that prevents the denominator from layer and normalize them with softmax function. According to
being zero, µ(l) which σ(l) represent the mean and standard these generated weights, we perform weighted aggregation of
deviation of X (l) respectively, and are computed as follow: the three feature vectors, and adaptively adjusted the weights
 during back propagation:
 D
 1 X (l)
 µ(l) = X:,d , (13) F f used = w pose f p + wg−h Fg−h + wgraph Fgraph . (19)
 D
 d=1
 v 2) Model Optimization: In the first stage, we employ the
 u D
 u1 X (l) image-to-text contrast loss Li2t and text-to-image contrast loss
 σ = t
 (l)
 (X:,d − µ(l) )2 . (14) Lt2i to reduce cross-modal discrepancy between images and
 D
 d=1
 textual descriptions. The overall loss function is formulated as
 Subsequently, we map the normalized features to graph follows:
nodes and divide the nodes into three groups (t = 3) according L stage1 = Lt2i + Li2t . (20)
5576 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 Fig. 7. Illustration of graph-based multi-layer interactive enhancement module.

 In the second stage, we first apply a ranking loss Lrank in IV. E XPERIMENTS
the pose-aware identity enhancement moduleto minimize the A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
discrepancy between appearance and pose features. Furthermore, we adopt identity loss LID and triplet loss Ltri to achieve 1) Datasets: To assess the effectiveness of our proposed
further optimization of the model: CMFF method, we perform experiments on four publicly
 available cloth-changing pedestrian datasets: VC-Clothes [23],
 Celeb-reID [24], Celeb-reID-light [19], and NKUP [25]. In
 C
 X particular, for the VC-clothes dataset, we set two scenarios:
 LID = − yi log(pi ), (21) one is “general”, which includes both clothing changes and
 i=1 clothing consistency scenes; the other is “cloth-changing”,
 N
 1 X which only includes clothing changes. The characteristics of
 Ltri = max 0, m + dap − dan ,
 
 (22) each dataset are summarized in Table I.
 N
 i=1
 2) Evaluation Metrics: Following previous methods, we
where C denotes number of categories, yi is the one-hot adopt the first-rank hit rate (Rank-1) and mean average precision (mAP) as metrics to assess the efficacy of our proposed
encoding of the true label, pi is the predicted probability of the
 CMFF.
corresponding category of the mode. N refers to the number
of samples in same batch, dap represents distance between the
anchor sample and the positive sample, and dan indicates the B. Implementation Details
distance from the anchor sample to the negative sample. In this study, we use ViT-B-16 in the CLIP ReID framework
 To fully exploit the potential of CLIP, we adopt an image- as the backbone network. The images are first resized to
to-text cross-entropy loss to ensure that image features closely 256 × 128 resolution to accommodate the network input
correspond to the corresponding text descriptions while keep- requirements. To improve the generalization of the model,
ing distance from text features of other irrelevant identities: we apply a series of data augmentation techniques, including
 N
 ! random horizontal flipping, random erasing, and edge padding.
 X e s(Vi ,Tyk ) During data loading, we use a hybrid sampler that combines
 Li2tce(i) = − log PN . (23)
 s(Vi ,T ya ) softmax and triplet loss, processes 4 instances per batch and
 k=1 ya =1 e
 uses 8 worker threads for parallel data processing. The training
where V represents the overall visual features fused in the
 process of this study is optimized in two stages.
second stage, and S (·, ·) is used to calculate the similarity
 In the first stage, we use Adam optimizer with a batch size
score.
 of 128, a base learning rate of 3.5 ×10−4 , and a training
 Thus, the overall loss function for the second stage is
 cycle of 60 epochs. In the second stage, the training cycle
expressed as follows:
 is extended to 120 epochs, while the batch size remains
 L stage2 = Lrank + LID + Ltri + Li2tce . (24) unchanged. The base learning rate is reduced to 0.5 ×10−5 ,
 the number of iterations is set to 10, and both weight decay
 and bias weight decay are configured at 0.1 ×10−3 .
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5577

 TABLE I
I NTRODUCTION TO THE DATASET U SED IN THE E XPERIMENT, W HERE ‘SC’ R EPRESENTS THE S AME C LOTHING AND ‘CC’ R EPRESENTS D IFFERENT
 C LOTHING

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS ON VC-C LOTHES (%)

C. Performance Evaluations and Comparison clothing parts, suppresses the fluctuations caused by clothing
 texture in the identity feature space, and reduces the depen-
 In this experiment, we compare our method with the current dence on interference factors during discriminative learning by
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on the VC-Clothes, NKUP, generating adversarial interference factor decoupling networks.
Celeb-reID, and Celeb-reID-light datasets. In addition, we GI-ReID [37] incorporates gait recognition as an auxiliary
further compare and analyze the performance differences of task and utilizes unique gait information to guide model in
these methods with or without auxiliary information. learning features that are independent of clothing. Although
 1) Results on VC-Clothes: Consistent with previous stud- these methods improve the accuracy of feature extraction
ies, our comparative experiments on the VC-Clothes dataset through single biomodal information, they also significantly
adopt the following two settings: 1) General setting, where rely on the quality and consistency of the data, which limits
gallery sets include both samples with clothing changes and their generalization ability in new environments or changing
samples with the same clothing; 2) Cloth-Changing setting, conditions. In contrast, our method combines pose estimation
where the gallery sets just contain samples that have undergone and global features, fully leveraging the identity recognition
clothing changes. As shown in Table II, our method achieves information of the head, which substantially enhances the
the highest performance in both settings. Compared with the model’s capacity to capture inherent identity information.
second-best method DSIFLF [42], our method improves Rank- 2) Results on Celeb-reID and Celeb-reID-Light: We per-
1 and mAP by 0.5% and 0.2% in Cloth-Changing scenarios, form comparative experiments with state-of-the-art methods
and improves mAP by 1.3% in the General scenarios. Among on the Celeb-reID and Celeb-reID-light datasets, with detailed
the contrasting methods, GLH [41] utilizes a multi-branch results provided in Table III. Obviously, ours surpasses all
architecture to capture both global and local identity informa- comparative methods on both datasets. MADE [50] extracts
tion, and trains local body parts by clustering the generated personal attribute descriptions through attribute detection
pseudo labels for cross-image comparison. However, this model and masks out clothing and color information. However,
strategy that relies on automatically generated pseudo labels when clothing attributes are closely combined with other body
may introduce errors due to inconsistent label quality, thus features, masking clothing attributes alone is not enough to
affecting the accuracy and robustness of the model. FSAM [35] completely eliminate all clothing-related information. AFDenhances clothing-independent features by transferring fine- Net [44] and SAFR [11] use generative adversarial networks
grained body shape knowledge between two stream branches. to separate identity-related and irrelevant features. Among
DSIFLF [42] uses a human body parsing model to erase them, the decoupling and reconstruction of AFD-Net rely
5578 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS ON C ELEB - RE ID AND C ELEB - RE ID-L IGHT DATASETS (%)

 TABLE IV of different postures under the same identity through image
 C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS ON NKUP DATASET (%) stitching technology, which can effectively extract human
 semantic information independent of the background and adapt
 to the posture changes of pedestrians. These strategies enable
 IGCL to show a strong advantage in processing low-definition
 images. CCUP [48] also demonstrated the effectiveness of
 synthetic data pre-training in CC-ReID tasks, where the pretrain-fine-tune framework leverages large-scale synthetic data
 to enhance the generalization ability of the model. However,
 the performance gap compared to IGCL suggests that synthetic
 pre-training may be of limited effectiveness for low-quality
 surveillance scenarios like NKUP, where field-specific adaptation methods (such as the attention mechanism and pose
 enhancement strategy of IGCL) show greater advantages when
 handling low-resolution images under challenging lighting
 conditions.
on complex self-supervision, which increases the difficulty of
training and is less efficient. Although SAFR learns disentan- D. Ablation Study
gled features from random samples, the quality and diversity 1) Effectiveness of Graph Structure Grouping: We perform
of input samples limit its generalization ability. 3DInvarReID an in-depth analysis on the impact of feature grouping in
[49] innovatively uses 3D body model to separate identity GMIE module and set different grouping numbers n = {1,
and non-identity features, but extreme posture changes and 2, 3, 4, 6} for experiments. The results presented in Fig. 8
clothing diversity may reduce the accuracy and efficiency of its demonstrate that mode’s performance fluctuates significantly
decoupling. In contrast, our approach employs a multi-branch with change of the number of groups. In particular, when
architecture to extract critical identity cues from the head n=1, the mAP of the model is always the lowest regardless
and posture, while leveraging a graph attention mechanism to of the nature of the dataset; while when n = 3, it performs
aggregate multi-scale features, thereby significantly enhancing optimally on all datasets. In addition, the number of groups
the model’s performance in complex scenarios. that is too low or too high will cause performance degradation.
 3) Results on NKUP: We conduct comparative experiments The main reason is that when features are only divided into
with existing methods on the NKUP dataset, and the results one group, the model that relies on a single fusion output may
are shown in Table IV. In this experiment, our CMFF method over-compress information, resulting in the loss of critical fineobtains the second highest performance, with rank-1 and mAP grained features such as edges and textures, which are essential
0.9% and 8.5% lower than IGCL [54] respectively. The main for identifying small differences in complex scenes. It is
reason is that the images of the NKUP dataset are collected in evident that a moderate increase in the number of groups (such
a dark environment, and the image clarity is low. IGCL intro- as n = 3) can effectively retain and utilize features at different
duces clothing attention activation maps to mask clues related scales, balance the diversity and completeness of information
to the appearance of clothes, and enriches the expression through the complementarity of features within each group,
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5579

 GMIE module are 1.4%, 0.3% and 1.4%. Secondly, PIE and
 GLHA, as biometric learning branches, focus on extracting
 pedestrian posture and head information respectively. The
 combination of the two achieves 1.3%, 2.0% and 2.7% Rank-
 1 improvement on the three datasets respectively compared
 with the baseline, proving complementarity of the two modules
 and their effectiveness in extracting discriminative features.
 On this basis, the GMIE module was introduced, and the
 Rank-1 accuracy was further improved by 1.3%, 0.6%, and
 1.4%, verifying the effect of enhancing multi-scale context
 perception.
 To highlight the individual contribution of each module more clearly, we further conduct ablation experiments
 by removing each component from the full model. The
 results demonstrate substantial performance degradation when
 excluding any single module: (1) removing the PIE module
 leads to Rank-1 accuracy drops of 1.5%, 0.6%, and 0.7%
Fig. 8. Results with different numbers of groups on four cloth-changing on the three datasets; (2) eliminating GLHA resulting in a
pedestrian datasets. more significant drop of 2.1%, 1.1%, and 1.5%; (3) removing
 GMIE causes a drop of 1.3%, 0.6%, and 1.2%. The findings
 TABLE V reveal that GLHA contributes most significantly to overall
C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS ON VC-C LOTHES , NKUP AND performance, followed by GMIE and PIE, which is consistent
 C ELEB - RE ID DATASETS (%)
 with the intuition that head features maintain the highest
 reliability in clothing-changing scenarios. In addition, the
 consistent performance drops across all modules confirm their
 complementary nature and collective necessity for achieving
 optimal results.
 We also visualize each branch and combination on CelebreID dataset, as illustrated in Fig. 10. It can be seen that the
 PIE, GLHA and GMIE modules alone outperform the baseline
 model, with the combination of PIE and GLHA significantly
 improving the matching rate for Ranks 1-10. Especially after
 the introduction of the GMIE module, the model accuracy is
 further improved, which is consistent with the results of our
and thus optimize the model performance. However, too many ablation experiments.
groups (such as n = 4 or 6) will lead to over-dispersion of 3) Effectiveness of λ1 and λ2 : To comprehensively evaluate
features, resulting in insufficient information in each group, the robustness of the model, we conduct ablation experiments
which is not conducive to effective learning and recognition, on the hyperparameters in the ranking loss function on the
thereby reducing the overall performance. Therefore, choosing dataset NKUP, where both parameters varied between 0.1 and
the appropriate number of groups is extremely critical to 1.0, as shown in Table VI. The experimental results show
improving model accuracy and adaptability. that the performance is optimal when λ1 = 0.5 and λ2 =
 2) Effectiveness of Each Module: We assess the contribu- 0.5, which indicates that balancing the weights of inter-class
tion of each branch in CMFF framework through experiments and intra-class ranking loss is crucial for effective feature
conducted on three cloth-changing datasets: VC-Clothes, learning. The model performs relatively stably in the range of
NKUP and Celeb-reID. We set CLIP ReID with Vision Trans- λ1 , λ2 ∈ [0.3,0.7], with performance fluctuations of less than
former as the backbone network as the baseline, and integrate 1%. However, when any parameter takes an extreme value (0.1
Pose-aware identity enhancement module (PIE), global-local or 1.0), the performance will further degrade due to insufficient
hybrid attention module (GLHA) and graph-based multi-layer inter-class distinction or over-constrained intra-class variation.
interactive enhancement module (GMIE) on this baseline, as Therefore, the balanced parameter configuration ensures that
well as different combinations of these modules, to explore the model can effectively coordinate inter-class separation and
their specific impact on performance. Table V lists all the intra-class aggregation to achieve the optimal feature learning
results, and its cumulative matching feature (CMC) curve is effect.
shown in Fig. 9. First, we can find that the introduction of 4) Effectiveness of Ranking Loss in PIE Module: To verify
a single module has achieved an improvement in accuracy the effectiveness of our proposed ranking loss in the poserelative to the baseline model on the three datasets. Specifi- aware identity enhancement (PIE) module, we conducted
cally, the improvements of the PIE module on mAP are 0.4%, comparative experiments on two cloth-changing datasets:
0.5% and 0.2% respectively; the improvements of the GLHA NKUP, and Celeb-reID. As demonstrated in Table VII, we sysmodule are 0.8%, 0.6% and 0.5%; and the improvements of the tematically three variants: (1) using our proposed ranking loss
5580 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 Fig. 9. Advantages of each module using CMC curves on NKUP, Celeb-reID and VC-Clothes datasets.

Fig. 10. Visualization of retrieval results on Celebreid dataset. The left side presents the results of our method (including various modules), and the right side
shows the results of CLIP-ReID. Rank-1 to Rank-10 are reported. Positive matches are indicated by green rectangles, and negative matches are highlighted
with red rectangles.

Lrank , (2) PIE using the standard L2 loss, and (3) the baseline. worth noting that the L2 loss method only slightly improves
Experimental results show that our ranking loss consistently over the baseline, and sometimes even performs worse, which
outperforms the other two alternatives on all datasets. It is indicates that simple distance minimization is not sufficient for
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5581

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT λ1 AND λ2 C OMBINATIONS ON NKUP DATASET

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
 E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT L OSS F UNCTIONS IN PIE M ODULE (%) P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT ATTENTION M ECHANISMS IN
 GLHA M ODULE

 TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE F USION IN GMIE mechanism we designed in the GLHA module, we conducted
 M ODULE
 ablation experiments on the NKUP and Celeb-reID datasets,
 comparing three attention mechanisms: unidirectional fg → fh
 (global to head), unidirectional fh → fg (head to global),
 and our proposed bidirectional method. The experimental
 results in Table IX show that bidirectional attention can
 consistently achieve the best performance on both datasets,
 indicating that the mutual guidance between global features
 and head features is crucial for effective identity representation
effective pose-appearance alignment. Therefore, our ranking
 learning. Specifically, on the NKUP dataset, our bidirectional
loss design effectively minimizes the intra-class distance while
 method outperforms the best unidirectional variant ( fg → fh )
maximizing the inter-class separation, which is crucial for
 by 0.3% and 0.6% in Rank-1 and mAP, respectively. On
cloth-changing person ReID.
 the Celeb-reID dataset, bidirectional attention outperforms
 5) Effectiveness of Graph Structure in GMIE Module:
 the unidirectional alternative by 0.2% and 0.7% in Rank-1
To verify the effectiveness of the graph structure in the
 and mAP, respectively. This is sufficient to prove that the
multi-layer interaction enhancement (GMIE) module, we conbidirectional design effectively combines the advantages of
ducted comparative experiments on two clothing-changing
 both directions, realizes comprehensive feature interaction and
datasets, NKUP and Celeb-reID, and the results are shown
 achieves superior recognition accuracy.
in Table VIII. We designed three variants for comparison: (1)
GMIE using simple concatenation followed by linear projection, (2) GMIE using weighted average of multi-layer features,
 V. C ONCLUSION
and (3) GMIE using our proposed graph-structure-based
fusion method. Experimental results show that our method In this work, we have proposed a multi-modal feature learnsignificantly outperforms other alternatives on both datasets. ing method (CMFF) to tackle the challenges of cloth-changing
Although the simple concatenation method can integrate multi- person Re-ID. First, we designed a pose-aware identity
layer information, it is constrained by feature redundancy and enhancement module (PIE) that combines pose estimation with
increased computational overhead, resulting in limited perfor- global feature analysis to strengthen the model’s capacity of
mance improvement. The weighted average method alleviates discriminating essential identity features and narrow the gap
the dimensionality explosion problem to a certain extent, but between appearance and pose-driven features through ranking
it still cannot fully utilize cross-layer information due to the loss. Next, we introduced a global-local hybrid attention modlack of ability to model complex spatial relationships between ule (GLHA) to highlight key head information in the global
multi-scale features. In contrast, our graph structure effectively scope through head branch fusion with cross attention. Finally,
captures the spatial correlation of cross-layer features by we adopt a graph-based multi-layer interactive enhancement
adaptively learning the dependencies between features, thereby module (GMIE) to update and integrate multi-layer features of
achieving more robust multi-scale context understanding in the the image encoder to enhance the context-awareness of multicloth-changing person re-identification task. scale features. Extensive experiments on several mainstream
 6) Effectiveness of Bidirectional Attention in GLHA Mod- cloth-changing pedestrian datasets demonstrates the superior
ule: To verify the superiority of the bidirectional attention performance of our proposed CMFF.
5582 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 Despite our approach achieving promising results, it still [20] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang, “Deep high-resolution represensuffers from some limitations including computational com- tation learning for human pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 5686–5696.
plexity from the multi-branch architecture and dependency [21] G. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Zheng, G. Martin, and R. Wang, “Local-enhanced
on pose estimation accuracy. For future work, we plan to representation for text-based person search,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 161,
integrate infrared modality to enhance performance in low- May 2025, Art. no. 111247.
 [22] G. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zheng, and R. Wang, “InfinitePerson: Innovating
light conditions, develop lightweight variants for practical synthetic data creation for generalization person re-identification,” IEEE
deployment, and explore video-based extensions with temporal Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3160–3171, Apr.
consistency, which may provide additional discriminative cues 2025.
 [23] F. Wan, Y. Wu, X. Qian, Y. Chen, and Y. Fu, “When person
for clothing-invariant ReID. re-identification meets changing clothes,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020,
 R EFERENCES pp. 830–831.
 [24] Y. Huang, J. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhong, P. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Beyond
[1] G. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, and Y. Zheng, “Progressive scalar neuron: Adopting vector-neuron capsules for long-term person
 discrepancy elimination for visible–infrared person re-identification,” re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30,
 Neurocomputing, vol. 607, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 128387. no. 10, pp. 3459–3471, Oct. 2020.
[2] Y.-J. Li, Y.-C. Chen, Y.-Y. Lin, and Y.-C. F. Wang, “Cross-resolution [25] K. Wang, Z. Ma, S. Chen, J. Yang, K. Zhou, and T. Li, “A benchmark for
 adversarial dual network for person re-identification and beyond,” 2020, clothes variation in person re-identification,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 35,
 arXiv:2002.09274. no. 12, pp. 1881–1898, 2020.
[3] G. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Lin, A. K. Chandran, and X. Jing, “Camera [26] W. Li et al., “An in-depth exploration of person re-identification and
 contrast learning for unsupervised person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. gait recognition in cloth-changing conditions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 4096–4107, Aug. 2023. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 13824–13833.
[4] Y. Chen, G. Zhang, Y. Lu, Z. Wang, and Y. Zheng, “TIPCB: A simple but [27] Z. Feng, S. Huang, and J. Lai, “Attention-guided Siamese network for
 effective part-based convolutional baseline for text-based person search,” clothes-changing person re-identification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image
 Neurocomputing, vol. 494, pp. 171–181, Jul. 2022. Graph., 2021, pp. 314–325.
[5] Y. Dong et al., “HybridGait: A benchmark for spatial–temporal cloth- [28] J. Wu, H. Liu, W. Shi, H. Tang, and J. Guo, “Identity-sensitive
 changing gait recognition with hybrid explorations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. knowledge propagation for cloth-changing person re-identification,” in
 Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1600–1608. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2022, pp. 1016–1020.
[6] J. Zheng, X. Hu, T. Xiang, and P. P. K. Chan, “Dual-path model for [29] D. Arkushin, B. Cohen, S. Peleg, and O. Fried, “GEFF: Improving
 person re-identification under cloth changing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. any clothes-changing person ReID model using gallery enrichment with
 Learn. Cybern. (ICMLC), Dec. 2020, pp. 291–297. face features,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
[7] V. D. Nguyen, P. Mantini, and S. K. Shah, “Contrastive clothing and Workshops (WACVW), Jan. 2024, pp. 143–153.
 pose generation for cloth-changing person re-identification,” in Proc. [30] X. Yu, N. Dong, L. Zhu, H. Peng, and D. Tao, “CLIP-driven semantic
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), discovery network for visible-infrared person re-identification,” 2024,
 Jun. 2024, pp. 7541–7549. arXiv:2401.05806.
[8] C. Eom, W. Lee, G. Lee, and B. Ham, “Disentangled representations for [31] S. He et al., “Region generation and assessment network for occluded
 short-term and long-term person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 8975–8991, Dec. 2022. pp. 120–132, 2024.
[9] P. P. K. Chan, X. Hu, H. Song, P. Peng, and K. Chen, “Learning disentan- [32] Q. Wang, X. Qian, B. Li, Y. Fu, and X. Xue, “Image-text-image
 gled features for person re-identification under clothes changing,” ACM knowledge transferring for lifelong person re-identification with hybrid
 Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1–21, clothing states,” 2024, arXiv:2405.16600.
 Nov. 2023. [33] Y. Sun, L. Zheng, Y. Yang, Q. Tian, and S. Wang, “Beyond part models:
[10] Z. Zheng, X. Yang, Z. Yu, L. Zheng, Y. Yang, and J. Kautz, “Joint Person retrieval with refined part pooling (and a strong convolutional
 discriminative and generative learning for person re-identification,” in baseline),” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 480–496.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. [34] K. Zhu, H. Guo, Z. Liu, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “Identity-guided
 2019, pp. 2138–2147. human semantic parsing for person re-identification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
[11] Z. Gao, H. Wei, W. Guan, J. Nie, M. Wang, and S. Chen, “A semantic- Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 346–363.
 aware attention and visual shielding network for cloth-changing person [35] P. Hong, T. Wu, A. Wu, X. Han, and W.-S. Zheng, “Fine-grained shapere-identification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, appearance mutual learning for cloth-changing person re-identification,”
 pp. 1243–1257, Jan. 2025. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
[12] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural 2021, pp. 10513–10522.
 language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021, [36] X. Gu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Bai, S. Shan, and X. Chen,
 pp. 8748–8763. “Clothes-changing person re-identification with RGB modality only,”
[13] J. Xin, H. Tang, J. Gao, X. Du, S. He, and Z. Li, “Delving into in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
 multimodal prompting for fine-grained visual classification,” in Proc. pp. 1060–1069.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 2570–2578. [37] X. Jin et al., “Cloth-changing person re-identification from a single
[14] Z. Zuo, J. Dong, Y. Wu, Y. Qu, and Z. Wu, “CLIP3D-AD: Extending image with gait prediction and regularization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 CLIP for 3D few-shot anomaly detection with multi-view images Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 14278–14287.
 generation,” 2024, arXiv:2406.18941. [38] Z. Yang, X. Zhong, Z. Zhong, H. Liu, Z. Wang, and S. Satoh, “Win-win
[15] J. Chen et al., “Exploring open-vocabulary semantic segmentation from by competition: Auxiliary-free cloth-changing person re-identification,”
 CLIP vision encoder distillation only,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 2985–2999, 2023.
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 699–710. [39] Z. Zhao, B. Liu, Y. Lu, Q. Chu, N. Yu, and C. W. Chen, “Joint
[16] S. Yan, N. Dong, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “CLIP-driven fine-grained text- identity-aware mixstyle and graph-enhanced prototype for clothesimage person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, changing person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26,
 pp. 6032–6046, 2023. pp. 3457–3468, 2024.
[17] C. Cui, S. Huang, W. Song, P. Ding, M. Zhang, and D. Wang, [40] Y. Ding, A. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Multidimensional semantic disentan-
 “ProFD: Prompt-guided feature disentangling for occluded person re- glement network for clothes-changing person re-identification,” in Proc.
 identification,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2024, Int. Conf. Multimedia Retr., May 2024, pp. 1025–1033.
 pp. 1583–1592. [41] D. T. Thanh, Y. Lee, and B. Kang, “Enhancing long-term person
[18] S. Li, S. Li, and Q. Li, “CLIP-ReID: Exploiting vision-language model re-identification using global, local body part, and head streams,”
 for image re-identification without concrete text labels,” in Proc. AAAI Neurocomputing, vol. 580, May 2024, Art. no. 127480.
 Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, 2023, pp. 1405–1413. [42] Y. Li, D. Cheng, C. Fang, C. Jiao, N. Wang, and X. Gao, “Disentangling
[19] Y. Huang, Q. Wu, J. Xu, and Y. Zhong, “Celebrities-ReID: A benchmark identity features from interference factors for cloth-changing person refor clothes variation in long-term person re-identification,” in Proc. Int. identification,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2024,
 Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2019, pp. 1–8. pp. 2252–2261.
ZHANG et al.: CLIP-BASED MULTI-MODAL FEATURE LEARNING FOR CLOTH-CHANGING PERSON ReID 5583

[43] G. Wang, Y. Yuan, X. Chen, J. Li, and X. Zhou, “Learning discriminative Jieqiong Zhou received the B.E. degree in software
 features with multiple granularities for person re-identification,” in Proc. engineering from Nanjing Xiaozhuang University in
 26th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2018, pp. 274–282. 2021. She is currently pursuing the master’s degree
[44] W. Xu, H. Liu, W. Shi, Z. Miao, Z. Lu, and F. Chen, “Adversarial with the School of Computer and Cyberspace Secufeature disentanglement for long-term person re-identification,” in Proc. rity, Nanjing University of Information Science and
 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021, pp. 1201–1207. Technology. Her research interests include pedes-
[45] G. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Zheng, and H. Zhang, “Multi-biometric trian re-identification in clothing-changing scenarios
 unified network for cloth-changing person re-identification,” IEEE and related applications.
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4555–4566, 2023.
[46] Y. Huang et al., “Meta clothing status calibration for long-term person
 re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2334–2346,
 2024.
[47] S. Yang, B. Kang, and Y. Lee, “Sampling agnostic feature representation
 for long-term person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 vol. 31, pp. 6412–6423, 2022. Lu Jiang received the master’s degree from Peking
[48] Q. Wang, X. Qian, B. Li, X. Xue, and Y. Fu, “Exploring fine- University. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 grained representation and recomposition for cloth-changing per- degree with the School of Computer Science,
 son re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, Nanjing University of Information Science and
 pp. 6280–6292, 2024. Technology, Nanjing, China. Her research interests
[49] F. Liu, M. Kim, Z. Gu, A. Jain, and X. Liu, “Learning clothing include deep learning and computer vision.
 and pose invariant 3D shape representation for long-term person reidentification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct.
 2023, pp. 19617–19626.
[50] C. Peng, B. Wang, D. Liu, N. Wang, R. Hu, and X. Gao,
 “Masked attribute description embedding for cloth-changing person reidentification,” 2024, arXiv:2401.05646.
[51] Z. Gao, H. Wei, W. Guan, W. Nie, M. Liu, and M. Wang, “Multigranular
 visual-semantic embedding for cloth-changing person re-identification,”
 in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 3703–3711. Yuhui Zheng (Member, IEEE) was born in Shanxi,
[52] Y. Yan et al., “Weakening the influence of clothing: Universal clothing China, in 1982. He received the B.Sc. degree in pharattribute disentanglement for person re-identification,” in Proc. 31st Int. macy engineering and the Ph.D. degree in pattern
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 1523–1529. recognition and intelligent systems from Nanjing
[53] Y. Zhao, C. Wu, Y. Xu, X. Du, R. Li, and G. Niu, “CCUP: A controllable University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
 synthetic data generation pipeline for pretraining cloth-changing person China, in 2004 and 2009, respectively. From 2014
 re-identification models,” 2024, arXiv:2410.13567. to 2015, he was a Visiting Professor with the Dig-
[54] Z. Gao, S. Wei, W. Guan, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and S. Chen, “Identity- ital Media Laboratory, School of Electronic and
 guided collaborative learning for cloth-changing person reidentification,” Electrical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 2819–2837, South Korea. He is currently a Full Professor at the
 May 2024. Key Laboratory of Tibetan Information Processing,
 Ministry of Education, Qinghai Normal University. His main research areas
 include image and video analysis, scene understanding, visual tracking, and
 pattern recognition.

 Weisi Lin (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 from King’s College London, U.K. He is currently
 a Professor with the School of Computer Science
 and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University.
 His research interests include image processing,
 perceptual signal modeling, video compression, and
 multimedia communication, in which he has published more than 200 journal articles, more than
 230 conference papers, filed seven patents, and
 Guoqing Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. authored two books. He is a fellow of the IET
 and master’s degrees in information engineering and an Honorary Fellow of Singapore Institute of
 from Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China, in Engineering Technologists. He was the Technical Program Chair of the IEEE
 2009 and 2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree ICME 2013, PCM 2012, QoMEX 2014, and IEEE VCIP 2017. He has
 in pattern recognition and intelligent systems from been an invited/panelist/keynote/tutorial speaker at more than 20 international
 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nan- conferences. He was a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Circuits and
 jing, China, in 2017. He is currently a Professor Systems Society from 2016 to 2017 and Asia–Pacific Signal and Information
 with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing Processing Association (APSIPA) from 2012 to 2013. He has been an
 University of Information Science and Technology Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING, IEEE
 (NUIST), Nanjing. His current research interests T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY,
 include computer vision, pattern recognition, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA, and IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING
machine learning. L ETTERS.