Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Journal of Information Security and Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jisa

Commander: A robust cross-machine multi-phase Advanced Persistent Threat
detector via provenance analytics
 ∗
Qi Liu , Kaibin Bao , Veit Hagenmeyer
Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, 76344, Germany

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Intrusion detection systems (IDS) have traditionally focused on identifying malicious behaviors caused by
Advanced Persistent Threat detection malware undertaking a series of suspicious activities within a short time. Facing Advanced Persistent Threat
Data provenance analysis (APT) actors employing the so-called low-and-slow strategy, defenders are often blindsided by the poor
Digital forensics
 performance of these IDS. Provenance-based IDS (PIDS) emerged as a promising solution for reducing false
Active Directory
 alerts, detecting true attacks, and facilitating attack investigation, by causally linking and contextualizing
Industrial-sector organization security
 indicative system activities in provenance graphs. However, most existing PIDS can detect neither multi-phase
 nor cross-machine APT attacks, enabled by persistence and lateral movement techniques, respectively. In the
 present work, we propose a new PIDS called Commander, which is, to our knowledge, the first system capable
 of detecting cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks. Further, Commander targets several evasion attacks that
 can bypass existing PIDS, making it more robust. In addition, Commander can perform whole network tracing
 for cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks across an industrial-sector organization, for which we additionally
 develop parsers for system logs of popular industrial controllers. We also develop detection rules with a
 reference to MITRE’s knowledge base for industrial control systems. Our evaluations show that Commander
 accurately detects attacks, outperforms existing detection systems, and delivers succinct and insightful attack
 graphs.

1. Introduction incorporate TTP (Tactics, Techniques, Procedures) detection rules with
 a reference to the MITRE ATT&CK Matrix [8]. This matrix provides
 Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) actors are well-resourced attack- a high-level summary of attack tactics and techniques based on realers specialized in launching covert cyberattacks on computer systems world observations, including execution of LOLBins. It is maintained
to which they maintain unauthorized access for an extended period with contributions from leading security vendors.
of time. The main objectives of APT actors are cyber espionage and
 Yet, simply applying TTP detection rules results in a deluge of
impairing physical processes when targeting industrial-sector organisecurity alerts, and hence leads to the alert fatigue problem, as the
zations. Once achieved initial access on a machine in a target organimajority of these alerts are in fact false positives [9]. Provenance-based
zation, attackers typically find ways to pivot to other domain-joined
machines for more sensitive data, or means to cause destructive dam- IDS (PIDS) [10–24] emerged as a promising approach for reducing false
ages to cyber–physical systems. Stolen credentials are the most popular alerts and accelerating attack investigation, by parsing system audit
way for attackers to access further machines in the network: Recent logs into provenance graphs and thus presenting historical context of
CrowdStrike studies [1–4] show that 80% of modern cyberattacks system activities. Starting from an indicative system activity associated
are identity-driven, and Dragos’s findings [5] suggest that nearly all with a security alert, backward & forward tracing in the provenance
attackers leverage stolen credentials for lateral movement. graph can uncover more indicative, causally related system activities.
 To remain undetected, APT actors routinely employ the so-called By doing so, TTP security alerts can be linked, contextualized, and then
low-and-slow strategy. Relying on Living-Off-the-Land Binaries (LOL- prioritized for further investigation. The underlying assumption of PIDS
Bins) [6,7], i.e., system pre-installed programs, helps attackers stay is that, when a series of TTP alerts can be causally linked into an attack
low, as legacy intrusion detection systems (IDS) often consider system
 graph reassembling a Cyber Kill Chain, they are more likely caused by
activities associated with these programs benign, due to their constant
 attackers than those alerts unrelated to each other.
presence during normal operations. In response to this, current IDS

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: qi.liu@kit.edu (Q. Liu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2025.104057

Available online 29 April 2025
2214-2126/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 However, most existing PIDS can detect neither multi-phase nor cross- systems, i.e., Siemens SIPROTEC [32] and Hitachi Energy RTU500 [33].
machine APT attacks, enabled by persistence and lateral movement tech- We also developed TTP detection rules with a reference to the MITRE
niques, respectively. Multi-phase attack detection necessitates an un- ATT&CK Matrix for ICS [34] for these controllers. Commander is capable
derstanding of persistence attacks’ nature, and cross-machine tracing of accurately attributing the activities on these controllers to the true
faces significant challenges due to the notorious dependency explo- identity behind those actions, even if the access originates from the
sion problem [25,26]. In order to evade PIDS, APT actors resort to enterprise network.
persistence techniques, which enable them to disassemble an attack We evaluate Commander on the AVIATOR dataset [27], which is
chain into multiple phases and stay slow. This makes it infeasible for based on the MITRE attack emulation plans [35] and consists of the
PIDS without persistence awareness [10–24] to causally link those most complex and authentic APT attacks comparing to other datasets.
system activities (and the TTP alerts) from the same attacker, as they The AVIATOR dataset includes two extended MITRE emulation plan:
are located in fragmented, seemingly unrelated graphs. Cpd [25] is one for Sandworm [36] and one for Oilrig [37]. These extended emthe first specialized persistence detector, which can accurately identify ulation plans incorporate an ICS infrastructure and attack steps on it,
attackers’ use of persistence techniques from system logs, and hence making AVIATOR the only APT dataset for investigating attacks spanrecouple those disassembled, but actually related graphs. ning from an enterprise network to an ICS network. Our evaluations on
 Most PIDS are restricted to intra-machine provenance tracing, even the AVIATOR dataset show that Commander accurately detects attacks,
though cross-machine activities are omnipresent in real-world APT outperforms open-source detection rules and a commercial detection
attacks [27]. This, again, limits PIDS’ ability to link attack steps of system, and produces succinct and informative attack graphs.
the same APT actor, and thus reveal the scale of the attacker’s traver- The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
sal inside an organization, crucial for accurate attack detection and • We introduce several attack techniques for evading Hades, the first
remediation. To overcome this, Hades [26] presents a concept called PIDS capable of accurate cross-machine tracing.
logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing, which tackles the • We present two specialized detectors: one for session hijacking
cross-machine dependency explosion problem, and hence enables ac- attacks and one for port forwarding attacks.
curate and efficient causality-based cross-machine tracing in enterprise • We propose Commander, a modularized provenance-based detecnetworks. tion system that integrates Cpd and the above two specialized
 However, our analysis of APT threat reports linked in the MITRE detectors with Hades to counter evasion attacks.
ATT&CK knowledge base [28] yields the finding that Hades, as the first • We develop parsers and TTP detection rules for two popular
PIDS capable of accurate cross-machine tracing, is susceptible to several industrial controllers.
evasive attack tactics/techniques routinely employed by APT actors: • We demonstrate Commander’s ability to perform robust whole
persistence [29], session hijacking [30], and port forwarding [31]. network tracing, including attribution of malicious activities con-
Whereas port forwarding attacks can directly interrupt Hades’s cross- ducted on industrial controllers.
machine tracing, both persistence and session hijacking attacks hinder
accurate intra-machine tracing, on which cross-machine tracing hinges. 2. Background
The impacts of these evasion techniques on Hades are discussed in
Section 4.2 in detail. An industrial-sector organization typically has an enterprise/IT net-
 Recognizing the weaknesses of Hades, we designed Commander work and an ICS/OT (Operational Technology) network that are sepa-
(CrOss-Machine Multi-phase AdvaNced persistent threat DEtectoR). rated from each other [38]. Communications between these networks
Commander integrates Cpd with Hades, and incorporates another two are often enabled by a gateway/jump server. To reduce the risk, the
specialized detectors: one for session hijacking and one for port for- enterprise network and the ICS network have separate identity and
warding. Commander features a three-stage approach for efficient and access management (IAM) systems [5,39]. IAM systems are ubiquitous
accurate attack detection and graph reconstruction. The first stage of in networks of large organizations. (Microsoft) Active Directory is the
Commander serves as preliminary detection, and accommodates four spe- most popular IAM system, with more than two-thirds of the market
cialized detectors running in parallel, i.e., an authentication anomaly share and 90% of Fortune 1000 companies relying on it [4,40,41].
detector, a cyber persistence detector, a session hijacking detector Active Directory is popular not only in IT networks, but also in OT
and a port forwarding detector. The authentication anomaly detector networks. In fact, OT vendors, e.g., Schneider Electric, shifted their
identifies anomalies indicating identity-driven attacks, and produces OT products’ OS from Unix-based ones to Windows NT long time ago
an initial high-level attack graph for each anomaly, which is passed in order to better make use of Active Directory functionalities like
to Commander’s second stage, i.e., whole network tracing. The other Kerberos Authentication and Group Managed Service Accounts [42].
three specialized detectors make complementary contributions to en- Although our implementation and evaluation of Commander rest on
suring robust and correct whole network tracing, by delivering critical Active Directory, the concept for robust whole network tracing and
information to guide and adjust the tracing process. efficient attack detection introduced in Section 6 is transferable to
 The objective of whole network tracing is to separate system ac- networks employing another IAM system.
tivities from different identities, and causally link system activities As shown in [43], during an attack against an industrial-sector
of the same identity, be it the attacker or a genuine user, on each organization, a complete attack path includes multiple cross-machine
involved machine across the entire organization. Correct and complete movements necessary for APT attackers to achieve their final objectracing in this stage is vitally important for the attack graph ranking in tives. Often, attackers first gain an initial foothold on a machine in
Commander’s final stage, in which graphs are ranked by threat score. The the IT network through phishing or binary exploitation. From the
threat score is determined by the set of indicative attack steps/security initially accessed machine, attackers routinely perform Active Directory
alerts found in an attack graph. Thus, incorrect or incomplete tracing discovery to locate more machines in the network. In comparison
could let true attack graphs be ranked lower than false-positive ones. to network scanning using third-party tools like nmap [44], Active
 Further, Commander is designed as a PIDS for detecting cross- Directory discovery techniques leverage native Windows programs like
machineattacks in industrial-sector organizations consisting of an en- setspn [45] to avoid noisy network activities and hence bypass netterprise network and an industrial control system (ICS), which are work IDS. Moreover, attackers commonly steal credentials, e.g., cached
typically in two separate domains. That is, Commander is able to trace authentication tickets, password hashes, or even clear text passwords,
across domains, given that the enterprise network and the ICS network on each accessed machine. Leveraging stolen credentials is the most
are often connected via a gateway server. Besides, we developed parsers popular way for attackers to move across a target network [1–5]. The
for system logs from two popular industrial controllers in energy pivotal access on a gateway server enables attackers to reach machines

 2
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 Fig. 1. Taxonomy of APT detection and investigation systems.

in the OT network. As the objective of attacks against industrial-sector nor assist attack investigation by providing detailed attack graphs, in
organizations is impairing physical processes, the final target of the which the lateral movement attack stage is associated with other attack
attackers is typically Engineering Workstations, through which field stages of a Cyber Kill Chain.
controllers are programmed and configurated, and field controllers, There are only a few network log-based kill chain detectors: BPF
like PLC (Programmable Logic Controller), RTU (Remote Terminal [53], KCSM [54]. By construction, network log-based kill chain detec-
Unit) and IED (Intelligent Electronic Device), through which physical tors can only detect a partial Cyber Kill Chain, as some attack stages,
processes are controlled. e.g., persistence, credential access, and privilege escalation, can be
 detected only with host logs. Further, attack graphs output by such
3. Related work detectors are very coarse granular, in which nodes denote individual
 machines and edges denote suspected attack stages. To find the root
 In Fig. 1, we present a taxonomy of APT detection and investigation cause for an attack or thoroughly assess the attack consequences,
systems, which we categorize into main systems and auxiliary systems. security analysts would still need to manually inspect host logs from
Systems designed directly for APT detection and investigation are con- each involved machine.
 We find that the majority of host log-based APT detection systems
sidered as main systems, while systems that serve to assist the detection
 leverage data provenance analysis. Only a few detectors do not fall into
or investigation process, but do not perform detection themselves are
 the category of provenance-based intrusion detection systems (PIDS),
considered as auxiliary systems. We further categorize main systems
 e.g., MDATP [55] for detecting credential access attack stage, and
into network log-based and host log-based systems, depending on the
 APTMalInsight [56] and Bon-APT [57] for detecting (APT malware)
data source. In addition, we classify a detection system as single attack
 execution attack stage. Comparing to network log-based kill chain
stage detector, if it is designed for detecting a specific attack stage,
 detectors, host log-based kill chain detectors operate at a finer grane.g., data exfiltration. In contrast, kill chain detectors have a broader
 ularity. Attack graphs produced by PIDS expose malicious behaviors
detection scope: a Cyber Kill Chain consisting of several attack stages.
 at the system activity level, e.g, malicious process creation or suspi-
 We find that network log-based APT detection and investigation
 cious file access, rather than at machine level, e.g., suspicious network
systems largely fall into the category of single attack stage detector,
 interaction.
whereas host log-based APT detection and investigation systems mostly A recent study [58] shows that PIDS are considered more effective
aim to detect an entire Cyber Kill Chain. For instance, Hopper [46], than other detection systems, mostly due to better interpretability
Euler [47,48] target lateral movement detection using network logs. of detection results. Context-rich provenance graphs are leveraged
There are also network log-based single attack stage detectors for in PIDS to accelerate attack detection & investigation process. PIDS
detecting phishing emails/initial access, e.g., DAS [49], command and are often categorized into anomaly-based systems and heuristic-based
control (C2) activities, e.g., DNND [50], Hawk-Eye [51], and data systems. Anomaly/learning-based PIDS model/learn benign behavior
exfiltration, e.g., ibHH [52]. from provenance graphs, and detect deviations from it as anomalies.
 It is worth noting, that although our system Commander’s cross- Heuristic-based PIDS embed expert knowledge and developed heurismachine APT detection involves detection of lateral movement, it tics into detection algorithms. Heuristics are often derived from key
is more than a lateral movement detector. That is, like Hades [26], insights identified during analysis of past real-world APT attack cam-
Commander performs whole-network provenance tracing to accurately paigns. PIDS are included in the red, dashed bounding boxes in Fig. 1,
and comprehensively unravel attackers’ traversal inside a network, and and further discussed in Section 3.1 in detail due to their relevance to
hence to reveal detailed malicious system activities of an attacker on our system Commander.
each involved machine (see Fig. 7 and 12). On the contrary, existing In order to enhance PIDS’ practicality, a number of auxiliary systems
lateral movement detectors like Hopper [46], Euler [47,48] leverage have been proposed. For instance, various dedicated log reduction
network logs to infer simply the presence of the lateral movement schemes are developed: CPR [59], NodeMerge [60], DPR [61], LogApattack stage. They can neither perform accurate provenance tracing, prox [62], SEAL [63], ELISE [64]. They serve to reduce the volume of

 3
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Table 1
Comparison of PIDS.
 Name Methods Innovative Tracing Attack Target Detect. Investigation Resp.
 techniques optim. scope envir. result assistance time
 SLEUTH Heuristics Node Tagging, ✓ Simp. Indiv. Alerts Succinct short
 [10], 2017 Tag Propagation APT hosts attack graphs

 Winnower Heuristics Graph Grammar 7 Non- Distr. Alerts Succinct short
 [11], 2018 Models APT appli. attack graphs

 NoDoze Rules, Behavioral Execution ✓ Simp. Indiv. Ranked Succinct short
 [13], 2019 Anomaly Partitioning APT hosts alerts attack graphs

 HOLMES Rules, Information Flow 7 Simp. Indiv. Ranked High-level short
 [12], 2019 Heuristics Correlation APT hosts alerts scen. graphs

 RapSheet Rules, Graph-Based ✓ Simp. Indiv. Ranked Succinct short
 [14], 2020 Heuristics Scoring Scheme APT hosts alerts attack graphs

 OmegaLog Heuristics Log Unification, 7 Non- Indiv. Alerts Succinct short
 [16], 2020 Peephole Concretization APT hosts attack graphs

 UNICORN ML, Sketch-based 7 Simp. Indiv. Alerts None long
 [19], 2020 Anomaly Provenance Encoding APT hosts

 MORSE Heuristics Tag Attenuation, ✓ Simp. Indiv. Alerts Succinct short
 [15], 2020 Tag Decay APT hosts attack graphs

 CONAN Heuristics State-based ✓ Simp. Indiv. Alerts Succinct short
 [17], 2020 Detection Framework APT hosts attack graphs

 TRACE Heuristics Unit-based Selective ✓ Simp. Enter. Alerts Succinct short
 [18], 2021 Instrumentation APT netw. attack graphs

 ATLAS ML, Sequence-based 7 Simp. Small Alerts Succinct long
 [21], 2021 Anomaly Model Learning APT netw. attack graphs

 SHADEWA. ML, Recomm.-guided 7 Simp. Indiv. Alerts None N/A
 [20], 2022 Anomaly Log Analysis APT hosts

 DISTDET Anomaly Alarm Deduplication & 7 Simp. Small Ranked Succinct N/A
 [22], 2023 Semantic Aggregation APT netw. alerts attack graphs

 KAIROS ML, Encoder–Decoder-based 7 Simp. Indiv. Alerts Verbose long
 [23], 2024 Anomaly Anomaly Quantification APT hosts attack graphs

 FLASH ML, Embedding Recycling 7 Simp. Indiv. Ranked Verbose long
 [24], 2024 Anomaly Database APT hosts alerts attack graphs

 Cpd Rules, Pseudo Edges, ✓ MP Indiv. Ranked Succinct short
 [25], 2024 Heuristics Expert-guided Edges APT hosts alerts attack graphs

 Hades Rules, Logon Session-based ✓ CM Enter. Ranked Succinct short
 [26], 2024 Heuristics Execution Partitioning APT netw. alerts attack graphs

 Commander Rules, Anti-evasion techniques, ✓ CM MP IS Ranked Succinct short
 Heuristics Robust Tracing APT organ. alerts attack graphs

Note: appli. = applications, APT = Advanced Persistent Threat, CM = Cross-Machine, Detect. = Detection, Distr. = Distributed, Enter. = Enterprise, envir. = Environment, Indiv. =
Individual, IS = Industrial-sector, MP = Multi-Phase, ML = Machine Learning, N/A = not applicable/available, netw. = networks, optim. = optimization, organ. = organizations,
Recomm. = Recommendation, Resp. = Response, scen. = scenario, SHADEW. = SHADEWATCHER, Simp. = Simplified.

logs required for APT detection and investigation, and hence alleviate hosts in isolation. We consider an attack scenario as simplified APT attack,
the long-term log storage problem. if the entire scenario is restricted to a single host and does not contain
 The large volume of host logs also deteriorate the dependency an effective persistence technique, as apposed to real-world APT attacks.
explosion problem. Dependency explosion happens for long-running SLEUTH produces alerts as detection result, and succint attack graphs
processes, in which each input event is conservatively considered to support investigation by security analysts. Evaluation on a DARPA
causally responsible for all subsequent output events, and vice versa, dataset [69] shows that SLEUTH has a short response time, i.e., within
resulting in excessive amounts of false dependencies and formidably a few seconds or minutes. Winnower [11] is a heuristic-based PIDS
dense provenance graphs [65,66]. Program execution partitioning tech- that adapts graph grammar techniques to detect attacks on distributed
niques introduced in BEEP [65] and ProTracer [67] are the first applications, instead of whole systems. It is evaluated on a unpublished,
proposed approaches for combating (intra-machine) dependency explo- self-developed dataset.
 NoDoze [13] is an anomaly-based PIDS that leverages detection
sion. MPI [68] improves these techniques by introducing a semanticrules from commercial security products to generate initial alerts. Then
aware program annotation and instrumentation technique.
 it performs tracing on these alerts with system logs, and employs behavioral execution partitioning for enhanced tracing efficiency. With a
3.1. Comparison of PIDS path-based anomaly scoring algorithm, NoDoze is the first PIDS producing ranked alerts. Ranked alerts are more useful in practice, as security
 Table 1 provides a comparison of PIDS. SLEUTH [10] is a PIDS analysts can prioritize the highest ranked alerts for investigation due to
that introduces node tagging and tag propagation based on heuristics limited time.
for attack graph reconstruction. It is designed for detecting and inves- HOLMES [12], as a heuristic-based PIDS, proposes the notion hightigating simplified APT attacks, and focuses on attacks on individual level scenario graph (HSG), which is a summarized description of an

 4
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

attack history. It first produces initial alerts through self-developed a high percentage of benign system activities, complicating attack
detection rules, then performs tracing via correlation between suspi- investigation [25]. Further ML-based PIDS, e.g., APT-KGL [72], WATcious information flows, and outputs HSG at the end. RapSheet [14] SON [73], THREATRACE [74], DEPIMPACT [75], PROGRAPHER [76],
also combines detection rules with heuristics for APT detection and MAGIC [77], are not discussed, as they all, like the state-of-the-art MLinvestigation. Instead of relying on self-developed detection rules, Rap- based PIDS KAIROS and FLASH, have a limited attack scope: simplified
Sheet employs a commercial EDR (Endpoint Detection and Response) APT attacks.
product for the initial alerts. Unlike NoDoze, RapSheet adopts a graph- We argue that, most prior PIDS, both anomaly-based [13,19–24] and
based scoring scheme for ranking final alerts. RapSheet also proposes heuristics-based ones [10–12,14–18], would fail at detecting not only multitechniques to perform graph reduction, which makes produced attack phase APT attacks but also cross-machine APT attacks. First, prior PIDS
graphs more succinct. OmegaLog [16] presents the first approach re- fall short of detecting persistence, due to failure to recognize that peralizing log unification, in which system logs and application logs are sistence attack is always a two-part act [25]. By leveraging persistence,
combined to enhance tracing efficiency, and to produce succinct attack APT attackers break down an entire attack chain into multiple phases,
graphs with enriched context. which in turn makes these PIDS create rather disintegrated, seemingly
 UNICORN [19] is the first Machine Learning (ML)-based anomaly unrelated attack graphs. Second, prior PIDS are, by construction, limited
detector via runtime provenance analytics. It uses a sketch-based, to intra-machine tracing, and unable to causally associate an attacker’s
time-weighted provenance encoding scheme to summarize provenance activities across machines in an organization’s network(s), as a result
graphs for training and detection. However, unlike aforementioned of an obliviousness to the network context [26].
PIDS, UNICORN does not assist attack investigation by producing attack Unlike these systems, Cpd excels in detecting persistence techniques
graphs. Rather, it classifies an entire provenance graph as benign or by combining advanced detection rules with pseudo-edges and expertmalicious. UNICORN is evaluated on StreamSpot [70] and DARPA [69] guided edges. This unique approach enables Cpd to effectively identify
datasets. and investigate persistence threats, bridging the gaps that other PIDS
 MORSE [15] improves on SLEUTH [10] by introducing two key fail to address. Hades is the first PIDS capable of performing truly
techniques called tag attenuation and tag decay, which help to com- causality-based cross-machine tracing, capitalizing on a critical yet prebat the dependency explosion problem for long-running attacks. Note viously undiscovered information: logon session ID. However, we find
that SLEUTH [10] can create succinct attack graphs only for short- that Hades is vulnerable to several evasion attack techniques, including
lived attacks. For long-running attacks, SLEUTH would produce dense persistence. By integrating several preliminary detectors, targeting each
 evasion attack technique individually, with Hades, our system Commanattack graphs containing many benign system activities. CONAN [17]
 der’s whole network tracing achieves a considerably higher level of
proposes a state-based detection framework, in which each system
 robustness. Moreover, Commander is the first PIDS that incorporates a
entity, e.g., process and file, is represented as an finite state aumodule for provenance tracing to industrial controllers.
tomata (FSA)-like structure. Combined with suspicious code execution
 Like HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [14], Commander leverages the
tracking, system entities are assigned with benign or malicious states.
 synergy of detection rules and heuristics for APT detection and inves-
 TRACE [18] presents a network connection-based cross-machine
 tigation. These detection rules match indicative system activities, and
tracing approach, and proposes a technique called unit-based selecare used to initiate the tracing process or calculate a threat score, which
tive instrumentation to reduce dependence explosion during tracing.
 in turn serves to discover related indicative system activities, or rank
TRACE’s cross-machine tracing is, however, restricted to system acan attack graph, respectively. But, unlike RapSheet [14], we do not
tivities of individual instrumented programs, rather than an entire
 rely on any commercial security product. Comparing to self-developed
machine’s system activities. In addition, such invasive program instrudetection rules in HOLMES [12], self-developed rules in Commander are
mentation is often too costly to be adopted in practice [16]. Although
 readily integrable into open-source rule repositories like Sigma [78].
TRACE’s target environment is enterprise networks, it is evaluated only
 We consider that a system offers tracing optimization, if specific
on DARPA-E3 [69] and DARPA-E5 [71] datasets, which contain simtechniques are proposed to improve tracing efficiency, completeness,
plified APT attack scenarios not in an enterprise setting [27]. Besides, or correctness. While most prior systems [10,13–16,18] optimize the
TRACE’s design is oblivious to the domain context of an enterprise tracing process all by enhancing the efficiency, e.g., through optimized
environment, and insufficient for combating cross-machine dependency path selection or instrumentation, Cpd and Hades optimize the tracing
explosion [26]. process by improving efficiency and completeness, and Commander also
 ATLAS [21] is a ML-based PIDS that leverages sequence-based improves tracing correctness.
model learning for APT attack graph reconstruction. It is applied to We stress that each compared study in Table 1 has its own strengths,
detect attacks on individual hosts or small networks consisting of only in which it solves a specific problem with the proposed innovative techtwo hosts. SHADEWATCHER [20] is another ML-based PIDS, which niques. For instance, SLEUTH [10] and MORSE [15] present tag-based
combines recommendation principles with provenance analysis. Like key techniques to combat the dependency explosion problem [65,66].
UNICORN, SHADEWATCHER does not support security analysts in Winnower [11] specifically targets attacks on distributed applications
attack investigation. DISTDET [22] is an anomaly-based PIDS focusing with its graph grammar models. NoDoze’s behavior execution partitionon cost-effective deployment of PIDS in practice. It introduces alarm ing [13] can enhance tracing efficiency. HOLMES’s information flow
deduplication & semantic aggregation techniques to filter false alarms. correlation produces simplistic high-level scenario graphs, which are
 KAIROS [23] is an anomaly-based PIDS that adopts a Graph Neural easily understandable without extensive security background knowl-
Network (GNN)-based encoder–decoder architecture for quantifying edge. RapSheet’s graph-based scoring scheme aims to produce more
the degree of anomaly of each system event. It improves on UNICORN, reasonably ranked alerts and help security analysts focus on more likely
and performs attack detection at a finer granularity. That is, instead of serious incidents. OmegaLog [16] presents a log unification technique
taking an entire provenance graph as input, it takes system events as to enhance tracing efficiency, and more properly leverage existing logs.
input, splits the entire time line into many time windows, and classifies CONAN [17] demonstrates yet another technique to increase tracing efeach time window as benign or malicious. Yet, this approach pro- ficiency, i.e., a state-based detection framework. TRACE [18] addresses
duces comparatively dense attack graphs mixing malicious and benign the dependency explosion problem with another key technique called
system activities. FLASH [24], as another GNN-based PIDS, performs unit-based selective instrumentation. DISTDET’s alarm deduplication
classification at an even finer granularity level: the node level. In technique [22] can reduce deployment cost of PIDS in practice.
addition, FLASH presents an embedding recycling database to store the The main strength of ML-based systems UNICORN [19], ATLAS
node embeddings from the training phase for improved computational [21], THREATRACE [74], KAIROS [23] and FLASH [24] is that they reefficiency. Nevertheless, attack graphs produced by FLASH still contain quire less security domain-specific expert knowledge from researchers

 5
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Fig. 2. Comparison of cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas a thin black edge
denotes a network connection, a thick black edge denotes a logon by a genuine user and
a thick red edge denotes a logon by an attacker. (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

to develop and improve. However, the detection logic and results are
comparatively less explainable. The common weakness of all compared
studies is that only simplified APT attacks are addressed, rather than Fig. 3. Comparison of results from different cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas
cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks in real world. To detect these black denotes system activities originated from genuine users, red denotes system
 activities caused by attackers. If a tracing approach returns more than one graph,
more complex attacks, dedicated techniques are required, which are
 these graphs are numbered and considered as independent for further investigation.
incorporated in our system Commander. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
 Nevertheless, key techniques in the compared studies can be com- to the web version of this article.)
plementary to our key techniques for efficient and accurate APT detection and investigation. For instance, tag-based techniques from
SLEUTH [10] and MORSE [15], and the log unification technique from dense graphs in Fig. 3(b). However, in the prevalence of identity theft,
OmegaLog [16] could be integrated in our system Commander for further it is infeasible to discern the true identity behind each logon. That is, a
reducing dependency explosion during tracing. The main weakness of provenance graph produced from logon-based tracing can still contain
our system Commander, like other heuristic-based approaches, lies in the system activities of multiple identities. In contrast, logon session-based
fact that it requires expert knowledge in security domain to develop and tracing narrows down system activities deemed as relevant from an
maintain. entire machine to just one logon session, as shown in Fig. 2(c), truly
 linking system activities belonging to the same identity, and separating
4. Motivating examples
 system activities unrelated to each other into individual provenance
 graphs displayed in Fig. 3(c).
4.1. Hades’s cross-machine tracing
 While intuitive, logon session-based tracing faces several challenges,
 which are addressed in Hades. We refer readers to [26] for a detailed de-
 Hades [26] is the first PIDS capable of performing accurate causalityscription of these challenges and the solutions. Note that a logon session
based cross-machine tracing, by tackling the cross-machine dependency
 is a computing session assigned with an access token representing the
explosion problem with a method called logon session-based execution
 authenticated account’s security context, and a unique ID (until next
partitioning and tracing. Whereas intra-machine dependency explosion
problem occurs for long-running processes [65,66], in which each input reboot) to label system activities run in that session [79,80]. Each logon
is conservatively considered causally responsible for all subsequent session contains only a fraction of all system activities collected from a
outputs, and vice versa, cross-machine dependency explosion happens machine. An enterprise-level server can run cumulatively thousands of
if cross-machine edges are created merely on a network connection logon sessions in only one day’s operation. This significantly increases
basis. the risk of creating an extremely dense provenance graph impossible
 Fig. 2 illustrates the difference between three cross-machine tracing to investigate for security analysts: Being unaware of logon sessions, a
approaches. Network connection-based tracing, which naively connects provenance tracing approach would connect all system activities inside
two intra-machine provenance graphs whenever there is a network a machine, as they all in the end can be traced back to the root process,
connection between the two machines, as shown in Fig. 2(a), would i.e., system (PID=4) on Windows. The more logon sessions a machine
lead to a dense graph indiscriminately connecting all system activities hosts, the more obvious logon session-based tracing’s performance in
as depicted in Fig. 3(a). It is worth noting that most provenance-based reducing provenance graphs’ size will be, as it identifies truly involved
detection systems mentioned in Section 3 can produce attack graphs logon sessions and tracks system activities only inside them.
including network activities/network socket accesses. However, this For the sake of simplicity and readability, we assume there are
can only suggest that they would be capable of network connection- only two logon sessions on each machine in Fig. 2. Also, note that
based cross-machine tracing, which is highly inaccurate and associated we differentiate between benign system activities and malicious system
with prohibitively high cost for further investigation. activities through different colors for illustration purpose only. The task
 Logon-based tracing in Fig. 2(b) reduces false dependencies by of accurate tracing is to connect system activities that can be attributed
considering only logon-initiated network connections, resulting in less to the same identity, be it the attacker or a genuine user, and separate

 6
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 of persistence attacks, broken links between involved logon sessions
 during intra-machine tracing are unavoidable. With logon sessionbased execution partitioning and tracing, missing cross-session edges
 in intra-machine tracing would lead to inaccurate and incomplete
 cross-machine tracing.
 An example of how accurate cross-machine tracing can be hindered
 via persistence is given in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) shows a persistence attack
 inside the Machine B, where the persistence setup is conducted in a
 logon session under user Alice, and the persistence execution is run
 in a logon session under user Bob. This is possible when the attacker
 drops a C2 agent program in the Machine B and links the path to this
 program with the Registry Run key under user Bob. Therefore every
 time user Bob logs in, the C2 program is automatically started by the
 operating system and connects back to the same attacker for further
 commands. Note that the logon session associated with persistence
 execution, i.e., the second session in the Machine B, can be under the
 user Alice as well, if the attacker links the path to the C2 program with
 the Registry Run key under user Alice, or even under the System user,
 if, for instance, the attacker hides the C2 program in a Windows service.
 The link between persistence setup and persistence execution cannot
 be established by parsing system logs alone. Only a persistence detection system like Cpd [25] that accurately detects persistence setups and
 persistence executions of various persistence attack techniques curated
 by MITRE [28] can discover the broken links and rebuild them into
 the provenance graphs. As Hades [26] is unaware of evasion attack via
 persistence, the dashed violet edge indicating a persistence attack in
 Fig. 4(b) is invisible, leading Hades to attribute the system activities in
 red and the system activities in pink to two different identities in Fig.
Fig. 4. Evasion of cross-machine tracing via persistence or session hijacking. Whereas
black denotes benign system activities, red, violet and pink all denote malicious system 4(c), although they are conducted by the same attacker.
activities. The dashed violet edges indicate a persistence or session hijacking attack. Evading HADES via Session Hijacking. In the present work, as
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
 session hijacking, we refer to console/remote desktop session hijackto the web version of this article.)
 ing [30,83], or more precisely logon session hijacking, rather than
 browser/web session hijacking. Note that console / remote desktop session and logon session are two different concepts, and are at different
system activities belonging to different identities. That is, the color abstraction levels. A console/remote desktop session contains at least
coding is transparent to logon session-based tracing. one logon session, and a console/remote desktop session hijacking indicates hijacking of all logon sessions within it. With sufficient privilege
4.2. Evading Hades’s cross-machine tracing on one session, attackers can hijack another existing session. A typical
 reason for an attacker to conduct session hijacking is that the hijacked
 Through our study on the MITRE ATT&CK knowledge base [28] session may contain more (credentials-related) information enabling
and linked APT threat reports, we found three attack tactics/tech- the attacker to further access other devices in the network.
niques that can be leveraged to evade Hades’s cross-machine tracing, Like persistence attacks, a session hijacking attack is not directly
i.e., persistence, session hijacking, and port forwarding. These attack evident in system logs, meaning that the link between a hijacking
techniques are employed frequently by APT attackers, even if their logon session and a hijacked logon session cannot be created by solely
objective is not necessarily to evade Hades’s cross-machine tracing. processing system logs. If a session hijacking attack is not detected, the
However, leveraging these attack techniques will inevitably misguide hijacking session would not be linked to the hijacked session during
and impede cross-machine tracing, if they are not explicitly detected logon session-based tracing, inevitably leading to premature end of
and the tracing process is not properly adjusted. whole network tracing. The dashed violet edge in Fig. 4(a) and (b) can
Evading HADES via Persistence. Cpd [25] is the first work systemati- also indicate a session hijacking attack, apart from a persistence attack.
cally investigating persistence techniques and realizing that an effective Unlike in a persistence attack, the second session, i.e., the hijacked
persistence is always a two-phase process that includes a persistence session, in the Machine B is typically under a user different from the
setup phase and a persistence execution phase. While the persistence user in the first session, i.e., the hijacking session. Being oblivious to
setup phase serves simply as preparation, the persistence execution evasive session hijacking attacks, and hence to the dashed violet edge
phase reveals attackers’ true intentions. During the persistence setup in Fig. 4(b), Hades will attribute the system activities in red and the
phase, attackers typically leverage a legitimate system functionality, system activities in pink to two different identities, as shown in Fig.
e.g., Registry Run key [81] or Windows Service [82], to drop some 4(c), even though they are in fact caused by the same attacker.
code functioning as a C2 (Command & Control) agent. This C2 agent Evading HADES via Port Forwarding. Due to network segmentation,
program is then run automatically during the persistence execution attackers frequently rely on port forwarding to reach other machines
phase. Intuitively, during persistence execution, the C2 program needs via an intermediate, already compromised machine, also known as
to either receive or initiate a remote connection from or to the attacker proxy [31]. When port forwarding is employed, the source IP address in
for further instructions, disclosing the attacker’s true objectives. a logon event shows the IP address of the proxy machine, instead of the
 As the persistence execution phase often starts with a machine true source machine. However, having the correct source IP address is
reboot or a new user logon, related system activities run under a new critical for Hades’s cross-machine tracing: During Hades’s cross-machine
logon session. That is, the persistence setup phase and the persistence tracing, it takes the source IP address from each logon event, and checks
execution phase often exist on different logon sessions. These logon against the authentication events collected from the domain controller
sessions can belong to the same user or different users. Being unaware and system events on the source host (resolved from the IP address)

 7
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 long-running attacks in which threat actors already managed to get
 an initial access to a domain-joined host via phishing or program
 exploitation, and move laterally to other machines leveraging stolen
 domain credentials instead of program exploitation. Attacks confined
 to a single machine are out of Commander’s detection scope.

 6. System design

 Algorithm 1: Robust Cross-Machine Tracing and Attack Detection
 Inputs : System audit log events ;
 Authentication & logon events ;
 AD TTP rules 𝐴𝐷 ;
 ICS TTP rules 𝐼𝐶𝑆
 Output: List 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> of attack graph and its threat score pairs
 1 Function GetAttackGraph(,  )
 /* Get a list of auth. & logon anomalies */
 2 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← DetectAuthenticationAnomaly()
 3 𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > ← DetectPersistence()
 4 𝐿< ← DetectSessionHijacking(, )
 ℎ𝑔 ,ℎ𝑑 >
 5 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , ← DetectPortForwarding(, )
 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >
 6 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ← null
 7 foreach (𝛾, 𝛾,  𝛾) ∈ 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> do
 8 𝐴𝐺 ← null
 9 𝐻𝐺 ← CreateHighLevelGraph(𝛾, 𝛾)
 10 𝐴𝐺 ← 𝐴𝐺 ∪ 𝐻𝐺
 11 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑦𝑝𝑒 ← CheckRemoteAccessType(𝛾, )
 12 𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷 ← ReassignSessionID(𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑦𝑝𝑒, 𝛾, )
 13 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷 ← LinkSessions(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝛾, )
 14 (𝛼, 𝐺𝛼) ← TraverseBackward(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, ,
 𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > , 𝐿< , > , 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > )
 ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑 𝑑𝑒𝑠
 15 (𝜅, 𝐺𝜅) ← TraverseForward(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, ,
Fig. 5. Evasion of cross-machine tracing via port forwarding. The dashed violet edges 𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > , 𝐿< , > , 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > )
 ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑 𝑑𝑒𝑠
indicate a port forwarding attack step. (For interpretation of the references to color in
 16 𝐴𝐺 ← 𝐴𝐺 ∪ 𝐺𝛼 ∪ 𝐺𝜅
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
 17 𝛼 ← 𝛼 ∪ 𝜅
 18 𝛼 ← CheckAuthenticationLogon(𝛼, )
 19 if 𝛼 is not null then
 20 goto 11
to confirm that an authentication request was sent from this host, 21 end
and a logon was indeed initiated from this host, respectively. If the 22 𝑇 𝑆 ← GetThreatScore(𝐴𝐺)
 23 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ← 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ∪ (𝐴𝐺, 𝑇 𝑆)
authentication request and logon initiation are confirmed, Hades will
 24 end
process further events to identify the logon session and user name etc., 25 return 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆>
and continue with the tracing. Otherwise Hades will not proceed the
 26 Function DetectAuthenticationAnomaly( )
tracing from this logon event.
 27 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← null
 Apparently, taking the IP address of the proxy machine would lead 28 foreach 𝑎𝑒 ∈  do
to premature termination of the tracing, as the logon was not initiated 29 𝛼 ← TraversalBackward(𝑎𝑒)
from the proxy machine. Fig. 5(a) shows a port forwarding attack 30 𝜅 ← TraversalForward(𝑎𝑒)
 31 𝛼 ← 𝛼 ∪ 𝜅
scenario, in which the attacker from the Machine A has logged on the 32 (𝛼,  𝛼) ← CheckAttackType(𝛼 )
Machine C via port forwarding through the Machine B. Being oblivious 33 if 𝛼 ∈ 𝐿< then
 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 >
to port forwarding, Hades is unable to create the dashed violet edge 34 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ∪ (𝛼, 𝛼,  𝛼)
in Fig. 5 (b), and end up wrongly attributing the system activities 35 end
 36 end
in red and in pink to two different identities, as shown in Fig. 5(c).
 37 return 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾>
That is, naively relying on the IP address in a logon event could lead
to incomplete cross-machine tracing. 38 Function GetThreatScore(𝐴𝐺)
 39 𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 ← null
 The objective of logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing 𝑠𝑢𝑏 >
 40 foreach (𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑀𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒𝐸𝑑𝑔𝑒,  𝜔) ∈ 𝐴𝐺 do
itself is to precisely separate system activities under different identities, 41 𝑇 𝑆𝑠𝑢𝑏 ← CalculateScore(𝐴𝐺,  𝜔, 𝐴𝐷 , 𝐼𝐶𝑆 )
rather than classifying system activities as benign or malicious. Yet, the 42 𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 > ← 𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 > ∪ 𝑇 𝑆𝑠𝑢𝑏
 𝑠𝑢𝑏 𝑠𝑢𝑏
detection accuracy of Hades [26], like other PIDS [12,14], depends 43 end
 44 𝑇 𝑆 ← SumScore(𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 )
on the completeness of returned attack graphs, which in turn rests on 𝑠𝑢𝑏 >
 45 return 𝑇 𝑆
the soundness of its tracing method. In the last step of Hades, it ranks
attack graphs according to their threat scores, which are determined by Our system Commander follows a three-stage approach for efficient
indicative attack steps/techniques present in the corresponding graphs. and accurate attack detection. We present Commander’s system archi-
An incomplete attack graph would likely lead to a lower threat score, tecture in Fig. 6, and a formal description of Commander’s tracing and
which in turn could let a true attack graph be ranked lower than detection procedure in Algorithm 1. The first stage of Commander serves
false-positive attack graphs. as preliminary detection, and consists of four specialized detectors
 running in parallel, i.e., an authentication anomaly detector, a cyber
5. Threat model persistence detector, a session hijacking detector and a port forwarding
 detector. While the authentication anomaly detector is introduced in
 Like other PIDS [10–26], our system Commander works under the Hades [26] and the cyber persistence detector is introduced in Cpd [25],
assumption that the integrity of the underlying OS, firmware and our both the session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector are
logging frameworks is guaranteed. Commander focuses on detecting proposed in our system Commander.

 8
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 Fig. 6. System overview of Commander.

 The authentication anomaly detector is integrated into Commander as In the final stage of Commander, it matches the provenance graphs
the first preliminary detector, which takes only authentication & logon resulted from the whole network tracing against open-source TTP (Taclogs as input. It is implemented as a dedicated module in Commander. tics, Techniques, Procedures) detection rules [78] for Active Directory
Commander starts with running this module and waiting for its outcome, discovery and credential access, and ICS TTP detection rules we dei.e., a list of authentication & logon anomalies. Each such anomaly veloped for Siemens SIPROTEC and Hitachi Energy RTU500 industrial
includes information of all involved hosts and the corresponding logon controllers. Then it ranks these attack graphs according to a threat
sessions; this information is used to initiate the whole network tracing scoring algorithm.
in Commander’s second stage. Our system Commander is unique for several reasons. First, Comman-
 In the meantime, i.e., before Commander’s second stage starts, the der can accurately detect cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks, while
cyber persistence detector runs as the second integrated preliminary existing systems cannot. Second, Commander’s modular design further
detector. This detector is also implemented as a dedicated module in enhance the robustness against evasion attacks. Third, Commander is
Commander. It parses through system logs to identify a list of persistence- designed as a provenance-based detection system for detecting attacks
related logon session pairs, which is then used in Commander’s second on industrial-sector organizations consisting of an enterprise network
stage to defend against persistence-based evasion attacks. That is, and an industrial control system (ICS). That is, Commander includes
during the intra-machine backward & forward tracing in Commander’s parsers we developed for system logs from two popular industrial
second stage (Fig. 6), Commander checks against this list to find out controllers in energy systems. Further, Commander also incorporates TTP
whether there is a persistence-related logon session in the traced ses- detection rules we developed with a reference to the MITRE ATT&CK
sions. By doing so, Commander can pinpoint further logon sessions Matrix for ICS [34] for these industrial controllers. Most importantly,
involved in evasive persistence attacks. Otherwise, the whole network Commander can accurately attribute the system activities on these industracing could be interrupted like in Fig. 4, resulting in the entire attack trial controllers to the true identity behind those actions, even when the
chain being missed.
 access originates from the enterprise network.
 Unlike the first two above-mentioned preliminary detectors, the
session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector proposed
 6.1. Preliminary detection
in our system Commander require both system logs and authentication
& logon logs as input. These two detectors are implemented in two
 In the following, we discuss the four specialized detectors in the preseparate dedicated modules in Commander, and run along with the first
 liminary detection stage of Commander one by one. As the authentication
two preliminary detectors during Commander’s first stage. The objectives
 anomaly detector and the cyber persistence detector are described in
of the session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector are
 Hades [26] and in Cpd [25] in detail, respectively, we discuss these two
the same; they serve to counter evasion attacks and hence ensure robust
 detectors only briefly in the present paper.
and correct tracing in Commander’s second stage. The session hijacking
detector produces a list of hijacking & hijacked logon session pairs,
against which Commander checks during the intra-machine backward 6.1.1. Authentication anomaly detection
& forward tracing in its second stage. Like the cyber persistence de- The authentication anomaly detector rests on a light-weight autector, this detector prevents the whole network tracing from being thentication anomaly detection model introduced in Hades [26]. This
interrupted by session hijacking attacks as in Fig. 4. model results from an extensive analysis of identity-based attacks in
 Further, the port forwarding detector outputs a list of source & Active Directory. In these attacks, the complex network authentication
destination logon session pairs, against which Commander checks during process in Windows domain is exploited by attackers who succeed in
the cross-machine backward & forward tracing in its second stage. This stealing some form of credentials or credentials-related data. The stolen
is to discover any port forwarding-related logon session in the traced credentials from one machine are then used to authenticate against a
sessions, so that Commander can track down further logon sessions domain controller, and hence access other machines.
involved in evasive port forwarding attacks. Otherwise, the whole In order to detect authentication anomalies, this module of Comnetwork tracing could be interrupted like in Fig. 5. mander inspects each authentication & logon log event, and performs
 Commander’s second stage starts by taking as input the identified host backward tracing on each logon event, and backward & forward tracing
names, user names and their logon session ID for each anomaly from on each authentication event (Algorithm 1 Lines 29–30). Note that
the authentication anomaly detector. It performs robust logon session- the authentication process in Active Directory is a multi-step process.
based execution partitioning and tracing to discover all involved logon The authentication & logon tracing’s outcome is matched against the
sessions from each host the same identity has accessed. The whole light-weight anomaly detection model to find out whether an aunetwork tracing ends, if no further logon session and host can be thentication anomaly is evident and, if yes, to which attack type it
found. It produces a low-level whole network provenance graph for belongs (Algorithm 1 Line 32). For each authentication anomaly, like
each anomaly spotted in Commander’s first stage. Hades, Commander produces a high-level attack graph including involved

 9
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

users and machines only (Algorithm 1 Line 9), marking the end of its Algorithm 2: Session Hijacking Detection
stage one. Fig. 7 presents an example of such high-level attack graphs Inputs : System audit log events ;
at its top right corner. It shows that user Alice from the Exchange Logon events ;
 Logoff events 
Server has used user Bob’s password hash to authenticate against the
 Output: List of hijacking & hijacked logon session pairs 𝐿<
 ℎ𝑔 ,ℎ𝑑 >
Domain Controller, and then accessed the Data Server, following the
 1 𝐿< , > ← null
Pass-the-Hash behavior. ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑
 2 foreach 𝜅 ∈  do
 /* Get the logon time, user and host of current
6.1.2. Cyber persistence detection
 logon event */
 Understanding persistence attacks’ nature is critical for persistence
 3 ( 𝜅,  𝜅, 𝜅) ← GetAttribute(𝜅 )
detection and hence correct provenance tracing. Cpd [25] is the first 4 𝛾 ← CheckLogOff(,  𝜅,  𝜅, 𝜅)
specialized cyber persistence detection system, which recognizes that 5 if 𝛾 is not null then
a successful persistence attack is always a two-part act consisting of 6 (𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷,  𝛾,  𝛾) ← GetAttribute(𝛾 )
 7 (𝛾, 𝐺𝛾) ← TraverseBackward(, 𝜅, 𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷,  𝛾,  𝛾)
the persistence setup phase and the persistence execution phase. While
 8 𝑝𝑒ℎ ← CheckPrivilegeEscalationHst(𝛾, 𝐺𝛾)
the persistence setup phase serves only as preparation, the persistence 9 if 𝑝𝑒ℎ is not null then
execution phase discloses attackers’ true motives. As discussed in Sec- 10 𝐿< , > ← 𝐿< , > ∪ (𝛾, 𝜅)
 ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑 ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑
tion 4.2, the persistence setup phase and the persistence execution 11 end
phase often exist on different logon sessions, necessitating explicit and 12 end
 13 end
correct association of these logon sessions. Otherwise, broken links
 14 return 𝐿< , >
 ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑
between involved logon sessions controlled by the same attacker would
be inevitable, ultimately resulting in incomplete cross-machine tracing.
 We implement Cpd as a preliminary detection module for Comman-
 Algorithm 3: Port Forwarding Detection
der, so that during Commander’s whole network tracing in the second
 Inputs : System audit log events ;
stage, persistence related logon sessions can be explicitly associated. Authentication & logon events ;
Thus, broken links due to persistence attacks can be avoided. The cyber List of port forwarding-related processes 𝐿<>
persistence detector first parses all system logs, and matches them Output: List of source & destination logon session pairs 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 ,
 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >
against a set of persistence setup detection rules introduced in [25] to 1 𝐿< ,
 𝑠𝑟𝑐 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >
 ← null
create a persistence setup table. Next, it spots all processes with remote 2 foreach 𝜅 ∈  do

connections from those system logs, and performs backward tracing /* Get process name, host name, and timestamp of
on these processes individually to create sub-graphs. Each sub-graph current event */
is then checked against a set of persistence execution detection rules, 3 (𝜅 , 𝜅,  𝜅) ← GetSubject(𝜅 )
 4 if 𝜅 ∈ 𝐿<> then
producing a persistence execution table. 5 (𝐼𝑃𝑠𝑟𝑐 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 , 𝐼𝑃𝑑𝑒𝑡 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑡 ) ← CheckCmd(𝜅 )
 Subsequently, the entries in the persistence setup table and per- 6 if 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 is not null then
sistence execution table are aligned with each other based on TTP 7 𝑝𝑜 ← CheckPortOpening(𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 , )
 8 𝐼𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑜 ← GetIp(𝜅)
labels, temporal order, and specific attributes. An alignment indicates
 9 if 𝑝𝑜 is not null then
a potential persistence attack. These alignments are fed to a false 10 (𝛾 ) ← CheckLogon(,  𝜅, 𝐼𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑜 , 𝐼𝑃𝑑𝑒𝑡 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑡 )
positive reduction algorithm introduced in Cpd [25], which integrates 11 foreach 𝑎𝑒 ∈ 𝛾 do
key insights from real-world persistence attacks, for enhanced detection 12 (𝛾, 𝜔) ← TraversalBackward(𝑎𝑒, 𝐼𝑃𝑠𝑟𝑐 )
 13 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > ← 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > ∪ (𝛾, 𝜔)
accuracy. The final outcome of the cyber persistence detector module 𝑑𝑒𝑠 𝑑𝑒𝑠
 14 end
in Commander is a list of logon session pairs, each include a persis- 15 end
tence setup logon session and a persistence execution logon session 16 end
(Algorithm 1 Line 3). 17 end
 18 end
 19 return 𝐿< ,
6.1.3. Session hijacking detection 𝑠𝑟𝑐 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >

 Commander’s session hijacking detector module leverages two key
insights: (1) a successful session hijacking will cause a logon event under
hijacked user and a logoff event under hijacking user almost at the
 but also very efficient, as an operating system like Windows introduces
same time,1 and (2) in order to perform session hijacking, the attacker
 the separation of privileges with logon sessions. That is, given the OS
has to first conduct privilege escalation to receive the highest privilege,
 integrity, Commander’s session hijacking detector only needs to check a
i.e. system privilege on Windows.
 few attributes, i.e., ‘‘Token Elevation Type’’ and ‘‘Integrity Level’’, in a
 Algorithm 2 outlines the session hijacking detection procedure in
 process generation system event to detect a privilege escalation. Finally,
Commander, which starts from processing each logon event and then
 the session hijacking detector outputs a list of logon session pairs
checking for a possibly related logoff event under a different user (Lines
 consisting of a hijacking logon session and a hijacked logon session.
3–4). After finding a related logoff event, it inspects the terminated
logon session due to the logoff, and performs backward tracing from
 6.1.4. Port forwarding detection
this logon session (Algorithm 2 Lines 6–7). Subsequently, it checks if
the tracing result contains a privilege escalation to the highest privilege
 The port forwarding detector module in Commander identifies port
(Algorithm 2 Line 8). With logon session-based execution partitioning
 forwarding setup in each machine from system logs, and checks for
and tracing, detecting privilege escalation is not only most accurate
 occurrence of port forwarding-based logon from authentication & logon
 logs. First, it parses each system log event to get the process name,
 1 and checks if it belongs to the list of port forwarding-related processes,
 Note that Windows Security events with event ID equal to 4778 or 4800
are considered as logon or logoff events, respectively. Whereas event ID 4778
 e.g., plink, ssh, netsh (Algorithm 3 Lines 3–4). Next, it parses the
reveals that a disconnected session was resumed/logged on, event ID 4800 command line arguments of that process to determine the source port &
states that an ongoing session was locked/logged out [84,85]. For instance, IP and destination port & IP for the port forwarding (Algorithm 3 Line
these events are always logged by Windows when a RDP session, and hence 5). If a source port can be identified, it checks in system logs if this
the associated logon session(s), are hijacked. port was opened through the host-based firewall, and the IP address

 10
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

of this proxy machine (Algorithm 3 Lines 7–8). Subsequently, it parses industrial-sector organization’s network is generally segmented into an
all logon events on the destination host that have happened after the IT domain network and an OT domain network, and the connection of
timestamp of the port forwarding setup event, and have the IP address these two domains is done via a gateway/jump server, as mentioned in
of the proxy machine as source IP (Algorithm 3 Line 10). For each found Section 2.
logon event, it performs backward tracing with the corrected source IP Following the cross-domain tracing, Commander checks if the Engiaddress to find the source logon session, and then appends the source neering Workstations are involved in the tracing process. If yes, it then
& destination logon session pair to a list. examines whether there are logon activities on the field controllers
 coming from a logon session in a Engineering Workstation. For each
6.2. Whole network tracing logon event, it parses all log events between that logon and the corresponding logoff on the field controller. Field controllers typically
 In its stage two, Commander performs whole network tracing, which have a single-user single-task embedded OS. Unlike general-purpose
improves Hades’s logon session-based tracing with enhanced robustness OS, embedded OS do not implement the concept of logon session,
against evasion attacks, and extends it to trace also across domains in- meaning that system activities cannot be sorted by logon session ID.
side an industrial-sector organization. This stage starts with processing However, thanks to its single-user restriction, it is straightforward to
the data delivered from the authentication anomaly detector, i.e., iden- correctly link a specific logon session on the Engineering Workstation
tified host names, user names and logon session ID. First, it infers the with only system activities on a field controller that are indeed caused
remote access type, in which it pulls both related authentication & by commands from that session.
logon events and system events. Then it extracts a list of attributes from Fig. 7 renders the result of whole network tracing for the extended
the events to analyze the context, and classify the remote access type Oilrig attack scenario in the AVIATOR dataset, unraveling the at-
(Algorithm 1 Line 11). tacker’s traversal inside the target organization. Commander first creates
 Next, it performs logon session ID reassignment and logon session an initial high-level attack graph including only high-level entities,
linking according to the remote access type (Algorithm 1 Lines 12–13). i.e., users and hosts, after the authentication anomaly detector iden-
Logon session ID reassignment is necessary for several remote access tifies a potential Pass-the-Hash attack. In Pass-the-Hash attacks [86],
types, e.g., RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) and Powershell-Remoting, attackers leverage stolen password hashes and choose NTLM authentias the system activities performed on a new logon session are recorded cation process over the default Active Directory authentication process
under an existing logon session ID. With logon session linking, a user Kerberos. Then it performs forward tracing inside the specific logon
logon session is coupled with the system logon session directly responsi- session under user Bob in the accessed host Data Server, and forward
ble for the creation of that user logon session. Note that a system logon & backward tracing inside the logon session of Alice in the accessing
session is normally a long-running session accommodating numerous host Exchange Server. The remote access type on the Data Server is
system activities. The logon session linking module selects only a identified as PsExec [87], for which session ID reassignment is not
fraction of these system activities, which are related to the user session required. User Bob’s logon session (0x4aa81e86) is linked to the
creation, to parse into the provenance graph. System logon session (0 × 3e7), as the server process psexesvc runs
 Subsequently, Commander proceeds with intra-machine backward & in the System logon session. psexesvc receives remote commands
forward tracing to find all involved logon sessions and system activities from the Exchange Server, and the remote commands run in Bob’s
inside them (Algorithm 1 Lines 14–15). This step automatically spots logon session. The whole network forward tracing from the Data Server
privilege escalation, as system activities run with different privileges leads to no further logon session on another machine, as the attacker
are contained in different logon sessions and labeled with different found the targeted data and did not move forward from the Data Server.
session ID. A process’s privilege is tied to the security context of the In contrast, the whole network backward tracing from the Exchange
logon session in which the process is running. During normal process Server discloses that the current logon sessions (0xb4874, 0xb4829,
creation, both child process and parent process run in the same logon 0xb37f41d122) on it belong to a RDP session that was initiated
session. But, during a privilege escalation, when a process is spawned from another logon session of user Alice inside another machine Workfrom another process with lower privilege, the spawned process runs in station_1. Besides, it spots a privilege escalation from unprivileged
a new logon session. Unlike Hades, Commander checks in this step also if user to Administrator, i.e., from 0xb4874 to 0xb4829, and a further
current logon sessions are involved in a persistence attack or a session privilege escalation from Administrator to System, i.e., from 0xb4829
hijacking attack, by inspecting the list of persistence setup & execution to 0xb37f41d122. Subsequently, it proceeds with the backward &
logon session pairs, and the list of hijacking & hijacked logon session forward tracing from the logon session of Alice (0xc8cf0a) in the
pairs. These lists are passed from the cyber persistence detector and the Workstation_1. While backward tracing from the Workstation_1 leads
session hijacking detector, respectively. If it finds a match, it connects to no further domain-joined machine, but rather an external IP address
the related logon sessions with a corresponding edge, and continues the that belongs to the C2 server run by the attacker, forward tracing from
intra-machine backward or forward tracing on the newly joined logon the Workstation_1 unveils multiple logon sessions on several machines.2
session. Among the newly found logon sessions, two sessions are on the
 Afterwards, Commander examines the authentication & logon logs Exchange Server. These two sessions predate other sessions on the
from the same domain. This is, on the one hand, to determine the Exchange Server. One of these two sessions contains system activities
source machine & logon session of current logon sessions, i.e., cross- related to credential access, contributing to the lateral movement to
machine backward tracing, and, on the other hand, to identify logon the Data Server. Unlike Hades, Commander performs also cross-domain
sessions inside any domain-joined machine initiated from the current tracing inside the same organization, resulting in identifying a logon
machine, i.e., cross-machine forward tracing. During this step, Com- session in the Gateway Server located in the OT domain. Besides,
mander also checks if the traced logon sessions are involved in a port each time Commander discovers a new logon session during tracing, it
forwarding attack, by inspecting the list of source & destination logon checks against the logon session pairs identified by its cyber persistence
session pairs output from the port forwarding detector. It attaches any detector, session hijacking detector and port forwarding detector, innewly found logon sessions to existing ones. At the end of intra-domain dividually. This is to find out whether this logon session is involved
tracing, Commander checks logon activities on the gateway server. If
any logon initiated from a machine in the IT domain is found, and
that machine is involved in the current tracing process, Commander 2
 Note that backward tracing can lead to no more than one logon session,
begins the cross-domain tracing. Commander’s performance to trace whereas forwarding tracing may lead to multiple logon sessions, as one may
across domains inside an organization benefits from the fact that an remotely access several other machines from one machine.

 11
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Fig. 7. An attack graph created by Commander on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended Oilrig attack scenario. Note that the bounding boxes with a session ID label or host
name are manually added for better readability, this information is encoded in nodes in the original attack graph. Besides, we replaced the user names in the original emulation
plan with shorter names. Some processes, e.g., ps and vmware, in the attack graph are malicious processes disguised under a false name. Further, meta-nodes are introduced as
an optimization technique in Hades [26] to conclude system activities of standard known benign routines.

in stealthy attacks that could impede accurate tracing. By doing so, by the port forwarding, the attacker was able to access the Engineering
Commander discovers a few more logon sessions in the Gateway Server Workstation in the OT domain directly from the Workstation_1 in the
and in the Engineering Workstation. The logon session in the Engineer- IT domain. Thanks to the port forwarding detector, the link to the
ing Workstation under user Dave finally leads to logon sessions on two Engineering Workstation can be discovered during the tracing. Further,
Siemens field controllers. cross-field tracing is initiated from the Engineering Workstation. Due to
 Because the first logon session of user Carol (0 × 256dcd90) on the coarse granularity of system logs on field devices, it is not feasible
the Gateway Server is identified as a persistence setup logon session by to create links between the system activities inside a device. Hence,
the cyber persistence detector, a persistence-based cross-session edge, in the attack graph, we use more abstract entities, i.e., matched ICS
named as pseudo-edge in Cpd [25], is created to connect it to the persis- TTP, and cluster and link them to the logon session on the Engineering
tence execution logon session (0 × 3e7). Without the cyber persistence Workstation from which the corresponding commands originate.
detector, forward tracing from Carol’s first logon session would end
up finding no further logon session and stopping the tracing process.
 6.3. Attack graph ranking
During the persistence attack step, the attacker has created a new local
user Mallory on the Gateway Server. This persistence technique [88]
 In an operational environment, as a detection system cannot guarprovides the attacker the ability to access the desktop environment on
 antee the perfect detection performance, i.e., no false positives and
the Gateway Server. Note that the first access to the Gateway Server
 no false negatives at the same time, each detection result needs to
was done via SSH and through public key authentication. That is,
 be further investigated by a security analyst. The reality is however
without knowing user Carol’s password, the attacker was able to log
into the Gateway Sever as Carol using a private key stored in the that most detection results/alerts cannot be investigated by security
Workstation_1. analysts due to limited time [9,89]. Our system Commander can not only
 Following the persistence execution, the attacker hijacked user produce attack graphs explaining attack history to accelerate further
Carol’s RDP session and hence the logon sessions (0 × 22a215, investigation by security analysts, but also rank the attack graphs with
0 × 22a1f9) inside it. From these logon sessions, the attacker was threat score. Ranked attack graphs/alerts are a very practical way to
able to conduct Active Directory discovery to find more machines in handle the trade-offs between false positives and false negatives in
the OT domain, as the user Carol is a domain user and the attackercreated user Mallory is not.3 Besides, the attacker has set up a port
forwarding in the session with higher privilege (0 × 22a1f9). Enabled domain information. Depending on the remote access type, a domain user’s
 logon session’s security context may not be sufficient for accessing domain
 information, a restriction implemented on Windows. That is, from the SSH-
 3
 Note that only domain administrators and specifically delegated users enabled logon session (0 × 256dcd90) of the domain user Carol, the attacker
can create new domain accounts. Local users are restricted from accessing was unable to conduct Active Directory discovery.

 12
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

reality. This is because that, in order to avoid false negatives, it still by the authentication anomaly detector in the preliminary detection
allows a great number of false positives, as a trade-off. However, with stage. During the tracing, it searches for relevant events to process
threat score ranking, those false positive alerts are more likely ranked via Elasticsearch, which provides scalable and near real-time search
lower than true positive alerts, and get investigated later, if a security for log data investigation. Moreover, we use Python NetworkX [92]
analyst still has time for them. That is, security analysts can prioritize for creating provenance graphs on demand, and PyVis [93] for graph
the highest ranked alerts for investigation due to limited time. visualization.
 Commander’s threat scoring scheme in its final stage builds on Whereas authentication logs for each domain are collected from the
Hades’s, resting on two key insights introduced in Hades [26]: (1) long- corresponding domain controller, logon logs are collected from each
running attacks against a large organization follow a rigid pattern accessed domain-joined machine. System logs are collected from all
after the initial access: Active Directory discovery, credential access, machines. On Windows, we collect Windows Security [80] logs and Syslateral movement and privilege escalation, (2) a successful credential mon [94] logs. Sysmon generates and records a process GUID (Globally
access is essential for the attacker to proceed with the attack, and the Unique Identifier) for each process, reducing false dependencies during
most observable result of an ongoing attack is lateral movement. For post-processing. However, Sysmon lacks logging for file/Registry read
each whole network attack graph output from Commander’s stage two, operations.4 Hence, we rely on Windows Security [80] logs for these
Commander calculates a threat score. By ranking attack graphs via threat system activities, as well as authentication and logon activities. On
score, Commander presents security analysts with the most likely true Linux we collect Auditd [95] logs. These logs are all industry-standard
attack graphs first for further investigation. logs, boosting Commander’s applicability in industry. To ensure log
 Commander extends Hades’s threat scoring scheme by also consid- integrity, recent versions of Sysmon start as protected processes, which
ering the occurrence of (1) persistence, session hijacking and port prevent tampering or disabling by attackers. Windows introduced Proforwarding attacks, (2) cross-domain activities, and (3) ICS TTP alerts tected Event Logging [96] to secure logs from unauthorized access. On
in an attack graph for score calculation. That is, for each potential Linux, making Auditd configuration immutable [97] safeguards against
lateral movement, i.e., a cross-machine edge in an attack graph, it rule changes and rule disabling.
checks the variety and frequency of credential access techniques and
Active Directory discovery techniques used in the source host. It also 8. Evaluation
checks the presence of persistence and session hijacking attacks in both
source and destination hosts, and whether this is a port forwarding- In this section, we evaluate Commander’s performance on the AVIenabled or a cross-domain lateral movement. Further, it checks whether ATOR [27] dataset. In particular, we compare Commander’s detection
the destination host is a field controller on which ICS TTP alerts are accuracy with prior detection systems, showcase Commander’s response
present. Each occurrence of these indicators increases the threat score. time, and analyze attack graphs produced by Commander. Note that a di-
 More formally, the threat score is determined by the following rect, empirical comparison with prior PIDS is difficult given the absence
two equations, of which Eq. (1) calculates the threat score for each of source code and differences in evaluation datasets. A comparison
cross-machine edge, and Eq. (2) accumulates the threat scores passed between one of Commander’s preliminary detectors Cpd and state-of-thefrom Eq. (1), and yields the final score. art PIDS KAIROS [23] and FLASH [24] is given in [25], in which it
 shows that prior PIDS fall short of detecting persistence, due to failure
 ∑
 𝑛
𝑇 𝑆𝐸 = (𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑡𝑒𝑞𝑖 ) × 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑖 ))𝑤𝑖 (1) to recognize that persistence attack is always a two-part act. That
 𝑖=1 is, prior PIDS would not be able to detect multi-phase APT attacks.
where 𝑛 denotes the number of tactics involved, e.g., credential access Further, as mentioned in Section 3.1, prior PIDS are, by construction,
or persistence. 𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑡𝑒𝑞𝑖 ) denotes the accumulated execution frequency limited to intra-machine tracing, and unable to causally associate an
of techniques in a given tactic, and 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑖 ) denotes the number of attacker’s activities across machines in an organization’s network(s), as
techniques being applied for the given tactic. 𝑤𝑖 is a weighting factor a result of an obliviousness to the network context.
for each tactic, with credential access having the highest weight due to
its importance as per the second key insight. 8.1. Datasets

 ∑
 𝑛
 Attack scenarios in most public datasets taken for evaluation of APT
𝑇 𝑆𝐺 = (𝑇 𝑆𝑖 × (𝐷𝐴 + 1) × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦) (2)
 𝑖=1 detection and investigation systems often lack not only a persistence
 attack step, but also a lateral movement attack step, even though these
where 𝑛 denotes the number of cross-machine edges found in a given
 steps are omnipresent in real-world APT attacks [27]. For instance,
attack graph, and 𝑇 𝑆𝑖 denotes the threat score assigned for each crossthe DARPA E3 dataset [69], which is one the most used datasets
machine edge from Eq. (1). 𝐷𝐴 indicates whether credentials of domain
 for PIDS evaluation, contains neither a persistence attack step, nor a
administrators are involved in the cross-machine activities, and has the
 lateral movement trace. Although the DARPA E5 dataset [71] includes
value 0 or 1. Different values of 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 are given to different attack
 two Windows-based persistence attack instances, attacks in this dataset
types, in which the Golden-Ticket attack type receives the highest
 are confined in individual machines. The more recent DARPA OpTC
value, as it implies a compromise of an entire domain. Besides, it
 dataset [98] is the only public dataset emulating APT attacks in a rescales up 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 accordingly, if a cross-machine edge (1) is port
 alistic enterprise environment with domain-joined machines. However,
forwarding enabled, or (2) connects two machines from two different
 this dataset contains only system logs on domain-joined machines, but
domains, i.e., cross domain, or (3) is tied to a field controller on which
 no logs from the domain controller. Authentication logs, which are
ICS TTP alerts are present, i.e., cross field.
 recorded only on domain controllers, are critical for not only three out
 of four Commander’s preliminary detectors, but also the whole network
7. Implementation
 tracing. Further, logs in the DARPA OpTC dataset lack a logon session
 ID, making it even more infeasible to evaluate Commander on this
 We implemented a prototype of Commander in Python, and deployed
 dataset.
it on a 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04 OS with 256 GB of RAM and a 32-
core processor. This machine also hosts Elasticsearch [90], to which
Commander interfaces via EQL [91], a query language designed for 4
 Sysmon only records file/Registry modification operations, e.g., creation,
security purposes. Like Hades, Commander operates as an on-demand deletion, value change, name change. Note that the ‘‘Event ID 9: RawAccesstracing system for enhanced efficiency. That is, it starts the whole Read’’ will not record most file/Registry read operations, as it only records
network tracing, only after an authentication anomaly is identified read operations from the drive using the \\.\denotation [94].

 13
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Fig. 8. Extended Oilrig emulation plan [27]. Edges in red denote initial access or lat-
 Fig. 9. Extended Sandworm emulation plan [27].
eral movement conducted by the attacker. These edges are numbered in chronological
order.

 8.2. Commander vs. Prior detection systems
 In contrast, at least two persistence attack techniques are included
in each of MITRE’s eleven full emulation plans [35], whereas Active To compare Commander with prior detection systems, including
Directory-based lateral movement is present in nine out of eleven open-source detection rules and a commercial Active Directory attack
emulation plans. These emulation plans are based on the observation detector, we first extracted all detection rules for Active Directoryof past real-world APT attacks, and target enterprise networks with based attacks from the most well-known rule repositories, i.e., Elasmore sophisticated, cross-machine attacks than most public datasets, tic [108], Sigma [78], Google Chronicle [109], and installed a commeroffering greater authenticity. AVIATOR is a dataset derived from MITRE cial Active Directory attack detector. Both the EQL queries converted
emulation plans. Apart from the original MITRE emulation plans, it also from the detection rules and the commercial attack detector are evalincludes data from emulating two extended MITRE emulation plans. uated alongside Commander on the datasets. The commercial attack
These extended MITRE emulation plans are based on real-world attacks detector is referred to as Cad in the present paper, since we did not get
on both enterprise and ICS networks conducted by notorious APT the permission to reveal the name of the security vendor. This vendor
groups Sandworm [36] and Oilrig [37]. Whereas Sandworm is responsi- is considered as a significant security solution provider in the security
ble for the attacks against Ukrainian electrical companies in 2015, 2016 market overviews [110,111]. We compare the detection results w.r.t.
and 2022 [99–102], Oilrig has targeted energy and chemical sectors in the number of false positives and false negatives on each dataset in
 Table 3.
Middle Eastern in 2017 [103–105].
 Table 3 shows that open-source detection rules generated more
 The extended emulation plans are demonstrated in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9,
 false positives than a full-fledged attack detector like Commander and
in which the original emulation plans are shown in a dashed bounding
 Cad, and missed some true attacks. More specifically, Elastic produced
box. As the extended emulation plans are the only ones including
 more false positives than Commander’s preliminary detection stage on
attack steps on ICS, we evaluate Commander only on the corresponding
 both datasets, while missing the true attack in the Sandworm dataset.
subsets of the AVIATOR dataset. Table 2 gives an overview of the
 Although Chronicle has a lower false positive rate on both datasets, it
two subsets, which are also referred to as AVIATOR-Oilrig dataset and
 did not detect any true attack. In contrast, Sigma identified the true
AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset, respectively, for brevity.
 attacks in both datasets, however at the expense of producing much
 It is worth noting that the possible errors of a dataset presented more false positives. Open-source detection rules’ overly high false
in [106], i.e., incorrect labeling logic and wrongly generated features, positive rate is well demonstrated and discussed in [25,26].
do not apply to the AVIATOR dataset. Like the DARPA E3 [69], Contrary to open-source detection rules, a dedicated attack detector
the DARPA E5 [71] and the DARPA OpTC [98] datasets, the AVI- like Commander and Cad associates events related to each other, and
ATOR dataset is not a dataset specifically created for training and analyzes the context, moving beyond inspecting individual log events
evaluating machine learning approaches. That is, unlike the examined independently. This context-awareness can significantly lower the false
network log-based datasets in [106], DARPA E3, DARPA E5, DARPA positive rate, as demonstrated by the comparison between the detection
OpTC and AVIATOR are host log-based datasets, in which no fine- results of Commander’s preliminary detection stage and final detection
grained automatic labeling was performed for each system activity. stage, i.e., after the whole network tracing. Note that most attack
Only coarse-granular labeling for each attack trace was performed, steps involved in stealthy APT attacks are based on misusing legitimate
which is manual, simple, and easily verifiable. Along with the raw system infrastructures and services, which are used intensively by
data, source code for environment setups, configuration files, attack genuine users as well. The prevalence of ‘‘indicative’’ system activities
scripts etc. is also provided as a documentation in the dataset’s repos- in benign operations helps attackers easily blend each of their attack
itory [107]. Besides, no feature generation was performed for APT steps into the noise caused by genuine users. However, with precise
datasets like DARPA E3, DARPA E5, DARPA OpTC and AVIATOR. That tracing, the system activities of individual attack steps can be linked
is, these datasets do not contain any wrong synthetic feature. into a provenance graph, as they are causally related.

 14
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 Table 2
 Overview of the evaluation datasets.
 Dataset Target host number Ground truth attack Target host OS Data size Event number
 AVIATOR-Oilrig 10 Pass-the-Hash Windows Embedded OS 566 GB 360 M

 AVIATOR-Sandworm 8 Golden-Ticket Windows Linux Embedded OS 610 GB 479 M

 Note that the AVIATOR-Oilrig dataset and AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset are the subsets of the AVIATOR dataset including attack steps on
 industrial control systems.

 Table 3
 Comparison of Commander and prior detection systems.
 COMMANDER Elastic Chronicle Sigma CAD
 Dataset
 Preliminary Final
 FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN
 AVIATOR-Oilrig 105 0 0 0 208 0 50 1 415 0 0 1
 AVIATOR-Sandworm 59 0 0 0 196 1 31 1 722 0 0 0

 Note that each dataset has only one true positive (TP=1). FP: false positives. FN: false negatives.

 Comparing to a provenance graph built from a genuine user’s all Table 4
 Summarized comparison of detection systems.
system activities, a provenance graph containing the whole of an at-
 System Precision Recall F1 score
tacker’s system activities typically includes more ‘‘indicative’’ activities.
It also outlines a logical order, e.g., lateral movement after credential COMMANDER 1.0 1.0 1.0
 Elastic 0.005 0.667 0.01
access, underpinning threat scoring schemes in PIDS like [12–14,25,26]
 Chronicle 0.024 0.5 0.046
and Commander. Often the longer the attack chain is, the more obvious Sigma 0.002 1.0 0.004
the attack pattern is, and thus the more likely the attack provenance CAD 1.0 0.667 0.8
graph is ranked higher than benign ones. In comparison to Hades, which
has assigned the third-highest score to the true attacks in two datasets,
Commander has produced no false positive by ranking the true attack
in each dataset the highest. This is due to the longer attack chain in
the extended emulation plans and Commander’s robust whole network
tracing ability.
 Commander’s final detection results in Table 3 are based on the
true attack threat score threshold in Fig. 10, which shows the cumulative distribution function of threat scores for benign and attack
provenance graphs. Like other provenance-based detection systems,
e.g., HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [14], the objective of our system Commander is not to remove all false alarms, but to prioritize investigation
of attack graphs based on their threat score. The value of the threat
score threshold can be configured depending on the human resources Fig. 10. CDF of threat score for false and true alerts.
of a security operation center has in practice. Fig. 10 shows that the true
attack in each dataset has the highest threat score. That is, when the
threshold is set with the value of the highest threat score, Commander
 We further compare the detection results w.r.t. precision, recall
has a false positive rate of 0 and a true positive rate of 1 in both
 and F1 score in Table 4, in which the detection results on the Oilrig
datasets. However, if the threshold is set, for instance, 50% lower than
 dataset and on the Sandworm dataset are merged for brevity. Table
the highest threat score, Commander still has a true positive rate of 1 4 shows that our system Commander significantly outperforms existing
in both datasets, but a false positive rate of 1.9% in the Oilrig dataset systems. Note that the superiority of Commander over existing systems
and a false positive rate of 3.4% in the Sandworm dataset. That is, the is proved not only by Table 3 and Table 4, but also by the succinct and
threat score assigned by Commander to the true attack is significantly complete attack graphs it produces, e.g., Fig. 7 and Fig. 12. Commander’s
higher than those assigned to most benign graphs in each dataset. ability to produce concise and informative attack graphs explaining
 Further, the detection result comparison between Cad and Comman- attack history of cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks is invaluable
der’s final stage in Table 3 shows that Commander outperforms Cad for security analysts in practice. Other systems lack this functionality.
by accurately detecting the true attacks in both datasets, thanks to We compare attack graphs produced by Commander and Cad further in
Commander’s more advanced tracing module than Cad’s. By investigating Section 8.4.
attack graphs output from Cad, e.g., Fig. 13, we find that these are
more abstract graphs, whose graph granularity is only comparable to 8.3. Response time
the initial high-level attack graphs produced at the end of Commander’s
preliminary detection stage. Consulting on the documentation, which Fig. 11 shows the cumulative distribution function of Commander’s
was provided by the vendor and includes a guideline for Cad’s logging response time on each dataset. Commander’s response time is measured
configuration and detection logic for various kinds of attacks, reveals per attack graph, i.e., the time it takes to output a single attack graph
that Cad does not collect system log events, but rather a subset of with calculated threat score. Intuitively, Commander has longer response
authentication & logon event types. This leads to limited visibility time than its four integrated detectors, as only after the preliminary
into intra-machine system activities, which we deem indispensable for detection stage has finished, i.e., all four integrated detectors have
accurate tracing and attack detection. Our engagement with the vendor finished, Commander’s next two stages start, i.e., whole network tracing
over weeks confirmed that Cad’s detection on Pass-the-Hash attacks has and threat score assignment. For each attack graph, the time spent on
known issues, contributing to Cad’s false negative on the Oilrig dataset. Commander’s stage two & three, vary between only 7 s and 32 s on the

 15
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 two sessions can only be found by a persistence detector. The cyber
 persistence detector in Commander’s stage one correctly identifies this
 as a WMI persistence instance [113]. Otherwise the backward tracing
 would lead to nowhere, but a overly premature termination of the
 whole network tracing and largely incomplete attack graph, like the
 one Hades would output in this case.
 Further, another logon session of user Carol (0 × 3c1ac442)
 is spotted during the forward tracing from the newly found session
 (0 × 3c128d94), as the session (0 × 3c1ac442) is a persistence
 execution logon session of another persistence instance Registry run
 keys [81]. That is, the attacker has executed two persistence techniques
 on the same logon session 0 × 3c128d94, so that every time the
 Fig. 11. CDF of response time of Commander. machine restarts, the attacker gets a call back from a System logon
 session, or every time the user Carol logs in, the attacker receives a call
 back from Carol’s logon session like 0 × 3c1ac442. On the System
Oilrig dataset, and between 11 s and 52 s on the Sandworm dataset, logon session (0 × 3e7), the attacker conducted credential access
indicating how much longer Commander’s response time is than its without performing privilege escalation first, and port forwarding &
integrated detectors. For more than 90% of attack graphs, Commander’s port opening through host-based firewall, since this logon session is
stage two & three takes less than 18 s in total per graph on the Oilrig always assigned with the highest privilege. On the user logon sesdataset, and less than 20 s in total per graph on the Sandworm dataset. sion 0 × 3c1ac442, the attacker executed several Active Directory
 However, the absolute response time to output an attack graph discovery techniques with the programs net, setspn and oradad.
ranges from 103 s to 128 s on the Oilrig dataset, and from 586 s to Note that chronologically speaking, instead of in the tracing order, this
627 s on the Sandworm dataset. This is due to a bottleneck resulted happened before the lateral movement to the OT Domain Controller
from Commander’s system design, i.e., Commander’s stage two only starts and the Engineering Workstation.
after all four preliminary detectors in its stage one have finished. The Next, backward tracing from the session 0 × 3c128d94 reveals
preliminary detection response time (marked with a dotted line pointed a logon session of user Alice (0 × 4500223c) on the Workstation_1
by a red arrow in Fig. 11) takes the largest of response times of from the IT domain. Further backward tracing from Alice’s session
the four preliminary detectors running in parallel. On both datasets, 0 × 4500223c discloses that this session is a persistence execution
the cyber persistence detector has the longest response time among logon session, and hence is linked to the corresponding persistence
the four detectors, reaching 96 s on the Oilrig dataset and 575 s on setup logon session, i.e., 0 × 3e7 on the Workstation_1. Forward
the Sandworm dataset. The response time of the cyber persistence tracing from the session 0 × 4500223c leads to another user logon
detector, as a preliminary detector, is a value accumulated from times session of Dave (0xe6362) on the Engineering Workstation in the
for processing all suspected persistence instances identified on each OT domain, thanks to the list of source & destination logon session
host. That is, this detector’s longer response time on the Sandworm pairs output from the port forwarding detector from Commander’s stage
dataset results from the fact that it has picked out noticeably more one. Without this list, the tracing would end prematurely at this step.
suspected persistence instances to process on this dataset, including Finally, forward tracing from Dave’s logon session 0xe6362 results in
false-positive ones. a session on the field controller Hitachi Energy RTU500 and several
 activities in it that can be mapped to ICS TTP alerts, e.g., modify
8.4. Reconstructed attack graphs parameters, further increasing the threat score of this attack graph.
 In comparison, attack graphs produced by our compared system Cad
 Whereas the reconstructed attack graph for the attack in the Oilrig are incomplete and much less informative, slowing down attack invesdataset (Fig. 7) is already interpreted in Section 6.2, we discuss in tigation by security analysts. For the attack scenario in the AVIATORthis section the true positive attack graph from the Sandworm dataset Oilrig dataset, Cad did not output an attack graph, as it has missed the
in Fig. 12. The tracing on this attack starts from an authentication attack. Fig. 13 shows the attack graph produced by Cad for the attack
anomaly mimicking the Golden-Ticket behavior in the OT domain. In scenario in the AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset. Comparing to the attack
Golden-Ticket attacks [112], attackers use stolen credentials of the graph produced by our system Commander in Fig. 12, Cad’s attack graph
krbtgt account from a domain controller for authentication, and can is much less valuable for security analysts in practice. First, it does not
impersonate any domain account, essentially having the ability to move present the complete list of machines and users that are involved in
laterally to any domain-joined machine. the attack. Second, due to Cad’s limited tracing ability, its attack graph
 After identifying the Gateway Server as the source host, from which reveals no malicious system activities conducted by the attacker. That
the attacker has used the stolen credentials, and the Engineering Work- is, when presented with such an attack graph, security analysts need to
station as the destination host to which the attacker has moved, Com- perform laborious, error-prone manual analysis to assess the attacker’s
mander performs forward tracing from the involved logon session under traversal inside the network for attack remediation and recovery.
user Dave (0 × 2b8d50717) on the Engineering Workstation, and
forward & backward tracing from the involved System logon session 9. Limitations & discussion
(0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server. The forward tracing from the session
0 × 2b8d50717 leads to no further machine or logon session, while Although Commander has successfully detected the true attacks in
the forward tracing from the session (0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server both datasets, the reconstructed attack graph from the Sandworm
exposes a user logon session (0 × 2b65c94e) belonging to the domain dataset is not entirely complete. In practice, a PIDS’s ability to reconstruct
administrator on the OT domain controller. concise and complete attack graphs is invaluable for security analysts, as
 As Commander also checks the list of persistence setup & execution detection systems cannot guarantee perfect accuracy. Further investigation
logon session pairs during the tracing, and correctly identified the ses- by security analysts is vitally important for further removing false
sion (0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server as a persistence execution logon positives and locating true attacks. Concise and complete attack graphs
session, the backward tracing from this session results in a logon session automatically generated from PIDS can substantially speed up the
under user Carol (0 × 3c128d94) on the Gateway Server, i.e., the investigation process, and therefore contribute to swift attack recovery
corresponding persistence setup logon session. The link between these & remediation.

 16
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 Fig. 12. An attack graph created by Commander on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended Sandworm attack scenario.

 to design a sound scheme for accurately associating initial accesses on
 different machines from the same attacker.
 Another limitation of Commander is its reliance on logs & log integrity. Like any other detection system that relies on logs, i.e., every
 system listed in Section 3, our system Commander would likely fail at
Fig. 13. An attack graph created by Cad on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended
 detecting the attacks, if attackers have managed to manipulate critical
Sandworm attack scenario.
 logs without leaving any trace, or there are no logs generated or left
 at all. This would be a very effective evasion technique for attackers
 to bypass our system Commander. However, as mentioned in Section 7,
 During its tracing on the true attack in the Sandworm dataset
 there are already efforts being put into preventing log manipulation.
(Fig. 9), Commander could not identify the attacker’s activities on the
 For instance, Windows introduced Protected Event Logging [96] to secure
Workstation_2, the Domain Controller and the Linux Server in the IT
 logs from unauthorized access. Nevertheless, we believe that more log
domain. The whole network backward tracing from the OT domain,
 protection techniques need to be proposed in future study in case
where the initial authentication anomaly was detected, could only
 attackers can bypass existing ones.
lead to the Workstation_1 in the IT domain. This is because, in the
 A further limitation of system log-based detection systems like
Sandworm emulation plan, the attacker has gained three initial accesses
 Commander is the demand for detailed system logs, which require more
(edges labeled as 1, 2 and 3, in Fig. 9) on different machines during
 computational resources to collect and process. On the one hand, this
the engagement, instead of an initial access on one machine. Since no presents a challenge for resource-constrained devices. On the other
system logs from the attacker’s machine are present, Commander’s logon hand, it may take longer to detect complex attacks that spread over
session-based tracing cannot causally link the three initial accesses many machines. Therefore, it is important for future study to investifrom the attacker’s machine. Note that Commander cannot detect initial gate techniques that can enhance logging efficiency. For instance, one
access, nor can any other PIDS. Rather, it adds network sockets with an may selectively, dynamically log system activities based on the system
external IP address in the reconstructed attack graphs as an annotation, environment, in order to reduce the amount of likely non-essential
suggesting where the initial access could come from. For the sake of system logs.
simplicity, we only show one such network socket in Fig. 7 and Fig. 12.
Commander does not perform backward tracing on an edge connecting 9.1. Generality of Commander
to a network socket, as, in Section 4, we show that network connection based-tracing would inevitably lead to the dependency explosion We developed Commander with considerations of its deployability
problem. in real world in mind, in order to avoid possible deployment-related
 Moreover, although Linux distributions also implement the concept restrictions in practice. First, Commander leverages system logs and
of logon sessions, popular Linux logging tools like Auditd [95] and authentication & logon logs collected by popular industry-standard
CamFlow [114] do not insert logon session ID into system log events, instrumentation-free logging frameworks. Second, Commander’s whole
nor do any other Linux logging tools we are aware of. That is, Comman- network tracing rests on a general concept called logon session-based
der cannot perform logon session-based tracing on Linux system logs execution partitioning and tracing, which is not tied to any specific enyet. We leave it to future work (1) to extend existing Linux logging vironment. Third, Commander’s detection rules are based on the MITRE
tools with means for embedding logon session ID into system logs, (2) ATT&CK Matrix [8], which is a widely recognized framework esteemed

 17
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

by organizations worldwide. Leading security vendors, therefore, not In future work, we plan to improve existing Linux auditing frameonly contribute to this framework but also utilize it as a reference works by including logon session ID into system logs emitted by them.
for the development of detection mechanisms. Fourth, Commander in- Moreover, we aim to create a reliable approach for associating initial
terfaces with Elasticsearch, a widely utilized tool for event searching accesses on different machines in the same network from the same
and threat analysis within organizations. Last, Commander is evaluated attacker.
on a typical organization network as specified in the MITRE emulation
plans. These characteristics should make Commander easily deployable CRediT authorship contribution statement
and adaptable in various environments.
 Qi Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Vi-
9.2. Integration of machine learning models into Commander sualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
 Data curation, Conceptualization. Kaibin Bao: Writing – review &
 Currently, Commander is a heuristic-based system. So are all inte- editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration. Veit Hagengrated detectors in Commander’s preliminary detection stage. Future meyer: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project
study can explore the possibilities of enhancing Commander’s robust- administration, Funding acquisition.
ness by incorporating machine learning-based detectors, in particular
graph neural network-based ones, in case APT actors find new evasion Declaration of competing interest
techniques or tactics. However, we believe that only when a machine
learning approach can accurately learn an attack technique’s semantics,
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finanit would truly outperform heuristic-based approaches. We refer readers
 cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
to [25] for a case study-based comparison between a heuristic-based
 influence the work reported in this paper.
approach and graph neural network-based approaches for detecting a
specific evasion tactic: persistence. It shows that state-of-the-art ma-
 Acknowledgment
chine learning-based systems [23,24] fail to learn persistence attacks’
semantics, and hence cannot outperform the heuristic-based approach.
 This work was supported by funding of the Helmholtz Association
 (HGF) through the Energy System Design (ESD) program.
9.3. Deploying Commander as a real-time detection system

 Our system Commander has been tested in an emulated environment, Data availability
but not yet deployed in a production system. There is a concern that
the detailed logs required by Commander would violate users’ privacy, Data will be made available on request.
especially because, by combining recorded system activities and logon
activities, Commander can reveal which employee has carried out what
 References
activities at what time. A proper log anonymization mechanism needs
to be designed in future work and incorporated into Commander.
 [1] CrowdStrike, Inc. CrowdStrike 2023 global threat report. 2023, URL https:
 Deploying Commander as a real-time detection system in a produc- //www.crowdstrike.com/global-threat-report/.
tion system requires the capability of real-time log ingestion, which [2] CrowdStrike, Inc. CrowdStrike 2023 threat hunting report. 2023, URL https:
can be easily realized, as Commander interfaces with Elasticsearch and //www.crowdstrike.com/resources/reports/threat-hunting-report/.
relies on Auditbeat [115] and Winlogbeat [116] to ship Linux and [3] Shastri V. Attackers set sights on active directory: Understanding your
 identity exposure. 2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/attackers-
Windows logs, respectively, to Elasticsearch. These log ingestion tools
 set-sights-on-active-directory-understanding-your-identity-exposure/. [Accessed:
provided by Elastic are designed to ship logs off of endpoints as soon as Dec. 2023].
possible. With real-time log ingestion, graphs created by Commander will [4] Shastri V. Endpoint and identity security: A critical combination to stop modern
be dynamically updated. A critical step of Commander’s graph creation attacks. 2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/unifying-endpoint-andor update is the query process for finding relevant events and filtering identity-security/. [Accessed: Dec. 2023].
 [5] Dragos. Credentials across IT and OT environments. 2024, URL https:
out irrelevant ones. Although Elasticsearch provides scalable and near
 //www.dragos.com/blog/minimizing-the-consequences-of-shared-credentialsreal-time search for log query, the cumulative computing resources across-it-and-ot-environments/. [Accessed: July 2024].
required cannot be underestimated. That is, operators need to strike [6] Falcon OverWatch Team. 8 LOLBins every threat hunter should know.
the right balance between the available computing resources and the 2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/8-lolbins-every-threat-huntergraph update frequency according to the level of real-time requirement, should-know/. [Accessed: May 2023].
 [7] Trellix. Trellix threat report 2023. 2023, URL https://www.trellix.com/
when deploying Commander.
 advanced-research-center/threat-reports/feb-2023/.
 [8] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE matrix. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
10. Conclusion & future work matrices/enterprise/. [Accessed: Jan. 2023].
 [9] Alahmadi BA, Axon L, Martinovic I. 99% false positives: A qualitative study of
 In this paper, we present Commander, a novel PIDS for detecting SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms. In: USeNIX security symposium.
 2022, p. 2783–800.
long-running APT campaigns with the so-called low-and-slow strategy
 [10] Hossain MN, Milajerdi SM, Wang J, Eshete B, Gjomemo R, Sekar R, et al.
in industrial-sector organizations. Commander’s modular design allows SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction from COTS audit data. In:
it to incorporate specialized detectors for evasion attack techniques, USeNIX security symposium. 2017, p. 487–504.
ensuring robust and accurate whole network tracing. We evaluate [11] Hassan WU, Mark L, Aguse N, Bates A, Moyer T. Towards scalable cluster
Commander on two extended MITRE emulation plans, featuring APT auditing through grammatical inference over provenance graphs. In: Network
 and distributed system security. NDSS, 2018, p. 1–15.
groups most known for their attacks against industrial-sector organiza- [12] Milajerdi SM, Gjomemo R, Eshete B, Sekar R, Venkatakrishnan VN. HOLMES:
tions in the past. Our evaluation results demonstrate that Commander Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows.
can accurately and efficiently detect cross-machine multi-phase APT In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2019, p. 1137–52.
attacks, and reconstruct concise and insightful attack graphs, crucial for [13] Hassan WU, Guo S, Li D, Chen Z, Jee K, Li Z, et al. NoDoze: Combatting threat
 alert fatigue with automated provenance triage. In: Network and distributed
understanding the intrusions and proper attack recovery & remediation.
 system security. NDSS, 2019, p. 1–15.
We believe that Commander’s ability to perform robust whole network [14] Hassan WU, Bates A, Marino D. Tactical provenance analysis for endpoint
tracing could make it a valuable asset for XDR (eXtended Detection and detection and response systems. In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy
Response) systems. (S&P). 2020, p. 1172–89.

 18
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 [15] Hossain MN, Sheikhi S, Sekar R. Combating dependence explosion in forensic [42] Security W. Cybersecurity in the AVEVA enterprise SCADA product – going
 analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics. In: IEEE symposium on deep. 2024, URL https://waterfall-security.com/ot-insights-center/ot-securitysecurity and privacy (S&P). 2020, p. 1139–55. standards/cybersecurity-in-the-aveva-enterprise-scada-product-going-deep-jake-
 [16] Hassan WU, Noureddine MA, Datta P, Bates A. OmegaLog: High-fidelity hawkes-episode-122/. [Accessed: July 2024].
 attack investigation via transparent multi-layer log analysis. In: Network and [43] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. Binary exploitation in industrial control systems:
 distributed system security. NDSS, 2020, p. 1–16. Past, present and future. IEEE Access 2022;10:48242–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.
 [17] Xiong C, Zhu T, Dong W, Ruan L, Yang R, Cheng Y, et al. Conan: A 1109/ACCESS.2022.3171922.
 practical real-time APT detection system with high accuracy and efficiency. [44] Nmap. 2024, https://nmap.org/. [Last accessed: May, 2024].
 IEEE Trans Dependable Secur Comput 2022;19(1):551–65. http://dx.doi.org/ [45] Microsoft. Setspn. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-
 10.1109/TDSC.2020.2971484. versions/windows/it-pro/windows-server-2012-r2-and-2012/cc731241(v=ws.
 [18] Irshad H, Ciocarlie G, Gehani A, Yegneswaran V, Lee KH, Patel J, et al. TRACE: 11). [Accessed: Jan. 2024].
 Enterprise-wide provenance tracking for real-time APT detection. IEEE Trans Inf [46] Ho G, Dhiman M, Akhawe D, Paxson V, Savage S, Voelker GM, et al. Hopper:
 Forensics Secur 2021;16:4363–76. Modeling and detecting lateral movement. In: USeNIX security symposium.
 [19] Han X, Pasqueir T, Bates A, Mickens J, Seltzer M. UNICORN: Runtime 2021, p. 3093–110.
 provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats. In: Network and [47] King IJ, Huang HH. Euler: Detecting network lateral movement via scalable
 distributed system security. NDSS, 2020, p. 1–18. temporal link prediction. In: Network and distributed system security. NDSS,
 [20] Zeng J, Wang X, Liu J, Chen Y, Liang Z, Chua T-S, et al. Shadewatcher: 2022, p. 1–16.
 Recommendation-guided cyber threat analysis using system audit records. In: [48] Husák M, Yang SJ, Khoury J, Klisura Ð, Bou-Harb E. Unraveling network-based
 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2022, p. 489–506. pivoting maneuvers: Empirical insights and challenges. In: Goel S, Nunes de
 [21] Alsaheel A, Nan Y, Ma S, Yu L, Walkup G, Celik ZB, et al. ATLAS: A Souza PR, editors. Digital forensics and cyber crime. Cham: Springer Nature
 sequence-based learning approach for attack investigation. In: USeNIX security Switzerland; 2024, p. 132–51.
 symposium. 2021, p. 3005–22. [49] Ho G, Sharma A, Javed M, Paxson V, Wagner D. Detecting credential
 [22] Dong F, Wang L, Nie X, Shao F, Wang H, Li D, et al. DISTDET: A Cost-Effective spearphishing in enterprise settings. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2017, p.
 distributed cyber threat detection system. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2023, 469–85.
 p. 6575–92. [50] Novo C, Morla R. Flow-based detection and proxy-based evasion of encrypted
 [23] Cheng Z, Lv Q, Liang J, Wang Y, Sun D, Pasquier T, et al. KAIROS: Practical malware C2 traffic. In: Proc. ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and
 intrusion detection and investigation using whole-system provenance. In: IEEE security. 2020, p. 83–91.
 symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2024, p. 9–28. [51] Alageel A, Maffeis S. Hawk-eye: holistic detection of APT command and control
 [24] Rehman M, Ahmadi H, Hassan W. FLASH: A comprehensive approach to domains. In: Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM symposium on applied
 intrusion detection via provenance graph representation learning. In: IEEE computing. SAC ’21, 2021, p. 1664–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3412841.
 symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2024, p. 142–61. 3442040.
 [25] Liu Q, Shoaib M, Rehman MU, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V, Hassan WU. Accurate [52] Ozery Y, Nadler A, Shabtai A. Information based heavy hitters for real-time
 and scalable detection and investigation of cyber persistence threats. 2024, DNS data exfiltration detection. In: Network and distributed system security.
 arXiv:2407.18832. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18832. NDSS, 2024, p. 1–15.
 [26] Liu Q, Bao K, Hassan WU, Hagenmeyer V. HADES: Detecting active directory [53] Oprea A, Li Z, Yen T-F, Chin SH, Alrwais S. Detection of early-stage enterprise
 attacks via whole network provenance analytics. 2024, arXiv:2407.18858. URL infection by mining large-scale log data. In: 2015 45th annual IEEE/iFIP
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18858. international conference on dependable systems and networks. 2015, p. 45–56.
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DSN.2015.14.
 [27] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. AVIATOR: A MITRE emulation plan-derived
 living dataset for Advanced Persistent Threat detection and investigation. In: [54] Wilkens F, Ortmann F, Haas S, Vallentin M, Fischer M. Multi-stage attack
 Proceedings of 2024 IEEE international conference on big data. 2024, p. detection via kill chain state machines. In: Proceedings of the 3rd workshop
 5592–601. on cyber-security arms race. CYSARM ’21, 2021, p. 13–24. http://dx.doi.org/
 10.1145/3474374.3486918.
 [28] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE ATT&CK. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.org.
 [55] Ah-Fat P, Huth M, Mead R, Burrell T, Neil J. Effective detection of credential
 [Accessed: Jan. 2023].
 thefts from windows memory: Learning access behaviours to local security
 [29] The MITRE Corporation. Persistence. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
 authority subsystem service. In: 23rd international symposium on research in
 tactics/TA0003/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 attacks, intrusions and defenses (RAID 2020). San Sebastian; 2020, p. 181–94.
 [30] The MITRE Corporation. T1563. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
 [56] Han W, Xue J, Wang Y, Zhang F, Gao X. APTMalInsight: Identify and
 techniques/T1563/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 cognize APT malware based on system call information and ontology
 [31] The MITRE Corporation. T1090.001. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
 knowledge framework. Inform Sci 2021;546:633–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.
 techniques/T1090/001/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 1016/j.ins.2020.08.095, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
 [32] Siemens. Digital protection relays and control - SIPROTEC 5. 2024, pii/S0020025520308628.
 URL https://www.siemens.com/global/en/products/energy/energy-automation-
 [57] Shenderovitz G, Nissim N. Bon-APT: Detection, attribution, and explainability
 and-smart-grid/protection-relays-and-control/siprotec-5.html. [Accessed: June
 of APT malware using temporal segmentation of API calls. Comput Secur
 2024].
 2024;142:103862. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103862, URL https://
 [33] Hitachi Energy. RTU500 series function and software. 2024, URL www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404824001639.
 https://www.hitachienergy.com/products-and-solutions/substation-automation- [58] Dong F, Li S, Jiang P, Li D, Wang H, Huang L, et al. Are we there yet?
 protection-and-control/products/remote-terminal-units/rtu500-series-function- An industrial viewpoint on provenance-based endpoint detection and response
 and-software. [Accessed: June 2024]. tools. In: ACM conference on computer and communications security. CCS,
 [34] The MITRE Corporation. ICS matrix. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/ 2023, p. 2396–410.
 matrices/ics/. [Accessed: June 2024]. [59] Xu Z, Wu Z, Li Z, Jee K, Rhee J, Xiao X, et al. High fidelity data reduction for
 [35] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE adversary emulation library. 2023, URL https: big data security dependency analyses. In: ACM conference on computer and
 //github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library. communications security. CCS, 2016, p. 504—-516.
 [Accessed: Jan. 2023]. [60] Tang Y, Li D, Li Z, Zhang M, Jee K, Xiao X, et al. Nodemerge: Template based
 [36] The MITRE Corporation. Sandworm emulation plan. 2023, URL efficient data reduction for big-data causality analysis. In: ACM conference on
 https://github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_ computer and communications security. CCS, 2018, p. 1324—-1337.
 library/tree/master/sandworm. [Accessed: Feb. 2023]. [61] Hossain MN, Wang J, Sekar R, Stoller SD. Dependence-Preserving data com-
 [37] The MITRE Corporation. Oilrig emulation plan. 2023, URL https: paction for scalable forensic analysis. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2018, p.
 //github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library/ 1723–40.
 tree/master/oilrig. [Accessed: Oct. 2023]. [62] Michael N, Mink J, Liu J, Gaur S, Hassan WU, Bates A. On the forensic validity
 [38] NIST. Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) security. 2024, URL https:// of approximated audit logs. In: Proceedings of the 36th annual computer
 nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-82r2.pdf. [Accessed: security applications conference. ACSAC ’20, 2020, p. 189–202. http://dx.doi.
 July 2024]. org/10.1145/3427228.3427272.
 [39] Mathezer S. Introduction to ICS security part 3. 2024, URL https://www.sans. [63] Fei P, Li Z, Wang Z, Yu X, Li D, Jee K. SEAL: Storage-efficient causality analysis
 org/blog/introduction-to-ics-security-part-3/. [Accessed: July 2024]. on enterprise logs with query-friendly compression. In: 30th USeNIX security
 [40] 6sense. Identity and access management. 2024, URL https://6sense.com/tech/ symposium (USeNIX security 21). USENIX Association; 2021, p. 2987–3004,
 identity-and-access-management. [Accessed: July 2024]. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/fei.
 [41] Krishnamoorthi S, Carleton J. Active directory holds the keys to your kingdom, [64] Ding H, Yan S, Zhai J, Ma S. ELISE: A storage efficient logging system powered
 but is it secure? 2020, URL https://www.frost.com/frost-perspectives/active- by redundancy reduction and representation learning. In: USeNIX security
 directory-holds-the-keys-to-your-kingdom-but-is-it-secure/. symposium. 2021, p. 3023–40.

 19
Q. Liu et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

 [65] Lee KH, Zhang X, Xu D. High accuracy attack provenance via binary-based [90] Elastic NV. Elasticsearch. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.co/. [Accessed: Sept.
 execution partition. In: Network and distributed system security. NDSS, 2013, 2023].
 p. 1–16. [91] Elastic NV. EQL search. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/
 [66] Ma S, Lee KH, Kim CH, Rhee J, Zhang X, Xu D. Accurate, low cost and elasticsearch/reference/current/eql.html. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
 instrumentation-free security audit logging for Windows. In: Annual computer [92] NetworkX developers. NetworkX. 2023, URL https://networkx.org/. [Accessed:
 security applications conference. ACSAC, 2015, p. 401–10. Sept. 2023].
 [67] Ma S, Zhang X, Xu D. ProTracer: Towards practical provenance tracing by [93] West Health Institute. PyVis. 2023, URL https://pyvis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
 alternating between logging and tainting. In: Network and distributed system [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
 security. NDSS, 2016, p. 1–15. [94] Russinovich M, Garnier T. System monitor. 2023, URL https://learn.microsoft.
 [68] Ma S, Zhai J, Wang F, Lee KH, Zhang X, Xu D. MPI: Multiple perspective attack com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
 investigation with semantic aware execution partitioning. In: USeNIX security [95] Grubb S. The Linux audit daemon. 2023, URL https://linux.die.net/man/8/
 symposium. 2017, p. 1111–28. auditd. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
 [69] Keromytis AD. DARPA transparent computing E3. 2023, URL https: [96] Wheeler S, Lombardi M. About logging windows. 2023, URL https:
 //github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md. //learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/
 [Accessed: Sept. 2023]. about/about_logging_windows?view=powershell-7.3. [Accessed: April 2023].
 [70] Manzoor E, Milajerdi SM, Akoglu L. Fast memory-efficient anomaly detection [97] Red Hat, Inc. Red hat security guide. 2023, URL https://access.redhat.com/
 in streaming heterogeneous graphs. KDD ’16, 2016, p. 1035–44. http://dx.doi. documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/security_guide/chaporg/10.1145/2939672.2939783. system_auditing. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
 [71] Torrey J. DARPA transparent computing. 2023, URL https://github.com/darpa- [98] van Opstal M, Arbaugh W. DARPA OpTC. 2023, URL https://github.com/
 i2o/Transparent-Computing. [Accessed: Sept. 2023]. FiveDirections/OpTC-data. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
 [72] Chen T, Dong C, Lv M, Song Q, Liu H, Zhu T, et al. APT-kgl: An intelligent [99] Hamilton BA. when the lights went out. 2024, URL https://www.boozallen.
 APT detection system based on threat knowledge and heterogeneous provenance com/content/dam/boozallen/documents/2016/09/ukraine-report-when-thegraph learning. IEEE Trans Dependable Secur Comput 2022;1–15. http://dx.doi. lights-went-out.pdf. [Accessed: June 2024].
 org/10.1109/TDSC.2022.3229472. [100] Cherepanov A. WIN32/indUStroyer: A new threat for industrial control systems.
 [73] Zeng J, Chua ZL, Chen Y, Ji K, Liang Z, Mao J. WATSON: Abstracting behaviors 2024, URL https://web-assets.esetstatic.com/wls/2017/06/Win32_Industroyer.
 from audit logs via aggregation of contextual semantics. In: Network and pdf. [Accessed: June 2024].
 distributed system security. NDSS, 2021, p. 1–18. [101] Slowik J. Anatomy of an attack: Detecting and defeating crashoverride. 2024,
 [74] Wang S, Wang Z, Zhou T, Sun H, Yin X, Han D, et al. Threatrace: Detecting URL https://www.dragos.com/wp-content/uploads/CRASHOVERRIDE2018.pdf.
 and tracing host-based threats in node level through provenance graph learning. [Accessed: June 2024].
 IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 2022;17:3972–87. [102] Mandiant. Sandworm disrupts power in Ukraine using a novel attack against
 [75] Fang P, Gao P, Liu C, Ayday E, Jee K, Wang T, et al. Back-Propagating system operational technology. 2024, URL https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/
 dependency impact for attack investigation. In: 31st USeNIX security symposium threat-intelligence/sandworm-disrupts-power-ukraine-operational-technology/.
 (USeNIX security 22). Boston, MA; 2022, p. 2461–78. [Accessed: June 2024].
 [76] Yang F, Xu J, Xiong C, Li Z, Zhang K. Prographer: An anomaly detection system [103] The MITRE Corporation. OilRig. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/groups/
 based on provenance graph embedding. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2023, G0049/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 p. 4355–72. [104] Mandiant. New targeted attack in the middle east by APT34. 2024, URL
 [77] Jia Z, Xiong Y, Nan Y, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Wen M. MAGIC: Detecting advanced https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/threat-intelligence/targeted-attack-inpersistent threats via masked graph representation learning. 2023, arXiv:2310. middle-east-by-apt34/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 09831. [105] Dragos Threat Intelligence. CHRYSENE threat group operations. 2024, URL
 [78] SigmaHQ. Sigma. 2023, URL https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma. [Accessed: https://www.dragos.com/threat/chrysene/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 Sept. 2023]. [106] Liu L, Engelen G, Lynar T, Essam D, Joosen W. Error prevalence in NIDS
 [79] Microsoft. LSA logon sessions. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/ datasets: A case study on CIC-IDS-2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS-2018. In: 2022 IEEE
 windows/win32/secauthn/lsa-logon-sessions. [Accessed: Feb. 2024]. conference on communications and network security. CNS, 2022, p. 254–62.
 [80] Microsoft. Security auditing. 2023, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en- http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CNS56114.2022.9947235.
 us/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/ [107] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. AVIATOR dataset. 2024, URL https://gitlab.kit.
 auditing/security-auditing-overview. [Accessed: May 2023]. edu/kit/iai/rsa/aviator. [Accessed: November 2024].
 [81] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1547.001. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre. [108] Elastic. Elastic detection rules. 2023, URL https://github.com/elastic/detectionorg/techniques/T1547/001/. [Accessed: May 2023]. rules. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
 [82] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1543.003. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre. [109] Google Security Operations. Chronicle detection rules. 2023, URL https://
 org/techniques/T1543/003/. [Accessed: Feb. 2023]. github.com/chronicle/detection-rules. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
 [83] Koecher I. Are disconnected RDP sessions ticking time bombs in your network?. [110] Mirolyubov E, Taggett M, Hinner F, Patel N. Magic quadrant for endpoint
 2024, URL https://www.eventsentry.com/blog/2022/04/are-disconnected-rdp- protection platforms. 2023, URL https://www.gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=1-
 sessions-ticking-time-bombs-in-your-network.html. [Accessed: June 2024]. 2FFCXFOM&ct=231025&st=sb.
 [84] Pamnani V. 4778(S): A session was reconnected to a Window Sta- [111] Mellen A. The forrester new wave: Extended detection and response (XDR)
 tion. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/ providers, Q4 2021. 2021, URL https://www.forrester.com/report/theit-pro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4778. [Accessed: forrester-new-wave-tm-extended-detection-and-response-xdr-providers-q4-
 June 2024]. 2021/RES176400.
 [85] Pamnani V. 4800(S): The workstation was locked.. 2024, URL https: [112] The MITRE Corporation. Golden ticket. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
 //learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows- techniques/T1558/001/. [Accessed: Jan. 2024].
 10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4800. [Accessed: June 2024]. [113] The MITRE Corporation. T1546.003. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
 [86] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1550.002. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre. techniques/T1546/003/. [Accessed: June 2024].
 org/techniques/T1550/002/. [Accessed: Dec. 2023]. [114] Pasquier T, Han X, Goldstein M, Moyer T, Eyers D, Seltzer M, et al. Prac-
 [87] Russinovich M. Psexec. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en- tical whole-system provenance capture. In: Symposium on cloud computing
 us/sysinternals/downloads/psexec. [Accessed: June 2024]. (SoCC’17). ACM; 2017.
 [88] The MITRE Corporation. T1136.001. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/ [115] Elastic NV. Lightweight shipper for audit data. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.
 techniques/T1136/001/. [Accessed: June 2024]. co/beats/auditbeat/. [Accessed: June 2023].
 [89] Segal E. Alert fatigue. 2023, URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/ [116] Elastic NV. Lightweight shipper for windows event logs. 2023, URL https:
 edwardsegal/2021/11/08/alert-fatigue-can-lead-to-missed-cyber-threats-and- //www.elastic.co/beats/winlogbeat/. [Accessed: June 2023].
 staff-retentionrecruitment-issues-study/?sh=4c96871035c9. [Accessed: Aug.
 2023].

 20