3948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 Contrastive Multi-Knowledge Graph Learning
 for Fake News Detection
 Bingbing Xie , Xiaoxiao Ma , Shan Xue , Jian Yang , Member, IEEE, Jia Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Hao Fan

 Abstract—The widespread dissemination of fake news on social the online intercommunication of people all over the globe. As is
media platforms has significantly disrupted people’s daily lives, well-known, advanced communication techniques undoubtedly
causing substantial inconvenience and loss. Although fake news bring people closer together but come with the exponential
detection has captivated great research effort, most of the existing
works either overlook the complementary ground knowledge, for- growth of fake news produced on social media platforms. The
mulated in individual knowledge graphs (KGs) or ignore multiple rapid spread of fake news not only has an undesirable impact
aspects of knowledge in different knowledge graphs. In this paper, on individuals, such as damage to reputation, influence on
we propose a novel contrastive learning framework for investigat- decision-making, and erosion of trust but also causes serious
ing the complementary knowledge in different knowledge graphs, consequences to society, like economic degradation, social diviwhich achieves superior fake news detection performance. We first
model three components within news articles (i.e., news content, en- sion, and even public panic [1], [2]. Meanwhile, it is extremely
tities, and topics) as a heterogeneous graph (HG). Subsequently, we challenging for individuals or organizations lacking prior knowlleverage the valuable factual evidence among real-world entities, edge to avoid being affected by fake news due to its complex
which is enclosed in two open-source knowledge graphs (Wikidata content, underscoring the urgency of fake news detection [3],
and DBpedia), and augment the heterogeneous graph into three [4], [5].
augmented graphs. We then fuse knowledge-enhanced high-level
news representations from each augmented graph and extract To effectively identify fake news, recent efforts could be
a unified news representation through our proposed contrastive divided into two categories, i.e., natural language processing
multi-knowledge graph learning framework, which is ultimately (NLP)-based methods and graph neural networks (GNNs)-based
utilized to identify fake news. We conduct extensive experiments methods. The former methods investigate fake news detecon four public fake news datasets and demonstrate the superiority
 tion as a text classification task, where NLP techniques (e.g.,
of our method over nine state-of-the-art baselines regarding five
widely-used evaluation metrics (i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, long short-term memory neural networks (LSTM), recurrent
F1-score, and ROC). neural networks (RNNs) [6], convolutional neural networks
 (CNNs) [7], etc.) are applied to detect fake news from semantic
 Index Terms—Fake news detection, anomaly detection,
knowledge graph, graph neural networks (GNNs), contrastive
 features of news articles. However, approaches in this line fail to
learning. explore the news structural features, such as the relations among
 entities, topics, and news. Therefore, the latter methods model
 structural and textual information of news articles as graphs
 I. INTRODUCTION and employ GNNs for fake news detection [8]. The overall
 HE popularity of social media, like Twitter, Instagram, framework of GNN-based approaches can be summarized as:
T Weibo, etc., has significantly stimulated and accelerated 1) First, the content and structure of news are extracted to construct informative graphs. 2) Second, the designed graph neural
 networks are used to generate efficient news representations.
 Received 14 April 2024; revised 28 March 2025; accepted 28 March 2025. 3) Eventually, the news is classified as fake or real based on
Date of publication 6 May 2025; date of current version 25 August 2025. This
work was supported in part by Chinese National Natural Science Foundation
 the representations. These works concentrate on modeling news
under Project 72474160 and Project 72374161, in part by Australian Research articles and designing effective graph neural networks but ignore
Council under Project DP230100899, and in part by Macquarie University Data exploring the rich ground-truth knowledge in various knowledge
Horizons Research Centre and Applied Artificial Intelligence Centre supported
this work. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Dusit Niyato. (Bingbing Xie
 graphs (KGs) for fake news detection.
and Xiaoxiao Ma contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: The factual knowledge in KGs, such as Wikidata [9], DBpe-
Jia Wu; Hao Fan.) dia [10], and YAGO [11], has been widely used in the industrial
 Bingbing Xie is with the School of Information Management, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the School of Computcommunity to determine investment opportunities, analyze the
ing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2113, Australia (e-mail: bingbing. quality of products, etc. [12] The affluent knowledge in KGs
xie@hdr.mq.edu.au, xbbice@outlook.com). can naturally serve as a factual basis for detecting fake news.
 Xiaoxiao Ma, Shan Xue, Jian Yang, and Jia Wu are with the School of
Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2113, Australia (e-mail:
 However, previous works rarely focus on combining KGs and
xiaoxiao.ma2@hdr.mq.edu.au; emma.xue@mq.edu.au; jian.yang@mq.edu.au; GNNs for fake news detection. Although CompareNet [13]
jia.wu@mq.edu.au). attempts to use external knowledge for a simple extension of
 Hao Fan is with the School of Information Management, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: hfan@whu.edu.cn).
 news embeddings, its straightforward approach cannot compre-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3567296 hensively explore KGs and leads to compromised performance.

 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3949

 data. Moreover, we conduct additional investigations to explore
 the impact of elements in the HG and KGs on our task. The main
 contributions of this research can be summarized as follows:
 r To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore
 multiple aspects of knowledge encapsulated in different
 KGs for fake news detection. Factual knowledge in different KGs provides complementary information about the
 ground truth and is capable of serving as the factual basis
 for fake news detection.
 r Our innovative Congrat framework introduces an adaptive
 capacity to digest ample textual and structural information
 from news articles. Simultaneously, it harnesses graph
 contrastive learning to effectively absorb complementary
Fig. 1. The Construction of HG. HG is constructed in light of entities and
 knowledge from two distinct KGs. Specifically, we inrelated topics extracted from news content. corporate complementary knowledge from two KGs to
 enhance our built HG through three different graph perspectives, as detailed in Fig. 2(
 1 ). Then, we employ graph
 Additionally, the complementary role among multiple KGs contrastive learning to comprehensively compare factual
has not been probed. Fake news on social media frequently information across these three graph perspectives. This
spans various fields, making it challenging to rely solely on allows us to investigate the impact of integrating knowla single KG for comprehensive factual evidence in fake news edge from multiple KGs on fake news detection. Through
detection. To be concrete, different KGs have their knowledge extensive experiments, we shed light on the remarkable
tendencies, which may limit their ability to address the diverse role of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs in
range of fake news circulating online. For example, a certain improving the performance of fake news detection.
KG is abundant in medical knowledge, while another excels in r We conduct comprehensive experiments1 on four realfinancial knowledge [14], [15]. A single KG is insufficient for world datasets to verify the effectiveness of our proposed
detecting fake news, as social media news often spans multiple Congrat. The results demonstrate its superior performance
domains. Thus, complementary knowledge from different KGs compared with nine cutting-edge baselines on the evaloffers more comprehensive factual information for detecting uation metrics of accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score,
fake news. and ROC. Simultaneously, the ablation study confirms the
 Existing studies (e.g., CompareNet [13]) combining a single role of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs for
KG with GNNs for fake news detection overlook the value enhancing fake news detection performance.
of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs, limiting
performance improvements. Therefore, we propose a novel II. RELATED WORK
Contrastive Multi-Knowledge Graph Learning for Fake News In this section, we summarize previous research in the fol-
Detection (Congrat), to provide fine-grained and multi-faceted lowing three fields: knowledge graph embedding, graph neural
ground-truth knowledge for enhancing detection performance, networks, and fake news detection.
where multi-knowledge is the complementary factual evidence
from different KGs. To be specific, we first model news content A. Knowledge Graph Embedding
and structure as a heterogeneous graph (HG) with three types
of nodes (i.e., news, topics, and entities), as shown in Fig. 1. Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) target mapping triplets
Our approach thoroughly investigates the relationships among of KGs into a low-dimensional, dense, and interpretable space,
these nodes to obtain high-level news representations. To capture thereby preserving as much knowledge as possible for downfactual evidence for fake news detection, we then utilize the enti- stream tasks like link prediction [16], anomaly detection [17],
ties in two KGs to incorporate various factual information from [18], [19], fake news detection [20], [21], [22], etc. KGE apdifferent KGs into multi-view heterogeneous graphs and thereby proaches can be categorized into three distinct groups: transenhance the integral graph content through graph augmenta- lation, semantic matching, and neural network models. The
tions. Then, we employ graph contrastive learning to assimilate translation models attempted to interpret the relationships as
the information of the constructed HG and two ground-truth a translational distance between head and tail entities, where
KGs for learning news embeddings. The graph contrastive learn- the scoring function evaluates triplet plausibility by inversely
ing module possesses the capability to thoroughly absorb the correlating it with the magnitude of this distance [23], [24], [25].
complementary knowledge from multiple KGs, thereby offering The semantic matching models, e.g., RESCAL [26], QuatE [27],
substantial tangible evidence to detect fake news. After the and ComplEx [28], aimed to qualify the semantic compatibility
learning process, we acquire valuable representations of news between entities and relations by employing scoring functions,
articles that encapsulate abundant information regarding both which compute the similarity of their latent representations
news content and KGs. These representations are subsequently
utilized to accurately classify fake news from extensive news 1 https://github.com/KG4FD/Congrat
3950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 2. The Framework of Congrat. Firstly, a heterogeneous graph HG with three types of nodes (i.e. news, entities, and topics) is constructed according to news
content. Then, two open-source knowledge graphs are leveraged to add ground-truth knowledge into the HG for generating three augmented graph views (I, II,
III), as shown in 2 . Next, three views are input to attention-based GNNs for encoding news embeddings, detailed in 2. Afterward, the generated hj , hi and hk
are used for learning the contrastive loss. Finally, we concatenate news embeddings by three views to predict news with label y  .

through dot product or tensor factorizations. The neural network NLP-based approaches leverage traditional machine learning
models aspired to compute plausibility scores by jointly process- or deep learning techniques to analyze linguistic patterns and
ing the head entities, relations, and tail entities through a neural semantic cues from news articles’ textual content, probably
architecture, which learns non-linear interactions to evaluate the augmented by external knowledge bases, e.g., decision trees,
semantic validity of KG triplets [29], [30], [31], [32]. support vector machines (SVM), RNNs, bidirectional LSTMs,
 CNNs, and other techniques [21], [48], [49], [50], [51]. Although
 these methods have a strong impression of enhancing detection
B. Graph Neural Networks performance, they do suffer from the drawback of neglecting
 In recent years, graph neural networks have emerged as news structures (e.g., the relations between news and topics [52],
a dominant paradigm for modeling topologically structured [53]). Such a limitation may constrain further advancements
data, achieving exceptional performance by iteratively aggre- in detecting fake news. However, incorporating the structural
gating neighborhood information to capture structural and rela- elements of news articles into the detection workflow could
tional dependencies [33], [34], [35]. GNNs are compatible with be vital for achieving even higher levels of effectiveness in
data across numerous domains, which can be roughly catego- identifying fake news.
rized into graph convolutional networks, graph autoencoders, Therefore, graph-based approaches are introduced to consider
graph attention networks, graph generative networks, and graph the spatial structures of news articles in fake news detection. The
spatial-temporal networks [36], [37], [38]. To date, a large num- methods of this line can be classified into social context-based
ber of scholars and organizations have attempted to use GNNs and content-based approaches. The former aimed to represent
for various tasks (e.g., clustering [39], anomaly detection [40], the available auxiliary information on social networks (e.g., user
multi-task learning [41], fake news detection [42], etc.), which comments, user profiles, user behaviors, etc. [54], [55], [56],
achieved commendable results [43], [44]. In addition, the recent [57]) as graphs to learn news embeddings for classifying whether
advent of graph contrastive learning (GCL) has significantly the news is fake. However, accessing social media user inforadvanced the capabilities of GNNs. By extending the idea of mation and profiles is usually challenging due to privacy concontrastive learning, originally prevalent in visual representa- cerns. In this research, we focus on content-based approaches,
tion tasks, to graph neural networks, GCL enables more gen- which targeted leveraging textual and structural features of news
eralizable, transferrable, and robust representation learning on content (e.g., topics, entities, etc. [13]) to construct graphs for
graph structure data [45], [46], [47]. However, as an emerging training GNNs to detect fake news. For example, Yao et al. [8]
methodology, GCL remains underexplored in diverse applica- introduced TextGCN, a graph convolutional network that contion contexts, particularly in the realm of fake news detection. structs a co-occurrence graph from textual features (e.g., worddocument relationships) for text classification like fake news
 detection. Afterward, Karnyoto et al. [58] adapted TextGCN for
C. Fake News Detection fake news detection by integrating text augmentation, enhancing
 Recently, fake news detection techniques can be broadly its robustness to linguistic variations in news content. In addition,
divided into NLP-based and graph-based methods. HGAT and CompareNet, proposed by Hu et al. [13], [53], trained
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3951

GNNs on complex heterogeneous graphs to enhance detection overview of Congrat is shown in Fig. 2, which comprises four
capabilities, with CompareNet specifically incorporating KGs modules, i.e., data modeling, knowledge preserving news emfor the task. However, CompareNet simply concatenated news bedding, multi-source knowledge enhancement via contrastive
embeddings and KG embeddings, which resulted in the un- learning, and fake news detector. Initially, we construct a hetderutilization of the valuable information present in the KG erogeneous graph HG for news articles and then use graph
knowledge. augmentation techniques, as shown in Fig. 2( 1 ) to enhance the
 Up to now, none of the former studies have integrated graphs factual information in the HG with two KGs, Wikidata5M [59]
and KGs into the learning process of GCL and investigated the and DBpedia [10]. Next, we input the knowledge-augmented
impact of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs on graphs into the three designed graph attention networks (GAT)
fake news detection. Therefore, our work aims to bridge these encoders to learn aggregated news embeddings by multi-edges in
research gaps by exploring news articles and diverse KGs with the HG, detailed in Fig. 2(
 2 ). Afterward, we employ contrastive
the specially designed Congrat framework. learning to compute the pairwise loss of the three knowledgeaugmented graphs and subsequently use cross-entropy to cal-
 III. PRELIMINARIES culate the overall classification loss, as shown in Fig. 2( 3 ).
 In this manner, Congrat can detect fake news with superior
A. Definition performance.
 1) Definition 1: (Heterogeneous Graph): A heterogeneous
graph is defined as HG = {N , E, A, V, R}, where N = B. Data Modelling
{ni }mi=1 denotes the set of nodes, xij ∈ E depicts an edge 1) Heterogeneous Graph Contruction: Social media platbetween node ni and node nj , A = {ai }m i=1 is the set of node forms categorize the vast volume of published news articles
attribute vectors, V and R represent the set of node types and based on their respective topics for efficient management.
edge types. A key condition for a heterogeneous graph is that Hence, topics play a pivotal role as one of the primary properties
|V| + |R| > 2, ensuring diversity in node and edge types. defining real-world news. Furthermore, it is widely recognized
 2) Definition 2: (Knowledge Graph): A knowledge graph that news articles typically encompass various entities that in-
KG contains numerous triplets, each of which can be uniformly corporate compelling and trending information to captivate the
depicted as KG = {< s, r, t >}, where s, t, and r are head readers’ interests. Thus, entities within news articles represent
entities, tail entities, and their relations, respectively. another essential property that contributes to the definition and
 understanding of news. Since topics and entities play signifi-
B. Problem Statement cant roles in expressing the content of news articles, these two
 In this article, we define fake news as news articles on tra- properties also offer valuable insights for fake news detection.
ditional and social media that contain factual inaccuracies or In this research, we build a HG with three types of nodes
distortions. Therefore, graph-based fake news detection aims to (i.e., news, entities, and topics) according to previous work [53],
detect anomalous/untrustworthy news with maximum accuracy where V = {n, t, e} and R = {xn,t , xn,e , xe,e }. n, t and e
performance. Given a heterogeneous graph HG, each node ni denote news nodes, topic nodes, and entity nodes in the HG
is a piece of news with an assigned label yi ∈ {0, 1}, where 1 respectively. xn,t , xn,e and xe,e represent news-topic edges,
represents that the news is fake. When detecting, only a subset of news-entity edges, and entity-entity edges, detailed in Fig. 1.
node labels is known. After the detection procedure, the unseen We propose a series of steps designed to effectively construct
fake news can be detected. In this paper, we attempt to use a the heterogeneous graph including node-level extraction, multi-
HG defined in Section III-A1 and multiple KGs depicted in edge connection, and feature initialization.
Section III-A2 to detect fake news with high accuracy. — Node-Level Extraction: In our built HG, each news article
 is created as a news node with labels. For entity nodes, we
 leverage TAGME,2 the entity link tool, to obtain various
 IV. METHODOLOGY
 entities in news content. For topic nodes, we utilize the
 In this part, we introduce our proposed Contrastive Multi- Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to extract the
Knowledge Graph Learning for Fake News Detection (Con- topics of each news article. We set a threshold α = 50 as
grat). Section IV-A summarizes the general procedure of how the total number of topics for the LDA model and select
our proposed model, Congrat, works superiorly. Sections IV-B the top K relevant topics (detailed in Section V-F) for each
to IV-E delve into the intricate details of the constituent elements news article.
within Congrat, specifically tailored to achieve outstanding fake — Multi-Edge Connection: After creating nodes for HG, the
news detection. Section IV-F provides a detailed explanation of next step involves establishing connections for each pair
the algorithm complexity associated with Congrat. of nodes. We build three types of edges in the HG. The
 news-topic edge xn,t is connected when the news article is
A. The Overview of Framework related to the topic. Each news node has K news-topic
 edges, detailed in Section V-F. The news-entity edge
 To enhance fake news detection, we incorporate multiple
ingredients into Congrat, i.e., three types of nodes in our built
HG, and the complementary knowledge from two KGs. The 2 https://sobigdata.d4science.org/group/tagme/
3952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 xn,e is constructed when the news article contains the and edge rewiring to augment our built HG. This involves
 entity, while each news node potentially has numerous utilizing entities from two KGs to link news nodes and HG
 news-entity edges. The entity-entity xe,e is linked when entity nodes, thereby altering the internal structure of the HG
 the cosine similarity score surpasses a threshold β = 0.5. for augmentation purposes. Specifically, we incorporate factual
 — Feature Initialization: We employ natural language tech- background knowledge to expand the HG into three distinct
 niques (i.e., Doc2vec, term frequency-inverse document augmentation views, detailed in Fig. 2( 1 . The augmentation
 frequency (TF-IDF), and one-hot encoding) to obtain ini- operations can be summarized: 1) View I is enhanced by contial feature vectors for nodes in the HG. For news nodes, necting the entities from KGI (i.e., Wikidata) with news nodes
 TF-IDF and Doc2vec are leveraged to encode the content and entity nodes in the HG, i.e., xn,kgi , and xe,kgi . 2) View II
 of each news article. In addition, TF-IDF and one-hot are serves as the anchor of subsequent contrastive learning, which
 applied to initialize the feature vectors for entity nodes requires background knowledge from both KGs. Hence, it is
 and topic nodes. These methods are capable of capturing augmented by linking the entities from two KGs with news and
 abundant features encapsulated in three types of HG nodes. entities nodes in the built HG, i.e., xn,kgi , xe,kgi , xn,kgii and
 2) Knowledge Graph Embeddings: A knowledge graph KG xe,kgii . 3) View III, similarly, is strengthened by building edges
encompasses valuable real-world knowledge that can provide for the KGII (i.e., DBpedia) entities, news and entity nodes in
factual information for fake news detection. Such knowledge is the modeled heterogeneous graph, i.e., xn,kgii and xe,kgii .
encapsulated in KG triplets consisting of head entities, relations,
and tail entities. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the knowl- C. Knowledge Preserving News Embedding
edge within a single KG might not cover all aspects of the world.
 After the acquisition of a content-based heterogeneous graph
Therefore, incorporating complementary knowledge from muland two open-source knowledge graphs, features of the HG and
tiple KGs can provide more comprehensive and sufficient factual
 KGs need to be encoded to acquire valuable news representations
evidence for our task.
 for promoting further fake news detection. In our proposed
 In this study, we employ HG entities to match relevant
 framework, we leverage the commonly used GAT to generate
knowledge entities from two open-source KGs, ensuring that
 high-level news embeddings for the aforementioned augmented
knowledge entities do not overlap with news nodes in HG.
 graph views. Specifically, we employ multiple attention schemes
Notably, we use Wikidata and DBpedia as factual knowledge
 to learn news embeddings by aggregating neighboring informafor three reasons: 1) Both are founded on Wikipedia, a trusted
 tion through the four-type relations surrounding news nodes in
and authoritative repository of factual knowledge. 2) Both are
 the three augmented graphs (i.e., xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii ),
RDF-based KGs that can be readily queried with SPARQL [60].
 detailed in Fig. 2( 2 ). After getting news representations of
3) Both provide ample factual evidence to detect fake news,
 different graph views, the contrastive module is introduced to
covering a broad spectrum of knowledge. 4) DBpedia extracts
 distinguish positive samples from negative samples in highstructured data from Wikipedia’s infoboxes, whereas Wikidata
 dimensional spaces for training GNNs to generate the ultimate
offers secondary or tertiary data sourced from Wikipedia. Therenews embeddings for deep fake news detection.
fore, the knowledge within the two KGs strengthens each other
 1) Node-Level Representation Generation: There are three
in a mutually beneficial manner. After obtaining multiple KG
 kinds of nodes in our built HG (i.e., news, entities, and topics).
knowledge entities, we expect to achieve excellent detection
 Congrat develops the graph attention encoder, as shown in
performance by exploring knowledge entity features. Various
 Fig. 2(2 ), which targets generating high-level embeddings for
approaches that represent knowledge features in previous works
 nodes according to their relations and factual knowledge. For
(e.g., QuatE [27], TransE [23], etc.) have been proven effecthree types of nodes in HG, the attention mechanism measures
tive in preserving valuable KG information while generating
 the impact of their neighbors based on the surrounding relations
low-dimensional representations of knowledge entities, which
 when projecting them into a latent space.
can be efficiently utilized for downstream tasks. Our proposed
 — Graph View I Embedding Generation: Particularly, for
framework, Congrat, can seamlessly integrate and collaborate
 nodes in graphs, Congrat introduces distinct attention laywith different KG embedding methods. Owing to the simplicity
 ers tailored to news, entities, and topics for aggregating
of TransE, we utilize the same embedding criterion and learn
 neighboring information of nodes.
KG entity representations as the factual basis.
 a) Topic node embeddings: Our approach leverages an attenhs + h r ≈ ht (1) tion neural network layer to generate their embeddings because
 the type of topic nodes’ neighbors is only one (i.e., news nodes).
where s is the head entity, t represents the tail entity, and r
 Therefore, the attention layer follows news-topic relation xn,t
denotes the relation between them. After training, each KG entity
 to propagate node information via:
will be allocated a vector hkg which is generated by moving s
 
and the t closer to each other along the direction of r. we leverage h t,in,t = ai,in,t ht,in,t +
 x x x x x
 ai,jn,t ht,jn,t , (2)
hkg of two KGs as factual evidence to implement heterogeneous j∈S xn,t (i)
graph augmentation. x
 3) Graph Augmentation: The techniques of graph augmen- where h t,in,t is the learned embedding of topic node i according
 x x
tation can be generally split into feature-level, node-level, edge- to news-topic relation xn,t . ht,in,t and ht,jn,t represent the input
level, and subgraph-level, graph-level approaches. In this study, feature vectors of topic i and its neighboring news node j
we explore novel methods within the scope of node interpolation respectively. S xn,t (i) denotes a set of surrounding news nodes
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3953

 x x
of topic i. ai,in,t and ai,jn,t depict the self-attention parameter of topics, entities, and two KGs. To generate unified news repretopic i and the attention coefficient between topic i and news sentations, we aggregate the news embeddings learned from the
node j respectively, which can be calculated as follows: augmented graph views by the following equation:
   
 h i = Aggr(h n,i ),
 τ
 exp bτ σ[hτnode,i  hτnode,j ] (6)
 aτi,j =     , (3)
 τ σ[hτ where Aggr(·) denotes an aggregation function. To avoid infork∈S τ (i)∪{i} exp b node,i  hnode,k ]
 τ
 mation loss, we utilize the “sum” operation to accumulate the
where σ(·) represents an activation function like Tanh, obtained news representations h τn,i as h i . For the three different
LeakyReLU, etc. hτnode,i and hτnode,j express the feature rep- graph views, τ will be distinguishable but belong to subsets of
resentations of node i and its adjacent node j according to a {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii }.
specific relation τ . b denotes trainable variables and  represents
the “concatenate” operation for multiple matrices. D. Multi-Source Knowledge Enhancement Via Contrastive
 b) Entity node embeddings: Congrat designs three attention Learning
layers to digest the neighboring information for entity nodes In this section, we introduce a graph contrastive loss to
according to three relations. According to a specific relation τ , improve the performance of fake news detection. Generally,
the attention layer learns entity embeddings by: the news embeddings generated by GAT encoders only explore
 
 h e,i = aτi,i hτe,i + the internal information propagation in each graph view but
 τ
 aτi,j hτe,j ; τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgi },
 j∈S τ (i)
 fail to investigate the effect of complementary knowledge from
 (4) multiple KGs on our task. To achieve this target, graph conwhere h τe,i represents the output representation of entity i ac- trastive learning is a potent approach that can mine external
cording to a specific relation τ , S τ (i) is a set of surrounding complementary information between varying augmented graph
nodes of entity i according to the relation τ . aτi,i and aτi,j denote views. Therefore, we design a contrastive module to further
the self-attention of entity i and the attention between i and its explore how complementary knowledge from KGs influences
adjacent nodes according to τ , which are quantized in the same fake news detection.
way as (5). Specifically, we generate three graph views to augment facc) News node embeddings: Congrat leverages three attention tual information for the original HG by capturing ground-truth
layers to generate news node embeddings according to the knowledge from two open-source KGs. Then, we acquire news
neighboring relations (i.e., news-topic, news-entity, news-kgi), representations of each graph view through our devised GAT
and the method to obtain representations is measured as: encoders. Next, we employ contrastive learning to enforce the
    embeddings of news nodes representing the same news article in
 exp bτ σ[hτn,i  hτn,i ] the three graph views to agree with each other and be different
 h n,i = 
 τ
    hτn,i from other news nodes. For any news node i, its embedding
 exp bτ σ[hτ  hτ ]
 k∈S τ (i)∪{i} n,i n,k in view II, hi is treated as the anchor. The two embeddings of
    this news node i generated in the other graph views, hj and
  exp bτ σ[hτn,i  hτn,j ] hk are treated as positive samples. The embeddings hq of the
 +     hτn,j ,
  news nodes other than i in the three graph views are regarded as
 k∈S τ (i)∪{i} exp b σ[hn,i  hn,k ]
 τ τ τ
 j∈S τ (i)
 negative samples. Formally, we compute the contrastive loss of
 (5) positive pairs by:
where h τn,i is the learned representations of news nodes, S τ (i)  exp(θ(hi , hj )/Ω) + exp(θ(hi , hk )/Ω)
is a set of neighboring nodes of news node i under a specific Lcontras = − log     ,
 exp(θ h , h  /Ω)
 i q
relation τ . Notably, τ ∈ {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi }. i∈Φ q∈Δ(i)
 (7)
 — Graph View II Embedding Generation: Congrat generates
 where θ is the cosine function to compute the similarity of two
 the representations of topic nodes, and entity nodes acnodes. Ω denotes a temperature parameter. Φ = {1, 2, . . . , 3m}
 cording to (2) and (4), whereas the entity relations will
 represents all news nodes generated by three graph views, each
 be τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgi , xe,kgii }. The news embeddings
 of which is m. Δ(i) = Φ \ i denotes all negative samples.
 are generated by (5) but the relation set will be τ ∈
 Since View I and View III are employed to commence con-
 {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii }.
 trastive learning with View II, we have two positive samples and
 — Graph View III Embedding Generation: Our model ob-
 3m − 3 negative samples for each news node. In addition, we
 tains topic embeddings and entity embeddings through
 can comprehensively investigate the impact of complementary
 (2) and (4), while the relation set of entity nodes will
 knowledge from two KGs on the final detection performance by
 be τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgii }. Similarly, the news represencomparing three graph views.
 tations are computed by (5) and the relations will be
 τ ∈ {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgii }.
 E. Fake News Detector
 2) News Representation Aggregation: For the three augmented graph views, Congrat learns news embeddings through The three graph attention encoders generate high-quality news
prior steps that comprise affluent and valuable information from embeddings by affecting each other via contrastive learning. For
3954 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

fake news detection, Congrat concatenates each news represen-
 Algorithm 1: Congrat Framework.
tation learned by three graph views as the final news embeddings
hi,f inal and feeds it to a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for
learning a deep fake news detector. The detector predicts the
label of news i via:

 yi = Γ(ρ(hi,f inal ; π)), (8)

where ρ(·) denotes an activation function that outputs a twodimensional vector with probabilities of news i’s label. Γ(·)
selects the label with the maximum probability to assign to
news i. π depicts trainable variables in MLP layers. The fake
news classification loss function is defined as cross-entropy.
Therefore, the overall loss of Congrat is measured as follows:

 Loverall = λLcontras + CrossEntropy(yi , yi ), (9)

where yi is the actual label of news i and yi is the predicted
label. λ is the hyperparameter to control the contribution of the
contrastive module. By minimizing the overall loss Loverall ,
Congrat will predict news labels with high accuracy.
 Notably, Congrat outputs the representations of all news
nodes in HG and trains the detector by labels ytrain of Ntrain .
When new data is input, our model extracts relevant entities
and topics, integrating them into the existing graph for learning.
Since the model’s weights are not dependent on the size of HG,
we incrementally train the model with incoming data from the
previous checkpoints, like training settings of large language
models, demonstrating the real-world usability and adaptability
of our model. TABLE I
 STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

F. Algorithm Complexity
 Algorithm 1 shows the details of Congrat. Apart from applying TransE for extracting knowledge entities’ features, the
multiple GAT layers and contrastive learning module introduce the most computational costs to Congrat. Specifically, the
complexity of each GAT layer employed for generating news
 r RQ5: How does the number of topics for each news article
embeddings is approximately O(mDD + |E|D ), where m is
the total number of nodes in our constructed HG, |E| is the total influence the detection performance?
 r RQ6: How computationally efficient is Congrat compared
number of edges, |D| is the input dimension and D is the embedding dimension. The contrastive learning algorithm complexity with baselines?
is O(2m2 D ) and the overall computational cost of Congrat
will be O(mDD + |E|D + 2m2 D ) ≈ O(|E|D + m2 D ) ≈ A. Experimental Setup
O(m2 D ) since D < m and |E| ≤ m2 .
 1) Datasets: To verify the performance of our proposed
 model, we utilize four widely used datasets to conduct ex-
 V. EXPERIMENTS periments consisting of COVID-19, FakeNewsNet, PAN2020,
 In this section, we perform extensive experiments to address and Liar. COVID-19 [61] contains news articles related to the
the following research questions: 2019 coronavirus pandemic collected from diverse social mer RQ1: How does the performance of Congrat compare to dia platforms, e.g., Twitter, Facebook, etc. FakeNewsNet [62]
 that of other state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines for fake comprises news content and associated posts, encompassing
 news detection? political news and entertainment news that have been factr RQ2: How does complementary knowledge involved in checked by reputable sources such as Politifact and Gossipcop.
 KGs help improve performance? PAN2020 [63] is a fake news dataset labeled by authentic
 r RQ3: How does the contrastive learning (CL) module platforms such as PolitiFact or Snopes. Liar [64] is a fake
 benefit overall achievement? news dataset that collects concise statements with labels from
 r RQ4: How does Congrat perform when using different PolitFact. The statistical information of the datasets we used in
 hyperparameters? this research is shown in Table I.
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3955

 TABLE II alignment of news content with KG entities, which is crucial
 COMPARISON OF CONGRAT AND BASELINES
 for modeling complex entity-news dependencies. In contrast,
 semi-supervised approaches risk introducing noise or mislinked
 entities, compromising detection robustness. Furthermore, our
 contrastive learning framework relies on label-guided subgraph
 comparisons to distinguish fake/real news, requiring reliable
 supervision to avoid adversarial confusion. For fairness, we
 exclude comparisons with semi-supervised learning methods in
 our experiments.
 3) Experimental Settings and Implementation: Our proposed Congrat framework employs a layered structure consisting of two sets of GAT layers aiming to acquire news
 high-quality news embeddings for different augmented graph
 2) Baselines: We conduct comparative experiments in com- views according to distinct types of relations accompanying
parison to nine SOTA baseline methods to demonstrate the news nodes, topic nodes, and entity nodes of the HG. eLU and
superiority of our proposed Congrat. These baselines can be LeakyReLU are chosen as the activation functions for graph
divided into text-based approaches, graph-based approaches, attention networks and contrastive learning. Meanwhile, Adam
and KG-based approaches, and their detailed information is is used as the optimizer with the learning rate, lr = 0.001, and
discussed as follows: weight decay, wc = 5e − 4 when backpropagating messages
 1) Text-based approaches and minimizing overall loss. We split each dataset into 80%,
 r BiLSTM [65]: The model utilizes bi-directional neural 10%, and 10% as a training set, a test set, and a validation
 networks to represent the textual content of news and then set. The maximum of the training epoch is set as 300 with an
 detects fake news via obtained news representations. early stop when Loverall converges. Unless explicitly specified,
 r RNN [6]: The method identifies fake news from the real the parameter settings for all baselines are identical to those
 by employing recurrent neural networks to embed news employed in our model. We use accuracy, precision, recall,
 articles. F1-score, and ROC as evaluation metrics for experimental
 r TextCNN [66]: The approach embeds news content by ap- results and set the same hyper-parameters of metrics for all
 plying a 1D-convolutional network for fake news detection. approaches. All experiments are carried out on the Linux server
 r Electra [67]: The technique employs a large language with 60G RAM and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU.
 model, ELECTRA, to represent news articles for detecting
 fake news.
 2) Graph-based approaches B. Model Comparison (RQ1)
 r TextGCN [8]: The model constructs a simple graph for Overall Performance: We compare our model with nine SOTA
 news textual and semantic content and then employs graph baselines to detect fake news on four datasets. From the expericonvolutional neural networks (GCNs) to classify fake mental results in Table III and Fig. 3, we make observations as
 news. follows:
 r AugTextGCN [58]: The approach uses text augmentation r In terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, Contechniques for news data and detects fake news by training grat demonstrates its superiority over the majority of base-
 GCN models. lines on COVID-19, FakeNewsNet, and PAN2020 (except
 r HGAT [53]: The method models short texts as a hetero- for precision on COVID-19). On Liar, although BiLSTM
 geneous graph and then utilizes their designed GCNs to and TextCNN achieve remarkable accuracy and precision,
 classify these short texts. Congrat outperforms the baseline models in overall perfor-
 3) KG-based approaches mance.
 r KGinformedFD [21]: The approach applies language mod- r Regarding the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
 els to embed news articles and simply combines them with curve, Congrat demonstrates a significantly superior area
 entity embeddings from a KG for fake news detection. under the ROC curve (AUC) compared to nine baselines
 r ComparNet [13]: The technique generates news embed- on four datasets, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
 dings by concatenating KG entity representations and news Comparison with Text-based Approaches (G1): These four
 representations learned by GCNs. Next, it utilizes the gen- methods achieve decent performance on certain datasets (e.g.,
 erated news embeddings for fake news detection. over 85% accuracy on COVID-19), yet they also exhibit subpar
 Table II shows the differences between our proposed approach results (e.g., below 50% recall on Liar). Given the results, the
and the baselines discussed in this article. Notably, there are baselines achieve commendable performance on COVID-19,
some semi-supervised methods like positive-unlabeled learn- particularly Electra. However, their results still lag behind that
ing [57] widely used in the detection of fake news to address of Congrat on COVID-19 (approximately 1%–10%) across all
the scarcity of labels. However, our work prioritizes a super- metrics. On FakeNewsNet, all these approaches achieve acceptvised framework for the integration of high-quality KGs and able accuracy and precision, whereas Electra’s performance is
graph contrastive learning. Supervised training ensures precise second only to Congrat across all metrics. On PAN2020, the
3956 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE III
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS (IN PERCENTAGE) OF CONGRAT IN COMPARISON WITH NINE EXCELLENT BASELINES ON FOUR DATASETS (MEAN ± STDV, BEST IN
 BOLD, SECOND BEST IN UNDERLINE)

Fig. 3. The ROC Curves of Congrat and Baselines. To further verify the superiority of our model, the ROC curves on four datasets are provided to compare with
the SOTA baselines, demonstrating Congrat’s excellent performance.

four methods exhibit subpar performance except for the 80.36% Comparison with KG-based Approaches (G3): KGInrecall of BiLSTM which ranks second only to Congrat. This formedFD and CompareNet leverage KGs to enhance fake news
is attributed to BiLSTM’s ability to accurately predict true detection, improving their reliability in distinguishing fake news.
positive samples. On Liar, BiLSTM and TextCNN attain the On COVID-19, both approaches perform acceptably across all
best accuracy and precision but remain far below Congrat across metrics, achieving scores above 80%. On FakeNewsNet, KGInother metrics. Besides, RNN performs worse than the other formedFD underperforms (below 60% for all metrics), while
three models. In summary, Congrat significantly outperforms CompareNet shows strong performance. On PAN2020, both
text-based methods, emerging as the leader in this category approaches achieve acceptable results across four metrics, with
across most metrics. CompareNet’s precision and F1-score ranking second highest
 Comparison with Graph-based Approaches (G2): These among all models. On Liar, KGInformedFD obtains subpar remodels do not exhibit notable performance on the four datasets sults while CompareNet performs commendably (nearly above
regarding all metrics. Specifically, on COVID-19, TextGCN and 50% for all metrics), indicating that KGs can indeed enhance
AugTextGCN perform satisfactorily but lag behind Congrat, fake news detection. In conclusion, both methods exhibit dewhile HGAT performs well across all metrics but still falls cent performance on four datasets, while Congrat’s detection
short. On FakeNewsNet, the three methods achieve excellent capability still surpasses theirs.
accuracy, while other metrics are far lower than Congrat (except Analysis of HG’s Structure: From the experimental statistics,
HGAT). On PAN2020, TextGCN and AugTextGCN exhibit Congrat’s performance varies across different datasets. As we
subpar precision, recall, and F1-score despite attaining reason- can see, COVID-19 is the top-performing dataset, followed by
able accuracy. However, HGAT achieves the second-highest FakeNewsNet, PAN2020, and Liar. The main reason is the
accuracy (63.70%). On Liar, the models achieve acceptable coverage of entities in news nodes within KGs. Each news
accuracy but have unsatisfactory precision, recall, and F1-score. node is linked to at least three entity nodes, which can be
Notably, TextGCN and AugTextGCN perform unstably on dif- associated with KG entities. Longer news texts contain more enferent datasets. In addition, the significant variance in Liar’s tities, strengthening their connection to KGs and providing more
results is due to its inherent attributes, such as diverse topics and factual evidence. However, the shorter texts in the Liar dataset
multiple sources, which may cause fluctuations in performance extract fewer entities, resulting in weaker associations with KGs.
across different methods. Overall, our approach outperforms this Case Study: To qualitatively evaluate the detection results
group of methods significantly across all metrics. of our model, we provide four representative cases in Fig. 4,
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3957

 TABLE IV
 ABLATION TEST ON FOUR DATASETS (MEAN ± STDV, BEST IN BOLD)

 enrich news information for detecting fake news. Such knowl-
Fig. 4. Examples of specific news article detection results. The four possible edge provides factual evidence for news articles and the perforoutcomes (i.e., FP, FN, TP, and TN) of the fake news detection task are provided mance could improve with an increased amount of ground-truth
for visual illustration. knowledge provided.

 C. Ablation Study (RQ2)
including false positive (FP), false negative (FN), true positive As shown in Table IV, we conduct an ablation study to
(TP), and true negative (TN). FP/FN cases often arise from explore how the performance of Congrat changes when different
politicized language, KG staleness, or misleading structural components (topics, entities, KGI, KGII, and the CL module)
patterns in the contrastive graph. For example, during graph are removed. In the table, ‘Congrat-M6’ refers to a version where
contrastive training, Congrat learns to distinguish ‘fake’ and only the initial news embeddings without any element mentioned
‘true’ by maximizing agreement between semantically similar above are used for fake news detection. ‘Congrat-M5’ uses the
nodes. However, structurally similar but semantically distinct representations of both topic nodes and news nodes to train
cases (e.g., factual reports about political figures) may be pushed GNNs for detecting fake news. ‘Congrat-M4’ only leverages
closer to the ‘fake’ cluster if KGs lack nuanced relational edges the embeddings of entity, topic, and news nodes for detection.
(e.g., ‘Sir Keir Starmer’ → ‘COVID-19 isolation guidelines’ → ‘Congrat-M3’, ‘Congrat-M2’, and ‘Congrat-M1’ successively
‘public health protocols’). Fortunately, Congrat demonstrates incorporate KGI, KGII, and both KGs into the model, but
strong detection performance across multiple datasets (i.e., TP without the CL module. Finally, ‘Congrat’ represents the full
and TN). This success can be attributed to the solid factual model with the CL module used to detect fake news.
foundation provided by the complementary knowledge of KGs According to ablation experiments, ‘Congrat-M6’ attains
and the comprehensive training enabled by graph contrastive subpar performance (e.g., 27.80% precision on FakeNewsNet)
learning. except 92.20% precision on COVID-19 when only considering
 Generally speaking, our model exhibits apparent advantages the initial news feature vectors. When topics are incorporated
in comparison to the other nine competing methods. The primary into our model, the performance of ‘Congrat-M5’ is significantly
reasons for the superiority are as follows: 1) Congrat leverages improved by approximately 2%–29% on COVID-19, 7%–50%
different strategies to learn node embeddings in HG (e.g., LDA on FakeNewsNet, 3%–15% on PAN2020 and 32%–48% on Liar,
model, Doc2vec, etc.) and aggregate the information for the indicating that topics have the potential to enhance detection
final generation of high-quality news representations according performance. When considering news, topics, and entities in
to multiple relations. 2) Meanwhile, GAT-based encoders are our model for fake news detection, ‘Congrat-M4’ achieves
employed to adaptively learn the node representations of three high precision (79.17%) on FakeNewsNet and further improves
augmented graphs, which can extract valuable information for performance on all four datasets. This implies that entities
the final news embeddings. 3) Congrat introduces contrastive exert a substantial influence on the overall performance of the
learning to absorb complementary knowledge from different model. When we integrate knowledge graphs into our model,
KGs to detect fake news. Multiple KGs are digested by our ‘Congrat-M3’, ‘Congrat-M2’, and ‘Congrat-M1’ perform better
model, which can provide comprehensive factual knowledge to than the models without KGs (i.e., ‘Congrat-M6’, ‘Congrat-M5’
3958 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 5. Results of λ and Parameter Sensitivity. To explicitly compare the performance of our model, the hyperparameter λ test of models on four datasets is
provided on the left side. To investigate parameter sensitivity, the 3D figure is presented on the right part, where the x-axis depicts embedding sizes and the y-axis
denotes training epochs, detailed in Section V-E.

and ‘Congrat-M4’), which means that KGs indeed have a signif- tends to be stable and optimal when λ = 0.2. On PAN2020,
icant impact on fake news detection. Meanwhile, ‘Congrat-M3’ Congrat achieves the best performance when we set λ as 0.1.
and ‘Congrat-M2’ exhibit similar performance across the four Obviously, λ = 0.3 is the optimal parameter for Liar, and our
datasets, which indicates that mere substitution of a knowledge model showcases the highest level of discriminative power
graph can not promote detection performance. When multiple regarding accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Based on
KGs are considered to identify fake news, the model’s perfor- the aforementioned observations, it is apparent that the value
mance experiences a slight enhancement, indicating that only of λ must be adjusted according to the specific dataset. This
augmenting the quantity of knowledge graphs does not have adjustment allows for better control over the influence of the
a substantial influence on the model’s performance. When the contrastive learning module on the overall model, thereby opticontrastive learning module is added to our model, the complete mizing the model’s effectiveness.
model achieves the highest scores for almost all metrics on four
datasets. This indicates that the CL module plays an important E. Parameter Sensitivity (RQ4)
role in our model to digest knowledge from multiple KGs.
 To assess the sensitivity of parameters, we conduct an eval-
The CL module facilitates the identification and absorption of
 uation of Congrat using various embedding sizes and training
complementary information across distinct KGs through comepochs in GNNs. For illustration purposes, we specifically exparison and then generates news representations encompassing
 amine the performance using PAN2020, considering 25 different
comprehensive semantic, structural, and factual information.
 combinations of epochs and embedding sizes. The embedding
 In summary, news, topics, entities, KGI, KGII, and the CL
 dimension and epoch are denoted as x and y, respectively,
module have a profound effect on the performance of fake news
 detailed in Fig. 5(b). The results demonstrate that the model’s
detection through ablation study. Notably, incorporating KGs
 performance exhibits improvement as the parameters increase,
into GNNs for training is significantly beneficial for perforpeaking at x = 128 and y = 300. Notably, our model consismance improvement, and the CL module is extremely important
 tently maintains satisfactory results across different parameter
to digest complementary knowledge from multiple KGs for fake
 combinations.
news detection.
 F. Analysis of Topic Quantity (RQ5)
D. Contrastive Learning Module Analysis (RQ3) To observe the effect of the number of topics per news article
 In this part, we observe the impact of different λ on the on the model, we conduct experiments to analyze the fluctuating
overall classification performance. λ is the significant parameter trend of Congrat’s performance under varying topic numbers,
to control the contribution of the contrastive loss to Congrat’s detailed in Fig. 6. In typical news articles, the number of topperformance, detailed in Fig. 5(a). As shown in the figure, for ics generally remains below ten, otherwise, the news becomes
different evaluation metrics, the values of λ present diverse overly scattered and devoid of coherence. Therefore, we set the
trends across different datasets. On COVID-19, the performance number of topics per news article from 1 to 10. In the radar
of our model is optimal when λ = 0.2 in terms of the balance map, the outermost values denote the number of topics, while the
of all metrics. On FakeNewsNet, our model exhibits significant radar scale represents the percentage corresponding to accuracy,
performance fluctuations according to different λ but Congrat precision, recall, and F1-score. As a metric extends outward, the
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3959

 VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
 In this paper, we develop a novel contrastive multi-knowledge
 graph learning, namely Congrat to explore how complementary
 knowledge from different knowledge graphs influences fake
 news detection. To be concrete, we first construct a heterogeneous graph with three types of nodes (i.e., news, entities, and
 topics) based on news content. Then, we extract ground-truth
 knowledge entities from two different knowledge graphs to
 enhance the factual information for the HG into three augmented
 graph views. Next, we employ contrastive learning for the three
 graph views, which involves positioning positive samples in
 close proximity to each other within a high-dimensional space.
 Simultaneously, we ensure that positive and negative samples
 are placed far apart from each other within this space. Finally,
 we concatenate news embeddings learned from the three graph
 views and feed them to an MLP-based classifier for predicting
 news labels. Comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets
 are conducted to demonstrate the superiority of Congrat by
 comparing it with nine baselines, and the further ablation study
Fig. 6. Analysis of the number of topics per news article. To further demon- verifies the efficacy of each part of our framework.
strate how the topic quantity influences our model, Radar maps on four datasets Discussion and Limitations: Our work focuses on fake news
are provided to investigate Congrat’s performance when the number of topics detection combining KGs and graph contrastive learning, with
per news article changes.
 broader implications for combating fake news. The ‘truth sandwich’ strategy is to frame misinformation with accurate information before and after its presentation to mitigate false claims.
 TABLE V
 RUNNING TIME & GPU MEMORY COST
 Although our model doesn’t explicitly implement this structure,
 its use of KG-derived factual context aligns with the principle.
 By grounding predictions in verified entities and relationships
 (e.g., authoritative sources, temporal/logical consistency), our
 framework inherently prioritizes truth, similar to the ‘bread’ of
 a truth sandwich that surrounds misleading claims. We will explore integrating explicit ‘truth sandwich’ mechanisms into fake
 news detection in follow-up work. In addition, the computational
 complexity of integrating multiple knowledge graphs increases
 the resource requirements, which needs to find strategies for
 efficiency improvement.
 Future Works: This work also identifies several underexplored areas for future research. These include exploring
performance of the metric improves. According to the results on techniques to achieve improved performance when detecting
four datasets, it is apparent that the model is in optimal condition short news articles within fake news datasets, determining which
with a balance of all metrics when the number of topics per news fake news topics should receive greater attention, such as those in
article is set as 2. Therefore, during the construction of the HG, the health or sports fields, and investigating advanced methods to
we set K = 2 as the top relevant topics of each news node. capture more semantic features for detecting fake news in textheavy news article data, etc. Furthermore, we will investigate
 alternative news data modeling approaches, such as weighted
G. Computational Cost (RQ6) graphs, bi-directed graphs, and other explainable models.
 We compare the computational efficiency of Congrat with
baselines in terms of both time and memory consumption, as REFERENCES
detailed in Table V. We choose COVID-19 and FakeNewsNet [1] J. Roozenbeek and S. Van der Linden, “Fake news game confers psyas the representative datasets. From the table, it is evident chological resistance against online misinformation,” Palgrave Commun.,
 vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2019.
that Congrat not only demonstrates an advantage in terms of [2] S. Qian, J. Hu, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Knowledge-aware multi-modal
computational cost but also delivers superior performance in adaptive graph convolutional networks for fake news detection,” ACM
a balanced manner. Specifically, Congrat achieves an optimal Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1–23,
 2021.
trade-off between moderate running time and memory usage, [3] L. Cheng, R. Guo, K. Shu, and H. Liu, “Causal understanding of fake
outperforming the baseline models that typically exhibit either news dissemination on social media,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
higher computational costs or less efficient performance. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 148–157.
3960 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 [4] K. Sharma, F. Qian, H. Jiang, N. Ruchansky, M. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Com- [30] L. Cai and W. Y. Wang, “KBGAN: Adversarial learning for knowledge
 bating fake news: A survey on identification and mitigation techniques,” graph embeddings,” in Proc. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Lin-
 Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1–42, 2019. guistics, Hum. Lang. Technol., 2018, pp. 1470–1480.
 [5] S. Qian, J. Wang, J. Hu, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Hierarchical multi-modal [31] T. D. N. Dai Quoc Nguyen, D. Q. Nguyen, and D. Phung, “A novel
 contextual attention network for fake news detection,” in Proc. 44th Int. embedding model for knowledge base completion based on convolutional
 ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2021, pp. 153–162. neural network,” in Proc. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
 [6] J. Ma et al., “Detecting rumors from microblogs with recurrent neural Hum. Lang. Technol., 2018, pp. 327–333.
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016, pp. 3818–3824. [32] Z. Li, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, T. Liu, and N. N. Xiong, “Learning knowl-
 [7] X. Zhou, J. Wu, and R. Zafarani, “SAFE: Similarity-aware multi-modal edge graph embedding with heterogeneous relation attention networks,”
 fake news detection,” in Proc. PAKDD, 2020, pp. 354–367. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3961–3973,
 [8] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text Aug. 2022.
 classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 7370–7377. [33] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applica-
 [9] D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch, “Wikidata: A free collaborative knowl- tions,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, 2020.
 edgebase,” Commun. ACM, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 78–85, 2014. [34] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive
[10] S. Auer, C. Bizer, G. Kobilarov, J. Lehmann, R. Cyganiak, and Z. Ives, survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 “DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data,” in Proc. ISWC ASWC, 2007, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
 pp. 722–735. [35] G. Corso, H. Stark, S. Jegelka, T. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Graph neural
[11] F. M. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G. Weikum, “Yago: A core of se- networks,” Nature Rev. Methods Primers, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2024.
 mantic knowledge,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2007, [36] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neupp. 697–706. ral networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” NueralPS,
[12] X. Zou, “A survey on application of knowledge graph,” in Proc. J. Phys.: vol. 29, pp. 1–9, 2016.
 Conf. Ser., IOP Publishing, 2020, vol. 1487, no. 1, Paper 012016. [37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” 2016,
[13] L. Hu et al., “Compare to the knowledge: Graph neural fake news detection arXiv:1611.07308.
 with external knowledge,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics Int. Joint [38] X. Li, J. Wang, and Z. Yan, “Can graph neural networks be adequately
 Conf. Natural Lang. Process., 2021, pp. 754–763. explained? A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2025.
[14] X. Wu, J. Duan, Y. Pan, and M. Li, “Medical knowledge graph: Data [39] T. H. Chan, G. Yin, K. Bae, and L. Yu, “Multi-task heterogeneous graph
 sources, construction, reasoning, and applications,” Big Data Mining learning on electronic health records,” Neural Netw., vol. 180, 2024,
 Analytics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 201–217, 2023. Art. no. 106644.
[15] Z. Chen, Y. Wang, B. Zhao, J. Cheng, X. Zhao, and Z. Duan, “Knowledge [40] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
 graph completion: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 192435–192456, detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022,
 2020. pp. 657–665.
[16] Y. Dai, S. Wang, N. N. Xiong, and W. Guo, “A survey on knowl- [41] Y. Wang, X. Yao, P. Zhu, W. Li, M. Cao, and Q. Hu, “Integrated heteroedge graph embedding: Approaches, applications and benchmarks,” geneous graph attention network for incomplete multi-modal clustering,”
 Electronics, vol. 9, no. 5, 2020, Art. no. 750. Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 132, no. 9, pp. 3847–3866, 2024.
[17] N. Vaska, K. Leahy, and V. Helus, “Context-dependent anomaly detection [42] X. Su, J. Yang, J. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Mining user-aware multi-relations
 with knowledge graph embedding models,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int Conf. for fake news detection in large scale online social networks,” in Proc.
 Automat. Sci. Eng., 2022, pp. 2020–2027. 16th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023, pp. 51–59.
[18] X. Ma, F. Liu, J. Wu, J. Yang, S. Xue, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Rethinking [43] S. Motie and B. Raahemi, “Financial fraud detection using graph neural
 unsupervised graph anomaly detection with deep learning: Residuals and networks: A systematic review,” Expert Syst. With Appl., vol. 240, 2024,
 objectives,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 881–895, Art. no. 122156.
 Feb. 2025. [44] J. Zhang et al., “Linear-time graph neural networks for scalable recom-
[19] X. Ma, R. Li, F. Liu, K. Ding, J. Yang, and J. Wu, “Graph anomaly detection mendations,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 3533–3544.
 with few labels: A data-centric approach,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD [45] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2024, pp. 2153–2164. learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[20] B. Xie et al., “Multiknowledge and LLM-inspired heterogeneous graph 2020, vol. 33, pp. 5812–5823.
 neural network for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social [46] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph con-
 Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 682–694, Apr. 2025. trastive learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
[21] B. Koloski, T. S. Perdih, M. Robnik-Šikonja, S. Pollak, and B. Škrlj, pp. 2069–2080.
 “Knowledge graph informed fake news classification via heteroge- [47] D. Xu, W. Cheng, D. Luo, H. Chen, and X. Zhang, “Infogcl: Informationneous representation ensembles,” Neurocomputing, vol. 496, pp. 208–226, aware graph contrastive learning,” NeuralPS, vol. 34, pp. 30414–30425,
 2022. 2021.
[22] B. Xie, X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, and H. Fan, “Knowledge graph enhanced [48] R. K. Kaliyar, A. Goswami, and P. Narang, “FakeBERT: Fake news
 heterogeneous graph neural network for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. detection in social media with a BERT-based deep learning approach,”
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2826–2837, Feb. 2024. Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 80, no. 8, pp. 11765–11788, 2021.
[23] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, and O. Yakhnenko, [49] J. Z. Pan, S. Pavlova, C. Li, N. Li, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “Content based fake
 “Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data,” NeuralPS, news detection using knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 16th Int. Symp. Wireless
 vol. 26, pp. 1–9, 2013. Commun. Syst., 2018, pp. 669–683.
[24] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, and Z. Chen, “Knowledge graph embedding [50] Y. Zhu et al., “Memory-guided multi-view multi-domain fake news deby translating on hyperplanes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 28, tection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 7178–7191,
 no. 1, 2014, pp. 1112–1119. Jul. 2022.
[25] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Y. Liu, and X. Zhu, “Learning entity and relation [51] L. Wu, Y. Rao, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, and A. Nazir, “Category-controlled
 embeddings for knowledge graph completion,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. encoder-decoder for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 Intell., vol. 29, no. 1, 2015, pp. 2181–2187. vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1242–1257, Feb. 2023.
[26] M. Nickel, V. Tresp, and H.-P. Kriegel, “A three-way model for collective [52] B. Xie, X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, S. Xue, and H. Fan, “Heterogeneous graph
 learning on multi-relational data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2011, neural network via knowledge relations for fake news detection,” in Proc.
 vol. 11, no. 10.5555, pp. 3104482–3104584. 35th Int. Conf. Sci. Stat. Database Manage., 2023, pp. 1–11.
[27] S. Zhang, Y. Tay, L. Yao, and Q. Liu, “Quaternion knowledge graph [53] H. Linmei, T. Yang, C. Shi, H. Ji, and X. Li, “Heterogeneous graph
 embeddings,” NeuralPS, vol. 32, pp. 1–11, 2019. attention networks for semi-supervised short text classification,” in Proc.
[28] T. Trouillon, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, É. Gaussier, and G. Bouchard, “Complex Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.-Int. Joint Conf. Natural
 embeddings for simple link prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Lang. Process., 2019, pp. 4821–4830.
 2016, pp. 2071–2080. [54] Y. Jin et al., “Towards fine-grained reasoning for fake news detection,” in
[29] A. Bordes, X. Glorot, J. Weston, and Y. Bengio, “A semantic match- Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 5746–5754.
 ing energy function for learning with multi-relational data: Application [55] Y.-J. Lu and C.-T. Li, “GCAN: Graph-aware co-attention networks for
 to word-sense disambiguation,” Mach. Learn., vol. 94, pp. 233–259, explainable fake news detection on social media,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput.
 2014. Linguistics, 2020, pp. 505–514.
XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION 3961

[56] N. Ruchansky, S. Seo, and Y. Liu, “CSI: A hybrid deep model for fake Shan Xue received the Ph.D. degree in informanews detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2017, tion management from the School of Management,
 pp. 797–806. Shanghai University, Shanghai, China, in 2018, and
[57] M. C. de Souza, B. M. Nogueira, R. G. Rossi, R. M. Marcacini, the second Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 B. N. Dos Santos, and S. O. Rezende, “A network-based positive and Center for Artificial Intelligence, University of Techunlabeled learning approach for fake news detection,” Mach. Learn., nology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, in 2019.
 vol. 111, no. 10, pp. 3549–3592, 2022. She is currently a Lecturer with the School of Com-
[58] A. S. Karnyoto, C. Sun, B. Liu, and X. Wang, “Augmentation and het- puting, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW. Her
 erogeneous graph neural network for AAAI2021-COVID-19 fake news main research interests include artificial intelligence,
 detection,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 2033–2043, machine learning, and knowledge mining.
 2022.
[59] X. Wang et al., “KEPLER: A unified model for knowledge embedding and
 pre-trained language representation,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
 vol. 9, pp. 176–194, 2021.
[60] O. Hartig, C. Bizer, and J.-C. Freytag, “Executing SPARQL queries over Jian Yang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. dethe web of linked data,” in Proc. Semantic Web-ISWC 2009: 8th Int. gree in data integration from The Australian National
 Semantic Web Conf., Springer, Chantilly, VA, USA, 2009, pp. 293–309. University, Canberra, ACT, Australia, in 1995. She is
[61] P. Patwa et al., “Fighting an infodemic: COVID-19 fake news dataset,” in currently a Full Professor with the School of Comput-
 Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics Constraint., 2021, pp. 21–29. ing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
[62] K. Shu, D. Mahudeswaran, S. Wang, D. Lee, and H. Liu, “FakeNewsNet: She has authored or coauthored more than 200 journal
 A data repository with news content, social context, and spatiotemporal and conference papers in international journals and
 information for studying fake news on social media,” Big Data, vol. 8, conferences, such as IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS, INno. 3, pp. 171–188, 2020. FORMATION SYSTEMS, DATA AND KNOWLEDGE EN-
[63] F. Rangel, A. Giachanou, B. H. H. Ghanem, and P. Rosso, “Overview of GINEERING, VLDB, ICDE, ICDM, and CIKM. Her
 the 8th author profiling task at pan 2020: Profiling fake news spreaders on main research interests include business process mantwitter,” in Proc. CEUR-WS.org, vol. 2696, 2020, pp. 1–18. agement, data science, and social networks. She is currently an Executive
[64] W. Y. Wang, “‘Liar, liar pants on fire’: A new benchmark dataset for fake Committee Member of the Computing Research and Education Association
 news detection,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2017, pp. 422–426. of Australasia.
[65] M.-Y. Chen, Y.-W. Lai, and J.-W. Lian, “Using deep learning models to
 detect fake news about COVID-19,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol., vol. 23,
 no. 2, 1–23, 2022.
[66] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,” in Jia Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang., 2014, pp. 1746–1751. degree in computer science from the University of
[67] A. Praseed, J. Rodrigues, and P. S. Thilagam, “Hindi fake news detection Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia. He is
 using transformer ensembles,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, 2023, currently an Associate Professor and the Research
 Art. no. 105731. Director with the Applied AI Centre, School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW. Since
 2009, he has authored or coauthored more than 200
 refereed journal and conference papers, such as IEEE
 TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGI-
 Bingbing Xie received the Master’s degree from NEERING, KDD, CIKM, WWW, IJCAI, AAAI, and
 Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China. NeurIPS. His current research interests include data
 He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree mining and machine learning.
 with the School of Information Management, Wuhan
 University, Wuhan, and the School of Computing,
 Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia. He
 has authored or coauthored articles in different jour- Hao Fan received the Doctorate degree in computer
 nals and conferences, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS, and information systems from Birkbeck College, Uni-
 SSDBM, and NPJ Digital Medicine. His research versity of London, London, U.K., in 2005. He is curinterests include data mining, machine learning, deep rently a Full Professor with the School of Information
 learning, and medical AI. Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. His
 research interests include information content analysis, intelligence mining, text semantic understanding,
 knowledge organization, knowledge service, data intelligence, and big data analysis. He is a Doctoral
 Supervisor and a Member of the Communist Party of
 Xiaoxiao Ma received the Master’s degree from The
 China.
 University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
 He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 with the School of Computing, Macquarie University,
 Sydney, NSW, Australia. He has authored or coauthored papers on top data mining journals and conferences, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE
 AND DATA ENGINEERING, KDD, WWW, EMNLP,
 SSDBM, and ICDM. His research interests mainly include data mining, deep learning, anomaly detection,
 and machine learning for health and social networks.