IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025 5504312

 Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning-Based
 Background Reconstruction for Hyperspectral
 Anomaly Detection
 Xiaoming Sun, Yuxiang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yanni Dong , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Bo Du , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Deep learning (DL) has received a lot of attention knowledge of anomalous targets or backgrounds [3]. In recent
in hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) in recent years. While years, HAD has flourished and is widely used in medicine [4],
some progress has been made in boosting the generalization of oil spill detection [5], civilian rescue [6], and other fields [7].
DL-based HAD methods, existing methods still face limitations
in labeled sample generation or transfer flexibility. To address Over the past few decades, numerous traditional methods for
these issues, we propose a contrastive self-supervised learning- HAD have been proposed. The most classical of these methods
based background reconstruction method for HAD (CSSBR). are the statistical assumption-based methods, which assume
By constructing a self-supervised pretraining model based on that the backgrounds obey a certain statistical distribution
a pixel- and patch-level masking strategy and a dual attention and consider the pixels that deviate significantly from this
network (DAN) encoder, the pretraining model can learn general
background representation without labeled sample generation. distribution as anomalies. The Reed–Xiaoli (RX) detector [8]
The DAN encoder is constructed by the vision transformer is the most widely used algorithm among the statistical
(ViT) and channel attention module (CAM) to extract the assumption-based methods, which assumes that the backglobal context information and the correlation between spectra. grounds obey a multivariate Gaussian distribution and utilizes
A transfer learning model is constructed based on the DAN all the pixels in the image to compute the background statistics.
encoder and a lightweight decoder, which is simply fine-tuned by
background reconstruction guided (BRG) loss to flexibly transfer According to the different ways of background statistical
the pretrained model to various HAD tasks. Experiments on estimation, various RX-based variants have been proposed,
four challenging hyperspectral datasets confirm that the CSSBR such as kernel RX [9], subspace RX [10], local RX [11],
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. local adaptive iterative RX (LAIRX) [12], and two-step
 Index Terms— Background reconstruction, contrastive learn- generalized likelihood ratio test (2S-GLRT) [13]. Subseing, hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD), self-supervised quently, the representation-based methods have gradually
learning (SSL). garnered widespread attention, encompassing collaborative
 representation [14], [15], [16], low-rank representation [17],
 I. I NTRODUCTION [18], [19], tensor representation [20], [21], and entropy
 representation [22]. For example, Li and Du [14] proposed
H YPERSPECTRAL imaging technology records both
 spectral and spatial information of ground objects [1].
Compared with other remote sensing images, hyperspectral
 the collaborative representation-based detector (CRD) to
 represent the pixel with the local background dictionary
images (HSIs) contain hundreds or even thousands of and separate anomalies from backgrounds by the recovery
almost continuous spectral bands, which can provide very residuals. Ma et al. [23] combined the integrating fractional
detailed spectral information [2]. Therefore, HSI can provide Fourier transform (FrFT) with the row-constrained low-rank
unique advantages for anomaly detection tasks. Hyperspectral and sparse matrix decomposition technique. Wang et al.
anomaly detection (HAD) focuses on distinguishing unusual [20] extended the 3-D tensor low-rank model to separate
materials from typical backgrounds in the absence of a priori the background component. Tao et al. [22] combined FrFT
 and Shannon entropy to maximize the distinction between
 Received 10 November 2024; revised 11 January 2025; accepted 21 January anomalies and backgrounds. These traditional methods are
2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date of current version
11 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural generally simple and extract shallow features to distinguish
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62222116, Grant 62071438, Grant anomalies from backgrounds.
62225113, and Grant 62171417; and in part by the Major Special Project of Recently, deep learning (DL) has gained prominence in
China Innovation Challenge (Ningbo) under Grant 2024T008. (Corresponding
author: Yuxiang Zhang.) HAD due to its powerful capabilities of feature mining and
 Xiaoming Sun and Yuxiang Zhang are with the School of Geophysics and feature representation. The most widely used deep neural
Geomatics, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: networks include convolutional neural network (CNN) [24],
sunxiaoming@cug.edu.cn; zhangyx@cug.edu.cn).
 Yanni Dong is with the School of Resource and Environmental Sciences, [25], [26], autoencoder (AE) [27], [28], [29], and generative
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail: dongyanni@whu.edu.cn). adversarial network (GAN) [30], [31], [32]. For example,
 Bo Du is with the School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430079, China (e-mail: gunspace@163.com).
 Li et al. [33] proposed a two-stream CNN with deep support
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3534185 vector data description that incorporates feature learning and
 1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

anomaly detection into a unified framework. Wang et al. method that can not only perform pretraining without labeled
[34] proposed an autonomous HAD network based on fully sample generation but also flexibly transfer the pretrained
convolutional AE (Auto-AD), which designs the adaptive model to various HAD datasets without the limitation of image
weighted loss function and the anomaly detector in an end- sensor and image size.
to-end manner. Xiang et al. [35] enhanced the ability of Inspired by the SSL [44], we propose a contrastive SSL
representing the background by introducing a guided model (CSSL)-based background reconstruction method for HAD,
to the hidden layer of AE. Xie et al. [36] proposed a spectral which can be labeled as contrastive self-supervised learning
adversarial feature learning method for HAD, which uses the based background reconstruction method for HAD (CSSBR).
adversarial AE (AAE) as its backbone and introduces the The overall architecture of CSSBR consists of two parts: selfstructure tensor matrix to adaptively calculate the contribution supervised pretraining and transferring the pretrained model
rate of each feature. Wang et al. [37] proposed an HAD to HAD tasks. First, the pretraining model is constructed
method based on variational background inference and GAN via a pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy, a dual
(VBIGAN-AD), which establishes the relationship between attention network (DAN) encoder, and a lightweight decoder.
data samples and latent samples through two subnetworks The pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy is
to capture the data distribution. It is worth noting that designed to randomly mask off some pixels or patches of the
self-supervised learning (SSL) with deep neural networks original HSI to obtain pixel- and patch-level random masked
is gaining attention in the field of HAD. Wang et al. image pairs with the same semantic information, which can
[38] proposed a pixel-shuffle downsampling masked-spot help to complete the pretraining task. The DAN encoder
reconstruction network (PDBSNet) in a self-supervised oper- based on vision transformer (ViT) and channel attention
ating fashion for HAD, which achieves effective background module (CAM) is constructed to extract the global context
reconstruction by means of an AE consisting of centrally information and the correlation between spectra. A lightweight
masked and dilated convolutions. Liu et al. [39] proposed a decoder is introduced to reconstruct the original image
self-supervised multiscale network (MSNet) for HAD with by reverse-mapping the encoded features and the masked
enhanced separation training, where the network consists patches. The pretraining model is trained by reconstructing
of convolutional AEs at multiple scales. Wang et al. [40] the backgrounds from the patch-level random masked image
proposed a self-supervised HAD transformer (SSHADFormer) and contrasting between pixel- and patch-level random
method based on finite spatialwise attention and AE, which masked images. Also, the loss function based on a designed
performs background reconstruction via the RGB cube background reconstruction guided (BRG) loss and a crossassociated with the given dataset. The DL-based methods entropy (CE) loss is introduced to guide pretraining to obtain
described above are usually trained and tested on the same background reconstruction without labeled sample generation
scene, which can learn feature representations for a specific and to learn general background representations for different
scene and HAD task. The learned feature representations tend downstream HAD tasks. Subsequently, the DAN encoder and
to work poorly when directly transferred to other scenes or the lightweight decoder are transferred to downstream tasks,
HAD tasks, exhibiting poor generalization. and a simple fine-tuning of the lightweight decoder through
 In order to improve the generalization of DL-based methods, BRG loss can obtain adaptive background reconstruction for
some scholars have introduced novel methods for HAD, which various HAD tasks. Finally, anomaly detection is performed
are trained in some scenes and transferred to other scenes. using reconstruction errors.
For example, Jiang et al. [41] proposed a weakly supervised The main contributions of our research are summarized as
discriminative learning method with spectrally constrained follows.
GAN for HAD (WeaklyAD). This method trains the model 1) A novel DAN encoder is proposed based on ViT and
by the labeled samples obtained via coarse anomaly detection CAM, which can effectively extract the global context
on a specific scene and transfers the trained model to the other information and the correlation between spectra.
scene obtained from the same sensor. Liu et al. [42] proposed a 2) A pretraining model is constructed by a CSSL-based
dual-frequency AE (DFAE) method, which introduces spectral background reconstruction method, where a pixel- and
domain learning to enhance the separability of backgrounds patch-level random masking strategy is designed to
from anomalies. This method uses an HSI for training and construct background reconstruction task and contrastive
transfers the trained model to other HSIs obtained from the learning task to learn general background representations
same sensor for testing. Li et al. [43] proposed a general of HSI without labeled sample generation.
anomaly enhancement network with generative SSL (GSSL) 3) A transfer learning model is constructed based on the
for HAD, named AETNet, which was trained on a set of DAN encoder and a lightweight decoder, where a BRG
anomaly-free HSIs with block-level random masks. The best loss is proposed to fine-tune the transfer learning model
pretrained model was searched during the transfer learning to obtain adaptive background reconstruction without
stage by using global Mahalanobis distance to adapt the labeled sample generation for various HAD tasks.
pretrained model to HAD tasks. In addition, AETNet is trained
and tested on images of the same size, which requires complex The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
window resizing when transferred to scenes of various sizes. briefly analyzes the related work. Section III describes the
According to the above analysis, while some progress has details of the proposed CSSBR method in detail. Section IV
been made in boosting the generalization of DL-based HAD analyzes and discusses the experimental results. Finally, the
methods, there is still a pressing need for a DL-based HAD conclusions are drawn in Section V.
SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD 5504312

 II. R ELATED W ORK the sequence and all other elements in the sequence [61].
A. Self-Supervised Learning It can process all elements in the sequence in parallel,
 thereby improving training efficiency. The transformer encoder
 SSL learns general feature representations of large amounts
 is composed of multiple identical layers stacked, each
of unlabeled data by designing a pretext task [45]. SSL
 including a multihead SA (MSA) mechanism sublayer and a
has been a huge success not only in computer vision (CV)
 fully connected (FC) feedforward network sublayer. Residual
[46], [47], [48], [49], [50] but also in natural language
 connections are used around the two sublayers followed by
processing (NLP) [51], [52], [53] and other areas. Most of
 layer normalization [60]. ViT [61] is the first model to
the mainstream SSL methods can be divided into two types:
 successfully apply the transformer architecture to CV tasks.
generative and contrastive. GSSL learns representations by
 Unlike 1-D sequential data in NLP, the data in CV are
reconstructing or generating input data [54]. Masked image
 usually 2-D or 3-D. Therefore, ViT first splits the image
modeling (MIM) [55] is a typical pretraining method in into nonoverlapping patches of fixed size. Then, these patches
GSSL that learns general and robust representations from are flattened into 1-D vectors for linear embedding. At the
unlabeled image data by masking parts of the input image same time, position embedding is added to preserve the
and predicting the masked content. On the other hand, CSSL relative positional relationships between the image patches,
aims to learn the invariance of differently augmented data to thus capturing the spatial relationships of the image. Finally,
obtain more discriminative feature representations [56], [57]. the generated embeddings are input into the transformer
In recent years, some CSSL methods have been proposed encoder.
in the CV field, such as momentum contrast (MoCo) for ViT-based methods have been successfully applied in
unsupervised visual representation learning [47], bootstrap HSI processing, such as image classification [62], anomaly
your own latent (BYOL) [48], and knowledge distillation with
 detection [43], and target detection [63]. Although ViT-based
no labels (DINO) [49]. MoCo uses a momentum encoder to
 methods have achieved good performance in anomaly
generate positive and negative sample features and encode
 detection, they still face the problem of insufficient utilization
negative sample features as keys to be stored in a dynamic
 of spectral information. We designed a novel DAN encoder
dictionary to facilitate contrastive learning. BYOL builds on
 based on ViT and CAM to improve the extraction of
MoCo by removing negative samples and achieving feature
 spectral features while learning spatial information. Besides,
optimization through the interaction of two neural networks.
 we construct a pretraining model based on DAN encoder to
DINO introduces knowledge distillation, uses the momentum
 obtain general background representations of HSI.
average to update the teacher network through the student
network, and uses the CE loss for training.
 III. M ETHOD
 GSSL has been introduced into HAD fields such as
PDBSNet [38], MSNet [39], SSHADFormer [40], and Our method can be divided into two parts: self-supervised
AETNet [43]. Among them, only AETNet constructs a pretraining and transferring the pretrained model to HAD
pretraining model via GSSL based on MIM and transfers tasks. The overall architecture of CSSBR is shown in Fig. 1.
the pretrained model to different HAD tasks. CSSL has been
successfully applied in the field of HSI processing, such A. Self-Supervised Pretraining
as change detection [58], target detection [56], and image The pretraining model aims to learn general background
classification [59]. To the best of our knowledge, CSSL is less feature representations of images by CSSL-based background
explored for HAD tasks. Inspired by current SSL methods, reconstruction. The pretraining framework is divided into six
we integrate the MIM-based GSSL approach with the CSSL parts, namely, pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy,
approach to design a CSSL-based background reconstruction teacher encoder, student encoder, student decoder, projection
method to construct the pretraining model. Unlike previous header, and loss function.
methods, our method implements image masking from pixel- 1) Pixel- and Patch-Level Random Masking Strategy:
level and patch-level to construct background reconstruction Data augmentation plays a crucial role in SSL and is the
task and contrastive learning task. The contrastive learning task key to improving the performance of model. We design a
is utilized to help the background reconstruction task to obtain pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy, including
general background representations without labeled sample pixel-level random masking and patch-level random masking,
generation, which can be flexibly transferred to various HAD to randomly mask off some pixels or patches of the original
datasets without the limitation of image sensor and image size. HSI. Thus, we can obtain image pairs with the same semantic
 information, which helps to complete the pretraining task.
B. Transformer and ViT We denote the original pretraining HSI as X ∈ Rb×h×w ,
 Transformer is a DL model designed to process sequence where b, h, and w represent the number of bands, height, and
data, proposed by Vaswani et al. [60]. Transformer was width, respectively. The pixel-level random masking employs
initially designed for NLP tasks, particularly achieving a masking ratio of n to randomly mask some pixels of the
significant success in machine translation. Unlike traditional original pretraining HSI, generating the pixel-level random
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and CNNs, transformer is masked image Xt. The number of total pixels is N =
based on the self-attention (SA) mechanism that computes h × w and the number of masked pixels is N ′ = n × N .
the relationship or dependency between each element in Patch-level random masking first follows ViT to divide the
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of the proposed CSSBR method. (a) Pretraining. (b) Transferring to HAD.

original pretraining HSI into regular nonoverlapping patches a 1 × 1 convolutional layer to remove redundant information,
and then employs a masking ratio of m to randomly mask generating a new spectrum with band number of b′ . The
some patches, generating the patch-level random masked correlation between the remaining spectral bands is then
image Xs. The size of patch is the same as the size of captured by three CAMs. In order to concatenate with the
the patch divided by the ViT in the encoder, which is output spatial features of the spatial branch, an adaptive
experimentally set as p = 4 in this work. The number of average pooling (AAP) layer operation is performed at the
patches is M = h/ p × w/ p and the number of masked end of the spectral branch to obtain a spectral feature vector.
patches is M ′ = m × M. Patch-level random mask images The structure of CAM is shown in Fig. 1. First, we reshape
 ′ ′
are used to construct the background reconstruction task, the input feature A ∈ Rb ×h×w to Rb ×N , multiply matrix A
while pixel- and patch-level random mask images are used to with the transpose of A, and input their result to a softmax
 ′ ′
construct the contrastive learning task. The contrastive learning layer. Thus, we obtain the channel attention map C ∈ Rb ×b ,
task can help the background reconstruction task to obtain which can be expressed as follows:
general background representations without labeled sample
 exp Ai ATj
 
generation. c ji = Pb′ (1)
 2) Encoder: It consists of two components, teacher encoder T
 
 i=1 exp Ai A j
and student encoder. Two encoders maintain the same network
architecture via DAN backbone on different masked images to where c ji measures the ith channel’s impact on the jth
learn feature representations. The network architecture of DAN channel and Ai and A j are the ith and jth row of matrix
is shown in Fig. 1. The network includes a spatial branch and a A, respectively. Then, we perform a matrix multiplication
spectral branch to extract spatial and spectral features through between the channel attention map C and the reshaped input
 ′
ViT and CAM. The spatial branch focuses on extracting the feature A and reshape their result to Rb ×h×w . Subsequently,
global context information, and the spectral branch focuses on we multiply the result by the learnable scale parameter β to
capturing the correlation between spectra. perform an element-wise sum operation with the input feature
 The spatial branch uses a three-layer transformer with three A to obtain the final output
heads. First, the input HSI is divided into nonoverlapping ′
 b
patches. Second, these patches are flattened and the flattened X
 Ij = β (c ji Ai ) + A j (2)
patches are mapped using linear projection to obtain patch
 i=1
embeddings. Finally, the full patch embedding is used as input
to learn the latent feature representation and obtain a spatial where I j is the jth row of matrix I and represents the final
feature vector. feature of each channel, which can be expressed as a weighted
 The spectral branch consists of three CAMs, which first sum of the features of all channels and the original features.
downscales the spectrum with band number of b by using In other words, CAM helps to capture the long-distance
SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD 5504312

correlation between spectral features and improve spectral where the temperature parameter τ is commonly used in
feature extraction. knowledge distillation to control the clarity of the output
 Finally, the features obtained from the spatial and distribution. The dimension Z of the probability distributions
spectral branches are concatenated and the final feature is output by the encoder networks is set to 1024.
320 dimensions, where the spatial and spectral branches output 7) Loss Function: Considering that the pretraining framefeatures with dimensions of 192 and 128, respectively. work involves contrastive learning task and reconstruction
 3) Teacher Encoder: The teacher encoder takes pixel-level task, the widely used CE loss and mean square error (mse)
random masked images as input. The teacher encoder is loss can be integrated to train the pretraining model. The
constructed based on the state of the student encoder in the CE loss can constrain the training of contrastive learning
past iterations. A parameter update is performed between the network by aligning the final output probability distributions
teacher encoder and the student encoder via the exponential of the teacher encoder and the student encoder to learn
moving average (EMA), with update rule θt ← λ θt +(1−λ )θs . discriminative features. The mse loss can constrain the training
θt and θs are the parameters of the teacher encoder and the of reconstruction network to ensure image reconstruction
student encoder, respectively. λ follows a cosine schedule from quality. With the integration of CE loss and mse loss, the
0.9995 to 1 during the training period. pretraining framework can capture not only discriminative
 4) Student Encoder: The student encoder takes patch-level features between masked image pairs with the same semantic
random masked images as input and is trained by cropping the information but also overall features of the patch-level masked
input and inserting learnable embeddings. Thus, the student image, thus achieving good feature representations of HSI.
encoder can learn a potential feature representation of the However, the learned feature representations of the whole
masked image, which is then used to reconstruct the original image are not enough for HAD tasks, where we usually
signal of the masked patches. The trained student encoder will extract background features to distinguish anomalies from
be transferred to HAD tasks as a feature extractor. backgrounds. Inspired by total variation (TV) loss [64],
 5) Student Decoder: The student decoder consists of we propose a BRG loss based on mse loss and TV loss
three convolutional layers, where each layer contains a 2-D to boost the background feature learning by guiding the
convolutional operation with a kernel size of 3 × 3 and a step training of reconstruction network to strengthen background
size of 1. Bilinear interpolation is used for upsampling after the reconstruction.
first two 2-D convolution operations to recover a reconstructed The TV loss considers the difference between the pixels
image of the same spatial resolution as the encoded image. The and their surrounding pixels in the image, aiming to smooth
student decoder finally converts the encoded features back into the image by reducing local variations between pixels. The
the original feature space to reconstruct the original HSI from background is dominant in terms of the pixels number and
the masked image. Since the student decoder is a sequence of there is less spectral feature variation between neighboring
convolutional layers rather than ViT and CAM, the decoder pixels within the same background category. In contrast, the
is a lightweight structure in order to reduce computational anomalies are usually smaller and sparser, showing marked
consumption in pretraining and transferring learning. spectral feature differences from the surrounding background.
 Based on the above facts, the BRG loss can enhance the
 6) Projection Head: The projection head consists of a
 smoothness of the reconstructed background by constraining
three-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP), where the first two
 the differences between neighboring pixels. Thereby, the BRG
layers use the Gaussian error linear unit (GELU) activation
 loss can improve the reconstruction network’s ability to extract
function in order to introduce nonlinear transformations, and
 background features.
the last layer is a linear layer without activation function but
 The BRG loss can be calculated as follows:
with an L 2 normalization layer and a weight normalized FC
 h w
layer with Z dimensions. The projection head is added after 1 XX
both the student encoder and the teacher encoder to map the L mse = (x i, j − x̃ i, j )T (x i, j − x̃ i, j ) (5)
 hw i=1 j=1
features output from two encoders into a space suitable for
 h w−1
contrastive learning. The projection head behind the teacher’s 1 X X
encoder is also updated by EMA. L TV = x̃ i, j − x̃ i, j+1
 h(w − 1)b i=1 j=1
 We denote student encoder, student decoder, and teacher
 h−1 w
encoder as Eθs , Dθs , and Eθt , respectively. For the input of 1 XX
pixel-level random masked image Xt and patch-level random + x̃ i, j − x̃ i+1, j (6)
 (h − 1)wb i=1 j=1
masked image Xs, both encoder networks finally output
probability distributions on Z dimensions named Ps and Pt , L BRG = L mse + L TV (7)
which can be expressed as follows:
 where x i, j ∈ Rb×1 and x̃ i, j ∈ Rb×1 denote the spectral vectors
 of pixel with spatial position (i, j) in the original pretraining
 exp(Dθs (Eθs (Xs)(i) )/τs ) HSI and the reconstructed pretraining HSI, respectively.
 Ps (Xs)(i) = P Z (3)
 (z)
 z=1 exp(Dθs (Eθs (Xs) )/τs )
 L mse represents the mse loss between the original HSI and
 exp(Eθt (Xt)(i) /τt ) the reconstructed HSI. L TV represents the TV loss, which
 Pt (Xt)(i) = P Z (4) calculates the average difference between the pixels and their
 (z)
 z=1 exp(Eθt (Xt) /τt ) surrounding pixels in the reconstructed image.
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 The CE loss and BRG loss constitute the total loss for the
pretraining phase, which is calculated as follows:
 L CE = min H (Pt (Xt), Ps (Xs)) (8)
 θs
 L Total = L BRG + L CE (9)
where H (a, b) = −a log b and L CE represents the CE loss,
which calculates the difference between the output probability
distributions of student encoder and teacher encoder. Fig. 2. Partial images of pretraining dataset HAD100.

B. Transfer Learning
 This section describes how to efficiently transfer the
pretrained model to various HAD tasks without labeled
samples. The transfer learning model contains four parts,
namely, encoder, fine-tuning decoder, loss function, and
anomaly detection.
 1) Encoder: We transfer the pretrained student encoder
to downstream HAD task. Feature extraction is performed
on the testing image via the pretrained student encoder,
 Fig. 3. Pseudo-color images and ground-truth maps of the testing datasets.
producing low-dimensional, abstract, and general background (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.
representation. We denote the testing HSI as Y ∈ R B×H ×W ,
where B, H , and W represent the number of bands, height,
and width, respectively. IV. E XPERIMENT
 2) Fine-Tuning Decoder: To reconstruct the background
for the testing image, we transfer the student decoder to A. Experiment Details
downstream HAD task to reverse-map the encoded features 1) Experimental Datasets: In this work, one hyperspectral
into the original feature space. During the fine-tuning process, dataset HAD100 with a large scale is used for pretraining,
the encoder parameters are not updated, which can obtain a and four hyperspectral datasets, Pavia, Texas Coast, Cri, and
general background representation and improve the efficiency EI Segundo, are used for downstream HAD tasks. Details of
of fine-tuning. Due to the limited pretraining images, the each dataset are given as follows.
data distribution of the downstream image may be different 1) HAD100 Dataset [43]: It was acquired by the Airborne
from that of the pretraining images. Therefore, the decoder Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer-Next Generation
should be continuously updated based on the parameters (AVIRIS-NG) sensor with a total of 100 images, some of
obtained from pretraining according to the testing image, which are shown in Fig. 2. The images were uniformly
which makes the model better adapted to the specific HAD cropped into patches of size 64 × 64 with a spectral
task and improves the ability of background reconstruction. range of 377–2500 nm. Original band 425 and 276 bands
 3) Loss Function: In order to enable the reconstruction reserved. Considering that the dataset includes not
model to better reconstruct the background of a specific testing only type-rich background features such as grasslands,
image, we perform a simple fine-tuning through the BRG deserts, and lakes but also different anomalous targets
loss to efficiently transfer the pretrained encoder and the such as vehicles, boats, and buildings, the dataset is used
lightweight decoder to a variety of HAD tasks without labeled for pretraining.
samples. 2) Pavia Dataset [17]: It was acquired over the northern
 4) Anomaly Detection: Once the reconstruction model is Italy city of Pavia using the Reflective Optics System
fine-tuned through BRG loss, each testing image is fed into Imaging Spectrometer (ROSIS) sensor. Fig. 3(a) shows
the pretrained encoder and the fine-tuned decoder, producing the pseudo-color image and the ground-truth map. The
a reconstructed background image. If the tested pixel is data size is 108 × 120 pixels with a spatial resolution of
background, the reconstruction error between the testing image 1.3 m. The spectral coverage spans from 430 to 860 nm,
and the reconstructed image is likely to be small; otherwise, encompassing 102 bands after the elimination of noise
the reconstruction error is likely to be large. The anomaly bands and water vapor absorption bands. The anomalies
detection result can be obtained as follows: are vehicles and piers on the bridge, consisting of
 Di, j = yi, j − ỹi, j 2 (10) 43 anomalous pixels.
 3) Texas Coast Dataset [65]: It was acquired over the
where y ∈ R B×1 and ỹ ∈ R B×1 denote the spectral vectors of coastal region of Texas in the United States using
the tested pixel with spatial position (i, j) in the testing image the AVIRIS sensor. Fig. 3(b) shows the pseudo-color
and its reconstructed image, respectively; and Di, j denotes image and the ground-truth map. The data size is
the anomaly probability of the tested pixel, which ultimately 100 × 100 pixels with a spatial resolution of 17.2 m.
constitutes the anomaly detection map. The spectral coverage spans from 450 to 1350 nm,
SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD 5504312

Fig. 4. Detection maps of different methods. (a) Ground-truth maps of Pavia, Texas Coast, Cri, and EI Segundo datasets. (b) GRX. (c) 2S-GLRT. (d) CRD.
(e) FEBPAD. (f) Auto-AD. (g) GAED. (h) PDBSNet. (i) MSNet. (j) AETNet. (k) CSSBR.

 encompassing 207 bands. The anomalies are buildings, system, NVIDIA GeForce RTX3060 graphics processing unit
 consisting of 155 anomalous pixels. (GPU) with 16 GB of memory.
 4) Cri Dataset [66]: It was acquired by the Nuance Cri 3) Evaluation Metrics: In order to assess the anomaly
 hyperspectral sensor. Fig. 3(c) shows the pseudo-color detection performance of different methods, we use a
 image and the ground-truth map. The size of the data variety of evaluation metrics, namely, detection map, receiver
 is 400 × 400 pixels. The spectral coverage spans operating characteristic (ROC) curve, area under the curve
 from 650 to 1100 nm, encompassing 46 bands. The (AUC), separability map, and run time.
 anomalies are stones, consisting of 1254 anomalous The detection map is segmented using different thresholds
 pixels. (τ ) to obtain different false alarm rates (Pf ) and probability
 5) EI Segundo Dataset [67]: It was acquired by the of detection (Pd ). We use the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) and
 AVIRIS sensor in the EI Segundo area, CA, USA. (τ , Pd ) to evaluate the effectiveness of anomaly detector and
 Fig. 3(d) shows the pseudo-color image and the ground- the anomaly detection ability, respectively. The closer the ROC
 truth map. The data size is 250 × 300 pixels with curve of (Pf , Pd ) is to the top-left corner, the better the
 a spatial resolution of 7.1 m. The spectral coverage effectiveness of anomaly detector. The closer the ROC curve
 spans from 366 to 2496 nm, encompassing 224 bands. of (τ , Pd ) is to the top-right corner, the higher the anomaly
 The anomalies are tanks and towers in the oil refinery, detection ability.
 consisting of 2048 anomalous pixels. The AUC value indicates the area under the ROC curve, and
 we use a variety of AUC values for overall evaluation [68],
 2) Experimental Settings: To validate the effectiveness of [69]. Specifically, higher values of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) indicate better
the proposed method CSSBR, we compare it with nine detector effectiveness. Higher values of AUC(τ,Pd ) indicate
HAD methods, including four traditional methods, GRX [8], better anomaly detection ability. Lower values of AUC(τ,Pf )
2S-GLRT [13], CRD [14], and FEBPAD [23], and five indicate better background suppression performance. AUCJAD
DL methods, Auto-AD [34], GAED [35], PDBSNet [38], is AUC(Pf ,Pd ) + AUC(τ,Pd ) , which further indicates the anomaly
MSNet [39], and AETNet [43]. Through experiments and detection ability. AUCADBS is AUC(τ,Pd ) − AUC(τ,Pf ) , which
referencing the original paper, all the comparison methods indicates the anomaly detection and background suppresused the optimal parameters. sion performance. AUCOAD is the sum of AUC(τ,Pd ) and
 For the pretraining network in the CSSBR method, we use 1 − AUC(τ,Pf ) , which is the second AUCADBS metric derived
the AdamW optimizer and train for 100 epochs, with the from the classification point of view and indicates the overall
learning rate increasing linearly to 0.0001 within the first ten anomaly detection performance. AUCSBPR is computed by
epochs, followed by decaying the learning rate using a cosine AUC(τ,Pd ) /(1−AUC(τ,Pf ) ), which is also an effective detection
schedule. Temperature τs is 0.1, and a cosine warm-up from metric derived from a widely used idea in communications or
0.04 to 0.07 is used for τt within the first 30 epochs. The signal processing.
batch size and patch size are set to 16 and 4, respectively. The
patch-level random masking ratio and the pixel-level random B. Detection Performance Analysis
masking ratio are both set to 90% for all datasets. In this section, we compare the detection performance of the
 In the fine-tuning network, the AdamW optimizer is still proposed CSSBR method with other methods on four different
utilized with a learning rate of 0.0001 and 200 epochs. The hyperspectral datasets. To mitigate the effects of random
patch size is still set to 4. All experiments are based on factors, all experiments were run five times consecutively. The
the PyTorch framework in the 64-bit Windows 10 operating value of the third-ranked AUC(Pf ,Pd ) and its corresponding
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 5. ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

Fig. 6. ROC curves of (τ , Pd ) for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

values of other evaluation metrics were taken as the final method has a strong anomaly detection ability. Even though
results. The experiment’s purpose is to demonstrate the AUC(τ,Pf ) values of CSSBR are not optimal, the AUCADBS ,
effectiveness of our pretrained model in transferring to various AUCOAD , and AUCSBPR values of CSSBR are the highest in
HAD tasks. all the datasets, indicating that the proposed method is able
 Fig. 4 shows the detection maps of different methods on to achieve better overall results in highlighting the anomalies
four datasets. The results show that CSSBR is able to detect and suppressing the background. In summary, in terms of
all the anomalies and highlight the anomalies in the first three various AUC values, CSSBR is generally superior to other
datasets, for example, the right anomalies in Texas Coast methods.
dataset and the top-right and bottom-right anomalies in the Cri Fig. 7 shows the separability maps for different methods
dataset are well detected and highlighted. Besides, CSSBR is on four datasets, which can visually reflect the separation
able to detect more anomalies in the EI Segundo dataset in of anomalies and backgrounds. On all the datasets, CSSBR
comparison to the other methods. exhibits larger spacing between the anomaly box and the
 Fig. 5 shows the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for different background box compared to the other methods, indicating that
methods on four datasets. On Pavia, Texas Coast, and EI CSSBR is able to separate anomalies from backgrounds well.
Segundo datasets, the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for CSSBR are In addition, the center line of the anomaly box of CSSBR has
essentially located above that of the other methods. On the a higher position and the bottom of the anomaly box is higher
Cri dataset, CSSBR has the highest probability of detection on all datasets compared to the other methods, indicating that
when the false alarm rate is greater than 0.03. The results CSSBR highlights the anomalies well. In summary, in terms
generally show that CSSBR exhibits a better effectiveness of of separability maps, CSSBR outperforms other methods in
detector. distinguishing anomalies from backgrounds.
 Fig. 6 shows the ROC curves of (τ , Pd ) for different Table II shows the run times of different methods on
methods on four datasets. On all four datasets, the ROC curves four datasets, where the run time represents the total time
of (τ , Pd ) for CSSBR are basically located above that of the of performing the downstream task. The average run time
other methods. The results show that CSSBR exhibits a higher indicates the time efficiency of each method on various
anomaly detection ability than other comparison methods on datasets. Compared to traditional methods 2S-GLRT and CRD,
four datasets. CSSBR requires a shorter average runtime. Compared to all
 Table I shows the AUC values for different methods on four DL-based methods, CSSBR requires the shortest average run
datasets, where the optimal values are shown in bold. CSSBR time. Due to the freezing of the encoder, the number of
was optimal for most AUC values in all datasets. Specifically, parameters in the downstream task is significantly reduced,
the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values of CSSBR are the highest on all datasets, thus improving the time efficiency of the CSSBR method.
validating the effectiveness of the proposed method in anomaly By comparing the proposed CSSBR method and the other
detection. The AUC(τ,Pd ) and AUCJAD values of CSSBR are methods on four different hyperspectral datasets, in terms
the highest on all the datasets, indicating that the proposed of detection map, ROC curve, AUC value, separability
SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD 5504312

 TABLE I
 AUC VALUES FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F OUR DATASETS

Fig. 7. Separability maps for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

maps, and run time, we can draw a general conclusion that effectiveness of transferring the pretrained model to various
CSSBR outperforms the comparison methods, validating the HAD tasks.
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 TABLE II
 RUN T IMES ( IN S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F OUR DATASETS

 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON P RETRAINING P HASE

Fig. 8. Parameter analysis on four datasets. (a) Pixel-level and (b) patch-level
random masking ratio.

C. Parameter Analysis
 In this section, we discuss the impact of two important
parameters of the CSSBR method on the HAD performance.
The two important parameters are pixel-level random masking
ratio n and patch-level random masking ratio m. The
 MIM-based GSSL approach (GSSL-Pretrained); and 3) using
experiments are conducted on four datasets with the evaluation
 the proposed self-supervised pretraining model (CSSBRmetric of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) value.
 Pretrained). We aim to verify that the proposed pretraining
 First, the pixel-level random masking ratio n was set
 model integrating the MIM-based GSSL approach and the
according to the range [10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%,
 CSSL approach enables CSSBR to learn general background
70%, 80%, 90%], and the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values for the four
 representations for various downstream HAD tasks. The
datasets are shown in Fig. 8(a). On Pavia, Texas Coast, and
 AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values and run times are shown in Table III, with
EI Segundo datasets, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values hardly change as
 the optimal value in bold. With the proposed pretraining
n increases. On the Cri dataset, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show
 model, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are better on most datasets,
a slowly increasing trend with increasing n, and the best
 especially on Cri dataset. The run times are reduced
detection result is achieved at n = 90%. Considering the
 on all datasets compared to the case without using the
overall performance of the four datasets, we set the pixel-level
 pretraining model. The experimental results illustrate that the
random masking ratio n as 90%.
 general background representations learned by the proposed
 Subsequently, the patch-level random masking ratio m was
 pretraining model can be quickly and efficiently transferred to
set according to the range [10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%,
 various HAD tasks.
60%, 70%, 80%, 90%], and the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values for the
 Subsequently, we discuss the effectiveness of the DAN.
four datasets are shown in Fig. 8(b). On Pavia, Texas Coast,
 Specifically, we compare the performance of CAM, ViT, and
and EI Segundo datasets, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show an
 DAN. The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are shown in Table IV. DAN has
overall increasing trend as m increases. On the Cri dataset,
 better AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values on most datasets compared to CAM
AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show a decreasing and then increasing trend
 or ViT. The results show that DAN based on CAM and ViT
as m increases, but the change of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values does not
 can indeed improve the feature extraction effect and enhance
exceed 0.45%. Considering the overall performance of the four
 the anomaly detection performance.
datasets, we set m to 90%.
 Finally, we discuss the effectiveness of the BRG loss.
 Specifically, we use either the BRG loss or the mse loss
D. Ablation Study to guide the training of the reconstruction networks in both
 This section discusses the effectiveness of self-supervised the pretraining phase and the transferring learning phase.
pretraining, DAN, and BRG loss. The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are shown in Table IV, with the
 First, we discuss the effectiveness of self-supervised optimal value in bold. The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are improved
pretraining. Specifically, we compare the performance of by 0.01%, 0.12%, and 0.46% on the Texas Coast, Cri, and
three cases: 1) without using the pretraining model (Un- EI Segundo datasets, respectively. The results show that BRG
Pretrained); 2) using the pretraining model based on the loss improves the anomaly detection performance.
SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD 5504312

 TABLE IV [3] G. Shaw and D. Manolakis, “Signal processing for hyperspectral image
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS exploitation,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 12–16,
 Jan. 2002.
 [4] X. Hadoux et al., “Non-invasive in vivo hyperspectral imaging of
 the retina for potential biomarker use in Alzheimer’s disease,” Nature
 Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, Sep. 2019, Art. no. 4227.
 [5] P. Duan, X. Kang, P. Ghamisi, and S. Li, “Hyperspectral remote sensing
 benchmark database for oil spill detection with an isolation forest-guided
 unsupervised detector,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
 Art. no. 5509711.
 [6] H. K. Jusoff, “Pixel-based airborne hyperspectral sensing technique for
 search- and-rescue of the missing RMAF NURI helicopter in Genting–
 Sempah, Malaysia,” Disaster Prevention Manag., Int. J., vol. 19, no. 1,
 pp. 87–101, Feb. 2010.
 [7] M. Borengasser, W. S. Hungate, and R. Watkins, Hyperspectral Remote
 Sensing-Principles and Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
 2007, 2007.
 [8] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
 optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
 Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
 [9] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
 anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
 [10] A. Schaum, “Joint subspace detection of hyperspectral targets,” in Proc.
 IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Dec. 2004, pp. 1818–1824.
 [11] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
 optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
 anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
 [12] Y. P. Taitano, B. A. Geier, and K. W. Bauer, “A locally adaptable
 iterative RX detector,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2010,
 no. 1, Dec. 2010, Art. no. 341908.
 V. C ONCLUSION [13] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
 In this article, a CSSBR method is proposed for HAD. anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
By constructing a self-supervised pretraining model based Oct. 2022.
on a pixel- and patch-level masking strategy and a DAN [14] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
encoder, the pretraining model can learn general background anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
 pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
representation without labeled sample generation. The DAN
 [15] R. Wang, H. Hu, F. He, F. Nie, S. Cai, and Z. Ming, “Self-weighted
encoder is constructed by ViT and CAM to extract the collaborative representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Signal
global context information and the correlation between spectra. Process., vol. 177, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 107718.
The transfer learning model is constructed based on a DAN [16] Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, P. Ma, and W. Shi, “Collaborative representation
 with background purification and saliency weight for hyperspectral
encoder and a lightweight decoder, which is simply fine-tuned anomaly detection,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
through BRG loss and efficiently transferred to a variety of Jan. 2022.
HAD tasks. Experiments on four challenging hyperspectral [17] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
 decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral
datasets validate that the CSSBR method is capable of anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
performing various anomaly detection tasks with leading pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016.
detection performance and high detection efficiency. [18] Y. Qu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection through spectral
 unmixing and dictionary-based low-rank decomposition,” IEEE Trans.
 However, the proposed CSSBR method is still deficient Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4391–4405, Aug. 2018.
in background suppression. This may be due to the limited [19] L. Li, W. Li, Q. Du, and R. Tao, “Low-rank and sparse decomposition
number of pretraining images and the deviation of the with mixture of Gaussian for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
background distribution between the downstream dataset Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4363–4372, Sep. 2021.
 [20] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
and the pretraining dataset, resulting in limited background tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
suppression performance. We will continue to investigate how IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
to improve the background suppression performance. [21] X. Zhang, G. Wen, and W. Dai, “A tensor decomposition-based anomaly
 detection algorithm for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 5801–5820, Oct. 2016.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [22] R. Tao, X. Zhao, W. Li, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 The authors would like to gratefully thank all the editors detection by fractional Fourier entropy,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 4920–4929, Dec. 2019.
and anonymous reviewers for their careful reading and helpful [23] Y. Ma, G. Fan, Q. Jin, J. Huang, X. Mei, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
remarks. anomaly detection via integration of feature extraction and background
 purification,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8,
 pp. 1436–1440, Aug. 2021.
 R EFERENCES
 [24] Z. Yang et al., “A multi-scale mask convolution-based blind-spot
[1] X. Hu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using deep learning: A network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
 review,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 9, p. 1973, Apr. 2022. no. 16, p. 3036, Aug. 2024.
[2] Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. Wu, and T. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly [25] L. Zhang and B. Cheng, “Fractional Fourier transform and transferred
 detection with OTSU-based isolation forest,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. CNN based on tensor for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
 Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 9079–9088, 2021. Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 5505505.
5504312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[26] W. Liu et al., “UADNet: A joint unmixing and anomaly detection [47] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum
 network based on deep clustering for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans. contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc.
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5511419. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
[27] R. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Meng, and F. Shao, “A novel fully convolutional pp. 9726–9735.
 auto-encoder based on dual clustering and latent feature adversarial [48] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to selfconsistency for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, supervised learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.07733.
 no. 4, p. 717, Feb. 2024. [49] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
[28] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 “BS3 LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for Oct. 2021, pp. 9630–9640.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [50] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218. simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representa-
[29] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Zhao, and A. Plaza, tions,” in Proc. Intern. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2020,
 “Sliding dual-window-inspired reconstruction network for hyperspectral pp. 1597–1607.
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, [51] M. Lee, “A mathematical interpretation of autoregressive generative pre-
 Art. no. 5504115. trained transformer and self-supervised learning,” Mathematics, vol. 11,
[30] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. no. 11, p. 2451, May 2023.
 ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020. [52] H. Fang, S. Wang, M. Zhou, J. Ding, and P. Xie, “CERT:
[31] J. Zhong, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Characterization of Contrastive self-supervised learning for language understanding,” 2020,
 background-anomaly separability with generative adversarial network arXiv:2005.12766.
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [53] Z. Wu, S. Wang, J. Gu, M. Khabsa, F. Sun, and H. Ma,
 vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 6017–6028, Jul. 2021. “CLEAR: Contrastive learning for sentence representation,” 2020,
[32] J. Wang, S. Guo, Z. Hua, R. Huang, J. Hu, and M. Gong, “CL-CaGAN: arXiv:2012.15466.
 Capsule differential adversarial continual learning for cross-domain [54] X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, and B. Du, “Generative selfhyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., supervised learning with spectral–spatial masking for hyperspectral
 vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5517315. target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
[33] K. Li et al., “Spectral–spatial deep support vector data description for Art. no. 5522713.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [55] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522316. image transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254.
[34] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous [56] X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, and B. Du, “Spatial–spectral contrastive
 hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional self-supervised learning with dual path networks for hyperspectral
 autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
 Art. no. 5503314. Art. no. 5515612.
[35] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly [57] Y. Wang, C. M. Albrecht, N. A. A. Braham, L. Mou, and X. X. Zhu,
 detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., “Self-supervised learning in remote sensing: A review,” IEEE Geosci.
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 213–247, Dec. 2022.
[36] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, C.-I. Chang, and G. He, “Spectral [58] M. Hu, C. Wu, and L. Zhang, “HyperNet: Self-supervised hyperspectral
 adversarial feature learning for anomaly detection in hyperspectral spatial–spectral feature understanding network for hyperspectral change
 imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 4, detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 pp. 2352–2365, Apr. 2020. Art. no. 5543017.
[37] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspectral [59] X. Cao, H. Lin, S. Guo, T. Xiong, and L. Jiao, “Transformer-based
 anomaly detection based on variational background inference and masked autoencoder with contrastive loss for hyperspectral image
 generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023, classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
 Art. no. 109795. Art. no. 5524312.
[38] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and [60] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017, arXiv:1706.03762.
 A. J. Plaza, “PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot [61] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
 reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914. [62] D. Ibañez, R. Fernandez-Beltran, F. Pla, and N. Yokoya, “Masked
[39] H. Liu, X. Su, X. Shen, and X. Zhou, “MSNet: Self-supervised auto-encoding spectral–spatial transformer for hyperspectral image
 multiscale network with enhanced separation training for hyperspectral classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5542614.
 Art. no. 5520313. [63] D. Shen, X. Ma, W. Kong, J. Liu, J. Wang, and H. Wang, “Hyperspectral
[40] Z. Wang, D. Ma, G. Yue, B. Li, R. Cong, and Z. Wu, “Self-supervised target detection based on interpretable representation network,” IEEE
 hyperspectral anomaly detection based on finite spatialwise attention,” Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5519416.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502918. [64] L. I. Rudin, S. Osher, and E. Fatemi, “Nonlinear total variation based
[41] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised noise removal algorithms,” Phys. D, Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 60,
 discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial nos. 1–4, pp. 259–268, 1992.
 network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. [65] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang, “Hyperspectral
 Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022. anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
[42] Y. Liu, W. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Li, and Q. Du, “Dual-frequency autoencoder for Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016.
 anomaly detection in transformed hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. [66] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523613. for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
[43] Z. Li, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, Q. Ling, Z. Lin, and W. An, “You only train vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514.
 once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with random [67] S. Liu, M. Song, B. Xue, C.-I. Chang, and M. Zhang, “Hyperspectral
 masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. real-time local anomaly detection based on finite Markov via line-by-
 Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718. line processing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
[44] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE Art. no. 5503520.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2021. [68] C.-I. Chang, “Comprehensive analysis of receiver operating character-
[45] I. Misra and L. van der Maaten, “Self-supervised learning of pretext- istic (ROC) curves for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 invariant representations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5541124.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 6706–6716. [69] C.-I. Chang, S. Chen, S. Zhong, and Y. Shi, “Exploration of
[46] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked data scene characterization and 3D ROC evaluation for hyperautoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. spectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 135,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988. Dec. 2023.