Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Cyberattack event logs classification using deep learning with semantic
feature analysis
Ahmad Alzu’bi a ,∗, Omar Darwish b , Amjad Albashayreh a , Yahya Tashtoush a
a Department of Computer Science, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan
b
 Information Security and Applied Computing, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, USA

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Event logs play a crucial role in cybersecurity by detecting potentially malicious network activities and
Cyberattack preventing data loss or theft. Previous work did not place a high value on log messages and their impact
Event logs on security breach prediction and intrusion detection. This research paper introduces a novel approach for log
Intrusion detection
 message analysis applied to a dataset of event logs collected from various web sources. Event log messages were
Deep learning
 analyzed and categorized based on event and attack types with an explainable AI emphasizing the value of its
BERT
 key data. The study aims to enhance intrusion detection and minimize performance degradation by identifying
 suspicious events. In this regard, a new semantic vectorization framework is proposed, leveraging deep learning
 architectures to develop semantic discriminating log features, offering a cogent explanation and classification
 of event log messages. The use of BERT deep embeddings as a baseline for the prediction model allows for
 visualizing and interpreting the formulation of log message semantic features. Several empirical scenarios are
 set and conducted extensively to evaluate the performance of the event log classifier, considering the attack
 type, event type, and zero-shot logs. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed event log classifier
 outperforms state-of-the-art machine learning models, achieving a recall of 99.27% and a precision of 99.29%.
 This highlights the model’s ability to accurately identify events of a particular type by detecting as many
 suspicious events as feasible while minimizing the misclassification rate.

1. Introduction application or file, change the system date, shut down the system, and
 modify the configuration settings. Event logs record both user actions
 The recent growth of the Internet and the rapid expansion of and those performed by processes running on the computer (Satpathi
technologies make a considerable increase in cyberattacks, exposing et al., 2019). The event log is also an important source for evaluating
individuals and companies to increased security threats. The com- the system’s safety.
plexity of the threat landscape has intensified concomitantly with the Event logs provide the administrators with critical data to solve any
escalating frequency of cyberattacks, thereby resulting in an increasing problem with the system (Ali et al., 2022). This data could be a textual
number of serious threats to critical infrastructure (Zhang et al., 2020). description of the event, when it occurred, and who was responsible
Much of the useful information related to security threats, vulnerabili- for it. Moreover, logs enable administrators to validate process perforties, and attacks can be found in the event log files. Therefore, to tackle mance and identify bottlenecks. Aside from these functional benefits,
the growing cyber threats, there is a demand to collect the current logs
 since log files include a large number of recurring lines, they can be efas soon as feasible and assess the potential impact of the network and
 ficiently compressed and recorded affordably (Landauer et al., 2020b).
service events that are recorded in the log files. Security event logging
 Categorizing events based on their types could be helpful with issues
and monitoring are two components of the same process that are crucial
 like monitoring critical events, knowing what software and services
for having a secure infrastructure.
 are installed on the system, boot events, processing events, types of
 Log files record all the events that occur in a system based on
the log severity level. To accomplish this, the implemented logging crashes, and clearing events that occurred. The primary benefit of the
facilities gather, collect, and save logs generated continuously by most categorization process lies in its ability to assist in the identification
devices and parts of the system (Azahari and Balzarotti, 2024; Satpathi and classification of attacks. An attacker typically enters the system
et al., 2019). This includes getting permission to access, delete, add an with previously stolen credentials from a valid user and thus behaves

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: agalzubi@just.edu.jo (A. Alzu’bi).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104222
Received 8 August 2024; Received in revised form 17 November 2024; Accepted 19 November 2024
Available online 26 November 2024
0167-4048/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

similarly to a malicious insider 97% of the time (Jaafar et al., 2016). 1. Introducing a novel classification approach for event logs based
With the extensive use of computer networks, cyberattacks are becom- on the semantics embedded in the log messages. This approach is
ing increasingly common as attackers exploit system vulnerabilities validated on a new collection of event logs categorized by event
for sensitive data theft, monetary gains, or even complete network and attack types.
infrastructure destruction (Singh et al., 2017). As a result, there is an 2. Proposing a semantic vectorization framework based on deep
urgent need to protect the targeted systems from penetration, which learning methods as a foundation for developing semantic veccan be done by monitoring and understanding the systems’ events. tors to provide solid analysis of event log messages, as well as
 The event log message provides a detailed description of the spe- utilizing BERT capabilities in visualizing the attribution of the
cific activity that took place. Textual log messages are in a human- message’s semantic features.
readable, unencoded format, and they encompass information that 3. Providing a profound XAI-based analysis of the labeled log mescan be utilized to ascertain the type of attack that occurred. Con- sages with machine learning algorithms, including a hybrid deep
sequently, these messages serve as a means to identify, categorize, architecture, CNN with GRU.
and timestamp attacks. Even though log traces are increasingly being The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the
used to detect and prevent unauthorized access to corporate informa- related work; Section 3 presents a new labeled dataset of event log
tion systems (Padiet et al., 2024), there are limited datasets available messages and the procedure of log labeling and processing. Section 4
for anomaly-based intrusion detection techniques (Ring et al., 2017). discusses the methodology of the proposed work; Section 5 describes
Moreover, the previous research has not solely relied on semantic the experimental results with a thorough discussion, and Section 6
information in log messages, a valuable aspect of the attack detec- concludes this paper.
tion process. For instance, the researchers in (Landauer et al., 2022;
Lin et al., 2022) obtained multiple network flow features such as 2. Related work
timestamps, byte count, source/destination information, and messages
containing specific parameters as the primary method for identifying In recent years, cybersecurity researchers and practitioners have
abnormal behavior in the network. Most importantly, previous studies developed a wide range of methods (Ramish et al., 2022; Landauer
employed a conventional classification method to assess the normality et al., 2020a) that use machine learning to detect and classify intrusions at the network and host levels in a timely and autonomous
or suspicion of event logs and network flows (Satilmiş et al., 2024).
 manner. Popular research initiatives in cyberattack detection strategies
The data originated from a testbed established by the same individuals
 include: the insider threat analysis technique based on kernel PCA
who recorded and categorized the events. This led to an expected
 and LSTM-RNN that was developed by Meng et al. (2018). One of
manner for managing the attacks and predicting their type based
 the newest malicious traffic detection systems is OADSD (Zhang et al.,
on the employed hosts and the length of time that the attack was
 2023). OADSD works based on three steps: collecting the network
implemented. This implies that the attacks were captured based on
 traffic, extracting the important features, and detecting the anomalies.
time-specific scenarios under controlled settings, and the process was
 CTSCOPY (Mei et al., 2021) is an example as a provenance graphfully supervised (Tovarňák et al., 2020). Furthermore, certain event log based technique for cyber threat detection that uses system-level event
datasets (Tovarňák et al., 2020; MACCDC, 2012) have been introduced data streams to train an anomaly detection model. There was an
recently by capturing event logs, yet without classifying them into primary emphasize on constructing and upholding datasets suitable for
specific attack types. In contrast, our study uses a variety of data training and evaluating cybersecurity models and algorithms. Datasets
sources from different operating systems and network traffic types to such as ToN IoT dataset (Moustafa et al., 2020), game Theory and
categorize events based on attack and event types. Unlike traditional cybersecurity (GTCS) (Mahfouz et al., 2020), and ADFA linux dataset
approaches, our methodology prioritizes semantic features over non- (ADFA-LD12) (Creech and Hu, 2013) are critical for developing effecsemantic ones, making the classification process more challenging by tive cyber defense strategies and assessing the effectiveness of existing
assessing the model’s ability to identify event or attack types solely security measures. Table 1 summarizes the research works related to
from the message text. the scope of this study by grouping them based on their primary
 Earlier investigations (Kumar et al., 2023; Kalutharage et al., 2023; contributions into three categories: event log classification, cyberattack
Das et al., 2021) employed explainable AI (XAI) techniques to elucidate detection techniques, and the creation of new cyberattack datasets.
the contribution of numeric features in network flows for a specific To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing research that
type of attack. However, these studies did not delve into the semantic has devised a novel cyberattack detection technique with a newly
meaning of the textual content within event logs. The XAI tools aid diverse dataset of event logs, leveraging the semantic features of event
in identifying key features in vectorized log message representations, messages. Furthermore, there is no comprehensive dataset that includes
providing insights into the most influential semantic elements for attack a wide range of attack types. The majority of the existing data classified
detection. The interpretability of the vectorization process enhances the the event as normal or suspicious, and a few datasets classified the
comprehension of how specific text features contribute to categorizing event based on the attack type with limited labels. The research studies
various types of attacks. did not examine how much log messages contribute to the prediction
 process. Their technical focus was primarily on classifying the logs into
 As a result, this study suggests a novel approach for higher-level
 specific attack types. However, no effort was made to understand the
data classification, emphasizing the importance of the semantic content
 predictive nature of the attack types or the rationale behind classifying
of event messages in detecting intrusion. This is achieved by utilizing
 them into specific types as opposed to others. Their attention was
a diverse dataset of log events collected from various source environcentered on the outcome without delving into the underlying reasons.
ments, which undergoes systematic processing and analysis intending
 Conventional event log classification did not consider the individual
to detect attacks. The proposed approach provides detailed information
 contribution of log messages in generating each label, or how each
for classification procedures, aiding in attack-type detection. Different word in the entire text of the message contributes to the prediction
explainable AI techniques are employed to assess the impact of log process specifically.
words in the message text for predicting the attack type. Subsequently, In contrast to earlier studies, this paper proposes a new cyberata vectorization framework is established to evaluate the classifier’s tack detection framework and creates a dataset of log events from
capacity to learn a specific schema for decision-making, enabling it several source environments. This study also distinguishes itself by
to scrutinize the semantic content of the message for predicting attack incorporating various approaches from previous work, such as catetypes. The main contribution of this work is three-fold: gorization schema and semantic log vectorization, and incorporating

 2
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

Table 1
A summary of the recent related works.
 Aim Ref Methods Type of attacks Limitations
 Ramish et al. (2022) KNN, RF, SVM, MLP Brute Force, SQL Injection Purely based on binary classification
 Logs Gunawan et al. (2018) Kali Linux VM SQL Injection, XSS, WPA2 The victim side only contains Windows
 Classification event logs.
 Ceron et al. (2020) MikroTik honeypot Brute Force, Botnet Attacker avoidance of cloud-based
 honeypots and non-router devices
 Vu et al. (2019) LR, NN, LightGBM, – Purely based on binary classification
 XGBoost

 Zhang et al. (2023) OADSD, SVM, NB DDoS, DoS Deep learning not utilized
 Sriram et al. (2020) LSTM, RF, DT, NB, DoS, Reconnaissance, DDoS Purely based on network flow data.
 KNN, SVM, LR
 Cyberattack
 Vinayakumar et al. (2019) DNN DoS, Probe, R2L, U2R Reliance on predefined features and
 Detection
 labeled data
 Mei et al. (2021) CTSCOPY Ransomware, RCE, Phishing, Data Limited number of event types
 Theft
 Das et al. (2020) LR, NB, DT, NN, SVM SQL Injection, CRLF, XSS Using one data source
 Landauer et al. (2019) Netcat Script Webshell Attack Limited validity and reliability
 Skopik et al. (2022) AECID approach Outliers, Change in Trends Fluctuating data usage and infrastructure
 Anomalies changes
 Yagemann et al. (2021) MARSARA Spoofing, Delay Attacks High runtime overhead for PTs

 Moustafa et al. (2020) KNN, LOF, Clustering, Scanning, Ransomware, DoS, No attack detection experiments
 Correlation DDoS,
 Cyberattack Injection, MITM, XSS
 Datasets Sharafaldin et al. (2018) Kali and Windows 8.1 PCs Brute Force, DoS, DDoS Using a limited number of PCs
 Mahfouz et al. (2020) MLP, NB, DT, LR Brute Force, DDoS, Infiltration Using one dataset
 Ring et al. (2017) Nmap and Python Scripts Port Scans, Brute Force, DoS Limited to a fixed number of attacks.
 Creech and Hu (2013) Metasploit, TikiWiki tool Brute force, password, webshell Features lack data richness for reliable
 classification.
 Tovarňák et al. (2020) Kali Linux VMs Rreconnaissance, DoS, Web, Lake of attack labels
 Phishing,
 Ransomware, Data leakage
 Landauer et al. (2020) Port scanning,smtp- Port scan, brute force, and Services dependency and auto labeling
 user-enum, hydra tool webshell issue

more data sources in the data analysis procedure. The event logs are 2012 datasets contain event log messages that are recorded during
collected from Windows and Linux operating systems to provide a cyberattack testbeds without determining the specific attack for each
variety of events with nine types of attacks. The event logs are classified event message. The ultimate objective is to detect incoming cyberatbased on their messages, which is a missing feature in the body of tacks using the acquired knowledge from known attacks to predict and
research. Furthermore, by labeling each event based on its type, this identify new attacks on the network.
work determines the attack type from textual messages, which aids
in precisely determining the attack type. In this study, we explore 3.1.1. TLDCDE dataset
not only the classification procedure but also how each message con-
 The TLDCDE dataset has a wide range of event logs captured in
tributes to the determination of the attack type. Our approach involves
 an exercise network deployed in the KYPO cyber range platform. The
the utilization of explainable AI techniques to enhance transparency
 captured data was standardized into three unique event categories:
and comprehension in the decision-making process of identifying the
 archive of IP flow information export (IPFIX) traffic flows; archive of
system’s vulnerability to a specific attack type. Finally, the presented
 Linux Syslog entries with their text-based log messages, and archive
dataset is employed to evaluate the efficiency of diverse traditional and
 of Windows Event Log entries containing the payload of actual events
deep learning algorithms in the context of detecting cyberattacks.
 in raw XML. Each data type has a different number of samples. IPFIX
 traffic flow data was gathered from various protocols; Linux data was
3. Dataset collection and analysis
 gathered from various domains and applications; and Windows data
3.1. Dataset collection was gathered from audit events. The exercise is held between two
 teams: the red team and the blue team. A variety of users and twenty
 This study aims to bridge the gap from previous research by follow- learners were divided into six blue teams to protect an emulated critical
ing specific patterns to extract significant insights from the available information infrastructure from attackers in the red team. To simulate
datasets. Despite having few alternatives, we performed an extensive an internal environment, private IP ranges are used to address the blue
web search and ultimately identified three pertinent event log collec- team networks. Five subcategories represent the blue team network:
tions containing text messages that align with the objectives of this the demilitarized zone (DMZ), servers (SRV), operations (OPS), users
study. These datasets are (1) traffic and log data captured during (USR), and the virtual private network (VPN). The exercise aims to
a cyber-defense exercise dataset (TLDCDE) (Tovarňák et al., 2020), expose learners to cybersecurity incidents in a safe, isolated environ-
(2) austrian institute of technology (AIT) log data (Landauer et al., ment. The global gateway is the hub connecting all of the exercise’s
2020a), which provides synthetic log events appropriate for analyz- subnetworks. The exercise scenario uses the global network to imitate
ing intrusion detection systems, and (3) mid atlantic collegiate cyber the Internet. The service providers and the attackers are the two groups
defense Competition (MACCDC) dataset (MACCDC, 2012), collected of devices that make up the global network. The service providers
during a competitive test between university and college students. enable the blue teams and other genuine virtual participants in the
Additionally, a zero-shot dataset of event logs has also been considered exercise to access legitimate DNS, e-mail, and the web. This network
in this study, as described next. Cyber-defense exercise and MACCDC also includes the hub for the exercise’s routing and address translation.

 3
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

3.1.2. AIT log dataset greater control over data management and security, and the ability
 Another dataset that is used in this work is the AIT dataset. Landauer to tailor services to meet the specific needs of strategic imperatives.
et al. (2020a) created a new methodology using model-driven engi- This dataset did not contain any suspicious events. The vast majority
neering (MDE) techniques to collect a new log dataset. A simulation of the event logs concerned Windows services, boot events, crash
of a typical system infrastructure found in many enterprises was con- events, and processing events. This dataset is exclusively used for eventstructed. After analyzing usage statistics of some good technologies, type detection experiments due to its non-suspicious nature. Table 2
an Apache web server that hosts a mail platform and a content man- provides an overview of the traffic and log data collected from the four
agement system (CMS) that is viewed and used by a random number datasets.
of people was used. Open-source platforms with vulnerabilities, such
as horde groupware webmail and a web shop provided by OkayCMS, 3.2. The procedure of data labeling
were used.
 This testbed aims to create log data for assessing attack detection The labeling process is determined by either attack types or event
systems. Executing malicious activities on an idle machine, on the other types. The AIT dataset is already labeled, but the MACCDC dataset
hand, makes identification very easy because practically all created logs and traffic/log dataset need labeling. The dataset obtained from a
are likely to be relevant to the intrusion. Using the prominent web public local server was labeled solely based on event types due to its
automation tool selenium, a state machine that covers all necessary lack of suspicious events. A two-stage data labeling process has been
functions of the horde webmail and OkayCMS systems was constructed. employed, utilizing automated labeling based on message content and
The logs were gathered from four different testbeds. Each testbed is specific time intervals for each dataset. In the initial labeling phase,
made up of one web server with a database and a different set of linked all log events generated during the identified attack time intervals has
host machines, each used by one or more users. been classified as either suspicious or non suspicious, in accordance
 The log data gathered from the web servers contains Apache access, with the temporal information provided by the datasets. While this laerror logs, syscall logs, authentication logs, daemon logs, mail logs, sys- beling method is straightforward due to the ability to derive anomalous
logs, and user logs. In this testbed, two types of attacks were scheduled: time windows from attack scenario descriptions, it has the drawback of
multistep intrusion and webshell injection. The multistep intrusion has also categorizing non suspicious events occurring during attack periods
multiple tools generally used to exploit vulnerabilities to gain root as suspicious. The researchers in AIT employed a timely detection
access to a mail server. Scans for open ports and vulnerabilities are mechanism for event labeling as a preliminary step, ensuring that this
performed as the first two steps. The attacker then employs the SMTP- data was already labeled and eliminating the need for additional labeluser-enum tool to discover horde webmail accounts based on a list of ing. In contrast, the TLDCDE dataset contains time intervals without
popular names, followed by the hydra tool to brute-force log into one of corresponding labels. To address this, we applied similar mechanism
the accounts based on a list of standard passwords. The attack continues to (Landauer et al., 2020a) as initial step to label this data using a
with a Horde Webmail exploit that enables the upload of a webshell and script. Employing automated labeling proves advantageous due to its
remote command execution. speed and reduced effort requirements.
 However, the trade-off for this approach is a notable increase in
3.1.3. MACCDC 2012 dataset misclassification, as the code script may struggle to label unseen data.
 MACCDC (2012) is a one-of-a-kind opportunity for university and Samples that are not part of the available dataset may not be lacollege students to use their cybersecurity knowledge and skills in a beled correctly. Such untrained or unexpected scenarios can be hancompetitive test. Its distinctiveness lies in its focus on the operational dled by human professionals. Consequently, resorting to manual labelaspects of safeguarding an already established network infrastructure. ing emerges as a viable solution, even a time-consuming and labor-
The logs were collected from the SecRepo2 website. The MACCDC intensive one, particularly when handling extensive datasets to ensure
completion has two participating teams and two rounds. Each team al- accurate classification of the data. Landauer et al. (2020a) had difternates between attacking and defending the competition’s network. In ficulty distinguishing between interleaved malicious and normal prothe first round, team A assaults the network while team B defends it. In cesses due to the reliance on the code script in their labeling procedure,
the second round, team B assaults the network while team A defends it. which resulted in misclassification.
Both sides employ their campaigns to attack the network, evading the On the other hand, Ramish et al. (2022) and Chung et al. (2023),
defensive team’s preemptive and preventive strategies. Throughout the labeled their data manually to avoid the misclassification that will
contest, the teams must ensure that the systems provide the required result from automatic classification. Therefore, we performed manual
services when attacked by a volunteer Red Team. Furthermore, the corrections as a second phase to improve the reliability of the labeled
teams must complete periodic ‘‘injects’’ that imitate business operations events. The subsequent subsections explain the procedure of manual
that IT professionals must deal with in the real world. The competition’s correction applied to each attack and event type.
network had 4757 hosts, with 4739 experiencing malicious traffic. This
generated 2,677,375 snort alarms across 25 classes (Peshave et al., 3.2.1. Labeling based on attack types
2022). The malicious network event trajectories were used to construct In this work, a wide range of Windows and Linux event log files
sub-sequences of length 10, resulting in 658,343 unique subsequences, were obtained to classify them based on the attack types. The log
out of a total of 51,606 unique subsequences. messages were analyzed to discover the threat scenarios followed by
 the attackers. However, all the event logs could be suspicious, as they
3.1.4. Zero-shot dataset were captured in a controlled environment under cyber defense attack
 In contrast to the previous datasets, this data was specifically conditions. All data was collected when the attacks were actively pergathered from a local server solely for this study. The data collected on formed, while users were simultaneously interacting with the system.
Tuesday, October 25, 2022, from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. includes events So the events in this study were classified into suspicious and nongenerated using various systems, including service control manager, suspicious depending on the log message’s semantic meaning and the
Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-General, Microsoft-Windows- recommendations provided in monitoring active directory for signs of
TerminalServices-Printers, and Microsoft Windows WAS. It contains compromise that were documented by Microsoft.
Windows event logs representing daily activities, information on the There is a list of events that should be monitored in any environinstitution’s status, performance, and security, as well as information ment to ensure security and detect potential threats. By leveraging
on the apps and services that run on that server. This server gives local established classification methods and industry best practices, the event
hosts quick, dependable access to critical resources and information, logs were categorized into suspicious and non-suspicious events. The

 4
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Table 2
 A description of the traffic and log data collected from the four datasets.
 Dataset Data source Samples Info source
 IPFIX traffic flows 469,113 DNS, HTTP, DHCP, SSH, andPOP3 protocols.
 TLDCDE Linux 6,083,409 smbd, cron, sshd, usermod, firewalld,and useradd daemons and apps.
 Windows 2,901,154 user login/ logout, credentials validation,and privilege escalation audit events.
 AIT Linux 15,817 Apache2, PHP7, Exim, Horde, OkayCMS,Suricata, ClamAV, and MariaDB.
 MACCDC PCAP files 2,677,375 TCP, ICMP, SMP, UDP, HTTP, DHCP,and routing protocols.
 Zero-shot Windows 70,357 User login/ logout, credentials validation,and privilege escalation audit events.

 Fig. 1. Example system logs illustrating static and variable message components.

dataset was filtered by removing all the non-suspicious events and force attacks. In Linux, attempts with different credentials, ignored
starting a new classification to classify each suspicious event based on by the PAM service, and attempts exceeding the maximum allowed
the attack type. Various attempts have been made to carry out illegal number by an invalid user were classified as brute force attacks. All
actions while using explicit credentials resulting in many cyberattacks, authentication failures, attempts taken by an invalid user, and aborted
including reading administrator credentials, numerous attempts to scan login attempts were also classified as brute force attacks.
open ports, receiving spam emails, obtaining permissions for risky Data leakage attack. Is the disclosure of sensitive data to an
operations, and many more. The event logs were classified into nine untrustworthy environment. Data leakage occurs due to cyberattacks,
types of attack: network reconnaissance attack (NRA), credential based inside job responsibilities, or unintentional data loss or exposure in
attack (CBA), data leakage attack (DLA), brute force attack (BFA), an organization. As a result, in Windows data, any attempt to read
phishing attack (PHA), pass the ticket attack (PTT), denial of service sensitive information in the system carried out by a third party or the
attack (DoS), web attack (WA) and privilege escalation attack (PEA). admin/administrator was classified as a data leakage attack because
 Network reconnaissance attack. Is the foundational step for most many events in the system involve other parties reading the admintypes of attacks. The attacker attempts to gather critical information istrator’s credentials. Due to the reading of credentials by users who
about the victim, such as identifying the system’s weak points, the were not the owners, the log-on attempts using explicit credentials were
open ports, IP addresses, network topology, domain names, user names, classified as data leakage attacks. In Linux, all the attempts to load the
password complexity requirements, and more. As a result, in Windows host key, all the attempts to check passwords by unknown users, all the
data, any attempt to read sensitive information in the system carried attempts to get a rivest shamir adleman (RSA) certificate, all the TLS
out by a third party or by the admin/administrator was classified as library problems that describe illegal usage of data files or certificates,
a network reconnaissance attack because many events in the system and all the attempts to get AFS tokens were classified as a data leakage
involve other parties reading the administrator’s credentials. About attacks.
Linux, all attempts to probe, scan, or send unusual HTTP requests on a Pass the ticket attack. Is a cyberattack where an attacker steals
specified host, and all Nmap and Nikto events were incorporated into and uses Kerberos tickets, specifically the ticket-granting ticket (TGT)
the Network Reconnaissance Attack. or Service Tickets, to gain unauthorized access to a network. Kerberos is
 Privilege escalation attack. Aims to expand the users’ access per- an authentication protocol used in enterprise environments to manage
missions for critical tasks such as troubleshooting, financial reporting, secure access to resources. The attacker compromises a system through
or program installation. There are two types of privilege escalation: phishing or exploiting vulnerabilities, extracts Kerberos tickets from the
vertical and horizontal privilege escalation. Vertical privilege escala- compromised system, and impersonates users to gain access to other
tion involves attackers using limited user accounts to increase their systems or services. An attacker can use a pass-the-ticket attack to get
privileges, potentially by assigning special privileges or adding them a Kerberos ticket-granting ticket (TGT) from LSASS memory on one
to a security group, while still using the same account. On the other computer and use it on another to request Kerberos service tickets
hand, horizontal privilege escalation allows attackers to access higher- (TGS) to access the network resources. So, all the Kerberos service
priority admin credentials, allowing them to move around the network ticket requests were classified as pass-the-ticket attacks. This type of
without detection. This type of attack found only in Windows event attack was found only in the Windows event logs.
logs, involves assigning special privileges to new accounts or adding Denial of service attack. Is a type of cyberattack in which the
new members to security groups. These events were not isolated or rou- attacker attempts to make a machine or network resource inaccessible
tine administrative actions. Instead, they occurred frequently alongside to the end users by causing service crashes for the connected device.
other attack patterns, such as denial-of-service or system exploitation This is done by overwhelming the system with millions of requests
attempts. This behavior suggests a deliberate effort to exploit vulner- to cause system breakdown or application and service crashes. The
abilities and elevate access rights, which is a hallmark of privilege goal of the attacks was to cause system breakdowns or crashes in
escalation attacks. applications and services. In Windows, all application or service crashes
 Brute force attack. Involves an attacker systematically trying all were classified as denial of service (DoS) attacks, as they disrupted
possible passwords and passphrases until the correct combination is dis- critical functionality and aligned with the intent of denying access
covered. In Windows data, failed login attempts were classified as brute to resources. While crashes can sometimes result from software bugs,

 5
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

the consistent targeting of key services indicated a deliberate effort to Table 3
 Statistics of attack types dataset.
compromise system availability. In Linux, several indicators were also
classified as DoS attacks, including any attempts to terminate processes Attack type Training Validation Testing Total

using SIGKILL, dropped client connections, unresponsive authentica- Credential-Based Attack 5,599 623 1,179 7,401
 Brute Force Attack 2,637 293 1,000 3,930
tion processes, the inability to reach specific hosts, packet loss, and
 Privilege Escalation 1,993 222 500 2,715
lost connections after establishing a new connection from an unknown Network Reconnaissance 1,795 200 500 2,495
host. These actions undermined the system’s ability to maintain service Pass-the-Ticket 320 36 150 506
continuity, reflecting the core characteristics of a DoS attack aimed at Web Attack 238 26 110 374
overwhelming and destabilizing the environment. Data Leakage 202 22 100 324
 Denial of Service 118 13 42 173
 Credential based attack. Involves attackers stealing user creden-
 Phishing 4 0 4 8
tials to gain access to a network, bypass security measures, and steal
 Total 12,906 1,435 3,585 17,926
sensitive information, with the initial step being to steal credentials.
In Windows data, all successful or failed login or logout attempts from
suspicious IP addresses in the used dataset have a network logon type.
As a result, these suspicious events were carried out on the network describing the event. On the other hand, network traffic logs, captured
side. On this side, the attackers have several options for stealing cre- in PCAP files, record network data such as timestamps, source and
dentials. They can steal them by sending a fake message to trick the destination IPs, ports, protocols (TCP, UDP), and packet content. These
user into giving the attacker access to sensitive information. This fake logs focus on raw network traffic and are analyzed with tools such as
message may contain a forward link to a malicious website, a reset Wireshark. Table 4 summarizes the formats for Windows, Linux, and
password link, or others. There are a variety of paths the attacker can network traffic. Fig. 1 demonstrates example log messages from the
take, such as phishing, pass-the-hash, data leakage, brute force, and collected dataset, showcasing both static and variable components.
more. Concerning Linux, all the connections and disconnections, all All the collected system logs whether suspicious or non-suspicious
opened and closed sessions, and all the login attempts with the PLAIN were manually labeled into eight distinct event types based on the
method from suspicious IP addresses were classified as credential-based semantic content of the log messages, as they did not come with
attacks. predefined event classification categories, as detailed in Table 5. For
 Phishing attack. Aims to exploit user vulnerabilities by constantly example, events involving account logins, user account creation or
seeking ways to entice consumers to visit a phishing website. Spoofed deletion, successful or failed logins, or credential authentication were
emails are often professionally designed to target users and deceive classified under Account Usage. System start-up, shutdown, or update
them. Therefore, all the attempts that were made by spammers to hit times were categorized as boot events, while the installation of new
the mail server with bogus domains were classified as phishing attacks. applications or services fell under software and service installation.
This type of attack is found only in the Linux event logs. Crash events included logs detailing application crashes, errors, or
 Web attack. Is unauthorized third-party access to systems or net- hangs, and actions involving clearing history or files, such as through
works, aiming to destroy or steal sensitive data from information hypertext preprocessor (PHP), were labeled as clearing events. Any use
systems, frameworks, computer networks, or personal devices. All web- of Internet message access protocol (IMAP) was classified as a Mailing
shell attack events were added to the web attack. Attackers can manip- Event, and logs related to the initiation and completion of processes
ulate GET parameters to inject SQL queries into databases, allowing were grouped under Processing events. This manual labeling ensured
unauthorized data access or modification. They can also use POST data consistency across the dataset, addressing the variability in log formats
to execute arbitrary commands if the application does not properly and content. Based on Table 5 that describes the data statistics for the
sanitize inputs. therefore, all the successful or failed attempts to connect various types of events, it can be observed that the account usage events
to the server, any disconnection from unknown, any suspicious GET dominate the dataset, with a total of 14,173 messages. In contrast, the
or POST requests, all not permitted operations, all the external client processing events have the fewest messages in the dataset.
requests from the server with a reserved local IP address to use it Fig. 2 illustrates the event messages (a) and the attack messages
as a legal client for 24 h, and all the requests that imply opening (b). The 𝑥-axis indicates the message number in the dataset, while the
new sessions for external clients and providing them with configured 𝑦-axis indicates the number of words in each message. As shown in this
information were classified as a web attack. This type of attack was figure, the number of messages in the attack types data reaches more
found only in the Linux event logs. All the SQL injections and all than 17,500. The length of messages varies with the number of words.
the attempts to establish an encrypted connection between a web Some of the event messages have more than 5500 words, while others
server and a web browser using the secure sockets layer (SSL) security contain no more than five words. The number of the events’ messages
protocol were classified as web attacks. is enormous; it has surpassed 17,900.
 Table 3 shows the statistics on attack types within the data suggest
that the dataset is predominantly characterized by credential-based 4. Methodology
attacks, comprising a total of 7401 messages. Conversely, the phishing
attack represents the smallest number of messages in the dataset. This This section discusses the methodology used to analyze and evaluate
can be attributed to the fact that the overwhelming majority of events the collected dataset. Fig. 3 shows the general proposed framework
in the dataset revolved around the utilization of credentials, such as consists of five stages: data collection and preparation which is the
log-in and log-out events. initial step that involves gathering data from various sources, preprocessing, cleaning, and transforming it into a suitable analysis format.
3.2.2. Labeling based on event types Feature extraction aims to identify key features that improve model
 In this paper, the event logs are obtained from different sources such performance and make precise predictions. Architecture construction
as Windows, Linux, and network traffic. Each log source has a distinct involves designing and implementing a model architecture, machine
format suited to its environment. Windows logs are structured with learning, or deep learning. After training the model, it is crucial to
components like Event ID, timestamp, source (e.g., Security, System), assess its performance using appropriate metrics to assess its accuracy,
user, and a detailed message, typically stored in the EVTX format, reliability, and generalization capabilities on unseen data. Finally, sewhich requires tools such as Event Viewer to read. Linux logs are mantic feature analysis involves analyzing the model’s predictions and
stored as plain text files and follow a simpler format that includes the features to comprehend its semantics, interpret results, and provide
timestamp, host, process, log level (e.g., info, error), and a message insights for decision-making using explainable AI tools.

 6
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Table 4
 A Summary of Log Formats for Windows, Linux, and Network Traffic.
 Log type Components Format Example
 Windows - Event ID EVTX An account failed to log on. Subject:
 - Timestamp Security ID: S-1-0-0 Account Name:
 - Source - Account Domain: - Logon ID:0 × 0
 - User Logon Type:3 Account ForWhich
 - Event Type Logon Failed: Security ID:S-1-0-0
 - Message AccountName: User Account Domain:
 WORKSTATION Failure Information:
 Failure Reason: The specified
 account’s password has expired.
 Status: 0xC0000224
 Linux - Timestamp Plain text Time server_name APPLICATION:
 - Host model event Authentication
 - Process/Service failed. [pid 12345
 - Log Level on line 678 of
 - Message ‘‘/path/to/file.php’’]
 Network Traffic - Timestamp PCAP Packet No: 1633247 Time:
 - Source IP/Port 1706.530000 Source IP:
 - Destination IP/Port 192.168.X.X Destination IP:
 - Protocol 192.168.Y.Y Protocol:
 - Packet Length TCP Length: 70 Source Port:
 - Packet Data 50916 → Destination
 Port: 80 [ACK] Sequence No:
 306 Acknowledgment:
 464 Window Size: 15680 Length:
 0 Timestamp Val:
 5734915 Timestamp Echo:1882902

Table 5
Statistics of event types dataset.
 Event type Training Validation Testing Total
 Account Usage 10,636 1,182 2,355 14,173
 Mailing Events 567 63 310 940
 Processing Events 582 65 200 847
 Crash Events 624 70 400 1,094
 Windows Services 251 28 150 429
 Software&Service Installation 146 16 100 262
 Boot Events 76 8 40 124
 Clearing Events 39 4 30 73
 Total 12,921 1,436 3,585 17,942

4.1. Data preprocessing

 The event logs have been collected from four different sources. The
AIT dataset already had labels. The other datasets were unlabeled, so a
new framework has been created to include a unique phase for labeling
them depending on the attack and event types. The dataset obtained
from the local server has been labeled solely based on event types due
to its lack of suspicious events. However, after gathering data from
several sources, a new dataset that shows a great deal of variety has
been constructed and used to evaluate this framework. Fig. 3 shows
the preprocessing phase consists of four substeps, starting with data
transformation. In this step, the data has several forms. It is converted
from JSON to TXT, then to the XML format, and finally to CSV format.
The second step involves removing duplicates by eliminating identical
 Fig. 2. Event messages’ words counted by (a) Event and (b) Attack Messages.
events. This step is crucial, given that a substantial portion of the
ground truth data was identified as duplicated. In the third step, the
data is categorized based on event types, with events being reclassified
into suspicious and non-suspicious categories. Finally, the dataset is event message were included because they were a crucial aspect of
filtered by removing all the non-suspicious events to start a new type predicting the type of attack or type of event. In the feature extraction
of classification based on the attack types. phase, CountVectorizer (Manjunatha and Kempanna, 2022) was used
 to convert a given text into a vector based on the number of times
4.2. Feature extraction that each word appears across the full text. There were several text
 messages with variable lengths that needed to turn each word in them
 The data is primarily composed of event messages and their labels; into a vector to make them more useful in the text analysis process.
therefore, no standard technique is utilized during the feature selec- On the other hand, the Bag-of-Words technique was employed for deep
tion phase. However, all of the words contained in the text of each learning feature extraction. This approach extracts numerical features

 7
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Fig. 3. A depiction of the generic classification framework.

 Fig. 4. A block diagram of semantic feature extraction from log messages.

from text material in various ways, including tokenizing, counting, and complex, high-dimensional datasets. Traditional machine learning alnormalizing. This work employed the tokenizing method, which entails gorithms provide robust classification and predictive capabilities by
tokenizing strings, assigning a numeric ID to each potential token, and effectively identifying patterns within event features. These features
then generating token separators out of white spaces and punctuation. often represent distinct aspects of system behavior, such as user login
Fig. 4 explains how the countVectorizer and tokenization techniques attempts, access to sensitive files, and changes in system configurations,
extract the words from the event message. each carrying semantic meaning related to user activity and potential
 security threats. Also, deep learning models excel in capturing intri-
4.3. Data split cate spatial and temporal dependencies in the data. These models are
 highly effective in identifying and mitigating potential cyber threats
 due to their resilience against overfitting, scalability for large datasets,
 The data splitting step involved implementing numerous experiand enhanced ability to uncover subtle relationships. Integrating maments to pick the best data splitting for each used model and get the
 chine learning and deep learning techniques enhances the accuracy of
best results. The data was split into training, validation, and testing
 detection mechanisms, improving cybersecurity strategies for digital indatasets. A training dataset of 70%, a validation dataset of 10%, and
 frastructure protection, and promoting a comprehensive understanding
a testing dataset of 20% were used. Also, a zero random state with
 of the semantic meaning behind each feature.
stratification was applied to give all the datasets the same proportions
 This work used traditional machine learning and deep learning
of class labels.
 algorithms. For the traditional machine learning for performance evaluation. Seven standard algorithms were applied: multi-layer perceptron
4.4. ML and DL modeling (MLP), logistic regression (LR), random forest (RF), support vector classifier (SVC), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), stochastic gradient
 The use of various models in cybersecurity and event log attack descent (SGD), and naive bayes (NB). For deep learning models, we
detection relies on their unique capabilities to process and analyze evaluated the BERT-based model, convolutional neural network (CNN),

 8
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

bidirectional recurrent neural network (Bi-RNN), long short-term mem- 5.2. Experimental results
ory (LSTM), bidirectional long short-term memory (Bi-LSTM), bidirectional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU), and a hybrid model made up of This work conducted three types of experiments: the first was based
a CNN layer and a GRU layer. on the attack types dataset, the second was based on the event types
 dataset, and the last experiment was based on a zero-shot dataset.
4.5. Evaluation metrics A combination of traditional machine learning and deep learning algorithms was employed in all experiments. In each experiment, the
 Four distinct metrics were used to evaluate the performance of models’ performance was evaluated using four metrics: accuracy, precithe machine learning and deep learning models, which are: accuracy, sion, recall, and f1-score. The following subsections present the models’
precision, recall, and F1-score. Accuracy denotes the ratio of correct results based on the dataset types.
predictions to total samples, precision indicates the ratio of correctly
classified positive predictions, recall refers to the ratio of the positive 5.2.1. Performance based on attack type
samples that were correctly classified to the total number of positive With the best Hyperparameters for each used model, the CNN, Bisamples, and F1-score analyzes the classification accuracy by consid- LSTM, Bi-GRU, and a hybrid model made up of a CNN layer and a
ering both the precision and recall metrics. The recall measures the GRU layer were utilized under the same experimental configurations.
model’s ability to identify relevant events for a specific attack type. It is These models were trained throughout a 10-epoch session with an
the fraction of true positive events out of all actual positive events. The 8-batch size. The BERT-Based model were trained throughout a 10-
objective is to maximize true positives while minimizing false negatives epoch session with a 32-batch size. On the other hand, the LSTM
when classifying events based on their actual attack type. High recall and Bi-RNN models were trained over a 7-epoch session with a batch
is particularly important because false negatives (events that belong size of 32. Tables 7 and 8 summarize the performance of machine
to an attack type but are misclassified as not belonging to that type) learning and deep learning algorithms in terms of accuracy, weighted
are costly and potentially harmful. For instance, if a suspicious event is precision, weighted recall, weighted f1-score, macro precision, macro
misclassified as non-suspicious, it may go undetected by administrators, recall, and macro f1-score. As demonstrated in Table 8, the XGBoost
allowing attackers to continue their activity, potentially causing greater model obtained the best ML results, with a recall of 98.01, and a
damage to the system. On the other hand, Precision is the accuracy of precision of 97.94. The results of the ML models were less efficient
positive predictions, focusing on the proportion of true positive events than the results of the DL models. The BERT classifier achieved the
out of all classified as positive. High precision is crucial to minimize best results, with a recall of 98.77 and a precision of 98.98. The
false positives, where non-suspicious events are incorrectly flagged as accuracy metric has a sober limitation since it provides values that
suspicious, which can overwhelm administrators and reduce system are less distinct and discriminable. As a result, its capabilities to select
efficiency. This study emphasizes both recall and precision to ensure and determine the best detection model are hampered. The accuracy
that the model not only captures all relevant events but also minimizes is less informative and biased toward the minority class. Therefore,
unnecessary false alarms. A balance between high recall and precision the attention is highlighted on recall and precision results, as they
ensures the model can effectively detect minority classes (i.e., rare are considered the best discriminators in this context. Recall ensures
attack types) without overwhelming administrators with false positives, that the model identifies as many attacks as possible (minimizing
which is critical in our scenario where both false negatives and false missed detections), while precision focuses on reducing false positives
positives carry significant consequences. (ensuring non-attacks are not mistakenly flagged).

4.6. Semantic feature analysis 5.2.2. Performance based on event types
 With the best hyper parameters for each used model, the CNN, Bi-
 Explainable AI techniques shed light on the decision-making process LSTM, Bi-GRU, and a hybrid model made up of a CNN layer and a GRU
of black-box classifiers and help analysts understand and confidently layer were utilized under the same experimental configurations. These
accept expected outputs (Kasturi, 2024). This work uses explainable models were trained throughout a 10-epoch session with an 8-batch
techniques to understand the decision-making process of machine/deep size. The BERT-Based model was trained throughout a 10-epoch session
learning models that got the best results. The decision made by a DL or with a 32-batch size. On the other hand, the LSTM and Bi-RNN models
ML model has important repercussions in determining the type of attack were trained over a 7-epoch session with a batch size of 32. As shown
that the system is vulnerable to, as well as the approach that adminis- in Table 9, the SGD model achieved the best ML results, with a recall of
trators will take to deal with such an attack (Alzu’bi et al., 2024). We 99.05 and a precision of 99.02. The performance of the ML model was
used LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and Captum (Kokhlikyan et al., 2019) less effective compared to the results achieved by the DL model. With
to interpret each word in the event message, to explain its impact on a recall of 99.27 and a precision of 99.29, the BERT classifier achieved
the final decision, and to discover biases and incorrect decisions in the the best results.
predicted data. A thorough study has revealed that these two methods
are highly effective in explaining features and can justify any type of 5.3. Discussion
prediction made by a supervised learning model (Gohel et al., 2021).
 5.3.1. Model optimization for attack detection
5. Results and discussion This study addresses the effectiveness of machine learning and deep
 learning algorithms in identifying attacks and events. Transformer-
5.1. Experiments configuration based deep learning models, such as BERT, are especially successful
 in combating complex and nuanced cybersecurity attacks because they
 The experiments were conducted on a professional cloud processing can capture greater contextual connections in data, which is critical
platform with a powerful GPU. The proposed event log classifier was for detecting subtle or changing attack trends. Traditional machine
implemented using Python and machine learning packages such as learning models including XGBoost and Random Forest are effective
TensorFlow and Keras. The client system was equipped with an Nvidia in detecting attacks, with accuracy close to deep learning models.
T4 Tensor Core GPU, Intel Core i7 processor, and 12 GB RAM. Each These methods allow rapid and resource-efficient detection, making
model was trained for a different number of epochs with a learning them ideal for real-time threat monitoring. Balancing detection rates
rate of 2e−5 regarding BERT. Table 6 summarizes the hyper-parameters among attack types is critical, and models excelling in macro measures,
used for each model. such as BERT, are particularly successful at detecting less common

 9
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Table 6
 The hyper-parameters of the implemented DL models.
 Hyper-param. BERT CNN Bi-LSTM LSTM Bi-GRU Hybrid Bi-RNN
 Loss Entropy Entropy Entropy Entropy Entropy Entropy Entropy
 Activation SM,R SM,R SM SM SM SM,R SM/Tanh
 Optimizer Adam Adam Adam Adam Adam Adam Adam
 Epochs 10 10 10 7 10 10 7
 Batch Size 32 8 8 32 8 8 32
 Embedding 768 100 32 100 100 100 100
 Dropout 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.25,0.5 0.25,0.3,0.5 0.2

 SM: Softmax, R: ReLU, Tanh: Hyperbolic Tangent.

Table 7 Table 10
A summary of the ML and DL results. A summary of training and testing times complexity for the DL models.
 Data type Model Accuracy Weighted average (%) Macro average (%) Model Attack type (s) Event type (s)
 Precision F1-score Precision F1-score Training Inference Training Inference
 Attack XGBoost 98.01 97.94 97.96 96.86 96.27 BERT 290 48 290 49
 Type BERT 98.77 98.98 98.81 96.86 97.56 BiLSTM 32 2 176 12
 Event SGD 99.05 99.02 99.03 97.26 96.82 BiRNN 703 20 1523 141
 Type BERT 99.27 99.29 99.27 97.14 97.51 BiGRU 45 3 290 13
 LSTM 1089 32 2272 250
 CNN 7 0.002 10 1
Table 8 Hybrid 18 1.5 95 4
A summary of the experimental results for the attack types.
 Type Model Weighted average (%) Weighted macro (%)
 Precision Recall Precision Recall
 previous work by decreasing the model training time and focusing on
 MLP 97.66 97.68 95.72 95.10
 LR 97.69 97.68 95.31 95.27
 one critical feature, the semantic context of the log message, instead
 SVC 95.39 95.67 83.70 78.83 of relying on numerous numerical features. This approach reduces the
 ML RF 97.04 97.01 94.14 93.69 computing costs and training durations and enables a better under-
 SGD 97.51 97.40 94.81 95.23 standing of patterns and detection of attacks. It also allows for faster
 NB 95.94 95.95 96.26 89.29
 training and inference while maintaining high accuracy in real-time
 XGBoost 97.94 98.01 96.86 95.80
 attack detection.
 BERT 98.98 98.77 96.86 98.63
 Bi-LSTM 97.92 97.68 96.91 94.84
 This technique maximizes computational efficiency and real-time
 LSTM 97.61 97.60 86.45 84.45 performance, addressing scaling difficulties in previous approaches. As
 DL CNN 96.99 96.51 94.87 96.23 shown in Table 10, BERT effectively detects attack and event types, but
 Bi-GRU 97.11 96.93 96.97 96.42 its high computational cost makes it less suitable for real-time detec-
 Hybrid 96.61 96.51 96.42 95.07
 tion. BiLSTM offers a more efficient alternative with a shorter training
 Bi-RNN 96.37 95.98 97.00 82.80
 time of 5 min (32 s per epoch) for attack-type detection and 29.3 min
 (176 s per epoch) for event-type detection. Its low time complexity
Table 9 makes it suitable for log attack detection. On the other hand, BiRNN
A summary of the experimental results for the event types.
 has higher computational costs with training times of 82 min (703 s
 Type Model Weighted average (%) Weighted macro (%)
 per epoch) for attack type and 177.6 min (1523 s per epoch) for event
 Precision Recall Precision Recall type, limiting its applicability in real-time intrusion detection. BiGRU is
 MLP 98.57 98.57 95.19 94.98 a strong candidate for attack and event type recognition, with training
 LR 98.64 98.66 97.13 96.03
 times of 7.5 and 48.3 min, respectively. It incorporates performance
 SVC 97.49 97.57 96.89 91.61
 ML RF 98.61 98.63 96.59 95.98
 and speed, making it a viable option. LSTM models require longer
 SGD 99.02 99.05 97.26 96.42 training time because to inherent gating mechanisms, but CNNs have
 NB 96.79 96.54 90.90 93.03 outstanding speed with less training time. CNNs are often employed for
 XGBoost 98.31 98.38 96.58 94.50 image data, yet they offer the potential for fast anomaly detection in
 DL BERT 99.29 99.27 97.14 98.08 cybersecurity activities. The hybrid model, which combines complexity
 Bi-LSTM 98.89 98.74 96.31 95.62 and performance, reaches a compromise, with training durations of
 LSTM 99.00 98.68 97.01 95.24
 CNN 99.02 98.77 94.44 95.72
 3 min for attack type and 15.8 min for event type detection. The
 Bi-GRU 98.22 98.04 96.08 93.44 hybrid technique minimizes training time and solves the problem of
 Hybrid 97.83 97.65 92.96 90.61 high computational costs in (Sajid et al., 2024), without compromis-
 Bi-RNN 96.92 96.40 88.80 89.48 ing much performance. This paper uses model design optimization
 to achieve a balance between computational efficiency and real-time
 performance. The main strategies include decreasing training time,
but vital attacks, which is necessary for reliable defense systems. In balancing complexity and speed, and emphasizing scalability.
cybersecurity, it is important to detect anomalies and hostile activity Models including BiLSTM, CNN, and Hybrid surpass others in terms
with minimal delay and high accuracy. Models must balance computing of speed while maintaining accuracy. The CNN model takes just
efficiency and detection performance, especially in real-time networks. 1.16 min to detect attack types, making it perfect for real-time ap-
 Sajid et al. (2024) outlined the difficulty of using deep learning plications. The hybrid model, which keeps the benefits of complex
models, especially hybrid models, which are accurate but have high architectures while reducing computing, has a training period of only
computational costs and data volumes and face challenges in large-scale 3 min for threat detection, indicating a possible middle ground for realnetworks due to trade-offs between vertical and horizontal scalability. time cybersecurity applications. Focusing on models that demand fewer
These models can create processing delays, limiting their usefulness in resources allows these models to scale more efficiently in dispersed conhigh-speed network traffic situations. We addressed the limitations of texts, managing high quantities of network traffic without bottlenecks.

 10
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Fig. 5. Message explanations for each attack class.

Table 11 compares the performance of several models in terms of the outcomes and assured decision-makers could depend on them in critical
number of classes, training, and inference time. situations. XAI successfully balances performance and openness, which
 Our CNN-based detection model surpasses the other models in are essential to preserving accuracy and accountability in real-time cyterms of training time, taking only 7 s to complete the procedure. In bersecurity systems, assuring the advancement of sophisticated models
comparison, the LSTM (Sajid et al., 2024), DCNNBiLSTM (Hnamte and without compromising interpretability.
Hussain, 2023), and ADS (Muna et al., 2018) models require 73.41,
202, and 119.03 s, respectively. This demonstrates how efficient the 5.3.2. Semantic message explanation
CNN model is in learning patterns from data. Inference times differ This study used LIME tool to interpret the XG-Boost model pregreatly between models. The DCNNBiLSTM model has the longest dictions by creating human-readable explanations. Fig. 5 depicts local
inference time (95.04 s), while the ADS model has a little longer explanations for a specific instance of each class label in the data to
inference time (2.25 s) than our CNN model, which takes just 2 ms. identify the input data features that were most important in formu-
This shows that our CNN model not only trains faster but also predicts lating a given prediction. The highlighted words in the text message
more accurately, making it more suited for real-time applications. Our contributed the most to the prediction process. The greater the color
CNN model’s performance in terms of training and inference time intensity, the stronger the effect. Each word contributes either posishows that it is more scalable and applicable to large-scale or real-time tively or negatively to the prediction process. If the word appears under
applications. The short inference time, in particular, makes it perfect for the number of the label class, it has a positive effect. If it is listed
scenarios requiring rapid decision-making, such as online classification in the NOT label class, it signifies that it perplexed the model and
or real-time monitoring. Previous research (Sajid et al., 2024; Hnamte referred to another class label, which leads to an incorrect prediction.
and Hussain, 2023; Muna et al., 2018) lacks model interpretability, The class labels are encoded and represented numerically, such that 0
which is critical for decision-making. Complex models, such as deep indicates a brute force attack, 1 indicates a credential-based attack, 2
learning, can provide complex predictions, making it difficult for users indicates a data leakage attack, 3 indicates a denial of service attack, 4
to trust or evaluate the results. This lack of transparency makes it indicates a network reconnaissance attack, 5 indicates a pass-the-ticket
difficult to explain the origins of some predictions. To solve this issue, attack, 6 indicates a phishing attack, 7 indicates a privilege escalation
we included XAI tools in our model pipeline, which give clear, trans- attack, and 8 indicates a web attack. The labels brute force attack (0),
parent explanations for our models’ predictions and insights into the credential-based attack (1), data leakage attack (2), denial of service
features that influenced each decision. This boosted trust in the model’s attack (3), and web attack (8), have a vast majority of the words that

 11
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Table 11
 A comparison of model performance with prior works.
 Ref Model No. of Classes Training (s) Inference (s)
 Sajid et al. (2024) LSTM 5 73.41 –
 Hnamte and Hussain (2023) DCNNBiLSTM 3 202 95.04
 Muna et al. (2018) ADS 10 119.03 2.25
 Ours CNN 9 7 0.002

 Fig. 6. A representation of the token contribution in BERT layers.

contributed positively to the prediction process. The words ‘‘user’’ and layer. In the context of BERT, PMF refers to the output layer prediction,
‘‘invalid’’ contribute the most to the brute force attack, and this label where each node indicates the probability of a specific token in the
has a prediction probability of 100%. The most significant word in text given the input. In this study, the PMF is calculated utilizing the
credential-based attacks was ‘‘computer’’, which has a weight of 0.47. attribution values of the best word that contributed positively in each
The prediction probability for this label is also 100%. Data leakage class. Fig. 7 shows the PMF for all class labels in the last layer of BERT
attack, network reconnaissance attack, pass-the-ticket attack, and priv- is high because this is where the model makes its final prediction.
ilege escalation attack have the same prediction probabilities. On the The output layer is a fully connected layer that computes the
other hand, denial of service attack, phishing attack, and web attack probability distribution over the entire text using a softmax activation
have variant probabilities due to the bias for other labels, exhibiting function. The last layer identifies the most likely token (word) given
prediction probabilities of 0.47, 0.87, and 0.90, respectively. Words the input and context provided by the rest of the BERT model. High
such as ‘‘type’’, ‘‘logon’’, and ‘‘logged’’ have a negative impact on the PMF values at the BERT’s final layer imply that the model is confident
prediction results in several class labels due to their repetition in event in its predictions for a certain token in the given text. Attribution
messages that belong to various attacks. entropy is a measure of feature attribution confusion that can be used
 Fig. 6 depicts a heat map of token attributions for the BERT predic- to detect circumstances where a model’s predictions are less accurate
 or more difficult to explain. In this work, the attribution entropies are
tion across all layers. It is worth noting that the word ‘‘authentication’’
 calculated using the Shannon entropy. The Shannon entropy can be
has increasing attribution from layer one to layer nine in the BFA class.
 used in the context of BERT to quantify the randomness or uncertainty
This significance is gradually fading in the last three layers. On the
 of the model’s predictions for a given token. The amount of uncertainty
other hand, the word ‘‘credentials’’ in DLA gets an increasing level of
 in a probability distribution is measured by the Shannon entropy. The
attribution from the first to the last layer.
 entropy is calculated from a set of probabilities as the negative sum of
 In contrast to the ‘‘credentials’’ token, the ‘‘account’’ word in the CBA
 the probabilities times their logarithm to base 2.
class continues to decrease. In the first five layers, many tokens in all
 The probability distribution in the instance of BERT is represented
classes have negative or near-to-zero attribution. It is possible to begin
 by the prediction made by the last layer, PMF, for a specific token. The
noticing slightly higher attribution in tokens crucial after layer five, PMF’s entropy indicates how confident the model is in its prediction
such as the PEA class’s ‘‘universal’’ word. In the first nine layers, the for that token. High entropy indicates uncertainty or less confidence
token ‘‘account’’ in the WA class is also granted a high attribution score. in a model’s prediction, while low entropy indicates certainty and
Finally, in the last three layers, the correctly predicted token ‘‘error’’ confidence. Fig. 8 depicts the attribution entropies for each class label
for the PHA class has increasingly positive attribution. Since the input based on the Shannon entropy measure. The 𝑥-axis represents the
text (message) can be handled as a discrete random variable because number of layers, while the 𝑦-axis represents the entropy value in each
it has a finite number of possible values, the probability mass function layer.
(PMF) is calculated using the attribution values of each feature after
extracting the feature importance using a probability distribution on 5.4. Limitations of the study
the input features and scaling the attribution values accordingly.
 The PMF is used to comprehend how a particular token contributes There are certain limitations to this study, the most prominent
to the model’s output and to understand its relative importance in each of which was encountered during the data processing stage. Upon

 12
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

 Fig. 7. A representation of the probability mass function (PMF) distributions across BERT layers.

 types. By recognizing and monitoring significant events and classifying each event based on the message log, aiding customers in better
 understanding their events, strengthening security, and minimizing performance degradation would be guaranteed. The suggested framework
 will assist administrators in preventing incoming threats before critical
 data is stolen or lost by providing a better understanding of security
 events. If the topic of interest is not related to event messages, the
 same framework can still be used by modifying the obtained features
 and replacing them with other features of events. The results showed
 that the BERT-Based model outperformed all the conventional and
 deep learning models evaluated in this work with a recall of 99.27%
 and a precision of 99.29%. These findings reflect the ideal model’s
 ability to properly identify a high proportion of events of a particular
 type by detecting as many true positives as possible while avoiding
 false negatives. Several fascinating potential future work directions
Fig. 8. Attribution entropies for class labels calculated using the Shannon entropy including collecting more log samples from intrusion detection systems
measure. by developing an attacking simulation session with good system infrastructure. The use of network traffic data and the features of IP flows
 could be also investigated.
compiling log data from multiple sources, we found plenty of duplicate
 CRediT authorship contribution statement
messages. The dataset became more noisy due to this redundancy. We
cleaned the data by removing duplicate log entries in order to address
 Ahmad Alzu’bi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
this problem. This reduced the size of the dataset used for model testdraft, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology,
ing and training. Cyberattacks are constantly evolving, and attackers
 Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Omar
routinely discover new tactics to evade detection systems. This study’s
 Darwish: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validareliance on historical log data, which might not detect all new or tion, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Concepdeveloping threats, presents another difficulty. The model’s capacity to tualization. Amjad Albashayreh: Writing – original draft, Software,
respond to or identify previously unknown threats is restricted unless Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yahya Tashtoush: Writit is continuously retrained on up-to-date data. Additionally, since the ing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
primary objective of this study is to analyze the semantic context analysis.
of the log message, which focuses on the static parts, the variable
components have not been included in the analysis. A potential solution Declaration of competing interest
to address this limitation could involve adopting a pattern similar to the
one proposed in (Wurzenberger et al., 2024) which presents an event- The authors declare that they have no known competing finanbased detection mechanism. This method considers all token data types cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
associated with a specific event type during the log message analysis. influence the work reported in this paper.

6. Conclusion Data availability

 This paper presents a new event log dataset that is compiled from Data will be made available on request.
four separate datasets and categorized according to event and attack

 13
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

References Muna, A.-H., Moustafa, N., Sitnikova, E., 2018. Identification of malicious activities in
 industrial internet of things based on deep learning models. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 41,
Ali, A., Khan, A., Ahmed, M., Jeon, G., 2022. BCALS: Blockchain-based secure log 1–11.
 management system for cloud computing. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 33 Padiet, P., Islam, R., Khan, M.A., 2024. Users’ scenario-base for analysing insider threat
 (4), e4272. detection based on user’s downloads activity logs. In: Future of Information and
Alzu’bi, A., Albashayreh, A., Abuarqoub, A., Alfawair, M., 2024. Explainable AI-based Communication Conference. Springer, pp. 457–472.
 DDoS attacks classification using deep transfer learning. Comput. Mater. Continua Peshave, A., Ganesan, A., Oates, T., 2022. Predicting network threat events using HMM
 80, 3785–3802. http://dx.doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2024.052599. ensembles. In: International Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications.
 Springer, pp. 229–240.
Azahari, A., Balzarotti, D., 2024. On the inadequacy of open-source application logs
 Ramish, M., Sinha, A., Desai, J., Raj, A., Rajawat, Y.S., Punia, P., 2022. IT attack
 for digital forensics. Forensic Sci. Int. Digit. Investig. 49, 301750.
 detection and classification using users event log feature and behavior analytics
Ceron, J.M., Scholten, C., Pras, A., Santanna, J., 2020. MikroTik devices landscape,
 through Fourier EEG signal. In: 2022 IEEE 11th International Conference on
 realistic honeypots, and automated attack classification. In: NOMS 2020-2020
 Communication Systems and Network Technologies. CSNT, IEEE, pp. 577–582.
 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. IEEE, pp. 1–9.
 Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C., 2016. " why should I trust you?" Explaining the
Chung, M.-H., Wang, L., Li, S., Yang, Y., Giang, C., Jerath, K., Raman, A., Lie, D.,
 predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
 Chignell, M., 2023. Implementing active learning in cybersecurity: Detecting
 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 1135–1144.
 anomalies in redacted emails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00870.
 Ring, M., Wunderlich, S., Grüdl, D., Landes, D., Hotho, A., 2017. Flow-based benchmark
Creech, G., Hu, J., 2013. Generation of a new IDS test dataset: Time to retire the KDD
 data sets for intrusion detection. In: Proceedings of the 16th European Conference
 collection. In: 2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference.
 on Cyber Warfare and Security. ACPI. pp. 361–369.
 WCNC, IEEE, pp. 4487–4492.
 Sajid, M., Malik, K.R., Almogren, A., Malik, T.S., Khan, A.H., Tanveer, J., Rehman, A.U.,
Das, S., Agarwal, N., Shiva, S., 2021. Ddos explainer using interpretable machine
 2024. Enhancing intrusion detection: a hybrid machine and deep learning approach.
 learning. In: 2021 IEEE 12th Annual Information Technology, Electronics and
 J. Cloud Comput. 13 (1), 123.
 Mobile Communication Conference. IEMCON, IEEE, pp. 0001–0007. Satilmiş, H., Akleylek, S., Tok, Z.Y., 2024. A systematic literature review on host-based
Das, S., Ashrafuzzaman, M., Sheldon, F.T., Shiva, S., 2020. Network intrusion detection intrusion detection systems. IEEE Access 12, 27237–27266.
 using natural language processing and ensemble machine learning. In: 2020 IEEE Satpathi, S., Deb, S., Srikant, R., Yan, H., 2019. Learning latent events from network
 Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence. SSCI, IEEE, pp. 829–835. message logs. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 27 (4), 1728–1741.
Gohel, P., Singh, P., Mohanty, M., 2021. Explainable AI: current status and future Sharafaldin, I., Lashkari, A.H., Ghorbani, A.A., et al., 2018. Toward generating a new
 directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07045. intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization. ICISSp 1, 108–116.
Gunawan, T.S., Lim, M.K., Kartiwi, M., Malik, N.A., Ismail, N., 2018. Penetration testing Singh, R., Kumar, H., Singla, R.K., Ketti, R.R., 2017. Internet attacks and intrusion
 using kali linux: SQL injection, XSS, wordpres, and WPA2 attacks. Indones. J. Electr. detection system: A review of the literature. Online Inf. Rev. 41 (2), 171–184.
 Eng. Comput. Sci. 12 (2), 729–737. Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Höld, G., Landauer, M., Kuhn, W., 2022. Behavior-based
Hnamte, V., Hussain, J., 2023. DCNNBiLSTM: An efficient hybrid deep learning-based anomaly detection in log data of physical access control systems. IEEE Trans.
 intrusion detection system. Telematics Inform. Rep. 10, 100053. Dependable Secure Comput. 20 (4), 3158–3175.
Jaafar, F., Nicolescu, G., Richard, C., 2016. A systematic approach for privilege Sriram, S., Vinayakumar, R., Alazab, M., Soman, K., 2020. Network flow based
 escalation prevention. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE
 Reliability and Security Companion. QRS-C, IEEE, pp. 101–108. Conference on Computer Communications Workshops. INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE,
Kalutharage, C.S., Liu, X., Chrysoulas, C., Pitropakis, N., Papadopoulos, P., 2023. Ex- pp. 189–194.
 plainable AI-based DDOS attack identification method for IoT networks. Computers Tovarňák, D., Špaček, S., Vykopal, J., 2020. Traffic and log data captured during a
 12 (2), 32. cyber defense exercise. Data Brief 31, 105784.
Kasturi, S., 2024. Predicting Application Security Attack Paths Using Correlation Vinayakumar, R., Alazab, M., Soman, K.P., Poornachandran, P., Al-Nemrat, A., Venka-
 Analysis, Attack Tree, and Multi-layer Perceptron (Ph.D. thesis). Indiana State traman, S., 2019. Deep learning approach for intelligent intrusion detection system.
 University. IEEE Access 7, 41525–41550.
Kokhlikyan, N., Miglani, V., Martin, M., Wang, E., Reynolds, J., Melnikov, A., Vu, Q.H., Ruta, D., Cen, L., 2019. Gradient boosting decision trees for cyber security
 Lunova, N., Reblitz-Richardson, O., 2019. Pytorch captum. GitHub repository. threats detection based on network events logs. In: 2019 IEEE International
Kumar, R., Javeed, D., Aljuhani, A., Jolfaei, A., Kumar, P., Islam, A.N., 2023. Conference on Big Data. Big Data, IEEE, pp. 5921–5928.
 Blockchain-based authentication and explainable AI for securing consumer IoT Wurzenberger, M., Höld, G., Landauer, M., Skopik, F., 2024. Analysis of statistical
 applications. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.. properties of variables in log data for advanced anomaly detection in cyber security.
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Frank, M., Hotwagner, W., Wurzenberger, M., Rauber, A., Comput. Secur. 137, 103631.
 2022. Maintainable log datasets for evaluation of intrusion detection systems. IEEE Yagemann, C., Noureddine, M.A., Hassan, W.U., Chung, S., Bates, A., Lee, W.,
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 20 (4), 3466–3482. 2021. Validating the integrity of audit logs against execution repartitioning
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Hotwagner, W., Rauber, A., 2019. A attacks. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 framework for cyber threat intelligence extraction from raw log data. In: 2019 Communications Security. pp. 3337–3351.
 IEEE International Conference on Big Data. Big Data, IEEE, pp. 3200–3209. Zhang, P., He, F., Zhang, H., Hu, J., Huang, X., Wang, J., Yin, X., Zhu, H., Li, Y., 2023.
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Hotwagner, W., Rauber, A., 2020a. Have Real-time malicious traffic detection with online isolation forest over sd-wan. IEEE
 it your way: Generating customized log datasets with a model-driven simulation Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 18, 2076–2090.
 testbed. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 70 (1), 402–415. Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Liu, Z., Wei, W., 2020. A cyber-insurance scheme for water
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Rauber, A., 2020b. System log clustering distribution systems considering malicious cyberattacks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 approaches for cyber security applications: A survey. Comput. Secur. 92, 101739. Secur. 16, 1855–1867.
Lin, Y.-D., Wang, Z.-Y., Lin, P.-C., Nguyen, V.-L., Hwang, R.-H., Lai, Y.-C., 2022. Multidatasource machine learning in intrusion detection: Packet flows, system logs and Ahmad Alzu’bi (SMIEEE, MACM) received the M.Sc. degree in computer science from
 host statistics. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 68, 103248. the Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree
MACCDC, 2012. Capture files from mid-atlantic CCDC. https://www.netresec.com/ in computer science from the University of the West of Scotland (UWS), U.K., in 2016.
 ?page=MACCDC. (Accessed on: 2 March 2023). He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Science, Jordan
Mahfouz, A., Abuhussein, A., Venugopal, D., Shiva, S., 2020. Ensemble classifiers for University of Science and Technology, Jordan. He has many publications in reputed
 network intrusion detection using a novel network attack dataset. Future Internet journals and conferences. His research interests include computer vision, cybersecurity,
 12 (11), 180. and artificial intelligence.
Manjunatha, K., Kempanna, M., 2022. Count vectorizer model based web application
 vulnerability detection using artificial intelligence approach. J. Discrete Math. Sci.
 Cryptogr. 25 (7), 2039–2048. Omar Darwish (SMIEEE) received the M.S. degree from the Jordan University of
Mei, R., Yan, H.-B., Han, Z.-H., Jiang, J.-C., 2021. CTScopy: hunting cyber threats Science and Technology, Jordan, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
 within enterprise via provenance graph-based analysis. In: 2021 IEEE 21st Inter- Western Michigan University, USA. He is an Assistant Professor with the Information
 national Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security. QRS, IEEE, pp. Security and Applied Computing Department, Game Above College of Engineering and
 28–39. Technology, Eastern Michigan University. He was a Program Coordinator of computer
Meng, F., Lou, F., Fu, Y., Tian, Z., 2018. Deep learning based attribute classification information systems, and the Director of the IoT and Cybersecurity Laboratory, Ferrum
 insider threat detection for data security. In: 2018 IEEE Third International College. His research interests include cybersecurity, IoT, machine learning, networks,
 Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace. DSC, IEEE, pp. 576–581. big data analysis, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, data mining, and information
 retrieval.
Moustafa, N., Ahmed, M., Ahmed, S., 2020. Data analytics-enabled intrusion detection:
 Evaluations of ToN_IoT linux datasets. In: 2020 IEEE 19th International Conference
 on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications. TrustCom, IEEE, Amjad Albashayreh received her B.S. degree in Software Engineering from Jordan
 pp. 727–735. University of Science and Technology (JUST), Jordan in 2020, and her M.S. in

 14
A. Alzu’bi et al. Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

Computer Science from JUST in 2023. She is currently acting as a lecturer with the Yahya Tashtoush received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from
department of Computer Science, JUST, and she is also pursuing her Ph.D. in Computer the Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan, in 1995 and 1999,
Science at The University of Jordan. Her research interests include Cybersecurity, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of
computer vision, deep learning, federated learning, and artificial intelligence. Alabama in Huntsville and the University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA, in 2006.
 He is currently a Professor at the College of Computer and Information Technology,
 Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. His current research
 interests include software engineering, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, robotics,
 and wireless sensor networks.

 15