11662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 DDoS Attack Detection in Consumer IoT-Based
 Healthcare Systems Using Improved Off-Policy
 Proximal Policy Optimization and Generative
 Adversarial Network
 Jing Yang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Vijay Govindarajan , Lip Yee Por , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh , Qin Xin , Pronaya Bhattacharya , Member, IEEE,
 Abdullah Ayub Khan, and Yiyu Wang

 Abstract—Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks threaten with Hyperband’s scaling capabilities. Our model is evaluthe reliability of consumer IoT-based healthcare systems. ated on four datasets: KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, CICDDOS,
However, traditional DDoS detection methods often struggle and DARPA, achieving superior performance over state of
with feature selection, imbalanced datasets, generalizability, the art methods, with accuracy and F-measure values of
and hyperparameter optimization. This paper proposes a novel (90.498%, 89.286%), (93.186%, 91.896%), (92.403%, 90.285%),
method for detecting DDoS attacks in healthcare environments. and (92.849%, 92.790%), respectively. It demonstrates the
To enhance feature selection and handle imbalanced data, model’s efficiency in delivering timely predictions, supporting
we employ the off-policy proximal policy optimization (PPO) its practical deployment in real-time healthcare cybersecurity
algorithm, which improves sample efficiency by leveraging systems.
past experiences in reinforcement learning. SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) values are integrated for precise feature Index Terms—DDoS attack, proximal policy optimization,
identification, while augmented rewards for underrepresented GAN, consumer healthcare.
classes help mitigate data imbalance. An improved generative
adversarial network (GAN) is used for online data augmentation,
selectively excluding gradients from critical batch elements to I. I NTRODUCTION
generate more diverse and applicable results. Furthermore, the DOS attacks pose significant risks to networks, poten-
Bayesian Optimization Hyperband (BOHB) method accelerates
hyperparameter tuning by combining Bayesian optimization
 D tially disabling them entirely [1], [2]. This often leaves
 system administrators preoccupied with mitigating these
 Received 30 March 2025; revised 21 June 2025 and 3 August 2025; attacks, possibly overlooking other malicious activities coaccepted 25 August 2025. Date of publication 1 September 2025; date of occurring. Recent trends indicate a substantial escalation
current version 8 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under Grant NSTC-114- in both the frequency and magnitude of these attacks [3].
2224-E-027-001; private funding (PV009-2023); and in part by the KW Moreover, the IoT proliferation has introduced a new wave
IPPP (Research Maintenance Fee) Individual/Centre/Group Universiti Malaya, of IoT-driven botnets that threaten Internet stability through
Malaysia, under Grant RMF1506-2021. (Corresponding authors: Yiyu Wang;
Lip Yee Por.) DDoS onslaughts. This includes the Internet of Medical Things
 Jing Yang and Lip Yee Por are with the Center of Research for (IoMT), which is increasingly essential in delivering health
Cyber Security and Network, Faculty of Computer Science and Information services. According to Somasundaram and Thirugnanam [4],
Technology, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia (e-mail:
s2147529@siswa.um.edu.my; porlip@um.edu.my). DDoS stands out as particularly hazardous within these
 Vijay Govindarajan is with the Distribution and Supply networks. Also, numerous organizations integrate additional
Technology, Expedia Group, Seattle, WA 98119 USA (e-mail: IoT devices within their systems without effectively filling the
vigovindaraja@expediagroup.com).
 Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh is with Department of Computer Science and loopholes of the existing security issues, thus expanding the
Information Technology, Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari, Karachi scope and scale of IoT botnet attacks. So, it becomes crucial
75660, Pakistan, and also with the School of Engineering, École to design methods of countering such threats, especially in
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail:
zashaikh@bbsul.edu.pk). systems that handle sensitive information, such as healthcare
 Qin Xin is with the Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the systems [5].
Faroe Islands, 100 Tórshavn, Faroe Islands (e-mail: qinx@setur.fo). Recent advances have introduced various machine learning
 Pronaya Bhattacharya is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Amity School of Engineering and Technology, and the Research (ML) [6] and deep learning (DL) methods [7] for DDoS
and Innovation Cell, Amity University, Koltata 700135, India (e-mail: attack detection. While DL offers advantages over traditional
pbhattacharya@kol.amity.edu). ML, challenges remain in feature extraction, class imbalance,
 Abdullah Ayub Khan is with the Department of Computer Science,
Bahria University Karachi Campus, Karachi 75260, Pakistan (e-mail: generalizability, and hyperparameter tuning. These aspects are
abdullahayub.bukc@bahria.edu.pk). often underexplored in existing studies. Feature selection is
 Yiyu Wang is with the J.E. Cairnes School of Business and essential for improving DL model efficiency by removing irrel-
Economics, University of Galway, Galway, H91 TK33 Ireland (e-mail:
y.wang32@universityofgalway.ie). evant variables. Although DL can perform automatic feature
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3605098 extraction, targeted selection helps prevent overfitting, reduce
 
 c 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11663

training time, and enhance adaptability. However, current BOHB for hyperparameter optimization, which combines
selection methods often perform poorly in dynamic environ- the predictive efficiency of Bayesian optimization with the
ments. Class imbalance is typically handled through data-level resource-saving strategy of Hyperband. This method provides
strategies such as SMOTE [8] and NearMiss, which may a scalable solution for tuning hyperparameters in complex
cause overfitting or information loss, or through algorithm- tasks such as anomaly detection [14].
level approaches including cost-sensitive learning, ensemble This paper proposes a DDoS attack detection model taimodels, and threshold tuning. These methods emphasize lored for healthcare systems, incorporating an off-policy PPO
minority classes but may reduce performance on majority class algorithm to facilitate feature selection and mitigate class
predictions [9]. imbalance. An enhanced GAN is introduced for online data
 Advanced deep reinforcement learning (DRL) addresses augmentation, and BOHB is employed for efficient hyperpachallenges in feature selection and class imbalance by applying rameter tuning. The main contributions of this study, which
reward mechanisms that prioritize critical yet often overlooked are considered original within the field, are summarized as
attributes. The integration of explainable artificial intelligence follows:
(AI) techniques, such as SHAP values, enhances the trans- • We proposed an off-policy PPO algorithm that leverages
parency of this process. SHAP quantifies the contribution past experiences to train policies in accordance with
of each feature to the model’s output, ensuring focus on reinforcement learning principles. By integrating SHAP
attributes with high explanatory value. This improves feature values, this approach enhances feature selection, allowing
selection and promotes trust in AI decisions. DRL further the model to focus on the most relevant features and
improves class balance by boosting predictions for under- improve overall detection performance.
represented categories while maintaining overall performance. • We introduced an updated GAN that selectively dis-
However, both RL and DRL face notable limitations. RL cards gradients of critical batch members during training,
often requires substantial interaction with the environment and enabling the generation of diverse and relevant samples to
may exhibit instability or slow convergence due to noisy or augment the training set without expanding the database.
sparse rewards. DRL is powerful but has high computational • We designed the BOHB method for hyperparameter
requirements and sample inefficiency, particularly when it can- tuning, combining the accuracy of Bayesian optimization
not effectively reuse off-policy data. Off-policy PPO improves with the speed of Hyperband to accelerate convergence
DRL by using replay buffers to store previous interactions. by efficiently discarding suboptimal configurations.
This increases sampling efficiency and lowers the reliance
on constant new data. These enhancements enable DRL to
 II. R ELATED W ORK
adapt in dynamic settings, outperforming static conventional
models and maintaining robust performance across various A. Machine Learning
applications, including DDoS attack detection. A range of ML approaches have been employed for DDoS
 Data augmentation improves classifier performance by arti- detection, utilizing algorithms such as decision trees, support
ficially expanding the training set, enhancing class balance, vector machines, random forests, and k-nearest neighbors.
and supporting model generalization [10]. It is typically Feng et al. [15] proposed an enhanced KNN algorithm
categorized into offline and online methods. Offline augmen- using a k-dimensional tree for efficient source classificatation enlarges the dataset but increases computational load tion based on IP address risk levels. Tang et al. [16]
and training time. In contrast, online augmentation intro- adopted a pairwise learning-to-rank (LtR) algorithm to
duces synthetic samples during training without expanding prioritize flow entries in SDN, aiming to mitigate lowthe dataset or requiring additional storage. Recent advances rate DDoS attacks. Xu et al. [17] designed a federated
in online augmentation leverage GANs, which provide strong learning framework incorporating evolutionary game theory
generalization. However, GANs often face challenges such and auction mechanisms for bandwidth optimization under
as training instability and mode collapse. To address these mobile edge network attacks. Zhao et al. [18] introduced
limitations, this study proposes a modified GAN that excludes a machine learning-based scheduling system that encodes
the gradients of key batch members, helping stabilize training victim-defined traffic preferences without full knowledge of
and enhance sample diversity for healthcare applications [11]. attack patterns. Mirnajafizadeh et al. [19] proposed a sublinear
 Selecting appropriate hyperparameters is crucial for opti- ML-based flow prioritization framework for improving DDoS
mizing deep learning models and preventing both overfitting detection accuracy. Chandak and Ray [1] focused on resourceand underfitting [12]. Due to the large search space, this constrained environments, integrating edge nodes with a
task is complex and requires effective optimization strategies feature-selected SVM optimized using an information gain
to address. Various optimization strategies address this issue, ratio. Altulaihan et al. [6] developed an IoT intrusion detection
including grid search, Bayesian optimization, evolutionary system using supervised classifiers (DT, RF, KNN, and SVM)
algorithms, and Hyperband. Grid search is thorough but along with correlation-based feature selection and genetic
inefficient for large sets. Bayesian optimization offers efficient algorithms. Setia et al. [20] secured VANET cloud systems
sampling but may converge on local optima. Evolutionary using ML classifiers for predictive analytics on vehicular
algorithms can handle complex spaces, but they are resource- network flow. Mahato et al. [21] applied a chaotic grey wolf
intensive. Hyperband improves efficiency by focusing on optimizer with KNN to detect attacks in healthcare and IoMT
promising configurations early [13]. This paper utilizes networks. Recent studies have introduced hybrid or scalable
11664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

strategies. Fan et al. [22] utilized an improved distributed interpret decisions in DDoS detection for SDN-IoT healthcare
tensor train model with LightGBM to detect attacks across settings. Doménech et al. [34] developed a medical intrusion
heterogeneous networks. Belachew et al. [23] deployed SDN- detection system for the IOMT to counter DDoS attacks,
enabled ML models at the edge for latency-aware mitigation employing ML models with feature optimization and domainpolicies. Pradeep and Shukla [24] combined feature extraction specific preprocessing techniques.
via a predefined-mud ring algorithm with deep architectures,
including CAE and GRU. Dilshad et al. [25] adopted federated C. RL and DRL
learning and Gini-based feature selection for DDoS detection
 Several studies have explored traditional reinforcement
in the Internet of Vehicles. Hosain and Çakmak [26] developed
 learning (RL) methods, such as Q-learning and adaptive rate
an explainable intrusion detection system for IoMT using
 control, to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in dynamic IoT
recursive feature elimination and XGBoost, integrated with
 environments. Kumar and Singh [35] developed a message-
SHAP and LIME for interpretability. Although ML-based
 driven RL (MD-RL) framework for IoT edge security, utilizing
approaches show promise, they are often constrained by manstate-action policies for dynamic detection and response
ual feature engineering, limited adaptability to evolving attack
 to DDoS threats. Said et al. [36] proposed a quantum
patterns, and performance degradation under data imbalance.
 entropy Q-learning (QEQ) framework that extends classical
These limitations motivate the adoption of deep learning
 RL by integrating quantum processing and entropy-driven
and reinforcement learning techniques for more robust and
 exploration, enhancing DDoS mitigation in smart grid environgeneralizable DDoS detection frameworks.
 ments. Jayakrishna and Prasanth [37] introduced an RL-based
 adaptive rate limiting (RL-ARL) technique that adjusts rate
B. Deep Learning thresholds in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) based on
 traffic severity to counter DDoS attacks.
 DL has significantly enhanced network security by provid-
 Recent research has increasingly adopted deep reinforceing advanced solutions for DDoS attack detection. Traditional
 ment learning (DRL) techniques, such as deep Q-networks and
methods based on specialized networks such as CNN and long
 policy optimization, to improve DDoS detection in complex
short-term memory have effectively addressed recognizing
 systems. Roy et al. [5] combined a multi-step deep Q-learning
DDoS attacks in various network environments.
 network (MSDQN) with a deep learning network (DLN) to
 Benzaïd et al. [27] proposed a defense framework that
 secure healthcare IoT systems. The DLN verifies IoT device
uses a context-gated GRU (CG-GRU) model to learn spaidentities, while MSDQN detects and mitigates malware
tiotemporal patterns and applies transfer learning to detect
 and DDoS threats during data transmission. Gai et al. [38]
economic denial of sustainability (EDoS) attacks in flexible
 introduced a defense mechanism using deep Q-learning for
beyond fifth-generation (B5G) network slicing environments.
 moving target defense in consortium blockchains, dynam-
Duan et al. [28] proposed a cyber anomaly detection
 ically adjusting attack surfaces based on learned policies.
framework based on a continuous temporal graph neural
 Paidipati et al. [39] proposed a multilayer ensemble DRL
network. This network models dynamic interactions and
 (MEDRL) approach, incorporating metaheuristic tuning via
applies spatio-temporal message aggregation to handle irregan improved grasshopper optimization algorithm (IGOA) to
ular and low-frequency network behaviors. Shieh et al. [29]
 detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in cloud-based softwareintroduced a CNN-based method combined with reciprocal
 defined networks (SDNs). Shaikh et al. [40] developed a model
points learning and open-set recognition to detect both known
 for IoMT healthcare networks that integrates CNN, LSTM,
and unknown DDoS attacks. The lightweight model minimizes
 and reinforcement learning, leveraging a deep Q-network and
training parameters, offering an efficient and flexible solution
 PPO for robust DDoS countermeasures.
for cybersecurity. Anley et al. [30] developed a DDoS detection method using CNN, adaptive architectures, and transfer
learning. This approach enhances pattern recognition in traffic D. Limitations
data and improves generalization across datasets, facilitating Deep learning plays a key role in feature extraction for
the distinction between legitimate and malicious behaviors DDoS attack detection but faces several limitations. It often
in network infrastructures. Farzaneh et al. [31] applied deep requires extensive preprocessing to identify important features.
transfer learning to improve DDoS detection in 5G networks. DDoS datasets are typically imbalanced, with normal traffic
They utilized models such as bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM), dominating, which can lead to biased predictions. Models
CNN, residual networks (ResNet), and Inception to transfer may also struggle to generalize to new or evolving attack
knowledge from large datasets to smaller, annotated ones, patterns. In addition, hyperparameter tuning is complex and
which helps overcome challenges related to limited data time-consuming, affecting both performance and scalability.
availability. Ali et al. [32] proposed a vision transformer While RL and DRL models offer dynamic adaptability for
(ViT)-based system that transforms DDoS attack traffic into feature selection and classification in imbalanced settings, they
images and applies transformer-based deep learning for detect- commonly suffer from sample inefficiency, limiting their effecing multi-vector attacks during firmware over-the-air (OTA) tiveness. To overcome these issues, this study introduces an
updates. Ullah et al. [33] introduced an explainable hybrid off-policy PPO algorithm for feature selection and imbalanced
model that combines CNN for extracting spatial features and classification, an improved GAN for data augmentation, and
LSTM for learning temporal patterns, with SHAP used to BOHB for efficient hyperparameter optimization.
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11665

Fig. 1. Architecture of the suggested DDoS detection model using off-policy PPO for feature selection and imbalanced classification, an improved GAN
method for online data augmentation, and the BOHB method for hyperparameter optimization.

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code for Online Data Augmentation gradients from the most influential mini-batch elements during
Algorithm updates, enhancing both stability and sample diversity. The
Input: update process is as follows:
p: Threshold probability used to decide whether to retain the original
sample
 
 LG = θG − αG ∇θG V(D(zi ), G). (2)
pI : Computed probability for retaining sample IB: Collection of minibatches from the original dataset Zi ∈Z\ topk {D(Z)}
N: The overall number of mini-batches
Bi : A specific mini-batch from BI: An individual sample within mini- Here, D(Z) represents the discriminator’s response to
batch Bi yI : The label associated with sample IIN: A newly generated each sample in the mini-batch Z. θG is the generator’s
sample produced by the GAN with the same label yI Baug : The final parameter set, and αG is the learning rate. The expression
 
dataset composed of augmented mini-batches
Output: Expanded dataset Baug Zi ∈Z\ topk {D(Z)} ∇θG V(D(zi ), G)computes gradients only from
Begin with initializing initial batches B = {B1 , B2 , B3 , . . . , BN } mini-batch samples excluding the top-k highest-scoring ones
Assign Baug as an empty collection as determined by the discriminator. These top-k samples
for each Bi in B: strongly align with the target distribution and heavily influence
 Compute p for each sample in Bi model updates. To prevent overfitting to such dominant feafor each I in Bi : tures, our method excludes their gradients, promoting better
 if pI < p
 Move to the next sample (omit any modifications) generalization and sample diversity. This strategy also mitielse: gates mode collapse and stabilizes training by encouraging the
 Determine yI generator to explore a wider output space, leading to more
 Generate IN diverse and robust results.
 Substitute sample I with IN
 Append the possibly modified Bi to Baug
return Baug B. Feature Engineering
 Consider D that includes pairs (x, y), where x is a vector
 containing n input features F = {f1 , . . . , fn }, and y represents
 III. T HE P ROPOSED M ODEL
 the outcome. Each iteration involves randomly selecting a pair
A. Online Data Augmentation from D, and the agent determines which features to utilize.
 In this paper, we propose a GAN-based online data augmen- In our RL framework, the state space S comprises the data
tation method that enhances sample diversity by selectively instance x, its outcome y, and the chosen features F. The
omitting gradients from key batch elements. As shown in possible actions in our model are part of the set A, which
Algorithm 1, the generator and discriminator are trained in entails selecting a feature Af or making a prediction Ac . Opting
a two-player minimax game, where the generator aims to for a feature from Af adds to the feature set F, thus modifying
produce realistic synthetic data while the discriminator learns the prediction space. The reward for selecting a feature is given
to distinguish real from fake samples. by ∂ ∗ SHAP(fi ), where SHAP(fi ) denotes the SHAP value of
   the feature fi , and ∂ is a balancing hyperparameter. Actions
 min min V(D, G) = Ex∼pdata (x) log(D(x)) that lead to predictions shift the model to a terminal state,
 G D
  
 + Ez∼pz (z) log(1 − D(G(z))) (1) offering rewards or penalties of ±1 for the majority class and
 ±μ for the minority class. So, r : S×A → R is mathematically
 Here, x and z represent the input data and random noise, defined to encapsulate these dynamics:
respectively, while G and D denote the generator and dis- ⎧
criminator. pdata (x) and pz (z)are the probability distributions ⎪
 ⎪ ∂ ∗ SHAP(fi ) if at ∈ Af , at = fi
 ⎪
 ⎪
of input data and noise, and E and log denote expectation and ⎨ +1 if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CO , y = y
logarithm. In this study, the generator uses a novel gradient rt = −1 if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CO , y = y (3)
 ⎪
 ⎪
exclusion strategy to improve generalization and diversity by ⎪
 ⎪ +μ if at ∈ Ac , s t ∈ CN , y = y
 ⎩
removing dominant training signals. It selectively excludes −μ if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CN , y = y
11666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

where CO and CN represent the minority and majority Algorithm 2 Pseudo-Code for Training the Proposed Model
classes. The reward mechanism emphasizes accurate recog- Input:
nition across all classes, especially minority ones, to ensure D = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xT , yT )}: Training dataset with T
 labeled samples
fairness. Integrating SHAP values into the reward system α: Learning rate used for policy update
enhances transparency and interpretability in DDoS detection E: Total number of training epochs
for healthcare. SHAP offers insight into feature contributions, ε: Exploration probability (for selecting random actions)
supporting trustworthy decision-making and helping mitigate θi : Parameters of the current policy (old policy)
class bias. This improves detection accuracy while ensuring θi+1 : Parameters of the updated policy (new policy)
 φ: Parameters of the value function (critic)
fairness, providing robust protection for sensitive healthcare st : State at time tat : Action taken at time trt : Reward received at time
systems against diverse threats. tA(st , at ): Advantage estimation at time t for state-action pair
 SHAP values are based on the concept of the Shapley value μ(·|st ): Behavior policy used to sample action at at state st π : The
from cooperative game theory. The formula for the SHAP target policy to be optimized
value ∅i for a feature i is: B: Replay buffer to store transitions
 Q: Action-value function approximator (initialized with random
  |S|!(|F| − |S| − 1)! weights)
 ∅i = (v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S)) (4) Initialize θi+1 , θi , φ, A, B, and Q
 |F|!
 S⊆F\{i} for e = 1 to E:
 Randomize order of D
where F denotes the full set of features, and S represents for t = 1 to T:
any subset of F that does not include feature i. The notation Select at with probability ε
|S| refers to the number of elements in subset S, while Set s1
|F| represents the total number of features. The value v(S) if action at is feature-related:
indicates the output of the model when only the features in S Perform action at
 Calculate rt using Equation (3)
are used, and v(S ∪ {i}) represents the prediction of the model Determine st+1 from D
when feature i is added to subset S. Overall, SHAP measures Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 , μ(·|st )) in B
how much adding feature i to subset S changes the output of Compute A(st , at ) using value function parameters φ
the model, averaged over all possible subsets. Update π optimize the objective function via Equation (19):
 The transition function of the model operates as described CLIP
 θi+1 ← θi + α∇θ LOff−Policy PPO (π )
below:
 if at is subject-related:
 T if a ∈ Ac
 t((x, y, F), a) = (5) Perform at
 (x, y, F ∪ a) if a ∈ Af Calculate rt using Equation (3)
 Determine st+1 from D
where T denotes the terminal state. When an action adds a Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 , μ(·|st )) in B
new feature, it is included in the set F. The episode concludes
when the agent opts to make a prediction. It is crucial to note
that our RL model functions within a discrete-time framework.
 subject to:
The time variable t in st and st+1 marks when decisions to
  
incorporate features are made. In reinforcement learning, each Es∼ρπi DistenceKL (πi (.|s)|| πi+1 (.|s)) ≤ ϑ (8)
decision involves selecting a feature that can enhance future
prediction accuracy, influencing subsequent states and rewards. where πθi and πθi+1 represent the current and subsequent
 Algorithm 2 outlines the learning strategy involving dataset policies, respectively. ϑestablishes the threshold for allowable
shuffling, policy-based action selection, model execution, and divergence. DistenceKL measures the KL divergence, showfeedback-driven updates using the off-policy PPO algorithm. ing the extent of deviation between the policies πθi and
 1) Training: To enhance policy training, we adopt an off- πθi+1 at state s. The distribution ρπθi details the probability
 policy PPO algorithm. This section begins with an distribution of states under the old policy, beginning from the
 overview of trust region policy optimization (TRPO), ∞ state
 initial s0 and adhering to πi , calculated as ρπold (s) =
 t=0 γ P(st = s|s0 , πold ), with Pbeing the transition probt
 followed by PPO as its foundation, and concludes with
 the proposed off-policy PPO approach. ability. In the absence of this divergence limit, improving
 TRPO: To optimize policy performance, we first review the surrogate objective could lead to major alterations in the
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO), which maximizes policy.
expected discounted rewards from the initial state st : PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) avoids abrupt
 policy updates by optimizing a clipped surrogate objective:
 ∞
   
 E(s0 ,a0 ),... γ t r(st , at ) (6) πi+1 (a|s) πi+1 (a|s)
 Es∼ρπi ,a∼πi minimum Aπi (s, a), clip( ,1
 t=0 πi (a|s) πi (a|s)
 
 To ensure stable policy updates, TRPO maximizes a sur- −ε, 1 + ε)Aπi (s, a) (9)
rogate objective under a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
constraint: where ε is a small constant to limit policy deviation and
  
 πθi+1 (a|s) encourage stability. Aπi (s, a) represents the advantage func-
 Maximum Es∼ρπθ , a ∈ ππi Aπi (s, a) (7)
 πθi=1 i πθi (a|s) tion, quantifying the extra benefit of taking action a in state
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11667

 TABLE I
s according to policy πi . This function evaluates if an action H YPERPARAMETERS AND T HEIR R ANGES FOR O PTIMIZATION IN THE
performs better or worse than what is typically expected by M ODEL
that policy. In this context, clipping restricts excessive training
updates, promoting more consistent progress. This method is
further detailed below:

 clip(p, x, y) = max imum(x, minimum (y, p)) (10)

where p represents the variable under modification, with x
and y setting the minimum and maximum boundaries for the
allowable range. It is crucial to recognize that the clipped
surrogate objective (Equation (9)) aims to curtail excessively
large updates to the policy by penalizing deviations that
cause the ratio πi+1 (a|s)
 πi (a|s) to diverge significantly from 1.
Nonetheless, a primary issue with PPO is its dependence on
on-policy data, which escalates the sample complexity due
to the restricted utilization of off-policy data, requiring more
frequent interactions between the agent and the environment.
 Off-policy PPO: Off-policy PPO improves data efficiency
by learning from past experiences, including historical DDoS
incidents. Unlike on-policy PPO, it uses off-policy data to
recognize evolving attack patterns and adapt to changes.
  
 πi+1 (a|s)
 maximum Es∼ρμ , a∈μ Aπi (s, a) (11)
 π μ(a|s)
with:
 The value πi+1 (a|s)
 μ(a|s) often exceeds the boundaries of 1 − ε
 ρμ ,sqrt
 DistanceKL (μ, πi )DKL μ ρ ,sqrt μ
 (πi , πi+1 ) + DKL
 ρ
 (πi , πi+1 ) ≤ ϑ (12)
 to 1 + ε. As a result, the policy πi+1 (a|s) typically stays
 ∞ consistent when optimizing the clipped surrogate objective. To
 
 ρμ (s) = γ t P(st = s|s0 , μ) (13) counteract this rigidity, the boundaries of the clipped objective,
 t=0 ranging from 1 − ε to 1 + ε, are adjusted in Equation (18) by
 ρμ
 DistanceKL (πold , π ) incorporating a corrective factor πi+1 (a|s)
 μ(a|s) :
   
 = Es∼ρμ DistanceKL (πi (.|s) || πi+1 (.|s)) (14) πi+1 (a|s)
 ρμ ,sqrt Es∼ρμ , a∈μ minimum[ Aπi (s, a),
 DistanceKL (μ, πold ) μ(a|s)
     
 = Es∼ρμ DistanceKL (μ(.|s) || πi (.|s)) (15) πi+1 (a|s) πi (a|s) πi (a|s)
 clip , (1 − ε), (1 + ε) Aπi (s, a)]
 ρμ ,sqrt μ(a|s) μ(a|s) μ(a|s)
 DistanceKL (πi , πi+1 )
   (19)
 = Es∼ρμ DistanceKL ( πi (.|s) || πi+1 (.|s)) (16)
 C. Hyperparameter Optimization
where μ denotes the behaviour policy, showing the typical
decision-making strategy the agent uses in the environment. To address the high cost of evaluations, BOHB integrates
Absent the constraints (Equation (12)), efforts to improve Hyperband to speed up optimization through adaptive resource
the surrogate function using off-policy data (Equation (10)) allocation and early stopping. It tests multiple configurations,
could result in significant alterations to the policy. To mitigate focuses resources on the most promising, and eliminates
this potential problem, we utilize the PPO clipping method, weaker ones, lowering computation time and cost. By commodifying the surrogate objective as follows: bining Bayesian search with Hyperband’s efficiency, BOHB
   enables fast and accurate hyperparameter tuning in dynamic
 π (a|s) environments like healthcare cybersecurity. This helps ensure
 Lμ (πi+1 ) = Es∼ρμ , a∈μ Aπ (s, a) (17)
 μ(a|s) old strong model performance across diverse attack scenarios and
 improves the protection of sensitive healthcare data. Table I
 We can specify the clipped surrogate objective for off-policy
 lists the hyperparameters optimized using BOHB.
data as follows:

 Lμ (πi+1 ) IV. E XPERIMENTS
  
 πi+1 (a|s) A. Dataset
 = Es∼ρμ , a∈μ minimum Aπi (s, a),
 μ(a|s) To evaluate the proposed DDoS detection model, datasets
 
 πi+1 (a|s) such as the KDDcup99 [41], the information security cenclip( , 1 − ε, 1 + ε)Aπi (s, a) (18)
 μ(a|s) ter of excellence at the University of New Brunswick
11668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

(ISCX-UNB) [42], the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity IDAD [22], and SDN-Edge-IoT [23]; nine DL models,
DDoS (CICDDoS) [43], and the Defense Advanced Research including CNN-RPL [29], CNN-BiLSTM [48], ATL [30],
Projects Agency (DARPA) [44] were employed, each con- LSTM-CNN [49], MDDCC [50], DTL-5G [31], FCNN [3],
tributing values that are pertinent to healthcare industries. mGRU [51], and DDoSViT [32]; and four RL models,
 including MD-RL [35], Q-learning [38], MEDRL [39], and
B. Evaluation Metrics RL-ARL [37]. Additionally, we evaluated the impact of
 removing critical elements such as data augmentation (DA),
 These following metrics used to evaluate the proposed
 feature selection (FS), off-policy PPO, and hyperparameter
method:
 optimization (HO) from our model to understand their con-
 TP + TN tributions to its overall performance. Tables II, III, and IV
 Accuracy = (20)
 Total show the result details for the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and
 TP
 Precision = (21) CICDDOS datasets.
 TP + FP) Component analysis shows that removing data augmen-
 TP tation, feature selection, off-policy PPO, or hyperparameter
 Recall = (22)
 TP + FN optimization leads to noticeable performance declines, high-
 Precision + Recall lighting the importance of these elements. Although simplified
 F − Measure = 2 × (23)
  Precision + Recall versions such as PPO with SHAP provide weaker supervision,
 G − means = Recall × Specificity (24) they remain applicable for resource-limited scenarios. A twotailed paired t-test was conducted to verify effectiveness,
with with p-values consistently below 0.05 (accuracy p = 0.012,
 TN F-measure p = 0.015, G-means p = 0.009), indicating strong
 Specificity = (25)
 TN + FP statistical significance. Confidence intervals further confirm
 the observed improvements, supporting the model’s reliability
C. Experiment Setting and Main Evaluation Results for DDoS detection in healthcare settings.
 The study was conducted on a 64-bit Windows system with Tables II, III, and IV present a comparison of coman Intel i7 processor, 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 3090 putational efficiency among state-of-the-art DDoS detection
GPU, supporting large-scale data and complex computations. models based on runtime and GPU usage across the
Python 3.8 was used with PyTorch for deep learning tasks, KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. The
including the GAN and off-policy PPO algorithm. Scikit-learn proposed model demonstrates improved efficiency, requiring
handled traditional machine learning and data preprocess- 2726 seconds and 19.6 GB of GPU memory on KDDcup99
ing. Hyperparameter tuning was performed using BOHB via and 2587 seconds with 18.4 GB on ISCX UNB. Compared
the HpBandSter library. SHAP was used to interpret model to the DTL 5G model, which uses 3696 seconds and 25.9
predictions by identifying key features. GB, the proposed model reduces runtime by 30.0% and GPU
 In the evaluation phase, our model was extensively com- usage by 28.9%. On the CICDDOS dataset, it completes in
pared with seven ML models, including DPTCM-KNN [45], 2659 seconds using 18.7 GB of GPU memory. These results
ERF-KMC [46], FSSVM [1], ML-CFS [6], ML-EA [47], confirm the model’s ability to lower computational overhead.
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11669

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE ISCX-UNB DATASET

 the PR AUCs are 0.635, 0.665, and 0.652, respectively, indicating strong discriminative ability and consistent precision.
 Figure 3 presents the training and validation loss curves over
 300 epochs for the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS
 datasets. Both curves steadily decline with a narrowing gap,
 indicating effective learning, minimal overfitting, and strong
 generalization.
Fig. 2. Comparative a) ROC-AUC and b) PR-AUC curve analysis of the Figure 4 presents the decision time distributions of the
proposed model on the KDDcup99 and ISCX-UNB datasets. proposed model on the KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and
 CICDDOS datasets, providing insight into its suitability for
 real-time systems. The histograms display consistent decision
 Figure 2 shows the ROC and PR curves of the proposed times across multiple runs, with distributions tightly cenmodel on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS tered around mean values of 62, 60, and 64 milliseconds,
datasets. The ROC AUCs are 0.791, 0.814, and 0.807, while respectively. These results indicate a stable and efficient
11670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. Training and validation loss curves for the a) KDDcup99 an b) ISCX-
UNB datasets in 300 epochs.
 Fig. 6. KL divergence comparison across reinforcement learning algorithms
 for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets in 300
 epochs.

Fig. 4. Decision-making time distributions for the proposed model on the
a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.

 Fig. 7. Average reward comparison across reinforcement learning algorithms
 for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets in 100
 epochs.

 Fig. 8. Impact of varying reward modifier (μ) on the model performance.
Fig. 5. Scalability of the proposed model demonstrated through improvements in a) accuracy, b) F-measure, and c) G-means with increasing training
data from 20% to 100% on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS
datasets. TRPO, and soft actor-critic (SAC). Fig. 6 presents the
 KL divergence across policy updates on the KDDcup99,
 ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. The KL diverdecision-making process. Figure 5 illustrates the model’s gence values of Off-Policy PPO remain consistently
scalability as training data increases from 20% to 100% lower than those of SAC, indicating more stable policy
on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. updates and a reduced risk of disruptive shifts during
Performance improves consistently, confirming the model’s training. Fig. 7 illustrates the learning curves through
adaptability, robustness, and suitability for real-world scenar- average rewards per episode. Off-policy PPO shows
ios with growing data volumes. a smoother and faster increase in rewards compared
 1) Analysis of generalizability: To validate the broad to PPO, TRPO, and SAC, highlighting its ability to
 applicability of the proposed anomaly detection model, maintain consistent learning and adapt quickly.
 extensive evaluations were conducted on the DARPA Figure 8 shows the effect of varying μ (from 0 to 1 in 0.1
 dataset. As shown in Table XII, the model outper- increments) on model performance for the KDDcup99, ISCXformed traditional machine learning and deep learning UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Performance peaks at μ = 0.3,
 approaches, improving Accuracy by 6.54%, F-measure 0.3, and 0.4, respectively, indicating improved sensitivity to
 by 5.41%, and G-means by 5.35% compared to the minority classes without sacrificing accuracy. This underscores
 next best model, mGRU. Component ablation anal- the importance of tuning reward mechanisms in imbalanced
 ysis showed that removing any module, including settings and highlights the model’s adaptability to diverse data
 data augmentation, feature selection, off-policy PPO, distributions.
 or hyperparameter optimization, resulted in noticeable To enhance interpretability, SHAP was used to assess
 drops in accuracy. These findings confirm the impor- feature importance in DDoS detection, as shown in Fig. 9 for
 tance of each component in enhancing robustness, the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. SHAP
 generalization, and detection performance. values highlight key features influencing model decisions.
 2) Analysis of off-policy PPO: This section evaluates the Table V further confirms that off-policy PPO effectively hanstability of the Off-Policy PPO method by comparing dles class imbalance, with minority class accuracy nearing that
 its KL divergence and learning performance with PPO, of majority classes. High F-measure and G-mean scores reflect
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11671

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
 AUGMENTATION U SING THE ISCX-UNB DATASET

Fig. 9. Comparative analysis of feature importance using the SHAP
explanations on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL ON M AJORITY
 AND M INORITY C LASSES FOR THE KDD CUP 99, ISCX-UNB, AND
 CICDDOS DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
 AUGMENTATION U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

 Fig. 10. Comparison of data distributions generated by the conventional
 GAN and the enhanced GAN for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and
 c) CICDDOS datasets.
balanced performance, and the slightly higher MSE for minority classes does not impact overall reliability. These results
affirm the model’s robustness and practical applicability.
 3) Analysis of data augmentation: This section evaluates the proposed GAN for online data augmentation
 using Fréchet inception distance (FID), maximum mean
 discrepancy (MMD), Wasserstein distance, and the
 Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test. These metrics measure
 statistical similarity between real and generated samples.
 Tables VI, VII, and X show results for the KDDcup99,
 ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. On KDDcup99,
 the proposed GAN achieved lower scores with FID of
 1.022, MMD of 2.235, Wasserstein distance of 3.124,
 Fig. 11. Training loss curves for the generator and discriminator in the
 and KS value of 0.432. Compared to StyleGAN, this proposed GAN model over 300 epochs on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB,
 corresponds to improvements of 82% in FID, 68% in and c) CICDDOS datasets.
 MMD, 65% in Wasserstein distance, and 29% in KS
 value. Similar gains were observed on ISCX-UNB and
 CICDDOS, with metric reductions of up to 76%, 64%, The proposed GAN produces more dispersed distributions
 59%, and 32%, respectively. These improvements are that closely resemble real data, reflecting its effectiveness in
 attributed to the selective gradient exclusion strategy, avoiding mode collapse. Figure 11 shows the training loss
 which enhances sample diversity while maintaining bal- curves of the generator and discriminator over 300 epochs on
 anced class representation. the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Both
 Fig. 10 visualizes the alignment between the real and losses decline steadily, indicating stable convergence. The gengenerated distributions for the original GAN and the improved erator learns to produce realistic data, while the discriminator
GAN on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. improves its accuracy.
11672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE VIII TABLE XI
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER
 O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE CICDDOS DATASET

 TABLE XII
 TABLE IX C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY ACROSS
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHMS ON THE
 O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE ISCX-UNB DATASET KDD CUP 99, ISCX-UNB, AND CICDDOS DATASETS

 TABLE X
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
 AUGMENTATION U SING THE CICDDOS DATASET

 Fig. 12. Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis of BOHB versus conventional
 tuning on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.

 (PO) [54], covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) [55], artificial bee colony (ABC) [56],
 and differential evolution (DE) [56]. All model variables
 were standardized for fair comparison. As shown in
 Tables VII, IX, and X, BOHB achieves faster conver-
 4) Analysis of BOUB: This section evaluates BOHB against gence and strong performance across the KDDcup99,
 three traditional methods: random search, grid search, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Its effective baland Bayesian optimization, along with six evolutionary ance between exploration and exploitation demonstrates
 algorithms: white shark optimizer (WSO) [52], whale robustness and efficiency for real-world hyperparameter
 optimization algorithm (WOA) [53], puma optimizer tuning tasks.
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11673

 TABLE XIII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML AND DL M ODELS U SING THE DARPA DATASET

 improved GAN, and the BOHB algorithm. The approach
 effectively addresses imbalanced data and hyperparameter
 tuning, which are key challenges in real-world detection. Offpolicy PPO improves classification on imbalanced data using
 experience updates and SHAP-based feature selection. The
 enhanced GAN with selective gradient exclusion generates
 diverse and relevant samples, increasing model robustness.
 BOHB accelerates hyperparameter tuning, which is essential
 for time-sensitive healthcare environments. Experiments on
 the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, CICDDOS, and DARPA datasets
 confirm the model’s high accuracy and F-measure, highlighting its potential to strengthen DDoS detection and safeguard
 healthcare systems. Moreover, while the proposed system is
 tailored to consumer IoT in healthcare, its modular architecture
 and reliance on packet-level features make it adaptable to other
Fig. 13. Comparative performance of the proposed model vs. best-existing IoT-based domains such as smart cities and industrial IoT.
models on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, DARPA, and CICDDoS datasets.
 With minor adjustments in feature engineering and retraining,
 the framework can generalize well to diverse deployment
 scenarios.
 Figure 12 shows that BOHB achieves lower hyperparameter
sensitivity than traditional methods on the ISCX UNB and
KDDCup99 datasets, indicating greater model stability. Key R EFERENCES
improvements are seen in learning rate, batch size, dropout,
and number of layers. BOHB effectively reduces overfitting [1] A. V. Chandak and N. K. Ray, “DDoS attack detection in smart
 home applications,” Softw., Pract. Exp., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2086–2101,
and enhances generalization, making it suitable for complex 2024.
datasets. Figure 13 compares the proposed model with top [2] J. Deng et al., “FIDSUS: Federated intrusion detection for
existing methods on the KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and DARPA securing UAV swarms in smart aerial computing,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 11312–11328, May 2025,
datasets using Accuracy, F-measure, G-means, and MSE. doi: 10.1109/jiot.2025.3549508.
The proposed model consistently outperforms others, showing [3] A. Bhatt, A. Gohil, S. Vaghasiya, R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, and J. Bhatia,
notable accuracy gains across all datasets. “DL-based DDoS attack detection in SDN-assisted heathcare 4.0
 telesurgery networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Emerg. Technol. (INCET),
 2024, pp. 1–7.
 V. C ONCLUSION [4] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchain-enabled
 security framework against ransomware attacks for smart health-
 This research proposes a novel solution for DDoS attack care,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
detection in healthcare by integrating off-policy PPO, an Feb. 2023.
11674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 [5] P. P. Roy, V. Teju, S. R. Kandula, K. V. Sowmya, A. I. Stan, and [24] K. J. Pradeep and P. K. Shukla, “Designing a novel network anomaly
 O. P. Stan, “Secure healthcare model using multi-step deep Q learning detection framework using multi-serial stacked network with optimal
 network in Internet of Things,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 669, feature selection procedures over DDOS attacks,” Int. J. Intell. Netw.,
 2024. vol. 6, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2025.
 [6] E. Altulaihan, M. A. Almaiah, and A. Aljughaiman, “Anomaly detection [25] M. Dilshad, M. H. Syed, and S. Rehman, “Efficient distributed denial of
 IDS for detecting DoS attacks in IoT networks based on machine service attack detection in Internet of Vehicles using Gini index feature
 learning algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 2, p. 713, 2024. selection and federated learning,” Future Internet, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 9,
 [7] M. F. Saiyed, I. Al-Anbagi, and M. S. Hossain, “Interactive and 2025.
 explainable optimized learning for DDoS detection in consumer [26] Y. Hosain and M. Çakmak, “XAI-XGBoost: An innovative explainable
 IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, intrusion detection approach for securing internet of medical things
 pp. 6839–6853, May 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2024.3482092. systems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. 22278.
 [8] J. Manokaran and G. Vairavel, “GIWRF-SMOTE: Gini impurity-based [27] C. Benzaïd, T. Taleb, A. Sami, and O. Hireche, “FortisEDoS: A
 weighted random forest with SMOTE for effective malware attack and deep transfer learning-empowered economical denial of sustainabilanomaly detection in IoT-Edge,” Smart Sci., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 276–292, ity detection framework for cloud-native network slicing,” IEEE
 2023. Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2818–2835,
 [9] T. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhuang, and Z. He, “Traffic Jul./Aug. 2024.
 intrusion detection of medical consumption electronics in the [28] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, G. Feng, and X. Li, “Practical cyber
 field of medical management based on integrated learning” IEEE attack detection with continuous temporal graph in dynamic network
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1334–1341, system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4851–4864,
 Feb. 2024. 2024.
[10] R. Jiao, C. Li, G. Xun, T. Zhang, B. B. Gupta, and [29] C.-S. Shieh, F.-A. Ho, M.-F. Horng, T.-T. Nguyen, and P. Chakrabarti,
 G. Yan, “A context-aware multi-event identification method “Open-set recognition in unknown DDoS attacks detection with
 for nonintrusive load monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Consum. reciprocal points learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 56461–56476,
 Electron., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 194–204, May 2023, 2024.
 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3236452. [30] M. B. Anley, A. Genovese, D. Agostinello, and V. Piuri, “Robust
[11] K. Li, Z. Dai, X. Wang, Y. Song, and G. Jeon, “GAN-based controllable DDoS attack detection with adaptive transfer learning,” Comput. Secur.,
 image data augmentation in low-visibility conditions for improved vol. 144, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103962.
 roadside traffic perception,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, [31] B. Farzaneh, N. Shahriar, A. H. Al Muktadir, M. S. Towhid, and
 no. 3, pp. 6174–6188, Aug. 2024. M. S. Khosravani, “DTL-5G: Deep transfer learning-based DDoS attack
[12] C. Zhan, D. Yin, Y. Shen, and T. Hao, “GMINN: A generative moving detection in 5G and beyond networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 228,
 interactive neural network for enhanced short-term load forecasting in Dec. 2024, Art. no. 107927.
 modern electricity markets,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, [32] M. Ali, Y. Saleem, S. Hina, and G. A. Shah, “DDoSViT: IoT
 no. 3, pp. 5461–5470, Aug. 2024. DDoS attack detection for fortifying firmware Over-The-Air (OTA)
 updates using vision transformer,” Internet Things, vol. 30, Mar. 2025,
[13] L. P. S. Rao and S. Jaganathan, “Adaptive Bayesian contextual hyperband: A novel hyperparameter optimization approach,” Int. J. Artif. Art. no. 101527.
 [33] Z. Ullah et al., “Hybrid CNN-LSTM model for DDoS attack
 Intell., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 775–785, 2023.
 detection in Internet of Things-based healthcare industry
[14] M. Cao, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, and Z. Shi, “A Bayesian optimization
 5.0,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, May 13, 2025,
 hyperband-optimized incremental deep belief network for online battery
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3569610.
 behaviour modelling for a satellite simulator,” J. Energy Storage, vol. 58,
 [34] J. Doménech, O. León, M. S. Siddiqui, and J. Pegueroles, “Evaluating
 Feb. 2023, Art. no. 106348.
 and enhancing intrusion detection systems in IoMT: The importance
[15] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and of domain-specific datasets,” Internet Things, vol. 32, Jul. 2025,
 adaptable detection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE
 Art. no. 101631.
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226,
 [35] A. Kumar and D. Singh, “Detection and prevention of DDoS attacks on
 Jul./Aug. 2024.
 edge computing of IoT devices through reinforcement learning,” Int. J.
[16] D. Tang, Y. Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate the Inf. Technol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1365–1376, 2024.
 low-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled flow [36] D. Said, M. Bagaa, A. Oukaira, and A. Lakhssassi, “Quantum entropy
 tables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157, and reinforcement learning for distributed denial of service attack
 2023. detection in smart grid,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 129858–129869,
[17] Y. Xu, S. Zhang, C. Lyu, J. Liu, Y. Shen, and S. Norio, “Mitigating 2024.
 distributed DoS attacks on bandwidth allocation for federated learning [37] N. Jayakrishna and N. N. Prasanth, “Detection and mitigation of
 in mobile edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., distributed denial of service attacks in vehicular ad hoc network
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1941–1960, May/Jun. 2025. using a spatiotemporal deep learning and reinforcement learning
[18] Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, H. Chen, F. Zhang, Z. Song, and Z. Li, “Effective approach,” Results Eng., vol. 26, Jun. 2025, Art. no. 104839.
 DDoS mitigation via ML-driven in-network traffic shaping,” IEEE [38] K. Gai, G. Zhang, P. Jiang, L. Zhu, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4271–4289, moving target DDoS defense approach in consortium blockchain,” IEEE
 Jul./Aug. 2024. Tran. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4362–4378,
[19] S. M. M. Mirnajafizadeh, A. R. Sethuram, D. Mohaisen, D. Nyang, and Jul./Aug. 2025.
 R. Jang, “Enhancing network attack detection with distributed and in- [39] K. K. Paidipati, C. Kurangi, J. Uthayakumar, S. Padmanayaki,
 network data collection system,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. D. Pradeepa, and S. Nithinsha, “Ensemble of deep reinforcement learn-
 (USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 5161–5178. ing with optimization model for DDoS attack detection and classification
[20] H. Setia et al., “Securing the road ahead: Machine learning-driven DDoS in cloud based software defined networks,” Multimedia Tools Appl.,
 attack detection in VANET cloud environments,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 83, no. 11, pp. 32367–32385, 2024.
 vol. 2, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 100037. [40] J. A. Shaikh et al., “A deep reinforcement learning-based robust intrusion
[21] S. Mahato, M. S. Obaidat, S. Dutta, D. Giri, and M. S. Hossain, detection system for securing IoMT healthcare networks,” Front. Med.,
 “Enhancing malicious activity detection in IoT-enabled network and vol. 12, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 1524286.
 IoMT systems through meta-heuristic optimization and machine learn- [41] Y. Geng, Y. Du, and J. Li, “The support vector machine model and
 ing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 39958–39970, application based on particle swarm optimization algorithm,” in Proc.
 Dec. 2024. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Image Process. Comput. Appl. (ICIPCA), 2024,
[22] Q. Fan et al., “IDAD: An improved tensor train based distributed pp. 898–902.
 DDoS attack detection framework and its application in com- [42] A. Farah, M. Nielsen, and E. Vasilomanolakis, “Improving synthetic
 plex networks,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 162, Jan. 2025, network attack traffic generation,” in Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Traffic
 Art. no. 107471. Meas. Cybersecur., 2024, pp. 326–334.
[23] H. M. Belachew, M. Y. Beyene, A. B. Desta, B. T. Alemu, S. S. Musa, [43] D. Kapil, V. Mittal, and D. P. Gangodkar, “Evaluating machine learning
 and A. J. Muhammed, “Design a robust DDoS attack detection and miti- approaches for DDoS attack detection using CIC-DDoS2019,” in Proc.
 gation scheme in SDN-edge-IoT by leveraging machine learning,” IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol. (ICACCTech), 2024,
 Access, vol. 13, pp. 10194–10214, 2025. pp. 762–767.
YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 11675

[44] W. Mason, “The future of infrared efforts at DARPA,” in Proc. Infrared [51] A. D. Aguru and S. B. Erukala, “A lightweight multi-vector
 Technol. Appl., 2024, Art. no. 130460U. DDoS detection framework for IoT-enabled mobile health informat-
[45] G. Kaur and P. Gupta, “Detection of distributed denial of service attacks ics systems using deep learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 662, Mar. 2024,
 for IoT-based healthcare systems,” Comput. Assist. Methods Eng. Sci., Art. no. 120209.
 vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 167–186, 2023. [52] M. Braik, A. Hammouri, J. Atwan, M. A. Al-Betar, and
[46] A. A. J. Al-Abadi, M. B. Mohamed, and A. Fakhfakh, “Enhanced M. A. Awadallah, “White shark optimizer: A novel bio-inspired metarandom forest classifier with K-means clustering (ERF-KMC) for detect- heuristic algorithm for global optimization problems,” Knowl. Based
 ing and preventing distributed-denial-of-service and man-in-the-middle Syst., vol. 243, May 2022, Art. no. 108457.
 attacks in Internet-of-Medical-Things networks,” Computers, vol. 12, [53] M Jafari, M. H. B. Chaleshtari, H. Khoramishad, and
 no. 12, p. 262, 2023. H. Altenbach, “Minimization of thermal stress in perforated
[47] F. Talpur, I. A. Korejo, A. A. Chandio, A. Ghulam, and composite plate using metaheuristic algorithms WOA,
 M. S. H. Talpur, “ML-based detection of DDoS attacks using evo- SCA and GA,” Composite Struct., vol. 304, Jan. 2023,
 lutionary algorithms optimization,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 1672, Art. no. 116403.
 2024. [54] B. Abdollahzadeh et al., “Puma optimizer (PO): A novel
[48] I. Jebril et al., “Deep learning based DDoS attack detection in Internet of metaheuristic optimization algorithm and its application in
 Things: An optimized CNN-BiLSTM architecture with transfer learning machine learning,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27, pp. 5235–5283,
 and regularization techniques,” Infocommun. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 2–11, Jan. 2024.
 2024. [55] N. Sinha and K.-W. Chen, “Neural architecture search
[49] B. Habib and F. Khursheed, “Time-based DDoS attack detection through using covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy,” Evol.
 hybrid LSTM-CNN model architectures: An investigation of many-to- Comput., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 177–204, 2024. [Online]. Available:
 one and many-to-many approaches,” Concurr. Comput., Pract. Exp., https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00331
 vol. 36, no. 9, 2024, Art. no. e7996. [56] S. V. Moravvej, S. J. Mousavirad, D. Oliva, G. Schaefer, and
[50] K. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Duan, and T. Liu, “Detection and mitigation of Z. Sobhaninia, “An improved de algorithm to optimise the learning
 DDoS attacks based on multi-dimensional characteristics in SDN,” Sci. process of a BERT-based plagiarism detection model,” in Proc. IEEE
 Rep., vol. 14, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 16421. Congr. Evol. Comput. (CEC), 2022, pp. 1–7.