5106 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 Deep Graph Anomaly Detection: A Survey and New
 Perspectives
 Hezhe Qiao , Hanghang Tong, Fellow, IEEE, Bo An , Senior Member, IEEE, Irwin King , Fellow, IEEE,
 Charu Aggarwal , Fellow, IEEE, and Guansong Pang , Member, IEEE

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Graph anomaly detection (GAD), which aims to iden- open research problems in GAD to inspire more future high-quality
tify unusual graph instances (e.g., nodes, edges, subgraphs, or research in this area.
graphs), has attracted increasing attention in recent years due to
its significance in a wide range of applications. Deep learning ap- Index Terms—Graph anomaly detection, graph neural netproaches, graph neural networks (GNNs) in particular, have been works, anomaly detection, graph representation learning.
emerging as a promising paradigm for GAD, owing to its strong
capability in capturing complex structure and/or node attributes I. INTRODUCTION
in graph data. Considering the large number of methods proposed
 RAPH anomaly detection (GAD) aims to identify graph
for GNN-based GAD, it is of paramount importance to summarize
the methodologies and findings in the existing GAD studies, so that
we can pinpoint effective model designs for tackling open GAD
 G instances (e.g., node, edge, sub-graph, and graph) that
 do not conform with the normal regime. It has been an active
problems. To this end, in this work we aim to present a comprehenresearch area with wide application in detecting abnormal insive review of deep learning approaches for GAD. Existing GAD
surveys are focused on task-specific discussions, making it difficult stances in a variety of graph/network data, e.g., abusive user
to understand the technical insights of existing methods and their behaviors in online user networks, fraudulent activities in finanlimitations in addressing some unique challenges in GAD. To fill this cial networks, and spams in social networks. Furthermore, since
gap, we first discuss the problem complexities and their resulting the relations between data samples can be modeled as similarity
challenges in GAD, and then provide a systematic review of current graphs, one can also use GAD methods to discover anomalies
deep GAD methods from three novel perspectives of methodology,
including GNN backbone design, proxy task design for GAD, and in any set of data objects (as long as an appropriate pairwise
graph anomaly measures. To deepen the discussions, we further similarity function is available).
propose a taxonomy of 13 fine-grained method categories under Due to the complex structure of graphs, traditional anomaly
these three perspectives to provide more in-depth insights into the detection methods cannot be directly applied to graph data. In
model designs and their capabilities. To facilitate the experiments recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown promisand validation of the GAD methods, we also summarize a collection
of widely-used datasets for GAD and empirical performance com- ing capabilities in modeling and learning the representation of
parison on these datasets. We further discuss multiple important graphs by capturing structural patterns, inspiring a large number
 of GNN-based approaches for GAD. However, the popular GNN
 designs, such as aggregation of node representations and opti-
 Received 6 November 2024; revised 12 April 2025; accepted 10 June 2025. mization objectives, may lead to over-smoothing, indistinguish-
Date of publication 23 June 2025; date of current version 24 July 2025. This able representations of normal and abnormal graph instances,
work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and
CyberSG R&D Programme Office under its Translation and Innovation under which significantly limits their applications in real-world use
Grant CRPO-GC4-SMU-001, in part by the Ministry of Education, Singapore cases. Many novel GNN-based approaches specifically designed
under its Tier 1 Academic Research Fund under Grant 24-SIS-SMU-008, and in for GAD have been proposed to tackle the these challenges. In
part by the Lee Kong Chian Fellowship under Grant T050273. Recommended
for acceptance by Guoren Wang. (Corresponding author: Guansong Pang.) this work, to summarize the current methodologies and findings,
 Hezhe Qiao and Guansong Pang are with the School of Computing and we provide a systematic and comprehensive review of current
Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 deep GAD techniques and how they may tackle various types
(e-mail: gspang@smu.edu.sg).
 Hanghang Tong is with the Department of Computer Science, University of of challenges in GAD. We also propose several important open
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61801 USA. research problems in GAD to inspire more future research in
 Bo An is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Tech- this area.
nological University, Singapore 639798.
 Irwin King is with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Related surveys: There have been several reviews on anomaly
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. detection in recent years, e.g., [2], [4], [78], [87], [102], [112],
 Charu Aggarwal is with IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, but most of them are focused on non-deep-learning-based meth-
NY 10598 USA.
 A continuously updated repository for GAD datasets, links to the codes of ods for GAD [2], [4], [102], or on general data rather than
GAD algorithms, and empirical comparison is available at https://github.com/ graph data [7], [87]. The studies [61], [78], [112] are on deep
mala-lab/Awesome-Deep-Graph-Anomaly-Detection. GAD, but the reviews are limited to a relatively narrow point
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2025.3581578, provided by the authors. of view. For example, Ma et al. [78] focus on task-specific
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3581578 discussions, with limited reviews on the technical development,
 1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5107

 TABLE I
 A COMPARISON OF OUR WORK TO EXISTING SURVEYS ON ANOMALY DETECTION

while Liu et al. [61] and Tang et al. [112] focus on establishing a of GAD benchmark datasets, and further provide quantitaperformance benchmark for unsupervised and supervised GAD tive comparison results on these datasets (Appendices A,
methods respectively. Although these surveys provide useful B, and C).
guidelines for the development of methods for GAD, it is difficult to understand the technical insights of existing methods II. PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES IN GAD
and their limitations in addressing some unique challenges in
 This section discusses some unique complexities and chal-
GAD.
 lenges in GAD.
 Our work: To fill this gap, we aim to offer a distinctive
review on GAD to discuss these insights, the limitations, and the
future research opportunities in this crucial topic. Specifically, A. Major Problem Complexities
we start with the discussion on the problem complexities and The complexities in GAD can be summarized in two
their resulting unique challenges in GAD. We then provide a sys- ways. One source of the complexities lies in some inherent
tematic review of current deep GAD methods from three novel characteristics of graph data.
perspectives of methodology, including GNN backbone design, r P1. Structural dependency: The samples are typically corproxy task design for GAD, and graph anomaly measures. To related/connected with each other instead of being indedeepen the discussions, we further propose a taxonomy of 13 pendent. The connections are of different semantics, e.g.,
fine-grained method categories under these three perspectives to it could be a purchase relationship in a social network, or a
provide more in-depth insights into the model designs and their citation relationship in a citation network. The complexity
capabilities. To facilitate the experiments and validation of the of graph structure is reflected in connectivity patterns,
GAD methods, we also summarize a collection of widely-used dependency, or influence at different levels of graph data,
datasets for GAD and empirical performance comparison on which play a significant role in defining what is abnormal
these datasets. A comparison of our work to these related surveys on graphs [4]. For example, different from i.i.d. data, where
is summarized in Table I. the anomalies are independent of the context, the anomalies
 In summary, our major contributions are as follows: in graphs often depend on the context of a graph data
 r The survey provides important insights into the problem instance, e.g., the neighboring nodes of a node. Anomalies
 complexities and the resulting challenges that are unique may be considered as normal in one context but abnormal
 for the task of GAD (Section II). in another.
 r We introduce a novel taxonomy of current deep GAD meth- r P2. Diverse types of graph: There are many types of
 ods, which offers in-depth understanding of the methods graphs in the real world, each serving different purposes
 from three technical design perspectives, including GNN and applications. Graphs can be categorized into static
 backbone design, proxy task design, and graph anomaly and dynamic types, depending on whether they change
 measures (Section III). over time. It can also be divided into heterophilic and hor We then introduce 13 fine-grained method categories under mophilic graphs according to the type of connection [150],
 these three perspectives to provide more in-depth insights [160]. The definition of anomaly in one type of graph can
 into the model designs (i.e., key intuition, assumption, differ significantly from that in other types of graph. In
 learning objectives, advantages and disadvantages) and particular, a graph instance (e.g., node/edge/graph) that is
 their capabilities in addressing the unique challenges in clearly abnormal in a dynamic graph at a specific time step
 GAD (Sections IV, V, and VI). (i.e., a static graph) can demonstrate strong normality when
 r We further discuss multiple important future research di- looking at the evolution of the graph; similarly, we can have
 rections that involve largely unsolved open problems in opposite abnormality of a graph instance in a homophilic
 GAD. Solutions in these directions would open up new graph vs. in a heterophilic graph. Dealing with diverse
 opportunities for addressing the unique challenges in GAD types of graphs requires the GAD methods to adapt its
 (Section VII). learning strategy based on its unique properties of graphs.
 r We also summarize a large number of representative deep r P3. Computational complexity in handling large-scale
 GAD methods from the 13 categories and a large collection graphs: With the increasing amount of online data, modern
5108 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 applications can include very large-scale graph data with normal and anomaly classes [3], [11], [87]. This also
 millions/billions of nodes and/or edges [41], [45], [97], applies to GAD, but this complexity is largely amplified
 [112], such as those in web-scale social networks, finan- in GAD due to potential long-tailed distributions in graph
 cial transaction networks, cyber networks, user-product structure/attributes [2], [68], in addition to the imbalance
 e-commerce networks, and citation networks. To identify in the class sample size.
 anomalies using global structural contexts, it is essential r P8. Abnormality camouflage: Bad actors may adjust their
 to consider the full graph structural information, or a large behaviors to camouflage the abnormality of the anomalous
 proportion of the structural relations. The key complexity instances, making them difficult to detect using popular
 here is to deal with the time and space complexities when AD methods. The anomaly camouflage in GAD refers to
 loading such large-scale structural relation data. the phenomenon where anomalous graph instances dis-
 Another source is from the variety of graph abnormalities. guise themselves as normal within a local neighborhood
 r P4. Diverse graph anomaly instances: In contrast to or the global graph. This may be done through various
 anomaly detection in other forms of data, anomalies within mechanisms, e.g., attribute manipulation and structural
 graph data can arise from different components, such as manipulation in a graph [23], [70], [98], [136].
 nodes, edges, sub-graphs, or the entire graph [78]. Moreover, graph anomalies can manifest themselves in diverse
 ways, depending on the structure and attribute information B. Major Challenges
 of graph data. This highlights the need for GAD methods The aforementioned problem complexities lead to the folto incorporate a range of techniques focused on identifying lowing largely unsolved challenges in GAD, which deep GAD
 irregular patterns across nodes, edges, subgraphs, and the approaches can tackle to various extent:
 entirety of the graph. r C1. Graph structure-aware GAD: As discuss in P1, graph
 r P5. Large variation in graph abnormality: Anomalies in anomalies are not solely determined by their own attributes
 graphs can manifest in different forms, including abnor- but also by their structural context. Thus, the GAD methods
 mality in graph attributes, graph structure, or the composi- are required to effectively capture those structural depention of graph attributes and structure [4]. Some exemplars dency in their anomaly scoring functions. The effect of
 include attribute anomalies (i.e., graph instances that are this dependency in anomaly scoring may vary significantly
 exceptional in a graph attribute set) [3], [87], structural from homophilic graphs to heterophilic graphs, and from
 anomalies (i.e., graph instances that connect different com- static graphs to dynamic graphs (P2). On the other hand,
 munities, forming dense connections with others) [18], oversmoothing is a common issue when modeling the
 [78], contextual anomalies (i.e., graph instances that have graph structure information, which is referred to as a
 different attribute values compared to other nodes in the phenomenon in graph representation learning where the
 same community) [18], [78], and local affinity anomalies learned representations of different nodes become overly
 (i.e., graph instances that demonstrate significantly weak similar due to the iterative aggregation of representations
 affinity to their connected instances compared to other of neighboring nodes to obtain the representations of the
 instances [66], [97]). Also, graph abnormality may vary target nodes. In GAD, this can lead to node/subgraph reprefrom a local context to a global context, e.g., the node sentations that smooth out anomalies as well, making them
 attributes in a 1-hop neighborhood vs. that in the full indistinguishable between normal and abnormal graph ingraph. This can lead to a highly complex composition stances [23], [97]. Therefore, it is challenging to model
 set of graph abnormalities, i.e., abnormality in attributes, diverse structural influences in the anomaly scoring on
 structure, or both attributes and structure conditioned on graphs, while avoiding adverse effects like representation
 a certain context, having very different definitions to the oversmoothing.
 conventional anomaly types – point, conditional, and group r C2. GAD at scale: As discussed in P3, large-scale graphs
 anomalies [3], [11], [87] – in general AD. with millions or even billions of nodes/edges presents a
 In addition, there are some complexities inherited from gen- significant computational challenge to GAD methods that
eral AD but amplified in GAD: aim to model global or higher-order structure informar P6. Unknowingness of abnormality: Many abnormalities tion [112]. Existing large-graph modeling methods are
 remain unknown until they actually occur [87], in which no challenging to apply directly to GAD due to the extreme
 prior knowledge about the abnormality is available for the imbalance in the data (P7). While some subgraph and
 modeling. Further, one type of abnormality can show very sampling techniques have been proposed to address this
 different behaviors to the other types of abnormality in a issue, they often fail to capture the full structural inforsingle graph, e.g., the heterogeneous abnormality in graph mation, resulting in sub-optimal performance [23], [66],
 attributes vs. that in graph structure, in a node set vs. in an particularly for unsupervised GAD. Consequently, peredge or subgraph set, in a 1-hop local structure context vs. forming anomaly detection on large-scale graphs remains
 in a higher-order structural context. Thus, knowing one or a long-standing challenge in the area.
 more types of graph anomalies may not be generalize to r C3. Generalization to different graph anomalies: As disthe other types of anomalies. cussed in P4, there are various types of graph anomaly
 r P7. Data imbalance: Due to the rare occurrence of anoma- instances, making it hard to apply a one-for-all approach.
 lies, there is typically a large sample imbalance between Achieving this requires a combination of robust feature
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5109

 extraction and versatile detection models. Further, the a graph by G = (V, E) where V and E denote the node set and
 anomalies can manifest in various forms, ranging from edge set respectively. For the graph G, we use X ∈ RN ×M to
 attributes, structure and their composition (P5). However, denote the matrix of node attributes and xi ∈ RM is the attribute
 most existing methods are designed for a specific type vector of vi ∈ V, and A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N is the adjacency matrix
 of anomaly in an unsupervised manner, which typically of G with Aij = 1 iff (vi , vj ) ∈ E, where N is the number of
 have a low recall rate [18], [66], [97]. The challenge is node.
 amplified when the training data does not illustrate every Problem Statement: GAD can be divided into anomaly depossible class of anomaly (P6), regardless of unsupervised tection at the node-level, edge-level, sub-graph level and graphor supervised methods [1], [16], [88], [89], [90], [119], level settings. The node-, edge- and subgraph-level AD tasks
 [158]. are typically performed within a single large graph G, where the
 r C4. Balanced GAD: As discussed in P7, since the num- input samples are nodes v ∈ G, edges e ∈ G, and subgraphs
 ber of normal instances is significantly larger than that s ⊂ G, respectively. For the graph-level AD task, the input
 of abnormal instances, the models tend to bias towards samples are a set of graphs G = {G1 , G2 , · · · }. For the sake
 the majority class during the training, i.e., they perceive of simplicity and generality across different levels of GAD, we
 the normal patterns more frequently. Consequently, the uniformly denote the input samples as o, i.e., o can denote a
 models might be overly specialized in recognizing normal node v, an edge e, a subgraph s, or a full graph G, depending on
 instances while generalizing poorly on the anomalies. Of- their use in specific algorithms or models. Then GAD aims to
 ten the detection decision thresholds are crucial for making learn an anomaly scoring function f : {o1 , o2 , · · · } → R, such
 predictions for some methods [23], [112], and poorly cho- that f (o) < f (o ), ∀o ∈ On , o ∈ Oa , where On and Oa denote
 sen thresholds can worsen the effects of data imbalance. the set of normal and abnormal graph instances, respectively.
 Thus, the challenge is to avoid biased GAD. Since anomalies are rare samples, it is typically assumed that
 r C5. Robust and interpretable GAD: GAD in real applica- |On |  |Oa |.
 tions needs to be robust against various adverse conditions,
 such as abnormality camouflage (P8) [23], [34], [112] and
 unknown anomaly contamination [97], [98]. Addressing B. Categorization of Deep GAD Methods
 the abnormality camouflage or anomaly contamination In order to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of the remay require models that can capture subtle differences be- search progress in GAD, we introduce a new taxonomy that cattween normal graph instances and camouflaged instances, egorizes current GAD methods into three main groups,including
 and complex relationships within the graph as well. Be- GNN backbone design, proxy GAD task design, and graph
 sides, an explanation of why a graph instance is detected as anomaly measures, depending on the insights offered by each
 an anomaly can be crucial for the utility of the predictions method. This enables us to review the GAD methods from three
 in real applications [59], [105], [105], but it is a largely different technical perspectives. To elaborate the insights in each
 unexplored area. For example, in bank fraud detection, it perspective, we further categorize the methods into fine-grained
 is essential to provide a comprehensive explanation of the 13 groups. An overview of the taxonomy is shown in Fig. 1.
 detected fraudulent activity for facilitating the subsequent More specifically, general GNNs can not be directly applied
 investigation, but it is challenging to link the fraud to to GAD due to the aforementioned problem complexities, and
 specific attributes of particular transactions (nodes) and thus, there is a group of studies that focus on designing suitable
 their relations (edges) at a specific time period. GNN backbones for GAD. The design of the GNN backbones
 can be divided into discriminative GNNs and generative GNNs
 III. CATEGORIZATION OF DEEP GAD according to the improvement of different modules in GNNs.
 The second main category of methods is on the GAD models
A. Preliminaries
 constructed by optimizing a diverse set of well-crafted learning
 GAD aims to recognize the anomaly instances in graph data objective functions to form a proxy task that can guide the
that may vary from nodes, edges to subgraphs by learning an GAD models to capture diverse graph anomaly/normal patanomaly scoring function. Traditional GAD methods achieve terns without the need for ground-truth labels. This category
anomaly detection using matrix decomposition and residual of methods can be further divided into five subcategories based
analysis [4]. However, their performance is often bottlenecked on the modeling in the proxy tasks. Lastly, there is a group of
due to the lack of representation power to capture the rich methods that build GAD models based on anomaly measures
structure-attribute semantics of the graph data and to handle that are designed specifically for graph data. These methods
high-dimensional node attributes. In recent years, GNNs have can be further grouped into four subcategories depending on
been widely used in GAD due to their powerful representation the type of graph anomaly measures used. A summarization of
learning ability. Some representative GNNs like GCN [51], representative algorithms for each type of GAD approaches is
GraphSage [37], and GCL [135] attract much attention in node presented in Table 1 in Appendix A, available online.
representation learning in graphs. These GNNs can be leveraged
to learn the expressive representation of different graph instances
 IV. GNN BACKBONE DESIGN
for GAD.
 Definition and Notation: In this section, we introduce the This category of methods aims at leveraging GNNs to learn
definitions and notations used throughout the paper. We denote effective representations of graph instances for downstream
5110 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed taxonomy of deep GAD from three high-level and 13 fine-grained technical perspectives.

anomaly detection tasks. Due to its strong capability to repre- Let hi be the feature representation of a graph instance oi
sent graph-structured data, GNNs can effectively obtain expres- that is obtained through l layers of feature aggregation (FAG)
sive node representations through aggregation among the con- in a GNN, i.e., hi = FAG1 :l (oi , Ni ) where Ni represents the
nected nodes. However, unlike general node/graph classification neighbor set of a graph instance oi , these methods are typically
datasets, GAD datasets are often extremely class-imbalanced, optimized via a general cross-entropy loss to train the discrimiwhich prevents GNNs from being directly applied to GAD native GAD model.
datasets. Therefore, several GNNs have been proposed to handle 
the imbalance problem for more effective GAD. Concretely, this Lcls = − [yi log pi + (1 − yi ) log(1 − pi )], (1)
 oi ∈G
type of methods can be roughly divided into discriminative- and
generative-based GNNs for GAD. where yi denotes the class label of the instance oi and pi =
 MLP1 :m (hi ) is the output of a mapping function that goes
 through m layers of multiple perceptrons (MLP) to project the
A. Discriminative GNNs
 feature hi to a probability of the sample being abnormal/normal.
 Discriminative GNN-based GAD methods refer to a GNN ar- During inference, given a graph instance, oj , pj or its inverse
chitecture specifically designed for discriminating normal graph 1 − pj can be used as its anomaly score.
instances from the abnormal ones, where the discrimination is Different GNN-based encoders can be used to obtain the
typically achieved through a supervised learning manner. Thus, feature representation h, such as graph convolutional networks
the discriminative GNNs are typically trained on the labeled (GCNs) [51], graph attention networks (GAT) [116], or Graphgraph dataset containing examples of both normal and abnormal Sage [37]. Depending on which part of the learning pipeline is
instances. The core idea in these methods is to adapt the conven- focused, we group the existing methods in this category into
tional GNN backbones in a way so that the message passing in two sub-categories, including the methods that focus on the
GNNs can capture the majority patterns or the deviation patterns GNN neighborhood aggregation design, i.e., FAG1 :l (oi , Ni ),
better. and that focus on feature transformation with the raw attributes
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5111

or node embeddings as input, i.e., Transformation(hi ) or
Transformation(xi ). Below we introduce each of them in
detail.
 1) Aggregation Mechanism: As a simple and effective way
to obtain the representation of nodes in GNNs, feature aggregation plays a crucial role in learning node representations by
aggregating information from neighboring nodes in a graph.
Thus, to create GNN-based methods for GAD, one principled Fig. 2. Three categories of aggregation mechanism.
approach is to craft suitable feature aggregation FAG designs
that are sensible for graph anomaly instances.
 Assumption: The GAD methods in this line assume that the neighboring nodes during the aggregation where Φ(Ni ) is inconnected instances from the same class in graphs have similar stantiated by a node selector that chooses the neighbors with
characteristics, from which we can perform feature aggregation high similarity. Moreover, a reinforcement learning module is
to obtain discriminative normality/abnormality patterns. also used in [23] to find the optimal amounts of neighbors to
 A widely-used FAG mechanism is as follows [51]: be selected. MITIGATE [12] implements Φ(Ni ) via a masked
     aggregation mechanism that utilizes the distance-based cluster-
 (l) (l−1) (l−1)
 hi = σ W(l) hi + AGG hj | o j ∈ Ni , ing algorithm to choose a subset of high-representative nodes,
 (2) in which the nodes that are closest to the cluster centers are
 (l)
where hi is the feature representation of instance i in the chosen. GmpaAD [79] takes a similar clustering-based approach
l-th layer, σ is an activation function, and W(l) is the training as MITIGATE, but it uses a differential evolutionary algorithm
parameters in the l-th layer. The graph instance oi is often set to find the optimal mapping strategy and generate the repreas a node vi , and Ni is typically the 1-hop neighborhood of the sentative nodes given the selected candidates from a clustering
node vi . AGG(·) is implemented using sum or mean aggregation, method. On the other hand, H2-FDetector [107] categorizes the
which sums or averages the representations of neighbor features. edges into homophily and heterophily connections in the graph,
More advanced aggregation methods, such as attention-based and further designs a new information aggregation strategy to
aggregation [29] and LSTM [149], are also widely used. How- ensure that the homophily connections propagate similar inforever, due to the oversmoothing representation issue (C1 in mation while the heterophily connections propagate different
Section II-B), directly applying such neighborhood aggregation information.
mechanism can largely reduce the discriminability of of graph In addition to using distance, Φ can also be specified via
anomalies, especially for those whose abnormal behaviors are meta learning or reinforcement learning. BLS [20] is the repsubtle (C3 in Section II-B). Therefore, a variety of methods were resentative method that enhances the FAG mechanism under
proposed to enforce distinguishable representations for normal imbalanced and noisy scenarios by selecting important nodes
and abnormal graph instances throughout a number of feature via a meta-learning gradient of the learning loss. AO-GNN [43]
aggregation iterations. These methods can be summarized via employs a reinforcement learning method supervised by a surrothe following principled framework: gate reward based on AUC performance to prune the heterophily
   edges. NGS [99] takes a meta-graph learning approach that
 (l) (l−1)
 ĥi = AGG hj | oj ∈ Φ (Ni ) ∪ Ψ(V) , devises a differentiable neural architecture to determine a set
    (3)
 (l)
 hi = σ W(l) hi
 (l−1) (l)
 + ĥi , of optimized message passing structures and then combines
 multiple searched meta-graphs in FAG.
where Φ(·) and Ψ(·) represent a filtering function on the neigh- • Soft Edge Selection: Another research line is
borhood set N and an edge synthesizer on the full node set V, adopting an attention mechanism in GNNs by assigning the
respectively. Depending on how the methods specify the Φ or weights for each edge for soft edge selection for GAD, rather
Ψ function, we further categorize them into two fine-grained than hard edge selection, as demonstrated in Fig. 2(c). This
groups – hard/soft edge selection and edge synthesis – to gain weight is generally obtained through the relationship between
better insights into these existing methods. node embeddings, which serves as an effective way to enforce
 • Hard Edge Selection: Popular aggregation mecha- the importance of some specific edge relations in the feature
nisms in GNN methods are built upon a homophily assumption aggregation. GAT [116] is widely used as the basic backbone,
that connected nodes come from the same class. on top of which a variety of designs is introduced in the methods
 Thus, the existence of non-homophily edges (i.e., edges that of this category for GAD. Specifically, the general attention
connect nodes of different classes, also referred to as heterophily mechanism in GAT can be formulated as:
edges below) in a GAD dataset can greatly hinders the discrim- ⎛ ⎞
inability of the learned feature representations. As shown in 
 hi = σ ⎝ Φ (hi , hj ; θ) Whj ⎠ ,
 (l) (l)
 (4)
Fig. 2(a), one popular strategy is to instantiate Φ(Ni ) that prune
 oj ∈N(i)
the heterophily edges w.r.t. the normal class, referred to as hard
edge selection. Below we review the methods in this line. where Φ indicates a weight learning function with parameters θ
 In order to enhance the homophily relations, CARE-GNN [23] applied on the embedding of a graph instance oi and its neighbors
devises a label-aware similarity measure to find informative oj . It represents the contribution of relations/neighbors to the
5112 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

target instance oi , where the instance oi is often specified as a
node vi . For instantiating Φ, GraphConsis [70] reveals an inconsistency phenomenon in node connections that abnormal nodes
can have a high likelihood of being connected to normal nodes
to camouflage their abnormality. It then introduces a consistency
scoring-based method based on node embedding similarities
and a self-attention mechanism to assign weights for different
connections in the aggregation in Φ. FRAUDRE [140] extends Fig. 3. Two categories of feature transformation.
the inconsistency-based scoring method to include three types
of graph inconsistencies in features, topology, and structural
relations to consider the importance of different connections. (ii) Edge selection may lead to the loss of important structure
On the other hand, PMP [162] introduces a partitioning message information while edge synthesis may introduce noise or some
passing to independently handle the heterophily and homophily irrelevant structure information into the message passing in
neighbors preventing the gradients in the optimization from GNNs.
being dominated by normal nodes. To achieve this, Φ is im- Challenges Addressed: The tailored GNNs for GAD enable
plemented by a weight generator function to adaptively adjust effective modeling of graph structure and its interaction with
the influence of neighbors from different classes to the target graph attribute information (C1). They may also be able to
node. learn more discriminative features for detecting subtle anomalies
 • Edge Synthesis: The edge selection function Φ fo- that are similar to labeled abnormal samples (C3). Since these
cuses on local structure only. Edge synthesis function Ψ can methods require local feature aggregation, they can often scale
often be used to complement Φ in capturing more global pat- up to large graphs (C2).
terns for GAD, as demonstrated in Fig. 2(b). For example, 2) Feature Transformation: In addition to the efforts on
GHRN [33] prunes the inter-class edges by emphasizing and the aggregation mechanism, another popular approach to obdelineating the high-frequency components of the graph. Apart tain discriminative features for GAD is to perform feature
from edge reduction, the indirect link between nodes can also transformation on either the graph instance representations
be beneficial for the normality representation learning [33]. To from GNNs, i.e., Transformation(hi ), or raw attributes, i.e.,
this end, GHRN introduces a global node selector Ψ(V) that Transformation(xi ). This is crucial since datasets used in GAD
chooses nodes beyond the neighboring nodes of the target node can often contain a substantial proportion of feature information
to introduce this information into the feature aggregation, which that is irrelevant, or even noisy, to GAD. There are two popular
can be seen as an edge synthesizer that connects distant nodes to approaches to instantiate this Transformation(·) function: one
a target node. PCGNN [63] specifies Ψ(V) using a subgraph is to use gradient information and another is to use spectral graph
construction method consisting of class-label-balanced node filters.
and edge samplers to tackle potential issues arising from the Assumption: It is assumed that there is irrelevant or noisy
skewed class distribution. To this end, it incorporates the label information in the raw attributes or graph structure w.r.t. GAD,
information into the sampling process to choose nodes and edges which should be discarded during feature aggregation.
for its sub-graph construction. A distance function is also used • Gradient-based Feature Scoring: Extracting
to simplify the neighborhood in the sub-graphs. NSReg [119] class-related features specific to the characteristics of a parleverages a novel normal structure regularization method where ticular class is one straightforward way to obtain discriminathe normal-node-oriented relation is used to enforce strong tive features. Inspired by variable decomposition [30], gradient
normality into the representation learning to avoid overfitting information-based methods have been emerging as one main apto the labeled abnormal nodes. proach to obtain discriminative representations from GNNs [75].
 The relation representations are generated through a learn- The key idea here is to select features from the representation
able transformation that fuses the representations of relevant hi based on the gradient backpropagated from the softmax
nodes, which are subsequently used to optimize the normal- probability of being a specific class, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a).
node-oriented relation prediction and the representation learner. Let αkc be the gradient score of an anomaly class c w.r.t. a feature
 Advantages: The key advantages of discriminative GNN- k, then it represents the contribution of this feature to anomaly
based GAD methods are as follows. (i) Treating anomaly detec- detection, which can be formulated as follows:
tion as an end-to-end imbalanced classification task simplifies
 1  ∂y c
 N
the GAD problem, allowing the use of available abnormal samples to detect known graph anomaly instances. (ii) This approach αkc = , (5)
 N i=1 ∂hk,i
does not rely on the reconstruction of the graph structure, which
significantly reduces memory usage and enhances its scalability where y c is the predicted probability of being the anomaly class
for large-scale graphs. c and hk,i is the k-th feature of the representation of node i from
 Disadvantages: They also have some major disadvantages. (i) a hidden layer. After obtaining a gradient score for each feature
Since these methods require some labeled graph data as super- dimension, the top K features with the largest gradient scores
vision information, they become inapplicable or less effective are selected to represent the nodes in a reduced feature space.
in practical applications where such data is difficult to obtain. This gradient score-based approach is used in GDN [32] to select
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5113

abnormal and normal features in a supervised manner, and these band-pass filters in GAD. Current GNNs with adaptive filters
features are found often to be invariant to structure distribution cannot guarantee to be band-pass or spectral localized. Thereshift. It helps reduce the negative influence of irrelevant features fore, they build on top of Hammond’s graph wavelet theory [38]
while preserving the extracted abnormal/normal graph patterns, to develop a new GNN architecture with a Beta kernel to better
thus enhancing the overall performance of GAD. Similarly, detect higher-frequency anomalies.
GraphENS [92] determines the importance of each node feature The aforementioned filters can be challenged by heterophily
via a gradient score-based method. Apart from gradient score, graphs since homophily graphs are assumed in these filters.
existing feature selection methods for anomaly detection or To tackle this challenge, SEC-GFD [131] employs a hybrid
imbalanced classification [54], [84], [85], [86], [91] may be band-pass filter to partition the graph spectrum into hybrid
adapted for GAD. frequency bands, while SplitGNN [123] combines a band-pass
 • Spectral Graph Filter: Spectral graph filter, graph filter with a tunable Beta Wavelet GNN to address the
which combines the strengths of spectral graph theory and heterophily issue in node representation learning for GAD (C1
GNNs, is widely applied to capture and analyze the structural in Section II-B).
properties of graphs for GAD tasks. This approach utilizes a Advantages: (i) The feature transformation approach supports
set of graph filters to transform the raw attributes to latent the extraction of discriminative features from data with various
space to extract discriminative graph representations, as illus- amount of irrelevant/noisy information. (ii) It can also provide
trated in Fig. 3(b). Each graph filter assumes that normal nodes rich and informative graph representations capturing beyond
tend to have similar features with their neighbors, which can local graph properties, such as connectivity, centrality, and combe regarded as low-frequency information, whereas abnormal munity structure, for more effective GAD.
nodes in the graph are characterized by deviations from the Disadvantages: (i) Depending on what criterion or spectral
norm, which are often accompanied by high-frequency infor- filter is used, this approach might overlook some important
mation since abnormal nodes often have different characteristics information in feature transformation that could be crucial for
from surrounding nodes. The distinction between low-frequency GAD, since one feature scoring criterion or filter often fails to
and high-frequency information is closely related to the spec- capture all possible discriminative features. (ii) The approach
tral properties of the graph. In particular, the low-frequency may confined to a specific type of graph. For example, spectral
and high-frequency variations on the graph can be effectively GNNs are primarily designed for homogeneous graphs, and thus,
captured by the lower and higher eigenvalues of the graph it may not be suitable for a heterogeneous graph with different
Laplacian matrix, respectively. To leverage this information for types of nodes.
GAD, graph Fourier transformation [109] based graph filtering Challenges Addressed: The feature transformation approach
operation is often used. Formally, let L be the symmetrically enhances GNNs by focusing them on specific types of discriminormalized Laplacian, with eigen decomposition L = UΛUT , native features, thereby providing effective solutions to the graph
where Λ = diag[λ1 , . . . , λn ], then a signal x ∈ Rn is trans- structure-aware anomaly detection problem (C1). Furthermore,
ferred by using a graph filter g, Transformation(x) = g  x = this approach focuses on discriminative features and does not
Ug(Λ)UT x, and thus, the graph signal filtered by the k-th filter require costly graph structure reconstruction, and thus, it is often
can be defined as good for GAD on large-scale graph data (C2).

 hi,k = Ugk (Λ)UT xi = Udiag [gk (λ1 ) , . . . , gk (λn )] UT xi . B. Generative GNNs
 (6)
 To better capture the feature separability, a set of multi- Generative GNN-based methods focus on synthesizing new
frequency filters is often employed to learn the node represen- graph instances to augment the existing graph data for enhancing
tations [10]. Accordingly, the final representation hi of node vi model training on the new graph for GAD. This approach is
can be obtained by motivated by the problem complexities like the scarcity of graph
   anomaly instances and their large variations (P5 and P7 in
 hi = αi,k hi,k = U αi,k gk (Λ)UT xi , (7) Section II-B). The underlying key idea in these GAD methods
 k k is to synthesize outliers that can simulate graph anomalies in
 some specific properties to provide pseudo anomaly information
where αi,k is an important score for the graph filter gk (Λ). for training the GAD models. In general, these methods can be
 Various spectral graph filters utilizing the frequency at differ- summarized by the following formulation:
ent level have been proposed for GAD. Specifically, AMNet [10]
is an early work that adaptively integrates different graph signals onew
 i = gφ (oi , X, A; ), (8)
with mixed frequency patterns via a multi-frequency graph where oi is an existing graph instance, gφ is a graph instance
filter group. It uses a restricted Bernstein polynomial param- generator with parameters φ that uses oi , existing attribute ineterization method to approximate filters in multi-frequency formation X, graph structure information A, and some auxiliary
groups. BWGNN [113] reveals a ‘right-shift’ phenomenon in information  to generate the augmented graph instance, onew .
 i
GAD datasets with synthetic or real-world anomalies, i.e., low- It is then followed by a one-class or binary classification loss
frequency energy is gradually transferred to the high-frequency Lcls defined as
part when the degree of anomaly becomes larger. According to 
this phenomenon, they justify the necessity of spectral localized Lgen = (Y, fθ (Xnew
 i , Anew
 i )), (9)
5114 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 classes. To alleviate this issue, GraphMixup [92] is introduced
 to construct semantic relation spaces that allow the interpolation
 to be performed at the semantic level. In GraphENS [92], the
 synthesized nodes are created using an adaptive interpolation
 rate that is determined by the distance between the minority and
 majority class nodes, and its neighborhood is built in a stochastic
 manner based on the distance between the ego-network nodes
 of a minority node and a target node. BAT [69] generates virtual
Fig. 4. Two categories of generative GNNs. nodes for each class as “shortcuts” connecting to the other nodes
 based on posterior likelihoods, where the representation of the
 generated nodes is generated based on a feature interpolation
where Xnew and Anew are the augmented version of X and operation.
A, Y represents the label set of the graph instances consisting Advantages: (i) Feature interpolation is a simple yet effective
of pseudo labels of the generated anomaly instances (and the way to create more samples for the under-represented anomaly
labels in the original graph if any), and f is a GAD model. classes. (ii) Mixing up feature representations from different
Depending on the source of  in gφ in (8), these methods can classes can diversify the training data, enhancing the training of
be categorized into feature interpolation and noise perturbation a more generalized GAD model.
generation methods. The former focuses on specifying  using Disadvantages: (i) Feature interpolation focuses on generatdata from existing graphs, while the latter focuses on utilizing ing node representations but lacks the ability to generate graph
prior distribution to specify . structural information. Typically, the methods in this category
 1) Feature Interpolation: Feature interpolation is a com- require the incorporation of an additional local structure genermonly employed technique in imbalance learning for augment- ator to address this limitation. (ii) Feature interpolation also has
ing data, where the representations of synthesized graph in- the risk of producing some ambiguous graph samples which may
stances are created by interpolating the representations of exist- lead to harder separation between normal and anomaly classes.
ing graph instances. It has been explored in popular algorithms Challenges Addressed: Feature interpolation provides a simlike SMOTE [31] and Mixup [142] to oversample the minority ple but effective way to augment the anomaly data, which helps
classes or generate diverse, large-scale samples for training deep mitigate the bias due to data imbalance (C4). Further, it may genmodels. The approach can be generally formulated as follows: erate abnormal graph instances that are dissimilar to the training
 (j) anomaly instances, thereby improving the generalization ability
 a + λ · hb ,
 hnew = (1 − λ) · h(i) (10)
 of GAD models to some unknown anomalies (C3).
where hnew is the representation of the generated graph instance 2) Noise Perturbation: Unlike the feature interpolation
using a convex combination of the representations of two exist- methods that generate new graph instances based on interpoing graph instances from the same class, ha and hb , as illustrated lation between representations of existing instances, the noise
in Fig. 4(a). perturbation generation methods aim to generate graph instances
 Assumption: The interpolated feature representations between using prior-driven noise perturbation, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
graph instances can well align with those of the instances from This approach can incorporate prior knowledge of the graph
the anomaly class. normality/abnormality into the generation process for more ef-
 GraphSMOTE [147], GraphMixup [124] and GraphENS [92] fective GAD. The generated graph samples as abnormal graph
are representative methods that utilize feature interpolation to instances, combined with the given labels for existing nodes,
address the challenge of biased GAD (C4 in Section II-B). These can then be leveraged to guide the training of a discriminator for
methods are designed for imbalanced node classification, which GAD.
can be considered as supervised GAD in a closed-set setting The approach can be generally formulated as follows
since they do not consider the detection of novel/unknown
anomaly types that are not illustrated by the labeled training anomaly examples [1], [16], [88], [90], [119], [158]. In Xnew , Anew = gφ (X, A; ),
particular, GraphSMOTE [147] extends SMOTE to synthesize
 
 N
new nodes and edges in graph data. Different from generic Lcls = (yi , fθ (Xi , Ai ))
data, generating new nodes in a graph requires the connections i=1
of these nodes to existing nodes. Thus, an edge generator is
trained simultaneously in GraphSMOTE to model the relations 
 M
 + (1, fθ (Xnew
 i , Anew
 i )) , (11)
between existing and new nodes when using the SMOTE-style
 i=1
approach to generate the new nodes. A similar work is done
in AugAN [156] that performs interpolation on the feature
representations of the nodes that are similar to labeled anomalies where  is noise perturbation typically generated from a probto increase the number of training anomaly examples. How- ability distribution, such as a Gaussian distribution, gφ (·) is a
ever, directly performing the interpolation may produce out- generation function parameterized by φ, and M is the number
of-domain samples due to the extreme sparsity of the minority of generated graph instances.
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5115

 Assumption: Certain prior distributions can be used as a
source of noise perturbation to generate pseudo-abnormal graph
instances and/or diversify normal graph instances.
 One group of methods in this category [8], [14], [57], [98]
takes a representation permutation approach, which focuses
on applying permutation to graph representations to instantiate
gφ (·), i.e., Permutation(Z). It first utilizes a GNN to obtain
the representations from the original graph data X and A. Then
it applies the permutation to the representations to generate the
representation of anomalous samples, denoted as Z̃.

 Z̃ = Permutation(Z; ), Z = GN N (X, A) (12)
 Fig. 5. Five categories of proxy task design.
where  are the hyperparameters of permutation. For example,
DAGAD [57] employs the permutation and concatenates on
the representation learned from a limited number of labeled Advantages: (i) The graph instance generation may allow the
instances to generate the anomalous sample, thereby enriching synthesis of novel anomalies that facilitate the identification of
the knowledge of anomalies captured in the training set. On unseen anomalies. (ii) Noise perturbation generation can create
the other hand, GGAD [98] aims to generate outlier nodes more diversified training samples, making the trained models
that assimilate anomaly nodes in both local structure and node less sensitive to small changes in the input data. Disadvantages:
representations by leveraging the two priors of anomaly nodes, (i) The generated instances can inevitably include some outincluding asymmetric local affinity and egocentric closeness, of-domain examples, which may deviate from the optimization
to impose constraints the representations. SDGG [8] takes a objective, rendering the detection models less effective. (ii)
similar approach as GGAD, but it is focused on generating Determining the optimal level of noise in the noise perturbation
abnormal graphs that closely resemble fringe normal graphs, can be challenging and may require extensive experimentation.
which are then used to train graph-level anomaly detectors. Challenge Addressed: The generation of instances can en-
Unlike GGAD and SDGG that work on exclusively normal hance the generalization of detecting different graph anomalies
training data, ConsisGAD [14] focuses on unlabeled nodes. It (C3). It also helps achieve a balanced GAD by enhancing the
creates a noise version of the unlabeled nodes by injecting noise training samples through the GAD-oriented generation (C4).
into their representations to synthesize instances that maintain
high consistency with the original instances while involving as
 V. PROXY TASK DESIGN
much diversity as possible. This operation helps mitigate the
scarcity of abnormal node instances while also enriching the The proxy task design-based approaches aim to capture didiversity of normal nodes. verse normal/abnormal graph patterns by optimizing a well-
 Apart from the representation permutation-based generation, crafted learning objective function that aids the detection of
denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [40] have anomalies in the graph data without the use of human-annotated
recently been emerging as another major approach to generate labels. One of the crucial challenges in proxy task design is
anomalous graph instances [62], [77]. The diffusion process is to guarantee that i) the proxy task is associated with GAD,
defined as a Markov chain that progressively adds a sequence of and ii) it can deal with rich structure information and complex
scheduled Gaussian noise to corrupt the original data x: relationships in graphs. We roughly divide the methods in this
 group into five categories according to the employed proxy
 Zs = Z0 + σ(s)ε, ε ∼ N(0, I), (13) tasks, including reconstruction, contrastive learning, knowledge
 distillation, adversarial learning, and score prediction. Their
where Z0 is the feature representations of the graph instances
 respective framework is shown in Fig. 5. Below we introduce
and the variance of the noise (the noise level) is exclusively
 each of them in detail.
determined by σ(s). The full denoising process is equivalent
to a reverse Markov chain that attempts to recover the original
data from noise. It iteratively denoises Ẑs to obtain Ẑsi−1 via A. Graph Reconstruction
denoising function. The estimated Ẑ0 is then fed into a graph Data reconstruction aims to learn low-dimensional feature
instance generator to generate anomalous graphs for GAD. In representations of data for reconstructing given data instances,
particular, GODM [62] employs iterative denoising to synthesize which is widely used in tabular data, and image/video data to depseudo anomalous graph instances that have close distribution tect anomalies [89]. Given that the normal samples often occupy
with the real anomalies in a latent space. DIFFAD [77] leverages most of the dataset, it helps guarantee that the representations can
the generative power of denoising diffusion models to synthesize retain the normal information, and thus, normal samples will be
training samples that align with the original graph instance in reconstructed with a smaller reconstruction error than anomaly
egonet similarity. The generation of supplementary and effective samples. As a commonly used technique in this category, Graph
training samples is utilized to mitigate the shortage of labeled autoencoder (GAE) [39] consists of a graph encoder and a graph
anomalies. decoder and it is easy to implement the reconstruction process.
5116 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

As shown in Fig. 5(a), given a graph with X and A, the graph the modularity matrix of the graph. Besides node reconstruction,
reconstruction can be formulated as some methods explore node relation construction, e.g., GAD-
 NR [103] that aims to reconstruct the neighborhoods’ structure
 Z = GN Nenc (X, A; Θenc ) ,
 and attributes. GAE can also be extended to perform multi-view
 X = GN Ndec (Z, A; Θdec ) , graph reconstruction for learning more expressive representa-
    tions from heterogeneous attributes [94]. Despite their simplic-
 Aij = p Aij = 1 | zi , zj = sigmoid zi zTj , (14) ity, such GAE-based methods have shown effective performance
 in not only anomalous node detection but also anomalous edge
where the GNN encoder and decoder, which typically follow detection [24], [138].
the general form of the FAG mechanism in (2), are designed to Another line of research is to complement the reconstrucobtain the feature representation for each node by aggregating tion loss with some auxiliary tasks, i.e., Φ(A, X; Θ) in (15),
the representations of its neighbors. They are parameterized to capture additional information for GAD, since the reconby ΘEnc and ΘDec respectively. Z are the representations of struction task is often too simple and vulnerable [49], [55],
the nodes in the latent space. X̂ and A are the reconstructed [81], [144]. In SpecAE [55], it integrates a density estimaattributes and graph structure respectively. The optimization tion into the reconstruction by leveraging Laplacian sharpening
objective of the methods in this group can be unified as follows to amplify the distance between representations of anomalies
 Lreconstruction = R(A, A) + S(X, X)) + Φ(A, X; Θ), (15) and the majority of nodes. MSAD [49] employs a number
 of weighted meta-paths, e.g., unknown-anomaly-unknown and
where R(·) and S(·) are two reconstruction functions on graph anomaly-unknown-unknown node paths, to extract contextattributes and structure respectively, and Φ(A, X; Θ) is an aux- aware information of nodes as an auxiliary task. In HimNet [81],
iliary optimization task to enhance the reconstruction for better hierarchical memory learning is incorporated via Φ(A, X; Θ),
GAD. A general assumption underlying the methods of this where the node-level and graph-level memory modules are
approach is as follows. jointly optimized to detect both locally and globally anomalous
 Assumption: Normal graph instances can be well recon- graphs. Netwalk [138] incorporates clustering as an auxiliary
structed while reconstructing the anomalies in terms of graph task in the reconstruction to learn the representation of nodes
attributes and/or structure will lead to a large error. for streaming graph data. On the other hand, Φ(A, X; Θ) is
 There have been many GAE-based GAD methods, among specified using adversarial learning in DONE [5] to generate
which early methods typically instantiate the encoder parameter node embeddings with an objective to minimize the adverse
Θenc and decoder parameter Θdec using different GNN mod- effects from outlier nodes.
els [5], [18], [29], [42], [55], [74], [94], [138]. DOMINANT [18] Advantages: (i) Data reconstruction is a simple but effective
is among the seminal studies applying GAE to detect anomalies, way to detect anomalies in graph data. Meanwhile, it does not
in which both Θenc and Θdec are specified by a three-layer graph require labeled data for training. (ii) The data reconstruction
convolution. The optimization terms R and S are specified using models can be generalized to detect anomalies at different
the pointwise difference between matrices: levels of graph instances, e.g., anomalous nodes, edges, and
 Lreconstruction = (1 − α)||A − Â||2F + α||X − X̂||2F , (16) graphs.
 Disadvantages: (i) To perform the reconstruction of graph
where α represents the adjustment ratio between attribute and structure and attributes, it is necessary to load the entire graph,
structure reconstruction. The anomaly score is often defined by which may require significant computing resources. (ii) The
the mean squared errors (MSE): reconstruction is vulnerable to noisy or irrelevant attributes. The
 presence of noisy or erroneous graph instances can disrupt the
 Score(vi ) = (1 − α)||ai − âi ||2 + α||xi − x̂i ||2 , (17)
 reconstruction process, resulting in false positives or diminished
where ai and âi are the original and reconstructed structure detection accuracy.
associated with node vi , xi and x̂i are the original and recon- Challenge Addressed: Reconstruction methods model the
structed attributes of node vi . Later studies explore the use of entire graph structure, capturing complex structural patterns for
more advance GAE by incorporating attention, spectral infor- GAD (C1). Due to simplicity and straight intuition, they are also
mation, etc [29], [74], [94]. For example, AnomalyDAE [29] applicable to the detection of different levels of graph anomalies
and GUIDE [139] employ a graph attention network (GAT) or (C3).
an attention module to evaluate the significance of neighbors
to nodes to enhance the reconstruction of the specific nodes
during the training. HO-GAT [42] develops a hybrid order B. Graph Contrastive Learning
GAT network to specify the Θenc that can detect abnormal Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to learn effective
nodes and motif instances simultaneously. Different from the representations without human annotated labels so that similar
focus on the importance of neighboring nodes, ComGA [74] is graph instances are pulled together in the representation space,
focused on enhancing node representations for more effective while dissimilar instances are far apart. A principled GCL
reconstruction. It achieves this by utilizing a community-aware framework for GAD is to devise a self-supervised contrastive
GNN that propagates a community-specific representation of learning task with suitable positive and negative pairs to learn the
each node into the feature representations to encode and decode underlying dominant (normal) patterns in graph-structured data.
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5117

As shown in Fig. 5(b), the framework generally first utilizes a used to combine the representations of the node and the sub-
GNN network to learn the representations of graph instances and graphs [66], [151]:
build the positive pair and negative pair based on the structure, 
 yi = Bilinear (hi , si ) = σ hi Wsi ,
and then employs a contrastive loss function Lc to maximize the (20)
 ỹi = Bilinear (hi , sj ) = σ hi Wsj ,
similarity of the positive views while minimizing the similarity
of the negative pairs [117]: parameterized by W, in which yi and ỹi are the predicted results
 for positive pairs (hi , si ) and negative pairs (hi , sj ) (i.e., sj acts
 hi = GN N (xi , X, A; Θ) , as s̃i here), respectively. The anomaly score in CoLA is defined
 as the difference between the positive and negative pairs:
 si = P ositive(vi ,A,X;Ωp ),s̃i = N egative(vi ,A,X;Ωn ),
 1
 R
 Lc = E(X,A) [log D (hi , ˜si ) + log (1 − D (hi , s̃i ))] , (18) Score (vi ) = (ỹi,r − yi,r ), (21)
 R r=1
where hi is the representation of target node vi , si and s̃i
are the graph instances generated from two sampling functions where R is the number of node-subgraph pairs sampled during
P ositive(·) and N egative(·) with parameters Ωp and Ωn that inference to obtain a stable anomaly score. This framework
are used to sample the positive and negative sample pairs for inspires a number of follow-up methods, including the use of
the target node vi . One key assumption made in the GCL-based prior knowledge of different anomaly types to generate the
GAD methods is that non-neighboring nodes can be treated as negative samples [133], supervised positive/negative subgraph
‘anomalous’ graph instances relative to a target node: pairs [154], and multi-view/scale subgraph generation [25], [48],
 Assumption: Non-neighboring nodes to a target node are dis- [130], [151]. The above methods are focused on node-level
similar, and thus, they can serve as effective negative (‘anoma- anomaly detection in static graph data. Contrastive learning is
lous’) samples to the target node. also used in dynamic GAD or graph-level anomaly detection.
 This assumption works in that the datasets typically contain For example, TADDY [67] applies a dynamic graph transformer
a substantial number of normal graph instances. Effective GCL that aggregates spatial and temporal knowledge simultaneously
training would enable the learning of the majority patterns on to learn the representations of edges. It specifies si and s̃i by
the deviated non-neighboring nodes w.r.t. the target nodes. Built constructing the positive edge using the existing edges in the
upon this assumption, GCL-based methods are focused on how training set and generates the anomalous edges via negative
the positive and negative graph instances s and s̃ can be generated sampling. SIGNET [64] is designed for graph-level anomaly
to be more aligned with the GAD task. detection, which first constructs two different views using dual
 One group of methods in this line aims to generate node-level hypergraph transformation and then maximizes the mutual incontrastive sample pairs [13], [121]. In particular, motivated by formation between the bottleneck subgraph from two views.
the success of the popular GCL method DGI [117], DCI [121] The estimated mutual information can be used to evaluate the
formulates the GCL objective as the classification of the pairs of graph-level abnormality.
target nodes and the nodes under perturbation against the pairs of Advantages: (i) Many existing GCL approaches and theories
target nodes and cluster-based global representations. Unlike the may be adapted to enable GAD. (ii) The rich graph structure
cluster-based representation, GCCAD [13] specifies s using the information provides flexible options to generate diverse posineighbors of target normal nodes and s̃ using the representations tive/negative views for effective GAD. (iii) Since many methods
of abnormal nodes. During inference, the anomaly score may be rely on only local graph information in their training, they can
defined in various ways, e.g., via the classification probabil- handle very large graph data.
ity [121] or similarity between the target node’s representation Disadvantages: (i) Since GCL is focused on representation
and the graph representation [13]. learning, it is crucial to develop an effective anomaly scor-
 In addition to the node-level contrasts, other methods use ing method based on the learned representations. (ii) As GCL
subgraphs as the target of contrastive learning to help the model methods rely on GNNs without class information, the problem
learn better representations for GAD. CoLA [66] is an early of over-smoothing between normal and abnormal instances re-
GCL framework for GAD that learns the relations between each mains prevalent. (iii) The subgraph generation in some methods
node and its neighboring substructures. Given a target node, s is may incur significant computational costs due to the need to
a subgraph generated by a random walk around the target node, traverse numerous nodes and edges.
while the negative subgraph is generated using the random walk Challenge Addressed: Contrastive learning models can be
around the other nodes. Let hi and Ei be the representations of designed to capture different levels of graph structure and graph
a target node and a subgraph, in which Ei is often obtained by anomalies (C1, C3). Without the need to load the full graph
a readout function as follows structure information, they can often scale up to large-scale
 graph data (C2).
 
 ni
 vk
 si = Readout (Ei ) = , (19) C. Graph Representation Distillation
 ni
 k=1
 Knowledge Distillation (KD) [35] aims to train a simple
where ni is the number of nodes in Ei , vk is the embedding model (student) that distills feature representations from a large
of node k in the subgraph, then a Bilinear(·) function is often (teacher) model while maintaining similar accuracy as the large
5118 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

model. The key intuition of KD-based GAD is that the repre- of smaller, more efficient models by transferring knowledge
sentation distillation can capture the majority patterns of graph from a larger model. This compression speeds up inference
instances and the difference in the distillation can be used to and reduces computational resource requirements for normality
measure the abnormality of samples. extraction. (iii) Distilling knowledge from a well-trained teacher
 Assumption: The graph representation distillation can be seen model enables the student model to better generalize across
as a process of extracting the prevalent patterns of the graph various types of graphs and quickly adapt to new data or target
instances, representing the normal patterns for GAD. domains.
 As shown in Fig. 5(c), this category of methods learns the Disadvantages: (i) Choosing an appropriate teacher model
representation from a teacher model initialized by a GNN. Sub- can be challenging. If the teacher model is too complex or not
sequently, a GNN-based student network is trained to replicate well-suited to GAD, the knowledge distilled to the student model
the representation outputs of the teacher model. The GNN-based may not be optimal. (ii) The student model may fail to capture
teacher and student networks are formulated as follows all the nuances and intricacies in the teacher model, which can
 hi = GN Nteacher (x impact the extraction of normality.
  i , X, A; Θ), Challenge Addressed: GNN-enabled knowledge distillation
 (22)
 ĥi = GN Nstudent xi , X, A; Θ̂ , enhances the ability of addressing graph structure-aware GAD.
 (C1). By distilling knowledge from a well-trained teacher, the
where Θ and Θ̂ are respectively the training parameters of student gains improved generalization across different GAD
student and teacher networks, hi and ĥi are the representations scenarios, showcasing enhanced robustness in GAD (C5).
learned by the two networks respectively. Both representations
are then integrated into the loss function which can be formulated
 D. Adversarial Graph Learning
as the following:
 Generative adversarial learning (GAN) provides an effective
 1 
 N  
 LKD = KD hi , hi ; Θ̂, Θ , (23) solution to generate realistic synthetic samples, which can be
 N i=1 used for normal pattern learning for GAD. The key intuition
 of this group of methods is to learn latent features that can
where KD(·) is a distillation function that measures the dif- capture the normality perceived in a generative GNN network.
ference between the two feature representations. Overall, the Specifically, the GANs employ a generator network aiming to
goal of the distillation-based GAD is to make the student model generate samples that are statistically similar to the real data
as close as possible in predicting the corresponding outputs while the discriminator network learns to distinguish between
of the teacher model that is built upon normal graph data. real and generated graph instances [15], [17]. The normal data
Therefore, the anomaly score can be defined as the difference in with a prior distribution can be easily captured by the generator
the representations between the teacher and student models. network while the anomalies struggle to be simulated by the
    
   generator due to the nature of the distribution.
 Score vi ; Θ̂, Θ = hi − hi  . (24) It is worth mentioning that the purpose of generation is
 2

 GlocaKD [76] is an early framework, in which the teacher different from the noise perturbation generation in the generative
model GN Nteacher is implemented using a random GCN. Then GNNs in Section IV-B. The former mainly uses the graph structhe distillation function KD(·) is instantiated using KL diver- ture information and interpolation operations in the latent space
gence to minimize the graph- and node-level prediction errors of to generate new node representations without using adversarial
the representations yielded by the random GCN. The anomaly learning process, while the latter is focused on generating node
score in GlocaKD is defined as the prediction error at the graph representations from a prior distribution through the adversarial
and node levels. To support better distillation of the normal graph learning to learn the latent normality.
representations, several distillation models have been proposed Assumption: A generator GNN can capture the majority of
for GAD with new architectures. For example, the dual-student- patterns in the graph data if it can generate instances that closely
teacher model, called GLADST, consists of one teacher model resemble the distribution of real graph instances.
and two student models [56], in which the teacher model, trained This group of methods (see Fig. 5(d)) typically employs
with a heuristic loss, is designed to make the representations GNNs to learn the representations of graph instances and a
more divergent. Unlike the traditional teacher-student model, generator network for generating graph instances based on a
GLADST trains the two student models on normal and abnormal prior. The discriminator is utilized to distinguish whether a graph
graphs separately to capture the normality and abnormality instance comes from the generator or the original data. Formally,
better. Unlike GlocalKD that uses a random GNN to be the these methods follow the following framework:
teach network, the approach FGAD uses a pre-trained anomaly hi = GN N (xi , A, X; Θ) ,
detector as the teacher [9]. Then the student is designed with (25)
 h̃i = G (z̃i ; ) , z̃i ∼ p(z̃),
a graph isomorphism network (GIN) and a projection head to
improve the robustness of GAD. where h is the feature representation of a node learned by GNN
 Advantages: (i) The distillation from the teacher model into a with parameter Θ, h̃ is the representation of a generated node,
simpler student model provides a new way to extract the normal- and p(z) is the prior distribution. The generator G(·) takes
ity of graph instances. (ii) Distillation enables the development noises sampled from the prior distribution p(z̃) as the input and
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5119

generates synthetic pseudo abnormal graph instances via: predict the anomaly score

min max Eh∼p(h) [log D(h)] + Ez̃∼p(z̃) [log(1 − D(G(z̃; )))], Score(si ) = fpred (xi , A, X; Θp ), (28)
 G D
 (26) where Θp is the training parameters of the score prediction
where the discriminator D(·) is often specified by a classifier network. DevNet [89] is a seminal work for score prediction
that tries to distinguish whether an input is the representation network, which was originally proposed to identify anomalies
of a normal node or a generated anomaly. The anomaly score is in tabular data. It employs a Z-score-based deviation loss to learn
typically defined based on the output of the discriminator: the anomaly scores in an end-to-end manner:
 Score(si ) = 1 − D(hi ). (27) Ldeviation = (1 − yi ) · |Dev(si )| + yi · max (0, m − Dev(si )) ,
 (29)
 AEGIS [17] and GAAN [15] are two representative works where yi is the class label, m is a pre-defined margin based on
that apply GANs to GAD by generating node representations the prior distribution, and Dev(si ) is defined as follows
from Gaussian noise. The discriminator is trained to determine whether nodes are real or generated pseudo abnormal Score(si ) − μr
 Dev (si ) = , (30)
instances. Some graph adversarial learning methods are also σr
proposed to address the multi-class imbalance problem at the where μr and σr are the estimated mean and standard deviation
node level [101], [108]. They incorporate adversarial training to of the anomaly scores based on the prior N(μ, σ).
make the model learn robust representations for both majority Meta-GDN [19] applies the deviation loss to the graph data
and minority classes, thereby benefiting the separation of the that leverages a small number of labeled anomalies to enforce
nodes from different classes. This graph adversarial learning is significant deviation of the anomaly scores of the normal nodes
also applied to anomalous edge detection. GADY [73] employs from the abnormal nodes. SAD [115] adapts DevNet to dynamic
an anomaly generator to generate abnormal interactions through graph data, in which contrastive learning is also used to fully
input noise. The generated interactions are then combined with exploit the potential of labeled graph instances on evolving graph
normal interactions as the input of a discriminator network streams. In WEDGE [154], the deviation loss function is defined
trained to determine whether the interaction is normal or ab- for at the subgraph level. By minimizing the deviation loss, the
normal. score network predictor will enforce a large positive deviation
 Advantages: (i) GANs provide a distinctive method for learn- of the anomaly score of an anomalous subgraph from that of the
ing structural normality by utilizing their graph structure-aware prior-based reference scores.
generation capability. (ii) Its adversarial training can generate Advantages: (i) By integrating the prior distribution into the
realistic samples from noise, enabling the detection models to model’s learning process, it can produce more interpretable
learn beyond the abnormal samples in the graph. anomaly scores compared to other detection methods. (ii) The
 Disadvantages: (i) It is difficult to generate samples that studied scenarios where some labeled normal and anomalous
accurately simulate real graph instances in terms of both graph graph instances are available are often common in real-world
structure and attributes, and thus, the generated graph instances applications.
may impair the detection performance. (ii) The training of GANs Disadvantages: (i) The performance of the score prediction
is relatively less stable compared to the GNN training in other model is dependent on the prior and the predefined margin used
groups of methods. during training. (ii) The score prediction network is better suited
 Challenge Addressed: GANs can model and generate differ- for tabular data because the samples are independent, but a
ent types of abnormal graph instances, facilitating the detection single prior distribution may not be able to effectively capture
of different graph anomalies, e.g., anomalies that are unseen dur- the dependent scores across the graph instances.
ing training (C3). Also, GANs can generate extensive abnormal Challenge Addressed: The score prediction provides a GNNsamples for more balanced GAD (C4). based end-to-end anomaly score learning framework for GAD,
 having good scalability to large-scale graph data (C1, C2). It
E. Score Prediction also provides an effective way to achieve generalized GAD in
 the application scenarios where part of the graph instances are
 The score prediction based-methods focuses on how to make
 labeled (C3).
full use of labeled data to build an end-to-end anomaly score
prediction model, as shown in Fig. 5(e). Unlike approaches that
directly apply GNNs for classification with labeled abnormal VI. GRAPH ANOMALY MEASURES
and normal nodes, this method is designed for the scenarios This category of methods aims to discuss GAD methods
where only some graph instances are known to be normal and that focus on designing anomaly measures for evaluating the
abnormal instances. abnormality of instances in the graph. These methods generally
 Assumption: The anomaly scores of normal graph instances perform anomaly scoring by incorporating some key abnormal
follow a prior distribution while those for abnormal instances graph characteristics. As shown in Fig. 6, they can be generally
significantly deviate from the distribution. divided into four categories, including one-class distance mea-
 The score prediction-based methods refer to training a predic- sure, local affinity measure, community adherence measure, and
tor fpred : G → R which is instantiated with GNNs to directly graph isolation-based approaches.
5120 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 methods optimize the one-class learning with some auxiliary
 tasks, such as node feature reconstruction [114], relation prediction [53], and self-supervision [100], to avoid notorious issues
 in this approach like model collapse.
 Advantages: (i) One-class classification does not require labeled anomaly data for training, making it suitable for the scenario where such data is scarce or unavailable. (ii) The one-class
 measure can handle isolated nodes well.
 Disadvantages: (i) Normal graph patterns can manifest in
 various ways, making it challenging for a one-class hypersphere
 to capture the full spectrum of normality. (ii) Learning the
Fig. 6. Four categories of graph anomaly measure.
 one-class hypersphere is prone to model collapse.
 Challenge Addressed: One-class classification with appropriate GNNs enables the learning of the majority structural pattern
A. One-Class Classification Measure in the graph data (normal graph instances) (C1). This approach
 One-class classification measures refer to evaluating the dis- also does not require the full graph structure information during
tance between each instance and a one-class center of the in- training, resulting in good scalability to large-scale graphs (C2).
stances for anomaly scoring [104]. This method can be applied
to graph data, with the GNNs trained to minimize the volume B. Community Adherence
of a hypersphere that encloses the representations of the graph Community adherence-based GAD [138], [155] aims to ideninstances. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), the key intuition is that tify the anomalies based on the adherence of instances to graph
anomalous graph instances differ significantly from the normal communities. The key intuition is that anomalies are not wellones, causing them to fall outside the hypersphere that encom- distributed and exhibit weak adherence to the communities,
passes most of the normal graph instances. whereas normal graph instances typically have strong adherence
 Assumption: Normal graph instances exhibit similar patterns to at least one community.
that can be encapsulated via a one-class hypersphere, from which Assumption: Normal instances adhere to at least one commuanomalies show largely deviated patterns. nity, whereas anomalies are unfit to any community.
 The one-class classification on the graph can be generally This type of methods first leverages a mapping function to
formulated as the following learn the representation of instances. A clustering or community
 1 
 N discovery method is then applied to group the graph instances,
 Lone−class = ||φ (Xi , Ai ; W) − c||2 + Φ(Θ), (31) as shown in Fig. 6(b), where the instances are grouped into three
 N i=1
 distinct clusters. Since anomalies generally exhibit significantly
where c is the central representation of the one-class hyper- weaker community adherence, the anomaly score can be defined
sphere, φ(Xi , Ai ; W∗ ) is the representation of graph instance by the minimum distance to the centers of the communities.
si learned by GNN, and Φ(Θ) is a regularization term or aux- Score (si ) = min φ (xi , X, A; W∗ )−cj 22 , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , p},
iliary task which can benefit the one-class distance measure. (33)
Anomalies are expected to samples that have a large distance to where p is the number of communities, cj is the center of
the center. Thus, the anomaly score can be determined by the community Cj , and W∗ is the optimal parameters of the mapping
distance of a graph instance to the center of the hypersphere: function.
 Score(si ) = φ (Xi , Ai ; W∗ ) − c 2 , (32) This approach is analogous to clustering-based anomaly detection in non-graph data [87], but here it needs to capture the
where W∗ are the parameters of the trained one-class model and graph characteristics for GAD. To this end, MHGL [155] utilizes
c is the representation of the one-class center. GNNs and a multi-hypersphere learning objective to learn multi-
 There have been some methods that adopt this one-class ple groups of fine-grained normal patterns, enclosing each group
classification approach for GAD [120], [157]. OCGNN [120] using a corresponding hypersphere in the latent space while
applies a one-class SVM to graphs, leveraging the powerful simultaneously pushing labeled anomalies far away from these
representation capabilities of GNNs. The objective of OCGNN hyperspheres. The anomaly score is defined as the Euclidean
is to generate node embeddings that are close to the center. Since distance between a test instance and the nearest hypersphere
the feature representations are crucial in one-class learning, center. Netwalk [138] is a method for both anomalous node and
various methods have explored the use of GNNs from different edge detection where k-means clustering was applied to group
perspectives to enhance the representation learning for one-class the existing node/edge into different groups. The anomaly score
GAD. For example, AAGNN [157] designs a subtractive aggre- of node/edge is measured as its distance to the center of its closest
gation [157] rather than the commonly used summation-based cluster.
aggregation for one-class GNN learning. DOHSC [146] adds Advantages: (i) By utilizing graph communities, the noran orthogonal projection layer [146] to ensure the training data mality of data beyond one-hop graph structures can be more
distribution is consistent with the decision hypersphere. Other effectively captured. (ii) The community adherence enables
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5121

a fine-grained modeling of normal patterns, which could be prompt tuning or in-context learning methods for GAD [65],
important for identifying some types of graph anomalies that [82], [96]. Exploring beyond the node-level affinity can be
depend on the context of graph communities. one potential approach for subgraph- or graph-level anomaly
 Disadvantages: (i) Community adherence-based methods are detection.
sensitive to hyperparameters like the number of clusters. (ii) Advantages: (i) The local affinity measure offers a novel way
Community adherence measures rely heavily on the effective- to quantify the abnormality of graph instances at a local scope.
ness of the community detection methods. (ii) The measure provides a principled framework for evaluating
 Challenge Addressed: Graph communities can be useful for the normality from both the graph structure and attributes. (iii)
discovering important structural contexts (e.g., those beyond a It can be more interpretable than those identified through task
fixed-hop neighborhood) to detect anomalies that deviate from proxy-based GAD methods.
the communities (C1). Community adherence can provide one Disadvantages: (i) Its effectiveness may vary if the affinity
way for interpreting anomalies based on deviations from ex- is specified differently. (ii) It is often designed based on predepected community-based behaviors (C5). fined graph properties, making it difficult to generalize to the
 anomalies that do not conform to the properties.
C. Local Affinity Challenge Addressed: Local affinity-based GAD methods can
 adapt to and leverage various structural properties for the detec-
 There are many graph properties that can be important for
 tion of various types of anomalies (C1, C3), though the prior
GAD, such as connectivity, degree distribution, and clustering
 knowledge about the properties is required. Local affinity also
coefficient. Local affinity is a graph property that integrates
 provides a way to explain why a node is considered anomalous
multiple properties for evaluating the normality and abnormality
 based on the local context, enhancing the interpretability of GAD
of graph instances. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the affinity may be
 (C5).
defined in various ways, such as the number of connections
of a graph instance to neighboring instances, the similarity
 D. Graph Isolation
with neighbors, or the clustering coefficient of the connected
subgraphs. The key intuition is that the normal graph instances Isolation-based methods [58] is among the most popular
typically have a strong affinity with their neighbors, whereas an methods for anomaly detection. Due to its general effectiveness
anomalous instance has a significantly weaker affinity with its across different datasets, it is also applied to identify anomalous
neighbors. Thus, the local affinity can serve as the inverse of the graph instances [132], [161]. Its use for GAD is based on the
anomaly score. isolation of graph instances in a feature representation space.
 Assumption: Normal instances are connected with other nor- Assumption: Anomalous graph instances can be isolated more
mal instances with similar attributes while anomalies are often easily than normal instances in the representation space.
graph instances that are less similar to their neighbors. As shown in Fig. 6(d), the methods in this group need to first
 Formally, the local affinity τ (si ) of an instance si can be learn the representations of the instances using a graph encoder
defined based on its average similarity to its neighbors: GN Nenc :
 1  hi = GN Nenc (si , X, A; Θenc ), (35)
 τ (si ) = sim (hi , hj ) , (34)
 |N (si )| where hi is the representation of the graph instance si . An
 sj ∈N(si )
 isolation mechanism is then applied on the representations,
where hi and hj are the representation of instance si and sj ,
 i.e., Isolation(hi ), where the split process is formulated as the
N(si ) represents the neighboring instance si .
 following
 TAM [97] is a seminal work that introduces local affinity as an  
 (j )
anomaly measure. It aims to learn tailored node representations P2k ← hi | hi k ≤ ηk , hi ∈ Pk ,
for GAD by maximizing the local affinity of nodes to their neigh-  
bors. It is optimized on truncated graphs where non-homophily (j )
 P2k+1 ← hi | hi k > ηk , hi ∈ Pk , (36)
edges are removed iteratively to mitigate its adverse effects on
the local affinity measure. The learned representations result in where Pk is the node set of in the k-th binary partition tree and
a significantly stronger local affinity for the normal nodes than j is the dimension in h used to partition the feature space. The
the abnormal nodes. CLAD [50] instead measures the affinity abnormality of a graph instance s is evaluated by the isolation
based on the discrepancy between a node and its neighbors difficulty in each tree of the tree set T:
using Jenson-Shannon Divergence. The anomaly score is ob-
 F (s | T) = Ωτi ∼T I (s | τi ) , (37)
tained from the affinity for each node in terms of both graph
structure and attributes. PREM [83] eliminates the message- where I(s | τi ) denotes a function to measure the isolation
passing propagation in regular GNNs by using an ego neighbor difficulty in tree τi and Ω denotes an integration function.
matching-based contrastive learning module. It aims to learn DIF [132] presents a new representation scheme that comdiscriminative patterns between the local ego network and the bines data partition and deep representation learning to perneighboring instances. These GAD methods are focused on the form isolation in randomly projected deep representations for
anomaly score of a node based on its affinity to its neighboring anomaly detection, showing good effectiveness in anomaly denodes. Similar ideas have also been explored in very recent tection in various data types, including graph-level anomaly
5122 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

detection. GCAD [161] uses isolation forest for anomalous problem, e.g., via selecting relevant features, incorporating donode detection. It uses the node representations after subgraph main knowledge, or using adversarial training [23], [98], but they
normalization as the input to graph isolation. The anomaly score often rely on the prior knowledge about what specific features
is defined using a depth-based weighted score that aggregates the attackers may use in the camouflage. A related problem is
scores from various associated subgraphs. If we treat isolation- anomaly contamination in the training data. Current methods
based measures as simpler alternatives to density estimation, are mostly unsupervised, working on anomaly-contaminated
there have been multiple other extensions [28], [28], [55], [148] training data, but the anomalous instances in the graph can
that leverage the learned graph representations to estimate a largely bias the message-passing [97], leading to less expressive
density-based anomaly score for GAD. representations. Recent approaches, such as semi-supervised
 Advantages: (i) Graph isolation measures are built on well GAD on a small set of labeled normal instances [98] or training
established isolation-based methodology for anomaly detection. GNNs using truncated graph data [97], may offer effective
(ii) Many existing isolation-based methods may be adapted to methodologies for handling these issues.
anomaly detection on graph data. Interpretable GAD: As shown by the summarized detection
 Disadvantages: (i) The isolation measure operates on a con- performance results in Tables 4, 5, and 6 in Appendix C,
tinuous feature space, so its effectiveness relies on the learning of available online, current GAD methods have shown impressive
an expressive representation space. (ii) The heuristic of isolation success in detecting anomalous graph instances, but they genis difficult to be incorporated into GNN-based representation erally ignore the interpretability of their detection results. In
learning, leading to less effective feature representations for the addition to accurate detection, interpretable GAD also requires
subsequent isolation mechanism. an explanation about why a graph instance is identified as
 Challenge Addressed: This measure can adapt traditional anomalous within a given graph structure, making it different
anomaly measures to GAD with the power of GNN-based from explaining anomalies in non-graph data. Exploring inforrepresentation learning (C1). The isolation mechanism is highly mation such as local graph structure, human feedback, and/or
efficient, allowing good scalability on large graphs (C2). domain knowledge [64] would be some interesting directions
 for providing the structure-aware anomaly explanation. Also, the
 obtained anomaly explanation may in turn be further leveraged
 VII. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES to improve the detection performance.
 Despite the remarkable success of numerous existing GAD Open-set Supervised GAD: As shown in Table 1 in Apmethods, there are a range of research opportunities that could pendix A, available online, there have been many supervised
be explored to tackle some largely unsolved GAD problems. GAD methods, most of which essentially tackle an imbalanced
 Advanced Graph Anomaly Measures: Most GAD methods binary classification problem. Such formulation is often quesare built upon proxy tasks or focused on the GNN backbones tionable since anomalies per se can draw from very different
using traditional non-graph anomaly measures, as summarized distributions and cannot be treated as from one concrete class.
in Table 1 in Appendix A, available online. Consequently, Open-set supervised GAD also trains the detectors with labeled
they may fail to learn feature representations that encapsulate normal and anomalous examples (i.e., seen anomalies), but it
holistic graph structure and attributes specifically for GAD. assumes an open set of anomaly classes (i.e., there are anomaly
Therefore, it is crucial to devise anomaly measures that go classes that are not illustrated by the training anomaly sambeyond traditional anomaly measures and proxy tasks, such as ples) rather than the closed-set assumption in most existing
local node affinity [97], for developing more dedicated methods studies [119]. Thus, it is a more realistic supervised GAD
for GAD. setting. Methods for this setting have shown significantly better
 GAD on Complex Graphs: Most existing GAD methods are performance than unsupervised and fully supervised methods on
focused on small-scale (e.g., less than millions of nodes/edges), visual data [1], [16], [134], [158] and tabular data [88], [89], [90].
static, or homogeneous graph data, as shown in Tables 2 and Recent studies also show similar advantages on graph data [119],
3 in Appendix B, available online. However, many real- [155]. Exploring better modeling of the normal patterns while
world graphs can involve millions/billions of heterogeneous fitting the seen anomalies could be an effective approach to avoid
nodes/edges [53], such as real-life citation networks, social overfitting of the seen anomalies (i.e., reducing misclassification
networks, and financial networks. The nodes/edges may appear of the unseen anomalies as normal).
in a streaming fashion, where the models can access to only Foundation Models for GAD: Leveraging foundation models
limited graph data at one time step and may need to adapt to new (FMs) for downstream tasks has been emerging as one effective
normal/abnormal patterns as the graph evolves [102]. Current direction to empower the sample-efficient performance in the
methods may be adapted to handle these graphs, but their per- downstream tasks, including graph-related tasks [59], [110],
formance would become less effective since their primary design [111], [128], owing to their superior generalization ability. Two
do not consider those complexity. GAD methods designed for main directions for the GAD task involve the training of graph
graphs with two or more of these complexities are required. foundation models (GFMs) for GAD and the exploitation of
 Handling Anomaly Camouflage and Contamination: In GAD, large language models (LLMs) for GAD. There have been a
anomalies might easily hide their abnormal characteristics by number of successful tuning of FMs for anomaly detection
mimicking the structure and attributes of their neighboring in- on image data [47], [152], [159] and video data [106], [125],
stances. There have been some approaches for addressing this [126], [127] via proper prompt crafting, prompt learning, or
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5123

in-context learning. Similar approaches may be explored for [16] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
GAD. For example, inspired by [159], an in-context residual Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7388–7398.
learning-based method is explored for few-shot GAD [65]; [17] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection
general abnormality/normality graph patterns and prompts are on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
learned for zero/few-shot cross-dataset GAD in [82], [96]. This pp. 1288–1294.
 [18] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
new paradigm is plausible for GAD in several aspects, such as attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, SIAM, 2019,
zero/few-shot detection on target graph data, inductive GAD, pp. 594–602.
and interpretable GAD with text description. [19] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly
 detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
 pp. 2448–2456.
 [20] L. Dong et al., “Bi-level selection via meta gradient for graph-based fraud
 VIII. CONCLUSION detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Database Syst. Adv. Appl., Springer, 2022,
 pp. 387–394.
 In this survey, we first discuss the complexities and existing [21] X. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, M. Yuan, and S. Wang,
 “SmoothGNN: Smoothing-based GNN for unsupervised node anomaly
challenges in GAD. Then we present a novel taxonomy for deep detection,” 2024, arXiv:2405.17525.
GAD methods from three new perspectives, including GNN [22] X. Dong, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Rayleigh quotient graph
backbone design, proxy task, and graph anomaly measures. neural networks for graph-level anomaly detection,” 2023,
 arXiv:2310.02861.
We further deepen the discussions in each perspective by dis- [23] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph
cussing more fine-grained categories of methods. Along with neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in
each fine-grained methodology category, we not only review Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324.
 [24] D. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Li, J. Lu, L. Shi, and C. Zhang, “AANE: Anomaly
the associated GAD methods, but also analyze their general aware network embedding for anomalous link detection,” in Proc. IEEE
assumption, pros and cons, and their capabilities in addressing Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1002–1007.
the unique challenges in GAD. We lastly discuss six important [25] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
 learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance.
directions for future research on GAD. By tackling the problems Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
in these six directions, we expect a more advanced generation [26] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE: Graph
of methods for solving real-life GAD tasks. anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure awareness,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 18172–18185,
 Dec. 2024.
 [27] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection via
 REFERENCES multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 2023, pp. 7502–7511.
 [1] A. Acsintoae et al., “Ubnormal: New benchmark for supervised open-set [28] M. Ester et al., “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
 video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 Recognit., 2022, pp. 20 143–20 153. Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231.
 [2] C. Aggarwal and K. Subbian, “Evolutionary network analysis: A survey,” [29] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “AnomalyDAE: Dual autoencoder for
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2014. anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust.
 [3] C. C. Aggarwal, Outlier Analysis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017. Speech Signal Process., 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
 [4] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection and [30] S. Fan, X. Wang, C. Shi, K. Kuang, N. Liu, and B. Wang, “Debidescription: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, pp. 626– ased graph neural networks with agnostic label selection bias,” IEEE
 688, 2015. Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4411–4422, Apr.
 [5] S. Bandyopadhyay, L. N, S. V. Vivek, and M. N. Murty, “Outlier resistant 2024.
 unsupervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,” in [31] A. Fernández, S. Garcia, F. Herrera, and N. V. Chawla, “Smote for
 Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2020, pp. 25–33. learning from imbalanced data: Progress and challenges, marking the
 [6] Y. Bei et al., “Reinforcement neighborhood selection for unsupervised 15-year anniversary,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 863–905, 2018.
 graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2023, [32] Y. Gao et al., “Alleviating structural distribution shift in graph anomaly
 pp. 11–20. detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023,
 [7] A. Boukerche, L. Zheng, and O. Alfandi, “Outlier detection: Methods, pp. 357–365.
 models, and classification,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–37, [33] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Addressing het-
 2020. erophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph spectrum,”
 [8] J. Cai, Y. Zhang, and J. Fan, “Self-discriminative modeling for anomalous in Proc. Web Conf., 2023, pp. 1528–1538.
 graph detection,” 2023, arXiv:2310.06261. [34] Z. Gong et al., “Beyond homophily: Robust graph anomaly detection
 [9] J. Cai, Y. Zhang, Z. Lu, W. Guo, and S.-K. Ng, “FGAD: Self-boosted via neural sparsification,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
 knowledge distillation for an effective federated graph anomaly detection pp. 2104–2113.
 framework,” 2024, arXiv:2402.12761. [35] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
 [10] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks,” survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
 in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 23–29. [36] R. Guo, M. Zou, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Yu, and Z. Feng, “Graph local
 [11] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,” homophily network for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, 2009, Art. no. 15. Manage., 2024, pp. 706–716.
 [12] W. Chang, K. Liu, K. Ding, P. S. Yu, and J. Yu, “Multitask active learning [37] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning
 for graph anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2401.13210. on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 [13] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive learning for anomaly de- pp. 1025–1035.
 tection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051, [38] D. K. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval, “Wavelets on
 Aug. 2023. graphs via spectral graph theory,” Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal., vol. 30,
 [14] N. Chen et al., “Consistency training with learnable data augmentation no. 2, pp. 129–150, 2011.
 for graph anomaly detection with limited supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [39] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of
 Learn. Representations, 2023. data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
 [15] Z. Chen, B. Liu, M. Wang, P. Dai, J. Lv, and L. Bo, “Generative 2006.
 adversarial attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. [40] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1989–1992. in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
5124 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 [41] W. Hu, M. Fey, H. Ren, M. Nakata, Y. Dong, and J. Leskovec, [67] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
 “OGB-LSC: A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 081–12 094,
 2021, arXiv:2103.09430. Dec. 2023.
 [42] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed networks,” [68] Z. Liu, Y. Li, N. Chen, Q. Wang, B. Hooi, and B. He, “A survey
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12249–12263, of imbalanced learning on graphs: Problems, techniques, and future
 Dec. 2023. directions,” 2023, arXiv:2308.13821.
 [43] M. Huang et al., “AUC-oriented graph neural network for fraud detec- [69] Z. Liu et al., “Topological augmentation for class-imbalanced node
 tion,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1311–1321. classification,” 2023, arXiv:2308.14181.
 [44] T. Huang, Y. Pei, V. Menkovski, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Hop-count based [70] Z. Liu, Y. Dou, P. S. Yu, Y. Deng, and H. Peng, “Alleviating the inconself-supervised anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Joint sistency problem of applying graph neural network to fraud detection,”
 Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2022, in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Informat. Retrieval, 2020,
 pp. 225–241. pp. 1569–1572.
 [45] X. Huang et al., “DGraph: A large-scale financial dataset for graph [71] Z. Liu, C. Cao, and J. Sun, “Mul-GAD: A semi-supervised graph
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, anomaly detection framework via aggregating multi-view information,”
 pp. 22 765–22 777. 2022, arXiv:2212.05478.
 [46] Y. Huang, L. Wang, F. Zhang, and X. Lin, “Are we really making much [72] Z. Liu, C. Cao, F. Tao, and J. Sun, “Revisiting graph contrastive learning
 progress in unsupervised graph outlier detection? Revisiting the problem for anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2305.02496.
 with new insight and superior method,” 2022, arXiv:2210.12941. [73] S. Lou, Q. Zhang, S. Yang, Y. Tian, Z. Tan, and M. Luo,
 [47] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer, “GADY: Unsupervised anomaly detection on dynamic graphs,”
 “WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in 2023, arXiv:2310.16376.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 19 606– [74] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
 19 616. detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 657–
 [48] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Anemone: Graph 665.
 anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. Conf. [75] J. Ma, P. Cui, K. Kuang, X. Wang, and W. Zhu, “Disentangled graph
 Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126. convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2019,
 [49] H. Kim, J. Kim, B. S. Lee, and S. Lim, “Deep semi-supervised pp. 4212–4221.
 anomaly detection with metapath-based context knowledge,” [76] R. Ma, G. Pang, L. Chen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep graph-level
 2023, arXiv:2308.10918. anomaly detection by glocal knowledge distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 [50] J. Kim, Y. In, K. Yoon, J. Lee, and C. Park, “Class label-aware graph Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 704–714.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 4008– [77] X. Ma, R. Li, F. Liu, K. Ding, J. Yang, and J. Wu, “New recipes for graph
 4012. anomaly detection: Forward diffusion dynamics and graph generation,”
 [51] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph 2023.
 convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907. [78] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
 [52] X. Kong et al., “Federated graph anomaly detection via contrastive self- deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12012–
 supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, 12038, Dec. 2023.
 no. 5, pp. 7931–7944, May 2025. [79] X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Towards graph-level anomaly
 [53] J. Li, G. Pang, L. Chen, and M.-R. Namazi-Rad, “HRGCN: Het- detection via deep evolutionary mapping,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl.
 erogeneous graph-level anomaly detection with hierarchical relation- Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1631–1642.
 augmented graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Data [80] L. Meng, H. Mostafa, M. Nassar, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Generative
 Sci. Adv. Analytics, 2023, pp. 1–10. graph augmentation for minority class in fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf.
 [54] J. Li et al., “Feature selection: A data perspective,” ACM Comput. Surv., Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 4200–4204.
 vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1–45, 2017. [81] C. Niu, G. Pang, and L. Chen, “Graph-level anomaly detec-
 [55] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “Specae: Spectral autoencoder tion via hierarchical memory networks,” in Proc. Joint Eur.
 for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2023,
 Manage., 2019, pp. 2233–2236. pp. 201–218.
 [56] F. Lin et al., “Discriminative graph-level anomaly detection via dual- [82] C. Niu, H. Qiao, C. Chen, L. Chen, and G. Pang, “Zero-shot genstudents-teacher model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Data Mining Appl., eralist graph anomaly detection with unified neighborhood prompts,”
 Springer, 2023, pp. 261–276. 2024, arXiv:2410.14886.
 [57] F. Liu et al., “DAGAD: Data augmentation for graph anomaly detection,” [83] J. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, and S. Pan, “PREM: A simple
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 259–268. yet effective approach for node-level graph anomaly detection,”
 [58] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE 2023, arXiv:2310.11676.
 Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. [84] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, D. Lian, and H. Liu, “Sparse modeling-
 [59] J. Liu et al., “Towards graph foundation models: A survey and beyond,” based sequential ensemble learning for effective outlier detection in
 2023, arXiv:2310.11829. high-dimensional numeric data,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif.
 [60] J. Liu, X. Shang, X. Han, W. Zhang, and H. Yin, “Spatial-temporal Intell., 2018, pp. 3892–3899.
 memories enhanced graph autoencoder for anomaly detection in dynamic [85] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Unsupervised feature selection
 graphs,” 2024, arXiv:2403.09039. for outlier detection by modelling hierarchical value-feature couplings,”
 [61] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 410–419.
 on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., [86] G. Pang, L. Cao Longbing, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning homophily
 2022, pp. 27 021–27 035. couplings from non-IID data for joint feature selection and noise-resilient
 [62] K. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Hu, F. Wang, and P. S. Yu, “Data augmentation outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 2585–
 for supervised graph outlier detection with latent diffusion models,” 2591.
 2023, arXiv:2312.17679. [87] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 [63] Y. Liu et al., “Pick and choose: A gnn-based imbalanced learning ap- anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–
 proach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021, pp. 3168–3177. 38, 2021.
 [64] Y. Liu, K. Ding, Q. Lu, F. Li, L. Y. Zhang, and S. Pan, “Towards self- [88] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weaklyinterpretable graph-level anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 8975–8987. Mining, 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
 [65] Y. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zheng, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, and S. Pan, “ARC: [89] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with
 A generalist graph anomaly detector with in-context learning,” deviation networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 2024, arXiv:2405.16771. 2019, pp. 353–362.
 [66] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly [90] G. Pang, A. van den Hengel, C. Shen, and L. Cao, “Toward deep
 detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” supervised anomaly detection: Reinforcement learning from partially
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, labeled anomaly data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 Jun. 2022. 2021, pp. 1298–1308.
QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES 5125

 [91] G. Pang, H. Xu, L. Cao, and W. Zhao, “Selective value coupling learning [118] Q. Wang, G. Pang, M. Salehi, W. Buntine, and C. Leckie, “Cross-domain
 for detecting outliers in high-dimensional categorical data,” in Proc. Conf. graph anomaly detection via anomaly-aware contrastive alignment,” in
 Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2017, pp. 807–816. Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4676–4684.
 [92] J. Park, J. Song, and E. Yang, “GraphENS: Neighbor-aware ego network [119] Q. Wang et al., “Open-set graph anomaly detection via normal structure
 synthesis for class-imbalanced node classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. regularisation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
 Learn. Representations, 2021. [120] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph
 [93] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN: neural networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural
 Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on at- Comput. Appl., vol. 33, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.
 tributed networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 519–541, 2022. [121] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling repre-
 [94] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view sentation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detection,”
 framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Informat. Retrieval, 2021,
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022. pp. 1239–1248.
 [95] T. Pourhabibi, K.-L. Ong, B. H. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detec- [122] Y. Wang et al., “Label information enhanced fraud detection against low
 tion: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection homophily in graphs,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2023, pp. 406–416.
 approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, 2020, Art. no. 113303. [123] B. Wu, X. Yao, B. Zhang, K.-M. Chao, and Y. Li, “SplitGNN: Spectral
 [96] H. Qiao, C. Niu, L. Chen, and G. Pang, “AnomalyGFM: Graph foundation graph neural network for fraud detection against heterophily,” in Proc.
 model for zero/few-shot anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:2502.09254. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 2737–2746.
 [97] H. Qiao and G. Pang, “Truncated affinity maximization: One-class ho- [124] L. Wu, J. Xia, Z. Gao, H. Lin, C. Tan, and S. Z. Li, “GraphMixup:
 mophily modeling for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Improving class-imbalanced node classification by reinforcement mixup
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 49490–49512. and self-supervised context prediction,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach.
 [98] H. Qiao, Q. Wen, X. Li, E.-P. Lim, and G. Pang, “Generative semi- Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2022, pp. 519–535.
 supervised graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [125] P. Wu et al., “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 10–15. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 18 297–18
 [99] Z. Qin, Y. Liu, Q. He, and X. Ao, “Explainable graph-based fraud detec- 307.
 tion via neural meta-graph search,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., [126] P. Wu et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection and localization
 2022, pp. 4414–4418. with spatio-temporal prompts,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
[100] C. Qiu, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Raising the bar in graph- 2024, pp. 9301–9310.
 level anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2205.13845. [127] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
[101] L. Qu, H. Zhu, R. Zheng, Y. Shi, and H. Yin, “ImGAGN: Imbalanced supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance.
 network embedding via generative adversarial graph networks,” in Proc. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 6074–6082.
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 1390–1398. [128] L. Xia, B. Kao, and C. Huang, “OpenGraph: Towards open graph foun-
[102] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N. F. dation models,” 2024, arXiv:2403.01121.
 Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,” Wiley [129] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
 Interdiscipl. Rev.: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247, 2015. graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
[103] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
 reconstruction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2024, [130] F. Xu, N. Wang, X. Wen, M. Gao, C. Guo, and X. Zhao, “Few-shot
 pp. 576–585. message-enhanced contrastive learning for graph anomaly detection,”
[104] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. 2023, arXiv:2311.10370.
 Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402. [131] F. Xu, N. Wang, H. Wu, X. Wen, and X. Zhao, “Revisiting
[105] B. Sanchez-Lengeling et al., “Evaluating attribution for graph neural graph-based fraud detection in sight of heterophily and spectrum,”
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 5898– 2023, arXiv:2312.06441.
 5910. [132] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for anomaly
[106] F. Sato, R. Hachiuma, and T. Sekii, “Prompt-guided zero-shot anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12591–
 action recognition using pretrained deep skeleton features,” in Proc. 12604, Dec. 2023.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 6471–6480. [133] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
[107] F. Shi, Y. Cao, Y. Shang, Y. Zhou, C. Zhou, and J. Wu, “H2-FDetector: network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. Pacific-
 A GNN-based fraud detector with homophilic and heterophilic connec- Asia Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Springer, 2022, pp. 444–457.
 tions,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1486–1494. [134] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided
[108] M. Shi, Y. Tang, X. Zhu, D. Wilson, and J. Liu, “Multi-class imbalanced semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,”
 graph convolutional network learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 24
 Intell., 2020, pp. 2879–2885. 490–24 499.
[109] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst, [135] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
 “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending high- learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” IEEE Syst., 2020, pp. 5812–5823.
 Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May 2013. [136] H. Yu, Z. Liu, and X. Luo, “Barely supervised learning for graph-based
[110] X. Sun, H. Cheng, J. Li, B. Liu, and J. Guan, “All in one: Multi-task fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 16
 prompting for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. 548–16 557.
 Data Mining, 2023, pp. 2120–2131. [137] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
[111] J. Tang et al., “HiGPT: Heterogeneous graph language model,” anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 18, no. 1,
 2024, arXiv:2402.16024. pp. 1–14, 2016.
[112] J. Tang, F. Hua, Z. Gao, P. Zhao, and J. Li, “GADBench: Re- [138] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
 visiting and benchmarking supervised graph anomaly detection,” “NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
 2023, arXiv:2306.12251. in dynamic networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
[113] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks 2018, pp. 2672–2681.
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022, [139] X. Yuan, N. Zhou, S. Yu, H. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Xia, “Higher-order
 pp. 21 076–21 089. structure based anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE
[114] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere: Int. Conf. Big Data, 2021, pp. 2691–2700.
 Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in [140] G. Zhang et al., “FRAUDRE: Fraud detection dual-resistant to graph
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 2724–2730. inconsistency and imbalance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining,
[115] S. Tian et al., “SAD: Semi-supervised anomaly detection on dynamic 2021, pp. 867–876.
 graphs,” 2023, arXiv:2305.13573. [141] G. Zhang et al., “Dual-discriminative graph neural network for imbal-
[116] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. anced graph-level anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 24 144–24 157.
[117] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D. [142] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “Mixup: Beyond
 Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv: 1809.10341. empirical risk minimization,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.09412.
5126 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[143] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view [154] Q. Zhou, K. Ding, H. Liu, and H. Tong, “Learning node abnormality with
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” weak supervision,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3584–
 2022, arXiv:2205.04816. 3594.
[144] L. Zhang, J. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Pei, and L. Wang, “A robust embedding [155] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, Q. Tan, and F.-L. Chung, “Unseen anomaly
 method for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint detection on networks via multi-hypersphere learning,” in Proc. SIAM
 Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8. Int. Conf. Data Mining, SIAM, 2022, pp. 262–270.
[145] R. Zhang et al., “Generation is better than modification: Combat- [156] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang,
 ing high class homophily variance in graph anomaly detection,” “Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via
 2024, arXiv:2403.10339. data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
[146] Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Cai, and J. Fan, “Deep graph-level orthogonal hyper- pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023.
 sphere compression for anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2302.06430. [157] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
[147] T. Zhao, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “GraphSMOTE: Imbalanced node aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf.
 classification on graphs with graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
 Web Search Data Mining, 2021, pp. 833–841. [158] J. Zhu, C. Ding, Y. Tian, and G. Pang, “Anomaly heterogeneity learning
[148] T. Zhao, B. Ni, W. Yu, Z. Guo, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “Action sequence for open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 augmentation for early graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 17 616–17 626.
 Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 2668–2678. [159] J. Zhu and G. Pang, “Toward generalist anomaly detection via in-context
[149] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets residual learning with few-shot sample prompts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 for fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2019, Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 17 826–17 836.
 pp. 1286–1293. [160] J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhao, M. Heimann, L. Akoglu, and D. Koutra, “Beyond
[150] X. Zheng et al., “Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A homophily in graph neural networks: Current limitations and effective
 survey,” 2022, arXiv:2202.07082. designs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 7793–
[151] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative 7804.
 and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,” [161] Z. Zhuang, K. M. Ting, G. Pang, and S. Song, “Subgraph centralization:
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233, A necessary step for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf.
 Dec. 2023. Data Mining, SIAM, 2023, pp. 703–711.
[152] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Object- [162] W. Zhuo et al., “Partitioning message passing for graph fraud detection,”
 agnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024. [163] D. Zou, H. Peng, and C. Liu, “A structural information guided hierarchical
[153] Q. Zhou et al., “Graph anomaly detection with adaptive node mixup,” in reconstruction for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 3494–3504. Manage., 2024, pp. 4318–4323.