IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025 18397

 Deep Multimanifold Transformation-Based
 Multivariate Time Series Fault Detection
 Hong Liu , Member, IEEE, Xiuxiu Qiu , Yiming Shi, Miao Xu, Zelin Zang , Member, IEEE,
 and Zhen Lei , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Unsupervised fault detection in multivariate time I. I NTRODUCTION
series (MTS) plays a vital role in ensuring the stable operation of
complex systems. Traditional methods often assume that normal
data follow a single Gaussian distribution and identify anomalies
as deviations from this distribution. However, this simplified
assumption fails to capture the diversity and structural complex-
 U N SUPERVISED fault detection [15], [23] in multivariate time series (MTS) has become increasingly vital
 in both academic research and practical domains, especially
ity of real-world time series, which can lead to misjudgments within industrial environments and the management of largeand reduced detection performance in practical applications. To scale systems [21], [29], [36]. By eliminating the need for
address this issue, we propose a new method that combines a
neighborhood-driven data augmentation strategy with a multi- labeled data, it enables early identification of anomalies and
manifold representation learning framework. By incorporating incipient faults [6], [38], which is crucial for minimizing maininformation from local neighborhoods, the augmentation module tenance overhead and averting potential system failures [17].
can simulate contextual variations of normal data, enhancing This capability makes it an indispensable tool for real-time
the model’s adaptability to distributional changes. In addi- monitoring and predictive maintenance in scenarios where
tion, we design a structure-aware feature learning approach
that encourages natural clustering of similar patterns in the labeled samples are scarce or entirely unavailable [40].
feature space while maintaining sufficient distinction between To address this challenge, a wide range of approaches
different operational states. Extensive experiments on several have been explored, from classical statistical methods to
public benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method achieves modern deep learning-based models [32], [37]. Despite the
superior performance in terms of both accuracy and robust- notable progress made in recent years [20], most existing
ness, showing strong potential for generalization and real-world
deployment. techniques still exhibit unsatisfactory detection performance in
 practical applications, characterized by frequent false positives
 Index Terms—Data augmentation, fault detection, multivariate and missed anomalies (see Tables I and II). This is largely
time series, unsupervised soft contrastive learning (CL).
 due to the restrictive assumptions imposed during modeling,
 often necessitated by the absence of supervision. A prevailing
 Received 29 July 2024; revised 13 February 2025 and 4 June 2025; strategy is to model normal behavior as a Gaussian distribution
accepted 25 June 2025. Date of publication 11 August 2025; date of current and to flag deviations as anomalies [39], as illustrated in
version 9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer” Fig. 1(a). While computationally convenient, such assumptions
and “Leading Goose” Research and Development Program of Zhejiang under
Grant 2024C01140, in part by the Key Research and Development Program fail to capture the intrinsic diversity and nuanced dynamics of
of Hangzhou under Grant 2023SZD0073, in part by Beijing Natural Science real-world systems.
Foundation under Grant L221013, and in part by the InnoHK Program. In reality, both normal and anomalous behaviors often
(Corresponding author: Zelin Zang.)
 Hong Liu is with the School of Information and Electrical Engineering, comprise multiple heterogeneous subpatterns, each exhibiting
Academy of Edge Intelligence, Hangzhou City University, Hangzhou 310015, distinct temporal and structural traits [Fig. 1(b)]. Relying on
China. a single Gaussian model obscures these internal variations,
 Xiuxiu Qiu is with the College of Information Engineering, Zhejiang
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310012, China. leading to suboptimal representations and a reduced capacity
 Yiming Shi is with the Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang to detect subtle deviations [23]. This oversimplification not
University, Hangzhou 310027, China. only impairs the model’s ability to capture gradual state
 Miao Xu is with the Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR),
HKISI-CAS, Hong Kong, China. transitions but also undermines robustness in highly variable
 Zelin Zang is with the School of Engineering, Westlake University, environments [10], [25]. Consequently, there is a pressing
Hangzhou 310015, China, and also with the Centre for Artificial Intel- need to move beyond Gaussian-centric assumptions and adopt
ligence and Robotics (CAIR), HKISI-CAS, Hong Kong, China (e-mail:
zangzelin@westlake.edu.cn). more expressive modeling paradigms capable of characterizing
 Zhen Lei is with the Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR), complex, multimodal system behaviors.
HKISI-CAS, Hong Kong, China, also with the State Key Laboratory of To address the limitations caused by the oversimplified
Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing 100190, China, and also Gaussian distribution assumption, we propose an unsupervised
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of framework, termed deep multimanifold transformation for
Sciences (UCAS), Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: zhen.lei@ia.ac.cn). fault detection (DMTFD). Unlike prior methods that char-
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3584988, provided by the authors. acterize normal states with a single Gaussian distribution
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3584988 [39], DMTFD adopts a multimanifold assumption, which
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
18398 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE I
FAULT D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE OF AUROC ON F IVE P UBLIC DATASETS . W E C OMPARE THE P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS U SING
 A C ONSISTENT W INDOW S IZE (DMTFD) W ITH O UR O PTIMAL R ESULTS O BTAINED T HROUGH VARYING W INDOW S IZES (DMTFD*) TO
 S HOWCASE THE M AXIMUM P OTENTIAL . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE G IVEN IN B OLD

 TABLE II
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE OF PR ON F IVE P UBLIC DATASETS . W E C OMPARE THE P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS U SING
 A C ONSISTENT W INDOW S IZE (DMTFD) W ITH O UR O PTIMAL R ESULTS O BTAINED T HROUGH VARYING W INDOW S IZES (DMTFD*) TO
 S HOWCASE THE M AXIMUM P OTENTIAL . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE G IVEN IN B OLD

 USD

 ones. To construct a meaningful representation space under
 this assumption, we introduce a neighbor-aware augmentation
 strategy that generates context-consistent variants of each
 sample [18] and adopt a softened similarity constraint to
 gently pull semantically close instances. This design alleviates
 the rigidity of binary contrastive signals and supports more
 nuanced anomaly boundary modeling [41].
 Comprehensive experiments show that DMTFD significantly outperforms existing methods in both AUC
 and precision-recall (PR) metrics. On benchmark datasets,
 DMTFD achieves consistently lower false alarm rates and
 higher detection accuracy.
 Furthermore, our visualization analysis supports the plau-
Fig. 1. Motivation of DMTFD. (a) Existing methods rely on Gaussian
assumptions and fail to capture complex latent structures with multiple
 sibility of the multi-Gaussian assumption and illustrates how
substates. (b) Our proposed DMTFD introduces a multimanifold assumption soft contrastive learning (CL) effectively captures underlying
to better model state variations and improve fault detection accuracy. substate structures.

acknowledges the intrinsic diversity of normal operating con- 1) Multimanifold Modeling of Operational States: We
ditions across different system states [see Fig. 1(b)]. break away from the conventional single-Gaussian
 Concretely, DMTFD leverages a multimanifold transfor- assumption and adopt a multimanifold view that reflects
mation module that maps MTS into a latent space where the heterogeneity of both normal and abnormal condiheterogeneous local patterns are better disentangled and tions. This insight leads to a more faithful and flexible
aligned. This transformation enables the model to preserve modeling of system behaviors.
fine-grained distinctions between submanifolds of normal 2) New Framework for Unsupervised Representation:
behaviors while amplifying their deviation from anomalous We propose a novel framework that integrates
LIU et al.: DEEP MULTIMANIFOLD TRANSFORMATION-BASED MTS FAULT DETECTION 18399

 neighbor-based data augmentation and loss function to III. P RELIMINARY
 construct a smooth and discriminative latent space. Normalizing flow is an unsupervised density estimation
 3) Superior Empirical Performance Across Benchmarks: approach to map the original distribution to an arbitrary target
 Our method achieves over 5% improvement in detection distribution by a stack of invertible affine transformations.
 metrics compared to existing baselines, demonstrating When density estimation on original data distribution X is
 strong robustness and generalization in real-world indus- intractable, an alternative option is to estimate z density on
 trial scenarios. target distribution Z. Specifically, suppose a source sample
 x ∈ RD ∼ X and a target distribution sample z ∈ RD ∼ Z.
 Bijective invertible transformation Fθ aims to achieve one-to-
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 one mapping z = fθ (x) from X to Z. According to the change
A. Time Series Anomaly Detection of variable formula, we can get
 ∂ fθ ˇˇ
 ˇ ˇ
 In time series anomaly detection, one-class classifica-
 PX (x) = PZ (z) ˇdet T ˇ .
 ˇ
 ˇ (1)
tion (OCC) methods—such as USAD [4] and DAEMON ∂x
[8]—typically assume access to purely normal data during Benefiting from the invertibility of mapping functions and
training [5], [16]. GANF [9] employs graph neural net- tractable Jacobian determinants | det(∂ fθ /∂xT )|, the objective
works (GNNs) for anomaly detection in MTS. MTGFlow of flow models is to achieve ẑ = z, where ẑ = fθ (x).
[39] combines dynamic graphs with normalizing flows, while Flow models are able to achieve more superior density
MTGFlow-cluster [40] further boosts accuracy by clustering estimation performance when additional conditions C are input
entities. AnomalyLLM [22] leverages large language models [3]. Such a flow model is called conditional normalizing flow,
for knowledge distillation, using prototypical signals and syn- and its corresponding mapping is derived as z = fθ (x|C).
thetic anomalies to achieve an improvement on UCR datasets Parameters θ of fθ are updated by maximum likelihood estiacross 15 benchmarks. PeFAD [31] introduces PLM-based mation (MLE)
parameter-efficient federated learning with anomaly masking
 ∂ fθ ˇˇ
  ˇ ˇ
and synthetic distillation, improving performance by up to θ = arg max log (PZ ( fθ (x|C)) + log ˇdet T ˇ . (2)
 ∗
 ˇ
 ˇ
28.74%. Graph-MoE [15] enhances GNN-based detection via θ ∂x
expert mixtures and memory routers, effectively utilizing hierarchical features. In addition, prior work USD [23] proposes IV. M ETHODOLOGY
a CL framework tailored for MTS fault detection, addressing A. Notation and Problem Definition
limitations of hard contrastive loss in the presence of view- Consider an MTS dataset X. The dataset encompassing
level noise. Building upon this, the present work introduces K entities, each with L observations, is denoted as X =
a multimanifold transformation strategy and a generalized (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ), where each xk ∈ RL . Z-score normalization
similarity modeling approach, enabling more expressive repre- is employed to standardize the time series data across difsentations and significantly improving detection performance ferent entities. A sliding window approach, with a window
and robustness across benchmarks. size of T and a stride size of S , is utilized to sample the
 normalized MTS, generating training samples xc , where c
 denotes the sampling count and xc represents the segment
B. Contrastive Learning and SoftCL
 x[cS −T /2]:[cS +T /2] .
 Soft CL (SoftCL) [33], [35] and deep manifold learn- The objective of unsupervised fault detection is to identify
ing [19], [24] represent two advanced methodologies in the segments xc within X exhibiting anomalous behavior. This
domain of machine learning, particularly in the tasks of process operates under the premise that the normal behavior of
unsupervised learning and representation learning. These tech- X is known, and any significant deviation from this behavior
niques aim to leverage the intrinsic structure of the data is considered abnormal. Specifically, abnormal behavior is
to learn meaningful and discriminative features. At its core, characterized by its occurrence in low-density regions of the
SoftCL [28], [33], [35] is an extension of the CL framework normal behavior distribution, defined by a density threshold
[7], [13], [14], which aims to learn representations by bringing θ < ρ(normal behavior). The task of unsupervised fault detecsimilar samples closer and pushing dissimilar samples apart in tion in MTS can thus be formalized as identifying segments
the representation space. However, SoftCL introduces a more xc where ρ(xc ) < θ.
nuanced approach by incorporating the degrees of similarity Definition 1: (Supervised Fault Detection in MTS): Let
between samples into the learning process, rather than treating D = {(xc , yc )}i=1 N
 be a labeled dataset for an MTS, where each
similarity as a binary concept. This is achieved through the c
 segment x is annotated with a label yc ∈ {0, 1}, indicating noruse of soft labels or continuous similarity scores, allowing the mal (0) or abnormal (1) behavior. Supervised fault detection
model to learn richer and more flexible representations. The aims to learn a function f : RL → {0, 1} that can accurately
softness in the approach accounts for the varying degrees of classify new, unseen segments xnew as normal or abnormal
relevance or similarity among data points, making it particu- based on learned patterns of faults.
larly useful in tasks where the relationship between samples is Definition 2: (Unsupervised Fault Detection under Gaussian
not strictly binary or categorical, such as in semi-supervised Assumption): In the Gaussian assumption context, unsuperlearning or in scenarios with noisy labels. vised fault detection in an MTS operates on the premise that
18400 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed DMTFD framework. (a) Temporal sequences x and x+ are processed via RNN to capture temporal dynamics, followed by
a GNN to model interentity dependencies, yielding embeddings y. A SoftCL head maps y to transformed features c, which are then used for density modeling
via a flow-based generative network. (b) SCL head helps cluster similar samples and separate dissimilar ones in the feature space.

the distribution of normal behavior can be modeled using a 2) Manti-Manifold Transformation Head (MTH): To
Gaussian distribution. Anomalies are identified as segments enhance the discriminative quality of the learned represenxc that fall in regions of low probability under this Gaussian tations, we introduce a multimanifold transformation head,
model, specifically where ρ(xc ) < θ, with θ being a predefined implemented as a multilayer perceptron (MLP) H(·; ω). This
density threshold. module receives the spatiotemporal embedding yc from the
 Definition 3: (Unsupervised Fault Detection under Multi- GNN as input and projects it into a latent feature space
Gaussian Assumption): Under the multi-Gaussian assumption, optimized for CL zc = H (yc ; ω), where ω denotes the learnable
unsupervised fault detection recognizes that the distribution of parameters of the MLP and zc is the contrastive representation
normal behavior in an MTS may encompass multiple modes, corresponding to time window c. The goal of this module is
each fitting a Gaussian model. This assumption allows for a to enforce semantic alignment between similar instances while
more nuanced detection of anomalies, which are segments ensuring separation among dissimilar ones. This is achieved
xc that do not conform to any of the modeled Gaussian via a soft contrastive loss, which penalizes embeddings of
distributions of normal behavior, detected through a composite positive pairs (semantically similar samples) that are far apart
density threshold criterion ρ(xc ) < θ. and encourages larger distances for negative pairs (semantically dissimilar samples) that are too close. Unlike hard
 contrastive formulations that impose strict binary similarity,
B. Neural Network Structure of DMTFD the soft version allows for graded similarity relationships,
 The core idea of DMTFD is to learn precise and discrimi- thereby providing a smoother optimization landscape and
native latent representations by integrating data augmentation improving robustness to intraclass variability.
with SoftCL. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the DMTFD framework jointly leverages a recurrent neural network (RNN)
R(·; θ), a GNN G(·; φ), and a normalizing flow model F(·; α) C. MLE Loss and Data Augmentation
to effectively model the temporal patterns, relational structures, and distributional properties of MTS data for fault A key objective of the DMTFD framework is to accurately
detection. identify abnormal behaviors by modeling the underlying dis-
 1) RNN-GNN-Flow Architecture: To jointly capture tempo- tribution of normal operational data. To this end, we employ
ral dynamics, interentity dependencies, and density patterns, MLE as the training criterion for the flow-based density
we adopt an RNN-GNN-Flow architecture. Given the mul- estimation module. The core motivation behind this design is
tivariate input at time window c, denoted as xc , we first to encourage the model to assign high likelihoods to normal
compute the temporal encoding gc = R(xc ; θ) using an RNN patterns while assigning low likelihoods to anomalous deviaparameterized by θ; a GNN with parameters φ then produces tions, thus enabling precise and fine-grained fault detection.
the spatiotemporal embedding yc = G(gc ; φ); and finally, a nor- Formally, given the contrastive representation zc for time
malizing flow with parameters α estimates the log-likelihood window c, the normalizing flow transformation f (·; α) maps
score `c = F(yc ; α), which is used to detect anomalies—where it into a latent variable ẑc = f (zc ; α) that follows a known
low likelihood indicates high abnormality. target distribution (typically standard Gaussian with mean µ
LIU et al.: DEEP MULTIMANIFOLD TRANSFORMATION-BASED MTS FAULT DETECTION 18401

and identity covariance). The MLE loss is then defined as maximize the similarity between positive pairs and minimize
 N 
 it between negative pairs, utilizing the InfoNCE loss
 ∂ fα ˇˇ
 ˇ   ˇ
 1 X 1 c
 LMLE = − kẑ − µk22 + log ˇˇdet
 ˇ
 N 2 ∂zc ˇ
 (3) LCL (xc1 , xc2 , {xcn }cn=1
 NK
 )=
 c=1  
 c1 T c2
 exp z z exp S zc1 ,zc2
 
where N is the number of time windows and µ is the mean of − log P  = −log PN (6)
 k=1 exp S z ,zcn
  
the target Gaussian distribution Z. The first term encourages NK c1 Tz K c1
 k=1 exp z cn
ẑc to match the target distribution, while the second term—i.e.,
the log-determinant of the Jacobian—ensures that the flow where (xc1 , xc2 ) constitutes a positive pair and (xc1 , xcn ) a
transformation remains invertible and probability-preserving. negative pair, with zc1 , zc2 , and zcn being the embeddings of
By optimizing LMLE , the flow model learns to model the xc1 , xc2 , and zcn , respectively, and NK representing the number
density landscape of normal patterns precisely. At inference of negative pairs. The similarity function S (zc1 , zc2 ) is typitime, data points with significantly low log likelihoods under cally defined using cosine similarity. This method effectively
the learned distribution are flagged as anomalies, enabling enhances the model’s discriminative power by distinguishing
accurate and interpretable fault detection across diverse tem- between closely related (positive) and less related (negative)
poral and relational contexts. samples within the augmented data space.
 Data augmentation is crucial for improving the model’s The conventional CL (CCL) loss is structured around a
ability to generalize beyond the training data by artifi- single positive sample contrasted against multiple negatives.
cially expanding the dataset’s size and diversity [34]. Our To refine this, we have restructured the CCL loss into a more
methodology incorporates two primary strategies: neighbor- nuanced form that utilizes labels for positive and negative
hood discovery and linear interpolation. samples, denoted by Hc1,c2 . Detailed explanations of this
 1) Neighborhood Discovery: This technique focuses on transformation from (6) and (7) are available in Supplementary
leveraging the local structure of the data to generate new, Material A.
plausible data points that conform to the existing distribution.
 LCCL (xc1 , {xc2 }c2=1
 NK
 )
For each data point xc , we define its neighborhood N(xc ) using X˚
 =−
 
a distance metric d(·, ·), such as the Euclidean distance. The Hc1,c2 log Qc1,c2 + 1 − Hc1,c2 log Q̇c1,c2 (7)
 c
neighborhood consists of points xnew that meet the criterion j=1

 d xc , xnew
 c
 
 ≤ (4) where Hc1,c2 indicates if samples c1 and c2 have been
 augmented from the same source. Hc1,c2 = 1 signifies a
where  is a predetermined threshold defining the positive pair (xc1 , xc2 ), and Hc1,c2 = 0 indicates a negative
neighborhood’s radius. This method captures the local pair. The term Qc1,c2 = exp(S (zc1 , zc2 )) represents the density
density of the data, enabling the generation of new samples ratio, as defined and computed by the backbone network.
within these densely populated areas and thus enhancing To enhance robustness against view-level noise introduced by
the dataset with variations that align with the original data data augmentation, we propose the multimanifold loss (MML).
distribution. Unlike conventional contrastive losses that treat pairwise labels
 2) Data Augmentation by Linear Interpolation: Data as binary constants, MML introduces soft similarity-based
augmentation strategy augments the dataset by creating inter- weights, enabling the model to downweight uncertain or noisy
mediate samples between existing data points. For two points samples during training.
xc and xnew
 c c
 , a new sample xnew is formulated as Given an anchor sample xc1 and a set of associated samples
 c2 NK
 {x }c2 =1 , the MML loss is defined as
 c
 xnew = αxc + (1 − α) xnew
 c
 (5)
 LMML (xc1 , {xc2 }) =
where α is a random coefficient sampled from a uniform NK
distribution, α ∼ U(0, 1). This approach facilitates a smooth
 X   
 − Pc1 ,c2 log Qc1 ,c2 + 1 − Pc1 ,c2 log 1 − Qc1 ,c2 (8)
transition between data points, effectively bridging gaps in the c2 =1
data space and introducing a continuum of sample variations.
By interpolating between points either within the same neigh- where Pc1 ,c2 is the soft label (weight) reflecting the similarity in
borhood or across different neighborhoods, we substantially input space and Qc1 ,c2 denotes the similarity in the contrastive
enhance the dataset’s diversity and coverage, providing the latent space. They are defined as
model with a more comprehensive set of examples for training. eα · κ (yc1 , yc2 ) if Hc1 ,c2 = 1
 (
 Pc1 ,c2 =
 κ (yc1 , yc2 ) otherwise
D. MML With Data Augmentation
 Qc1 ,c2 = κ (zc1 , zc2 ) (9)
 In data-augmentation-based CL, the task is framed as a
binary classification problem over pairs of samples. Positive where Hc1 ,c2 ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether xc2 is a positive pair of
pairs, drawn from the joint distribution (xc1 , xc2 ) ∼ P xc1 ,xc2 , xc1 , α ∈ [0, 1] is a confidence prior that emphasizes positive
are labeled as Hc1,c2 = 1, whereas negative pairs, drawn from pairs, and κ(·, ·) is a similarity kernel.
the product of marginals (xc1 , xc2 ) ∼ P xc1 P xc2 , are labeled as To improve robustness against augmentation noise and
Hck = 0. The goal of CL is to learn representations that sample-level variability, we adopt a generalized Gaussian
18402 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3. ROC and PR plots of four datasets. The ROC and PR curves of the SWaT, WADI, PSM, and MSL datasets are shown. The ROC curves illustrate
the tradeoff between true positive rate and false positive rate, while the PR curves show the tradeoff between precision and recall. The performance of our
method is compared against SOTA methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

kernel κβ (·, ·) as the similarity function in MML. Compared the DMTFD framework, we ensure a rigorous approach to
to the standard Gaussian kernel, the generalized Gaussian modeling and detecting anomalies in MTS data, setting a new
provides a tunable shape parameter that allows for heavier standard for unsupervised fault detection in complex systems.
tails when needed, enabling the model to assign meaningful
similarity scores even to moderately distant pairs. The kernel V. E XPERIMENTS
 A. Dataset Information and Implementation Details
is defined as
  β ! Datasets Information: We evaluate DMTFD on six widely
 β ka − bk2
 κ (a, b) = exp − (10) used MTS fault detection datasets (Table A-1 in the Supple-
 σ mentary Material). SWaT [11] and WADI [2] are collected
where β > 0 controls the shape of the decay (with β = 2 from water treatment and distribution testbeds, simulating
reducing to a Gaussian kernel and β < 2 producing heavier industrial cyberattacks with labeled anomalies. PSM [1]
tails) and σ is a scale parameter. This formulation makes the contains server metrics from eBay, used to detect system
loss function more tolerant to view-level noise and nonuniform performance anomalies. MSL [16] provides telemetry from
sample structures, leading to smoother gradients and improved NASA’s Curiosity rover for space mission anomaly detection.
generalization under multimanifold distributions. Unlike USD SMD [27] is from a large-scale server farm and captures
[23], which relies on a fixed Gaussian assumption and sharp system behavior across multiple machines; we report average
contrastive margins, our generalized kernel formulation offers results and ensure that test sets include anomalies via fixed
adaptive flexibility across manifold structures and improves random seeds. SMAP is a NASA dataset [16] that contains
tolerance to cross-view variation. Detailed comparisons and data from a satellite’s attitude control system, used for detectanalyses are provided in Supplementary Material A. ing anomalies in space missions. All datasets are standard in
 OCC for time series anomaly detection.
E. Optimization Objectives 1) Dataset Split and Preprocessing: In our experimental
 The entire DMTFD framework, encompassing the RNN, setup, we adhere to the dataset configurations used in the
GNN, and FLOW models, is optimized jointly through MLE GANF study [9]. MTGFlow [39] and MTGFlow Cluster [40].
to ensure effective anomaly detection. The joint optimization Specifically, for the SWaT dataset, we partition the original
process is formulated as follows: testing data into 60% for training, 20% for validation, and
 20% for testing. For the other datasets, the training partition
 LDMTFD = LMLE + LMML (11)
 comprises 60% of the data, while the test partition contains the
where LMLE is the MLE loss and LMML is the MML loss. The remaining 40%. The training data are used to train the model,
MLE loss is designed to maximize the likelihood of observing while the validation data are used to tune hyperparameters and
the transformed data points ẑi under the model, while the the test data are used to evaluate the model’s performance.
MML loss is designed to enhance the model’s sensitivity to The datasets are preprocessed to remove missing values and
subtle differences between normal and abnormal patterns. By normalize the data to a range of [0, 1]. The data are then
embedding these mathematical formulations into each step of divided into fixed-length sequences, with a window size of 60
LIU et al.: DEEP MULTIMANIFOLD TRANSFORMATION-BASED MTS FAULT DETECTION 18403

Fig. 4. Violin plot of AUROC scores on different training splits. The x-axis represents the training split ratio, and the y-axis represents the AUROC scores. The
DMTFD method consistently outperforms the baseline methods (MTGFLOW) across different training splits, demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness
in anomaly detection tasks.

Fig. 5. Visualization of multisubclass data distributions. (a) t-SNE visualization of embedding of DMTFD on SWAT datasets. The color shows the different
states of the data. Multiple clusters can be seen in the representation, which is consistent with the multiple manifold assumption of this article. The normal
and abnormal states are not a single cluster but can be divided into separate subclusters. (b) Heatmaps of individual data point, each row in the heatmap is
the index number of the time, and each column is the index number of the sensor. We selected four subclusters, and two samples from each cluster were
randomly selected for presentation. The similarity of samples within subclusters and the difference of samples between subclusters are illustrated.

and a stride of 10. The window size determines the number of representation collapse. DeepSAD [26] is a semi-supervised
time steps in each sequence, while the stride determines the method that detects anomalies via entropy differences in latent
step size between each sequence. The data are then fed into distributions. USAD [4] employs adversarially trained autoenthe model for training and evaluation. coders for unsupervised time series anomaly detection. GANF
 2) Implementation Details: For all datasets, we set the [9] enhances normalizing flows using Bayesian networks to
window size to 60–80 and the stride size to 10–30. All model interseries dependencies. MTGFlow [39] and MTGFlow
experiments were run for 400–600 epochs and executed using Cluster [40] utilize dynamic graph structure learning and
PyTorch 2.2.1 on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 24GB GPU. Addi- entity-aware flows for fine-grained density estimation, with the
tional specific parameters can be found in the Supplementary latter introducing clustering for improved accuracy.
Material.
 C. Fault Detection Performance on Five Benchmark Dataset
B. Evaluation Metric and Baselines Methods First, we discuss the performance advantages of the
 DMTFD method by comparing results on five common bench-
 Following prior work, DMTFD performs window-level
 marks. We list the results for the AUROC and AUPRC metrics
anomaly detection, where a window is labeled anomalous if
 in Tables I and II, where the numbers in parentheses represent
it contains any anomalous point. We evaluate performance
 the variance from five different seed experiments. In Tables I
using two metrics: area under the receiver operating characterand II, the results of DROCC, DeepSAD, USAD, DAGMM,
istic (AUROC), which measures overall discriminative ability
 GANF, and MTGFlow are from the article [39].1 The results of
across thresholds, and AUPRC, which is more informative
 MTGFlow Cluster are from [40].2 We report on two variants
under class imbalance, capturing the tradeoff between preciof DMTFD: one (DMTFD) uses the same hyperparameters
sion and recall.
 across all experiments and the other (DMTFD*) involves
 1) Baselines: We compare DMTFD with several state-ofthe-art (SOTA) anomaly detection methods. DROCC [12] is a 1 https://github.com/zqhang/MTGFLOW

robust OCC method assuming locally linear manifolds to avoid 2 https://github.com/zqhang/MTGFLOW Cluster
18404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDY. AUROC C OMPARISON ON F OUR DATASETS (SWAT,
 WADI, PSM, AND MSL). T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE G IVEN IN B OLD .
 T HE R ESULTS A RE AVERAGED OVER F IVE RUNS , AND THE
 S TANDARD D EVIATION I S S HOWN IN PARENTHESES

Fig. 6. Point plot of the anomalies predicted outputs of MTGFLOW and
proposed DMTFD. The x-axis represents the anomaly index, and the y-axis average result over five runs in Fig. 4. Although the anomaly
represents the log likelihood of the anomaly. Anomalous ground truths are contamination ratio of training dataset rises, the anomaly
marked by a red background. This indicates that DMTFD is able to detect
anomalies more accurately and in a timely manner. detection performance of MTGFlow remains at a stable high
 level. This indicates that the proposed DMTFD method is
hyperparameter tuning specific to each target dataset. The robust to the anomaly contamination ratio of the training
best results are highlighted in bold. To visualize the benefits dataset.
of DMTFD performance, the ROC and PR curves on four
 D. Visualization of Multisubclass Data Distributions
datasets are shown in Fig. 3. In the ROC and PR curves,
 To further investigate the effectiveness of the DMTFD
the DMTFD method consistently outperforms the baseline
 method, we visualize the multisubclass data distributions on
methods, demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness in
 the SWAT dataset. As shown in Fig. 5, the t-SNE visuanomaly detection tasks.
 alization of the embedding of DMTFD on SWAT datasets
 1) Performance Improvement: In terms of performance
 reveals multiple clusters, consistent with the multiple manimprovements, as shown in Tables I and II, the DMTFD
 ifold assumption of this article. The normal and abnormal
method shows significant enhancements compared to SOTA
 states are not a single cluster but can be divided into sepmethods. We compare the performance of different methods
 arate subclusters. The heatmaps of individual data points
using a consistent window size (DMTFD) with our optimal
 further illustrate the similarity of samples within subclusters
results obtained through varying window sizes (DMTFD*)
 and the differences between samples in different subclusters.
to showcase the maximum potential. The best results are
 This visualization demonstrates the ability of the DMTFD
shown in bold. These improvements are evident across both
 method to capture the diverse patterns present in both nor-
PR and AUC curves, particularly on the SWAT dataset
 mal and abnormal states, enhancing its anomaly detection
with a 5.4% increase in AUROC and a 7.7% increase
 capabilities.
in AUPRC, and on the MSL dataset with a 6% increase
 In addition, we present the point plot of the anomalies
in AUROC and a 7.0% increase in AUPRC. On averpredicted outputs of MTGFLOW and the proposed DMTFD
age, there is a 4.1% increase in AUROC performance and
 in Fig. 6. The x-axis represents the anomaly index and the ya 7.0% increase in AUPRC performance. The consistent
 axis represents the log likelihood of the anomaly. Anomalous
improvements in both AUROC and AUPRC indicate that the
 ground truths are marked by a red background. This indicates
DMTFD method has enhanced performance across multiple
 that DMTFD is able to detect anomalies more accurately and
aspects.
 in a timely manner, outperforming MTGFLOW in terms of
 2) Stability Improvement: As shown in Tables I and II
 anomaly detection performance.
and Fig. 3, the stability of the DMTFD method is also
 Fig. 7 shows the bar plot of the frequency of normalnoteworthy, exhibiting lower variance across all test datasets
 ized anomaly scores on baseline methods and DMTFD.
compared to traditional methods. This indicates that the
 The x-axis represents the anomaly scores and the y-axis
DMTFD method is more robust and less sensitive to random
 represents the frequency of each score. The normalized
initialization, making it a reliable choice for anomaly detection
 anomaly scores of DMTFD are significantly lower than those
tasks.
 of GANF and MTGFlow, indicating that DMTFD is more
 3) Performance Potential: Furthermore, by comparing the
 effective at distinguishing between normal and abnormal
results of DMTFD and DMTFD*, we find that conducting
 states.
hyperparameter searches for each dataset can significantly
boost the model performance. This suggests that our method
has good hyperparameter adaptability and considerable poten- E. Ablation Study: The Effect of SoftCL Loss
tial for further performance enhancements. To assess the effectiveness of each component designed
 4) Additional Results on Difference Train/Validation Splits: in our model, we conducted a series of ablation exper-
To further investigate the influence of anomaly contamination iments. The results of these experiments are presented
rates, we vary training splits to adjust anomalous contami- in Table III.
nation rates. For all the abovementioned datasets, the training We performed controlled experiments to verify the necessity
split increases from 60% to 80% with 5% stride. We present an of the SoftCL Loss in the UNDA settings across all four
LIU et al.: DEEP MULTIMANIFOLD TRANSFORMATION-BASED MTS FAULT DETECTION 18405

Fig. 7. Bar plot of the frequency of normalized anomaly scores on baseline methods and DMTFD. The x-axis represents the anomaly scores and the y-axis
represents the frequency of each score. The normalized anomaly scores of DMTFD are significantly lower than those of GANF and MTGFlow, indicating
that DMTFD is more effective at distinguishing between normal and abnormal states.

 TABLE IV
PARAMETERS A NALYSIS : L EARNING R ATES . TABLE OF AUC S CORES (AUROC%) FOR D IFFERENT L EARNING R ATES ON THE SWAT DATASET,
 I NDICATING DMTFD’ S S ENSITIVITY TO THE L EARNING R ATE

 TABLE V
PARAMETERS A NALYSIS : N UMBER OF E POCHS . TABLE OF AUC S CORES (AUROC%) FOR D IFFERENT E POCHS ON THE SWAT DATASET, I NDICATING
 DMTFD’ S S ENSITIVITY TO THE N UMBER OF E POCHS

 TABLE VI evaluated using DMTFD. Our method showcases promising
PARAMETERS A NALYSIS : H YPERPARAMETER ν. TABLE OF (AUROC%) results, with consistently competitive AUROC scores across
 S CORES (AUROC%) FOR D IFFERENT ν ON THE SWAT DATASET, I NDI - varying hyperparameter configurations. Notably, the standard
 CATING DMTFD’ S S ENSITIVITY TO THE H YPERPARAMETER ν
 deviations accompanying AUROC values indicate a high
 degree of stability, underscoring the reliability of our approach.
 Analysis of the table reveals that optimal configurations often
 coincide with larger window sizes and moderate block numbers, suggesting a preference for capturing broader temporal
datasets. The performance of the proposed DMTFD method contexts while maintaining computational efficiency. Additionis denoted as DMTFD in Table A-5 in the Supplementary ally, trends indicate that as the number of blocks increases,
Material. The variant w/o. SoftCL represents the model per- there is a discernible improvement in performance, albeit
formance with the SoftCL loss component, LMML (xti , yi t ), with diminishing returns beyond a certain threshold. This
removed from the overall loss function of DMTFD. The observation highlights the importance of carefully balancing
variant w. CL indicates the model performance when the model complexity with computational resources. Overall, the
SoftCL loss is replaced by a typical contrastive loss, LCCL , DMTFD method demonstrates robustness and effectiveness in
as defined in (6). The results clearly demonstrate that the anomaly detection tasks.
SoftCL Loss significantly outperforms the traditional CL loss.
We attribute the inferior performance of LCCL to its inability to adequately address the view-noise caused by domain 2) Hyperparameter Robustness: Learning Rate, ν, and
bias. Number of Epoch: In order to further investigate the effectiveness of MTGFlow, we give a detailed analysis based on
 the SWaT dataset. We conduct ablation studies on the learning
F. Hyperparameter Robustness
 rate, ν, and the number of epochs. The results are shown
 1) Hyperparameter Robustness: Window Size and Number in Tables IV–VII. The results show that the performance of
of Blocks: Table A-5 in the Supplementary Material presents MTGFlow is relatively stable across different learning rates,
an ablation study investigating the robustness of hyperparame- ν, and the number of epochs. This indicates that MTGFlow
ters, focusing on the window size and number of blocks. Three is robust to hyperparameter changes and can achieve good
distinct datasets, SWaT, WADI, and PSM, along with MSL, are performance with a wide range of hyperparameters.
18406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE VII
PARAMETERS ANALYSIS : W EIGHT OF N EGATIVE (N E ) S AMPLE AND P OSITIVE (P O ) S AMPLE . TABLE OF AUC S CORES (AUROC%) FOR D IFFERENT
 T OPOLOGICAL L OSS R ATIOS ON THE S WAT DATASET

 VI. C ONCLUSION [8] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and
 interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf.
 In this work, we propose DMTFD, an unsupervised frame- Data Eng. (ICDE), Aug. 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
work for fault detection in multivariate time series. To [9] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
overcome the limitations of Gaussian assumptions, DMTFD Jan. 2022, pp. 1–15.
models data with multi-Gaussian representations. A neighbor- [10] Y. Feng et al., “Computation-efficient fault detection framework for
based augmentation strategy is designed to generate positive partially known nonlinear distributed parameter systems,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 12604–12616, Sep. 2023.
pairs for learning, while a representation head enables opti- [11] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
mization based on local streamform similarities. This enhances research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
the separation between normal and anomalous states and Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Secur. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016,
 pp. 88–99.
broadens anomaly coverage. Experiments on standard bench- [12] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain,
marks (e.g., SWaT and WADI) demonstrate that DMTFD “DROCC: Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
achieves superior AUC and PR scores, with lower false alarm Mach. Learn., Jun. 2020, pp. 3711–3721.
 [13] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to selfrates and improved detection accuracy. Visualizations also supervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS),
validate the effectiveness of the multi-Gaussian modeling. vol. 33, Dec. 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
Although our current focus is unsupervised fault detection, [14] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
DMTFD can be extended to remaining useful life (RUL) Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
prediction. Its pretrained embeddings provide strong priors for [15] X. Huang, W. Chen, B. Hu, and Z. Mao, “Graph mixture of experts
temporal degradation modeling and, with minimal finetuning, and memory-augmented routers for multivariate time series anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, Sep. 2025,
can support few-shot RUL forecasting. We leave multitask pp. 17476–17484.
extensions integrating fault detection and RUL estimation for [16] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
future work. T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
 nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
 [17] R. Li, W. J. C. Verhagen, and R. Curran, “A systematic methodology
 R EFERENCES for prognostic and health management system architecture definition,”
 Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 193, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 106598.
[1] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn- [18] S. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Zang, D. Wu, Z. Chen, and S. Z. Li, “GenURL:
 chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” A general framework for unsupervised representation learning,” IEEE
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 286–298, Jan. 2025.
 2021, pp. 2485–2494. [19] S. Z. Li, Z. Zang, and L. Wu, “Deep manifold transformation for
[2] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “Wadi: A water nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” 2020, arXiv:2010.14831.
 distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical [20] S. Z. Li, Z. Zang, and L. Wu, “Markov-lipschitz deep learning,” 2020,
 systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water arXiv:2006.08256.
 Netw., Jul. 2017, pp. 25–28. [21] A. Lin, J. Cheng, L. Rutkowski, S. Wen, M. Luo, and J. Cao,
[3] L. Ardizzone, C. Lüth, J. Kruse, C. Rother, and U. Köthe, “Guided “Asynchronous fault detection for memristive neural networks with
 image generation with conditional invertible neural networks,” 2019, dwell-time-based communication protocol,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 arXiv:1907.02392. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9004–9015, Sep. 2022.
[4] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [22] C. Liu, S. He, Q. Zhou, S. Li, and W. Meng, “Large language model
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” guided knowledge distillation for time series anomaly detection,” 2024,
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jun. arXiv:2401.15123.
 2020, pp. 3395–3404. [23] H. Liu, X. Qiu, Y. Shi, and Z. Zang, “USD: Unsupervised soft contrastive
[5] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A learning for fault detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE
 survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407. Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2025, pp. 1–5.
[6] H. Chen, Z. Chai, O. Dogru, B. Jiang, and B. Huang, “Data-driven [24] N. D. Nguyen, J. Huang, and D. Wang, “A deep manifold-regularized
 designs of fault detection systems via neural network-aided learning,” learning model for improving phenotype prediction from multi-modal
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5694–5705, data,” Nature Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 38–46, 2022.
 Oct. 2022. [25] C. Peng and M. Fanchao, “Fault detection of urban wastewater treatment
[7] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework process based on combination of deep information and transformer
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. network,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6,
 Conf. Mach. Learn., Jun. 2020, pp. 1597–1607. pp. 8124–8133, Jun. 2022.
LIU et al.: DEEP MULTIMANIFOLD TRANSFORMATION-BASED MTS FAULT DETECTION 18407

[26] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019, Xiuxiu Qiu received the master’s degree in elecarXiv:1906.02694. tronic information from Zhejiang University of
[27] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Technology, Hangzhou, China, in 2025.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural Her research focuses on affective computing and
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data intelligent information processing.
 Min., Jun. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[28] J. Tang, Z. Gong, B. Tao, and Z. Yin, “Advancing generalizations of
 multi-scale GAN via adversarial perturbation augmentations,” Knowl.-
 Based Syst., vol. 284, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 111260.
[29] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
 graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023. Yiming Shi received the master’s degree from Zhe-
[30] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition jiang University, Hangzhou, China, 2006.
 transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in With long-term dedication to industrial control
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–12. systems research, he specializes in fieldbus technolo-
[31] R. Xu, H. Miao, S. Wang, P. S. Yu, and J. Wang, “PeFAD: A parameter- gies, information security, and edge intelligence.
 efficient federated framework for time series anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug.
 2024, pp. 3621–3632.
[32] X. Yu, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Chen, and J. Cai, “Statistical identification
 guided open-set domain adaptation in fault diagnosis,” Rel. Eng. Syst.
 Saf., vol. 232, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109047.
[33] Z. Zang et al., “DLME: Deep local-flatness manifold embedding,” in
 Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022, pp. 576–592. Miao Xu received the M.S. degree from the Institute
[34] Z. Zang et al., “DiffAug: Enhance unsupervised contrastivelearning with of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beidomain-knowledge-free diffusion-based data augmentation,” in Proc. jing, China, in 2024, under the supervision of Zhen
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 58174–58196. Lei.
[35] Z. Zang et al., “Boosting novel category discovery over domains with His research interests include computer vision and
 soft contrastive learning and all in one classifier,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF 3-D reconstruction.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 11824–11833.
[36] J. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. An, H. Luo, and S. Yin, “An integrated multitasking intelligent bearing fault diagnosis scheme based on representation
 learning under imbalanced sample condition,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6231–6242, May 2023.
[37] L. Zhang, J. Lin, H. Shao, Z. Zhang, X. Yan, and J. Long, “End-to-end Zelin Zang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 unsupervised fault detection using a flow-based model,” Rel. Eng. Syst. degree from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
 Saf., vol. 215, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107805. in 2024, under the supervision of Prof. Stan Z. Li.
[38] B. Zhao, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, Z. Yang, and Z. Zhan, “A novel unsupervised His research focuses on manifold learning, dimendirected hierarchical graph network with clustering representation for sionality reduction, and geometric deep learning,
 intelligent fault diagnosis of machines,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., with applications in single-cell omics, protein funcvol. 183, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109615. tion analysis, and biomedical image understanding.
[39] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate He has made notable contributions to deep manifold
 time series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. transformation techniques and has proposed several
 Intell., vol. 37, no. 4, Jun. 2023, pp. 4963–4971. high-impact models in AI for Science, including
[40] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate MuST for spatial transcriptomics integration and
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, DMT-HI for interpretable manifold visualization. His current research interests
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024. lie in developing interpretable and structure-aware representation learning
[41] T. Zonta, C. A. da Costa, R. da Rosa Righi, M. J. de Lima, E. S. da methods for high-dimensional biological data, with an emphasis on tree-like
 Trindade, and G. P. Li, “Predictive maintenance in the industry 4.0: A structure inference, large-scale biomedical foundation models, and multiagent
 systematic literature review,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 150, Dec. 2020, medical reasoning systems.
 Art. no. 106889.

 Zhen Lei (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 in automation from the University of Science and
 Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2005, and
 the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation,
 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in
 2010.
 He is currently a Professor with the Institute of
 Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has
 published over 200 articles in international journals
 Hong Liu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. and conferences with more than 30000 citations in
 degree from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, Google Scholar and an H-index of 81. His research
 in 2014. interests include computer vision, pattern recognition, image processing, and
 He had a post-doctoral experience in electronic face recognition in particular.
 science major at Zhejiang University. He was a Vis- Dr. Lei is an IAPR Fellow and an AAIA Fellow. He was a winner of
 iting Researcher with The Hong Kong University of the 2019 IAPR Young Biometrics Investigator Award. He was the Program
 Science and Technology, Hong Kong. He is currently Co-Chair of IJCB2023, the Competition Co-Chair of IJCB2022, and the
 an Associate Professor with the School of Infor- area chair of several conferences. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE
 mation and Electric Engineering, Hangzhou City T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE
 University, Hangzhou. His major research interests T RANSACTIONS ON B IOMETRICS , B EHAVIOR , AND I DENTITY S CIENCE,
 include system modeling, optimization, and control. Pattern Recognition, Neurocomputing, and IET Computer Vision.