IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 6443

 D EEP DRAC: Disposition Recommendation for
 Alert Clusters Based on Security Event Patterns
 Yang Liu , Member, IEEE, Gaofei Ruan , Zian Luo , Shilong Zhang, Donghao Liu, Xin Fan,
 Yadong Zhou , Member, IEEE, and Ting Liu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In the security operation center, false positive alerts the Security Operations Center (SOC) analyze alerts from
 generated by security devices overwhelm security operators, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention
 leading to alert fatigue and inefficiency in identifying real threats. Systems (IPS) before taking further security actions [1]. In this
 This paper introduces D EEP DRAC, a disposition recommendation method for alert clusters that is based on security event process, operators must use their knowledge of cyberattacks
 patterns. Our main idea is to reconstruct isolated alerts into secu- and normal traffic to determine whether an alert represents a
 rity events and capture their essential threat characteristics as real threat manually. However, a serious issue of alert fatigue
 patterns. By recommending pattern information, we enable batch has arisen [2], [3], [4], where operators are overwhelmed
 interpretable disposal of alerts. First, D EEP DRAC aggregates by a large number of false positives, making it difficult to
 correlated alerts to a graph, representing a security event. Then,
 it extracts the features of the security event from two aspects: detect and respond to real attacks promptly [5], [6]. A 2019
 basic features via statistical methods and detailed features via Cisco survey revealed that 41% of the 3,540 organizations
 a carefully designed Graph Neural Network (GNN) that focuses surveyed receive more than 10,000 alerts per day. Among these
 on edge features. Since many false alerts triggered by the same alerts, only 50.7% were investigated and analyzed owing to the
 cause often recur in a fixed pattern, D EEP DRAC translates limited disposal capabilities of the SOC, and only 24.1% of
 basic features into interpretable descriptors to define the basic
 pattern, whereas GNN embeddings complement detailed semantic the investigated alerts were considered real attacks [7]. These
 information, serving as the detailed pattern, together forming the observations highlight the pressing need for efficient, contextpattern of the security event. The pattern describes the critical aware alert disposition methods to help SOC operators identify
 information of the security event, so security events with the real threats from massive alert volumes with minimal manual
 same pattern are clustered for batch processing. Finally, with effort.
 few manually labeled security events, D EEP DRAC can conduct
 automatic disposition recommendations for newly arrived alerts, To address the issue of alert fatigue, researchers have
 significantly reducing the workload of alert analysis. We evaluate conducted numerous approaches, which can be categorized
 our approach on two benchmark datasets (i.e., DARPA 1999 into two main types. The first type enhances security devices
 and CIC-IDS2017) and a real-world dataset from a large power to improve the quality of alerts while reducing the total
 company. The extensive experimental results demonstrate that number of alerts [5], [8], [9], [10], [11]. However, updating
 our approach can alleviate alert fatigue more efficiently and
 accurately than the two state-of-the-art defense approaches can. various types of legacy security devices in an organization has
 become challenging [12]. The second type designs automated
 Index Terms—False positive alerts, alert fatigue, pattern recog- alert validation solutions to alleviate the burden on operators
 nition, graph neural networks, semi-supervised learning.
 [13], which is more practical for alleviating alert fatigue. The
 alert validation methods can be categorized into three types
 I. I NTRODUCTION based on how they capture alert relationships: spatial-based,

 W ITH the advancement of information technology,
 enterprise networks are facing increasingly complex
 cyberattacks. To safeguard network security, operators in
 temporal-based, and spatiotemporal-based methods. Spatial
 methods [14], [15] aggregate alerts with similar fundamental
 attributes, such as IP addresses or host information, into
 higher-level meta-alerts. Temporal methods [12], [16] generate
 Received 19 January 2025; revised 10 June 2025; accepted 12 June 2025.
 Date of publication 16 June 2025; date of current version 1 July 2025. This event sequences by aggregating alerts that occur in close
 work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development temporal proximity, based on the premise that alerts occurring
 Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2703500; in part by the National nearly simultaneously are likely to be related. Spatiotemporal
 Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62293500, Grant 62293501,
 Grant 62293502, and Grant 62272373; and in part by the Fundamental methods [2], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21] combine spatial and
 Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating temporal correlations to integrate alerts, preserving more comthe review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Guan Gui. plete contextual information than the previous two methods do.
 (Yang Liu and Gaofei Ruan contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding
 author: Ting Liu.) Modeling alerts as graphs is a representative spatialtemporal
 Yang Liu, Gaofei Ruan, Zian Luo, Shilong Zhang, Yadong Zhou, and Ting method, where the IP addresses of the alert are usually used as
 Liu are with the MOE KLINNS Laboratory, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, nodes, and an alert exists between two nodes to generate edges.
 Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail: tingliu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
 Donghao Liu and Xin Fan are with State Grid Information and Telecommu- Following the correlation of alerts, alert validation methods
 nication Company, Shaanxi Electric Power Corporation Ltd., Xi’an, Shaanxi typically employ representation and classification techniques
 710048, China. to guarantee that critical alerts receive immediate attention
 Data is available on-line at http://github.com/Gaofei-Ruan/DEEPDRAC-
 Appendix and response from operators. Unfortunately, existing alert
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3580337 validation methods still have several limitations.
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6444 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 First, most alert validation methods face significant chal- • A novel semisupervised deep learning-based alert validalenges in accurately reconstructing security events from raw tion method called D EEP DRAC is proposed, which can
 alerts. Spatial or temporal approaches often rely on one-sided correlate isolated alerts into security events and describe
 relationships, limiting their ability to capture the full event the critical information that triggers the events, called the
 context. While spatiotemporal methods combine spatial and pattern. D EEP DRAC processes alerts in an interpretable
 temporal features into graphs, they usually merge multiple manner based on recommendations, providing specific
 distinct events into a single graph. Spatiotemporal methods event descriptions while filtering false-positive alerts.
 typically adopt node-level, edge-level, or graph-level strate- • When training the GNN module of D EEP DRAC, we
 gies: the node-level and edge-level methods directly perform design a training framework consisting of self-supervised
 node classification or link prediction without considering event pretraining and supervised fine-tuning, which greatly
 semantics [2], [21]. On the other hand, graph-level methods reduces the dependence on ground truth labels.
 decouple events through graph partitioning, but they are typ- • We evaluate D EEP DRAC on two public datasets (DARPA
 ically based solely on topology. This approach fails to fully 1999 and CIC-IDS2017) as well as a real-world dataset
 exploit the semantic and contextual attributes of alerts, which collected from a large power grid company, and show that
 leads to incomplete event reconstruction [20]. D EEP DRAC outperforms state-of-the-art alert reduction
 Second, most alert validation methods rely heavily on methods.
 labeled samples. An increasing number of alert validation The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
 methods leverage deep learning techniques for their effec- explains the motivation of D EEP DRAC through an example.
 tiveness in representing and classifying correlated alerts [12], Section III provides a detailed description of the three compo-
 [18], [20], [22], [23]. These methods typically require many nents of D EEP DRAC. Section IV shows the performance of
 labeled samples for model training, which is particularly D EEP DRAC on two public datasets and a real-world dataset,
 challenging in the security domain. As a result, the dependence comparing it with that of state-of-the-art alert reduction methon labeled samples severely limits the capabilities and practical ods. Section V discusses additional aspects of D EEP DRAC,
 applicability of these methods. such as its time efficiency and robustness. Finally, Section VI
 Third, most alert validation methods lack interpretability, presents the conclusions.
 which limits their practical application [2], [12], [18], [20].
 Deep learning approaches for alert representation and classifi- II. M OTIVATION
 cation often produce outputs, such as predicted categories or We explain the motivation for using pattern recommendation
 anomaly scores, without providing explanations. As a result, methods to dispose of alerts via an example.
 operators cannot understand the rationale behind the model’s In real-world scenarios, many alerts are false-positives trigdecisions. This lack of interpretability undermines trust in gered by normal business activities. For example, routine asset
 the system and hinders its usability in critical operational scans conducted by IT operations teams are often misclassienvironments. fied as port-scanning attacks; simulated brute-force attempts
 In this paper, we present a semisupervised alert vali- during password strength testing are flagged as real credential
 dation method, D EEP DRAC (DEEP learning Disposition attacks; and cross-regional traffic between branch offices and
 Recommendation for Alert Clusters), which recommends risk headquarters, owing to its nonstandard network characteristics,
 levels and disposition information for alerts based on the is frequently misdetected as anomalous traffic. Although these
 patterns, aiming to alleviate alert fatigue. First, to recover alerts may seem isolated at first glance, multiple alerts often
 contextual information on security events, we model alerts belong to a single security event, such as “asset scanning
 within a time window as an alert graph. Second, we apply a events,” “password testing events” or “cross-regional access
 carefully designed community detection algorithm to the alert events.” Additionally, many security events triggered by the
 graph to obtain subgraphs (i.e., communities of related alerts). same business frequently occur in a fixed pattern. Security
 These subgraphs preserve contextual information on security events with the same pattern typically differ only in certain
 events, including spatial correlations (such as relationships noncritical features, such as whether IT operations teams
 between IP addresses and ports) and temporal correlations scanned two assets versus four assets.
 (since alerts occur within the same time window). We treat Fig. 1 illustrates an example of correlated alerts in a real
 these subgraphs as security events for further analysis. Third, enterprise intranet. The example includes four security events,
 we extract features of the security event, which consists of both where event 1 and event 3 share the same pattern. This pattern
 basic features via statistical methods and detailed features from similarity indicates that these events, despite occurring in
 Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Then, we translate the event different subnets, can be handled via a unified disposition
 features into patterns, and the security events with the same strategy. The ability to identify and group such events is
 patterns are clustered together. Finally, we recommend patterns critical for reducing alert fatigue and improving operational
 for security events and automate the filtering of false-positive efficiency. However, accurately reconstructing security events
 alerts via a semisupervised approach. With D EEP DRAC, from a vast number of raw alerts is challenging due to the
 operators can efficiently dispose of all alerts by analyzing a complexity of business logic. For example, “asset device
 small subset of security events for each pattern, significantly scanning” and “port scanning attacks” may trigger identical
 reducing their workload. In summary, the contributions of this alert types, making it difficult to distinguish legitimate activipaper are as follows: ties from actual threats. Without advanced methods to analyze

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6445

 TABLE I
 N OTATIONS AND D ESCRIPTIONS

 Fig. 1. Example of correlated alerts in a real enterprise intranet. Arrows in
 different colors represent different types of alerts. The example covers three
 subnets and four security events, where events 1 and 3 share the same pattern
 and belong to the same category of security events.

 the context and relationships between alerts, SOC operators
 must manually investigate each alert, leading to inefficiency
 and potential oversight of critical issues.
 To address these challenges, this paper introduces a pattern
 recommendation approach that accurately reconstructs security events from raw alerts and recommends corresponding
 patterns. For example, in Fig. 1, related alerts are grouped
 into four security events by correlation features, including
 spatial correlation (e.g., relationships between IP addresses
 and ports), temporal correlation (e.g., alerts occurring within
 the same time window), and alert categories (e.g., identifying
 whether alerts correspond to scanning, brute-force attacks, or
 anomalous traffic). Then, event 1 and event 3 are classified in
 the same pattern, as their features are highly similar correlation
 features. By clustering similar security events into the same
 pattern, SOC operators can focus on analyzing a small subset
 of representative security events for each pattern, significantly
 reducing the workload.

 III. M ETHODOLOGY data fields are shown in Table II. The semantic information
 We propose a method based on event reconstruction and contained in these data fields can be classified into three
 pattern recommendation, D EEP DRAC, which helps operators types: 1) Information about the network activity, including the
 quickly dispose of alerts. The framework of D EEP DRAC timestamp, the source IP address (src addr), the destination
 is shown in Fig. 2, which consists of three components: IP address (dst addr), and the protocol (proto); 2) Informathe Event Graph Builder for reconstructing security events tion about the activity’s traffic, including the packet length
 (Section III-B), the Pattern Generator for generating patterns (pkt len), the packet number (pkt num), the TCP sequence
 (Section III-C), and the SemiAutomatic Decision for alert number (tcp seq), and the TCP window size (tcp win); and
 disposal by recommending patterns (Section III-D). Notably, 3) Anomaly information of the alert generated by the IDS,
 the Pattern Generator uses the GNN to extract the semantic including the matched rule ID (rule), the anomaly category
 details of security events. We employ a self-supervised learn- (category), the anomaly message (message), etc. In this work,
 ing approach to alleviate the dependency on labeled samples we select a subset of the data fields (i.e., the highlighted fields
 during GNN training (Section III-E). in Table II), which is important for alert analysis and available
 in most security devices.
 Second, for alerts that have timestamps within the same time
 A. Data Preprocessing on Alerts window T, if the values of the fields (src addr, dst addr,
 As the data fields of alerts from different security devices dst port, proto, rule, category and priority) are identical,
 are not unified and there are large amounts of duplicate alerts, they are premerged to reduce duplicate alerts. The number
 we need to preprocess alerts before analysis. of merged alerts is denoted as warn num, and the alert fields
 First, we unify the data fields of all alerts referring to the used for constructing the alert graph are given by (timestamp,
 alert fields of popular open-source network IDSs (e.g., Snort src addr, dst addr, dst port, proto, rule, category, priority,
 and Suricata). Taking the alert generated by Snort 3.1.18 as and warn num). Here, the timestamp refers to the start time
 an example, it includes 44 fields in JSON format, whose main of the time window T.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6446 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 2. Framework of D EEP DRAC that shows the three main components. O 1 Event graph builder: An alert graph is built based on the alerts where the
 edge denotes alerts from one host (i.e., the node in the alert graph) to another host. Then, a community detection algorithm is applied to the alert graph,
 generating security events that contain contextual information. O 2 Pattern Generator: Patterns of security events are generated based on statistical features
 and GNN embeddings. On the one hand, statistical features are extracted and discretized to form the basic pattern, which intuitively describes the security
 event. On the other hand, GNN embeddings capture detailed features as supplements, together forming a comprehensive pattern. This pattern encapsulates
 the critical information of the security event. O
 3 Semiautomatic decider: First, security events with the same patterns are grouped. Second, a small number
 of labeled security events are introduced to generate a pattern knowledge base, which is used to identify patterns for subsequent alerts. With this decider,
 frequently occurring false alerts can be automatically filtered while maintaining good interpretability.

 TABLE II In one time window, alerts may contain multiple unrelated
 E XAMPLE OF THE M AIN F IELDS F ROM THE A LERT OF S NORT 3.1.18. T HE security events. The connections between alerts belonging to
 B OLDED A LERT F IELDS A RE U SED BY D EEP DRAC the same security event are close-knit, whereas the connections
 with alerts from other events are loose, this results in a clear
 community structure on the alert graph. Communities are
 subgraphs composed of a group of nodes and edges, which
 may share common features or be closely related in the graph
 [24]. The nodes and edges in the same community are more
 likely to connect. D EEP DRAC employs an enhanced Louvain
 algorithm based on alert categories and attempts to group alerts
 belonging to the same security event into one community. This
 community is referred to as the security event and its detailed
 definition is as follows.
 Definition 2 (Security Event G s ) Security event G s is a
 specific type of alert cluster that consists of alerts triggered
 by the same root cause, such as a single attack event or a
 business operation. It is represented as a subgraph obtained
 through community detection on the alert graph G and contains
 contextual information of the corresponding event. Formally,
 G s = {Alert1 , Alert2 , . . ., Alertn }, where each Alerti represents
 an individual alert associated with the same attack event or
 business operation.
 There are several issues when traditional community detec-
 B. Event Graph Builder tion algorithms are applied to alert graphs. First, current
 After alerts are unified and premerged, they are input community detection algorithms [25], [26], [27], [28] split the
 into the event graph builder to mine the spatial correlation graph into multiple communities (i.e., node sets) by cutting
 relationships between alerts. some edges, which may split the attacker and the victim of
 Definition 1 (Alert Graph G)The alert graph is a directed some alerts into two communities. Second, few community
 attributed graph G = (V, E, AN , AE , AG , T ) formed by alerts detection algorithms consider node or edge features, resulting
 within a time window T. Node v ∈ V represents a host with a in imprecise alert communities. To solve these issues, we introunique IP address, indicating either a suspicious attacker or a duce alert categories into community detection algorithms,
 potential victim in the network. The edge ei j ∈ E represents the achieve edge-based alert graph clustering and propose the
 merged alerts from the attacking IP address i (src addr) to the enhanced Louvain algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3.
 victim IP address j (dst addr). Since the dst port, category, The details of the enhanced Louvain algorithm are illusand other features may differ, there can be multiple edges trated in Algorithm 1, which includes two steps: initial
 between two nodes, with each edge representing a specific type partitioning based on connectivity and correction based on
 of network activity. AN and AE represent the node and edge alert categories. We first apply the Louvain algorithm to obtain
 feature matrix, respectively, whereas AG denotes the graph- the initial set of communities C of the alert graph (Line 1).
 level features. We mine the frequent combinations of alert categories in C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6447

 Fig. 3. Enhanced Louvain algorithm based on alert categories. Implementation consists of two steps. 1) In Step 1, the Louvain algorithm is employed to
 divide the alert graph, generating two communities C1 and C2 in the example. 2) In Step 2, these communities are further split based on alert categories.
 First, C1 and C2 are decomposed into six subcommunities S C1 − S C6, where each subcommunity has only one central node and the same category (i.e.,
 a, b, c, d, e, f ). Then, subcommunities within the same community that meet the merging rules are combined to form the final security event graph.

 Algorithm 1 Enhanced Louvain Algorithm Based on Alert which is called the central node. Finally, we merge some of
 Categories the subcommunities according to the preset rules to obtain
 Input: Alert graph G the community result: security events G s (Lines 13–23). The
 Output: Security events G s specific principle of the algorithm is as follows.
 1 C ← The set of initial communities from the Louvain 1) Community Initialization Based on Connectivity: To
 algorithm on G divide the original alert graph into different communities,
 2 FP ← Mine frequent combinations of alert categories in we initially employ the Louvain algorithm, which is one of
 C the most widely used community detection algorithms and
 3 for community C ∈ C do is based on modularity maximization [27]. The modularity
 4 if C is the single-center topology of the same alert measures the density of edges inside communities compared
 category then with edges between communities, which can be defined as:
 5 Leave C unchanged
 else
  
 6 1 X ki k j
 Q= δ ci , c j
 
 7 Select node v with the highest degrees Wi j − (1)
 2m i, j 2m
 8 Collect alert categories, src addr, and dst addr
 related to v
 where m represents the sum of all of the edge weights in the
 9 while highest degree of remaining nodes >2 do
 graph, Wi j denotes the weight between node i and node j, ki
 10 Identify alerts with the same attack direction and
 and k j represent the sum of the weights of the edges attached
 the highest number of categories.
 to vi and v j , respectively. ci and c j are the communities to
 11 Split them into subcommunities
 which vi and v j belong, respectively. δ denotes the Kronecker
 12 end while
 delta function, where δ(ci , c j ) is 1 if ci and c j are the same
 13 for frequent combination p ∈ FP with high conficommunity, and 0 otherwise. A larger Q indicates a more
 dence do
 compact community structure after aggregation. The Louvain
 14 Merge subcommunities containing frequent comalgorithm seeks to divide the graph into communities by
 bination p
 maximizing the modularity Q on the basis on a greedy strategy.
 15 end for
 2) Community Correction Based on Alert Categories:
 16 for subcommunity SC with the same central node
 Some communities generated by the Louvain algorithm exhibit
 and a category do
 complex topologies, with numerous alerts intertwined, making
 17 Merge SC into one community
 it difficult to accurately reflect the information of a single
 18 end for
 security event. Therefore, it is necessary to further correct the
 19 for subcommunity SC with only two hosts do
 clustering results.
 20 Merge SC with an adjacent subcommunity
 We find that 82.71% of security events consist of alerts
 21 end for
 of the same category and exhibit a single-center topological
 22 end if
 type when analyzing real-world datasets. Based on the above
 23 end for
 analysis, for single-center communities of the same alert
 24 return: G s
 category identified by the Louvain algorithm, we consider the
 clustering results to be satisfactory and leave them unchanged.
 For other communities with more complex topologies, several
 The results are used in the subsequent algorithm (Line 2). scenarios may guide us in optimizing the complex topological
 After that, we iterate through each community in the set C communities:
 and split the community into subcommunities with the single- • Some sporadic alerts link multiple originally unrelated
 center topology of the same alert category (Lines 3–12). In alert communities together.
 this context, a single-center topology denotes a community • The attacker triggered multiple categories of alerts via
 with exactly one node directly connected to all other nodes, various attack methods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6448 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 • Complex normal network activities trigger various cate- TABLE III
 gories of false positive alerts. F EATURES OF S ECURITY E VENT G s
 To improve the precision of community detection, we
 first apply the FP-tree algorithm [29] to discover frequent
 combinations of alert categories in the Louvain algorithm’s
 clustering results. For example, alerts indicating exploitation
 behaviors of different common exposures and weaknesses
 (CVEs) may appear simultaneously, which are attack attempts
 before a successful invasion. The temporal correlation between
 these behaviors indicates a high-security threat. Hence, these
 alerts should be clustered into the same community. Based
 on the results of frequent combination mining, we refine the
 multicenter topologies in the Louvain algorithm’s clustering
 results as follows:
 1) We first divide each community obtained from the Louvain algorithm into subcommunities with single-center
 topology and the same alert category.
 2) Based on the frequent combinations of alert categories, we merge subcommunities whose categories security event, such as the number of primary targets involved
 often appear together. These highly-confident combina- in the attack. On the other hand, Gembed captures contextual
 tions may indicate a highly threatening network attack semantic and structural information on G s , enhancing the
 or a specific normal network activity. expressiveness and distinguishability of G pat tern.
 3) We merge single-center topology subcommunities of the 1) Basic Pattern: The security event G s is a subgraph
 same alert category with the same central node. Single- composed of alerts, with its main features coming directly
 center topology communities of the same alert category from alert attributes or their statistical summary, as shown in
 with the same central node might represent multiple Table III. The basic pattern is derived from the transformaattack attempts by the same attacker, and the resulting tion of these features and provides fundamental information
 topology after merging is simpler and easier to analyze. about G s . The edge features are directly from the alerts,
 4) We merge subcommunities containing only two hosts and here we discuss only the node-level and graph-level
 with their adjacent subcommunities. As subcommunities features. The features of node vi ∈ V include ip labeli and
 with only two hosts lack contextual information for high degree labeli , where ip labeli indicates the asset type
 alerts and are difficult to analyze effectively, we merge associated with vi , and high degree labeli indicates whether
 them with adjacent subcommunities. vi holds a significant degree in G s .
 By incorporating domain-specific knowledge alongside the A high-degree node is defined as a node whose degree
 topological structure of the alert graph, the enhanced Louvain is relatively large compared with other nodes in the graph.
 algorithm improves the traditional Louvain algorithm in two Specifically, nodes are labeled “high-degree” if their degrees
 main aspects. First, a decoupling mechanism is introduced collectively account for at least 50% of the total degree sum
 based on alert categories to avoid clustering semantically of G s . Nodes with high degree labeli = 1 are referred
 unrelated alerts. Second, a merging mechanism informed by to as central nodes, which play a crucial role in network
 frequent co-occurrence patterns captures behaviorally corre- connectivity and information propagation.
 lated alerts that tend to occur together in practice. With these At the graph level, the features include center num, which
 improvements, we can produce community partitions that represents the number of central nodes, and the distributions
 better align with real-world security event boundaries, thereby of three-node motifs within the graph. To analyze the topoaddressing the tendency of the traditional Louvain algorithm logical characteristics of G s , we examine the distribution of
 to overfit purely structural connections. these motifs. As defined in [30], motifs are small recurring
 subgraphs that occur significantly more often in G s than in
 random graphs. These motifs provide insights into the struc-
 C. Pattern Generator tural properties of G s , such as attack directions or clustering
 Definition 3 (Security Event Pattern G pat tern) The secu- patterns. We use the FANMOD algorithm [31] to mine 13
 rity event pattern (abbreviated as pattern) is a vector with three-node motifs (as shown in Fig. 4) and calculate their
 semantic information, representing the critical information percentage in G s .
 of the security event, which is defined as G pat tern = The basic pattern is derived from the discretization and
 (center num, central ip label, nonCentral ip label, classification of features and is specifically defined as follows:
 topo type, category, Gembed ). (center num, central ip label, nonCentral ip label,
 The security event pattern consists of two parts: the basic topo type, category). center num represents the
 pattern derived from statistical features and the detailed pattern number of central nodes in G s , and central ip label
 represented by GNN embeddings Gembed . The basic pattern is the set of ip label corresponding to these
 provides a rough description of critical information about the central nodes. nonCentral ip label is the set

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6449

 where Θ0 is a learnable parameter implemented through a
 linear layer.
 b) Update Node States Based on GraphGPS: We design
 a GNN convolutional layer based on the GraphGPS framework
 [34] to update node states, which includes a graph Transformer
 layer and a GINE layer [35]. Most traditional GNNs (such as
 Fig. 4. 13 types of three-node motifs. If the proportion of motifs of types GCN [36] and GAT [37]) are designed for node-centric tasks,
 1–5 is greater than τmoti f , the security event is defined as the corresponding and edge features are usually ignored in message propagation
 topology type; otherwise, it is the other type. divergent0 and converged0 are
 weakened (or generalized) forms of divergent and converged, respectively.
 and aggregation [38]. However, in the security event G s ,
 the edges contain important alert attribute information (such
 as destination port, anomaly category, etc.), which plays an
 irreplaceable role. In addition, traditional GNNs suffer from
 the problem of oversmoothing, which limits the model capacity. Therefore, we design a convolutional layer based on the
 GraphGPS framework, which combines a GINE layer sensitive
 to edge features and a graph Transformer layer that alleviates
 the oversmoothing problem. The convolution is calculated as
 follows:
 Fig. 5. Workflow for generating detailed patterns via the GNN. (a) Inputting
 the security event and generating position encodings (PEs) via random walks; aiTl
 = Transformer(ail ) (3)
 (b) Combining the Transformer layer and GINE layer for message propagation 0 1
 to update node states, with this module stacked for L layers; (c) Aggregating X
 node states based on a global attention mechanism and concatenating the l
 aiM = Θ1 @ ail + ReLU(a lj + a ji )A (4)
 projected graph features to generate Gembed . j∈N (i)

 ail+1 = ail + Θ2 (aTi
 l
 + a lMi ) (5)
 of ip label corresponding to noncentral nodes.
 topo type describes the topology type of the security where ail is the state of node vi ∈ V after the l-th layer of the
 event G s . If G s has only two nodes, i.e., |V| = 2, then the GraphGPS convolution operation, L ≥ l ≥ 0. N (i) is the set
 topology type is defined as simple. If |V| ≥ 3, it is determined of one-hop neighbors of vi . Θ1 , Θ2 are both linear layers.
 based on the proportion of three-node motifs. As shown in c) Readout the Security Event Embedding: After L layers
 Fig. 4, if the proportions of motifs 1—5 are greater than the of node updates via GraphGPS convolution, we aggregate
 threshold τmoti f , topo type correspond to “diverging type, the information from all nodes in the graph via a global
 converging type, weak diverging type, weak converging type, attention mechanism and combine it with the graph features
 and bidirectional type”, respectively. Otherwise, topo type is to generate the security event embedding Gembed . Because not
 defined as other types. category is the set of alert categories all security events are perfect, some might include irrelevant
 for all alerts in G s . If the cardinality of this set exceeds three, nodes, and the influence of nodes in a security event is not
 it is defined as multicategory. The basic pattern roughly uniform. Therefore, we employ the attention mechanism to
 describes the topological structure (e.g., number of central assign weights to different nodes to measure their influence
 nodes, attack direction) and the attributes (e.g., types of assets and filter out irrelevant nodes during the readout stage [39].
 X
 associated with the main IPs, attack types) of the security G readout = softmax Θ q (aiL )| Θv aiL
 
 (6)
 event G s , providing fundamental information about G s . vi ∈V
 2) Detailed Pattern Based on GNN Embedding: Motivated where Θ q , aiL , Θv aiL correspond to the query, key, and value
 by the ability of machine learning technologies to identify vectors in the attention mechanism, respectively. Specifically,
 complex and subtle pattern information [23], we employ the Θ q and Θv are learnable parameters. Θ q is used to compute
 GNN model [32] to embed the security event G s , aiming to the attention coefficients, learning which nodes are relevant
 generate a detailed pattern for describing G s . As shown in to the current task and filtering out irrelevant information. Θv
 Fig. 5, the process of embedding G s can be roughly divided projects the final layer node states aiL into a suitable space to
 into three steps as follows. better generate the graph embedding. denotes the Hadamard
 a) Input: The security event G s contains node features product, and the softmax function normalizes the attention
 ai ∈ AN , edge features ai j ∈ AE , and graph features AG , coefficients. Through node updates and global aggregation,
 which serve as the inputs of the GNN model. Additionally, G readout contains the node features, edge features, and graph
 because our GNN module includes a Transformer component, structure information of the security event, but it still lacks the
 to enable it to sense the positional relationships between nodes, graph feature AG . Therefore, we project AG into the feature
 we generate node Position Encodings (PE) pi ∈ P based on space of G readout and then concatenate to generate the final
 random walks [33]. Then, we concatenate the node features security event embedding.
 with the projected PE, incorporating the positional information
 into the node features as: Gembed = G readout ⊕ Θ out AG (7)
 where Θ out is a learnable parameter, implemented through a
 ail = ail ⊕ Θ0 pi (2) linear layer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6450 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 By aggregating information from neighboring nodes and without replacement of each Pc . If their patterns are the
 edges, the detailed patterns generated via GNN embeddings same, the entire cluster is labeled at once, with the labeling
 effectively capture global correlations and latent semantics information including the pattern description and the correamong alerts. This structure-aware capability allows security sponding disposal method. If different risk levels of security
 events with different patterns to form clearer boundaries in the events are discovered during the sampling process, all security
 embedding space, thereby improving the clustering model’s events in the cluster will be handed over to operators for
 ability to differentiate them. To leverage both semantic breadth processing. In practice, the risk level of a pattern cluster is
 and resolution, we represent each security event via both assessed according to the nature of its constituent security
 basic patterns and GNN-based detailed patterns: the basic events: pattern clusters triggered by benign configurations or
 patterns define a coarse-grained semantic space, whereas the routine operations (e.g., internal scanning, whitelisted IPs)
 detailed patterns refine distinctions among similar cases. The are labeled false-positives; clusters caused by nonmalicious
 integration of both yields more accurate and semantically external behaviors such as low-frequency scans are labeled
 coherent clustering of security events. low risk; those involving clearly malicious but early-stage
 attacks such as Nmap scans and SQL injection attempts are
 D. Semiautomatic Decider marked medium risk; and clusters where the attacker has
 Definition 4 (Pattern Cluster Pc ) Pattern cluster Pc is a gained internal access and conducted harmful actions (e.g.,
 collection of security events that share the same pattern. Each such as executing unauthorized code) are labeled high risk.
 security event within the cluster exhibits similar semantic The more samples we select, the more accurate the labeling
 characteristics and originates from a common root cause, such results will be. A detailed discussion on the number of samples
 as repeated instances of the attack category. Formally, a pattern is presented in Section IV-B1b. Based on the capabilities of our
 cluster is defined as Pc = {G s1 , G s2 , . . ., G sn }, where each G si approach, almost all security events can be handled through a
 denotes a security event that shares the same pattern. small number of sampling analyses, significantly reducing the
 In the previous discussion, we obtained the pattern G pat tern workload of operators. Manually labeled results are stored in
 for each security event G s . In fact, many security events the pattern knowledge base, providing the foundation for the
 triggered by the same cause do not occur just once but often subsequent automated analysis stage.
 appear repeatedly in a fixed pattern. We expect to aggregate 2) Stage 2—Automated Analysis: In this stage, the pattern
 security events with a consistent pattern together for batch knowledge base generated during the manual analysis stage is
 processing. We relax the definition of security events with the used to automatically recommend risk levels and disposition
 same pattern to “same basic pattern, similar detailed pattern” information for security events. Specifically, when a new
 because even security events triggered by the same cause can security event enters the decider, it undergoes incremental
 exhibit subtle differences in their patterns, such as 10 port clustering to match known pattern clusters. If a match is found,
 scans versus 11 port scans. Nevertheless, security events with its risk level and disposition information are obtained, and an
 the same pattern share at least the same disposition method and automatic response action is performed (such as filtering false
 risk level. In the implementation, we first use the basic pattern positives, reporting high-risk hosts, etc.). If no matched pattern
 to divide the security event space and filter out subspaces clusters are found, the security event is temporarily stored,
 containing fewer than Nbaisc security events to ensure consis- awaiting the arrival of other security events to potentially form
 tency and frequency in the basic pattern. Second, within each a new pattern cluster. Operators can set the allowed waiting
 subspace defined by the basic pattern, we apply DBSCAN to time for generating a new pattern cluster. After this time, if
 cluster the GNN embeddings of security events, generating no match is found with an existing pattern cluster and no new
 pattern clusters Pc . Pc is a set composed of security events, pattern cluster is formed, the security event will be considered
 all of which share the same pattern. After that, we label pattern an emergency and prioritized for pushing to the operators.
 clusters to create a pattern knowledge base (manual analysis).
 Finally, new incoming alerts are organized into security events E. Training of the GNN
 and matched with the corresponding recommended disposition To alleviate the dependency on many labeled samples,
 methods based on the identified patterns (automated analysis). we adopt a pretraining and fine-tuning (P&F) strategy for
 1) Stage 1—Manual Analysis: In this stage, to build the training the GNN [40]. In the pretraining stage, we employ
 initial pattern knowledge base, we incorporate a small amount a contrastive learning paradigm for self-supervised training of
 of expert knowledge to label the risk levels and disposal the GNN model. The primary goal of contrastive learning is to
 information of pattern clusters. To ensure the accuracy of maximize the agreement of two jointly sampled positive pairs
 pattern knowledge, we sample multiple security events from (G si , G s j ) and minimize the agreement of two independently
 each Pc for labeling. sampled negative pairs (G si , G sk ) [41]. In the fine-tuning stage,
 In the ideal case, all security events in a pattern cluster the pretrained parameters are used as the initial parameters of
 Pc represent the same pattern, and analyzing a single secu- the GNN, which is then fine-tuned with a supervised task.
 rity event from Pc is sufficient to label the entire cluster. 1) Pretraining of the GNN: We generate two types of
 However, there is always the possibility of errors in all positive and negative sample pairs, which are based on the
 the models. D EEP DRAC employs a sampling approach to basic pattern and the graph kernel method, respectively. We
 reduce the possibility of model errors. D EEP DRAC expects generate many security events via historical data and divide
 operators to analyze N s security events, which are sampled them into two sets: DBbase and DBsearch . For each sample

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6451

 G si ∈ DBbase , we generate two types of positive and negative where Nb , Nc are the number of security events and number
 sample pairs. The first type is based on whether the samples of classes in a batch, respectively. ci is the cost coefficient
 G si share the same basic pattern. A positive sample G s j1 with of class i, which is the inverse of the proportion of class i
 the same basic pattern and a negative sample G sk1 with a samples in the total samples. si is the set of samples predicted
 different basic pattern are sampled from DBsearch . For the by the model as class i, and ŷi j is the predicted probability of
 second type, we employ a graph kernel method to generate sample j being in class i.
 positive and negative samples inside a single basic pattern
 space, enhancing the GNN model’s capacity to capture subtle IV. E VALUATION
 differences. Specifically, we use the Neighborhood Subgraph In this section, we first present our experimental settings in
 Pairwise Distance Kernel (NSPDK) method [42] to compute Section IV-A. We evaluate D EEP DRAC and compare it with
 the graph kernel distance for the sample pair (G si , G s0i ), where three baseline methods by answering three research questions.
 G s0i ∈ DBbase and shares the same basic pattern as G si . The RQ1: Can our approach effectively and interpretably reduce
 NSPDK computes the graph kernel distance by comparing the the workload of alert analysis?(Section IV-B)
 subgraph node and edge encodings in the sample pair and RQ2: Can our approach remain effective with a few
 is an efficient graph kernel method. We calculate the graph labeled samples, without relying on many labeled samkernel distance for each basic pattern in DBbase and generate ples?(Section IV-C)
 the probability density distribution. The lowest point of the RQ3: Can our approach accurately reconstruct security
 probability density distribution in the middle part (0.4—0.6) events from raw alerts?(Section IV-D)
 implies a transition from similar to dissimilar sample pairs
 and is more suitable as a threshold than 0.5. Therefore, we A. Experimental Settings
 adopt this strategy to generate the threshold ρ for each basic 1) Study Setup: Our experiments are conducted on a server
 pattern. Then, we randomly select samples from DBsearch running the Ubuntu 18.04.6 operating system and equipped
 with the same basic pattern as G si and compute the graph with an Intel Xeon 3.00 GHz CPU, NVIDIA GeForce RTX
 kernel distance. Pairs with a graph kernel distance below ρ 3090 GPU with CUDA 11.1, and 1024 GB of memory. The
 are considered positive sample pairs, whereas those above ρ hyperparameter settings are determined as follows. As most
 are considered negative sample pairs. security event graph diameters are less than 2, we adopt
 After positive and negative sample pairs are obtained two GraphGPS layers (i.e., L = 2). Each GraphGPS layer
 through the two aforementioned methods, we train the GNN takes as input the projected node features (30 dimensions),
 via triplet loss [43]: positional encodings (walk length = 2), and projected edge
 1X features (30 dimensions), and outputs updated node states
 Ltriplet = max 0, d G si , G s j − d G si , G sk + γ
 ˚  
 (8) (30 dimensions). After L layers of GraphGPS convolution,
 m
 all node states are aggregated to obtain a 30-dimensional
 where G si ∈ DBbase is the anchor graph, G s j ∈ DBsearch is the graph-level representation G readout , which is concatenated with
 positive sample, G sk ∈ DBsearch is the negative sample, m is a 2-dimensional projected graph feature to form the final
 the number of triplets in the dataset, and γ > 0 is the margin 32-dimensional GNN embedding Gembed . We trained the model
 parameter. d(·, ·) is a similarity measure that uses the Euclidean for 100 epochs via the Adam optimizer, with a learning rate
 distance as follows: of 0.001 for pretraining and 0.00001 for fine-tuning.
 d(G si , G s j ) = ||Gembed i − Gembed j ||2 (9) 2) Evaluation Datasets: We evaluate the performance of
 D EEP DRAC in alleviating alert fatigue via three datasets:
 where Gembed i and Gembed j are the GNN embeddings of G si a real-world dataset from a power grid company and two
 and G s j , respectively. publicly available and widely used benchmark datasets (i.e.,
 2) Fine-Tuning of the GNN: Although pretraining allows the DARPA’99 dataset [44] and CIC-IDS2017 dataset [45]).
 learning the features and structural information of the security a) EIPGC Dataset: This dataset consists of 182,640
 event G, it may miss some information relevant to downstream alerts from the Enterprise Intranet of a Power Grid Company.
 tasks. Thus, we fine-tune the GNN parameters via a limited There are approximately 3,000 physical hosts and 1,500 virtual
 set of labeled security events by conducting a classification hosts in the enterprise network, with an average traffic rate
 task, which identifies the risk levels of security events (i.e., of 1.2 GB/s and a maximum of 1.9 GB/s. Traffic monitoring
 false-positives, low-risk, medium-risk, and high-risk events). probes are deployed at more than 20 critical branch nodes,
 Specifically, the pretrained GNN parameters are used as the generating over 50,000 alerts per day, with an initial falseinitialization parameters of the GNN and are jointly trained positive rate exceeding 90%. These alerts are aggregated and
 with the prediction head consisting of a linear layer and a forwarded to the enterprise’s SOC for further disposal. To
 softmax function. Because false-positive and low-risk events ensure data quality, we manually labeled most alerts in this
 are much more common than other risk levels in security dataset based on their attributes, and these labels were further
 events are, we use a cost-sensitive cross-entropy loss function verified by SOC operators, resulting in a total of 170,710
 to address the class imbalance issue. (93.47%) labeled alerts. The remaining 11,930 (6.53%) alerts
 Nc are unlabeled due to insufficient alert information.
 1 XX The labeled data include various security events with differ-
 LCE = − ci · log(ŷi j ) (10)
 Nb j∈s ent risk levels. Among them, 38,817 (22.74%) false-positive
 i=1 i

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6452 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 alerts are triggered by normal business, such as internal vul- For example, if the equivalent alert Y is triggered 10 times
 nerability scanners and video conferences; 112,972 (65.18%) during the throttling interval, the operator will only receive a
 low-risk alerts are triggered by suspicious behaviors, such as single alert after the first occurrence. Equivalent alert Y refers
 port scans and DNS server version queries; 13,336 (7.30%) to the alert where all key fields are the same. All subsequent
 medium-risk alerts are triggered by behaviors, such as file instances of Equivalent alert Y within that period are merely
 detection and vulnerability exploitation, and 5,585 (3.06%) appended as supplementary details to the initial alert.
 high-risk alerts like WebLogic command execution vulnerabil- b) DeepCASE: Unlike traditional methods, such as alert
 ity and the exploitation of common exposures and weaknesses throttling, DeepCASE is a state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for
 (CVEs). alert reduction based on deep learning [12]. DeepCASE is
 b) DARPA’99 Dataset: This dataset is a mixture of a semi-supervised learning method based on alert sequences,
 normal and real attack traffic in the network testbed of the which mainly includes four modules. First, the SEQUENCING
 Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), covering 58 typical EVENTS MODULE collects and analyzes security events to
 attack methods that can be classified into five major categories, identify relevant contextual events. The CONTEXT BUILDER
 including scanning and probing (probe), denial of service module uses a deep learning model with an attention mech-
 (DOS), remote to local (R2L), user to local (U2L), and data anism to identify relevant contextual events and build an
 exfiltration (Data). As one of the most comprehensive attack attention vector. Next, the INTERPRETER module groups
 testing datasets, it has been widely used in the research the sequences into clusters based on total attention for each
 community as a benchmark dataset. In this work, we utilize distinct contextual event in a sequence. Finally, DeepCASE
 the traffic data from the last two weeks of the DARPA’99 is also divided into manual analysis and automated matching
 dataset and generate alerts via Snort 3.1.18. The alerts are stages. The manual analysis module presents each cluster
 then labeled via the ground truth provided in the dataset, of similar event sequences to an operator who decides how
 resulting in a total of 585,925 fully labeled alerts. Although it should be treated. The semiautomatic analysis module
 the DARPA’99 dataset does not provide risk levels for each compares the attention-weighted events of a new sequence to
 attack event, for subsequent risk level experiments, we classify known clusters and automatically warns the operator in case
 all alerts triggered by attacks as high-risk and those triggered of a match.
 by normal traffic as false-positives. c) Ablation Study: We conduct extensive ablation experc) CIC-IDS2017 Dataset: The CIC-IDS2017 dataset, iments to validate the effectiveness of the enhanced Louvain
 released by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), algorithm, GNN module, and the training strategy. Durwas generated by simulating realistic background traffic and ing the security event reconstruction phase, we compare
 recent network attacks such as Brute Force FTP and DoS. the enhanced Louvain algorithm with the standard Louvain
 It contains five days of traffic in pcap format, with ground algorithm in terms of reconstruction accuracy and time contruth labels provided based on flow 5-tuples and timestamps. sumption. During GNN training, we construct two versions
 We convert the 59 GB of traffic into 685,560 alerts via using only pretraining (i.e., unsupervised) or fine-tuning (i.e.,
 Snort 3.1.18. Except for Heartbleed, Snort successfully detects non-pretrained) to validate the indispensability of both stages.
 the remaining 13 categories of attacks. Among them, the Additionally, we build a version where the GNN module is
 most prevalent alert types are DoS Hulk and false positives, completely removed to validate the importance of embedding
 accounting for 50.95% and 28.98% of all alerts, respectively. in providing detailed patterns (i.e., non-GNN). Because the
 For consistency, we assign risk levels to alerts following the non-GNN version only contains basic patterns, the semiautolabeling strategy used in the DARPA’99 dataset. matic decider differs between the two stages. In the manual
 The three datasets are divided into two parts: a training set analysis stage, the basic pattern is used directly as the pattern,
 for training GNNs and a test set for evaluating the effectiveness and the highest risk level found during the sampling process
 of automatic alert filtering. For the EIPGC dataset, we use the is still taken as the risk level of the pattern cluster. In the
 first two days with a total of 86,398 alerts as the training set automated analysis stage, the security event is matched to the
 and the last day with 41,403 alerts as the test set. For the pattern cluster with the same basic pattern for processing.
 DARPA’99 dataset, we use a total of 165,795 alerts in the
 fourth week as the training set and a total of 86,007 alerts B. RQ1: Can Our Approach Effectively and Interpretably
 on the first two days of the fifth week as the test set. For the Reduce the Workload of Alert Analysis?
 CIC-IDS2017 dataset, since each category of attack occurs To answer RQ1, we evaluate the workload reduction effects
 only during a specific time period and does not reappear later, of our approach in both the manual analysis stage and the
 we sort all alerts chronologically and use the first 70% of each automated analysis stage. The metrics for evaluating reduction
 attack category as the training set and the remaining 30% as effectiveness in the manual analysis stage include the percentthe test set. age of alerts covered by the model’s capability (coverage), the
 3) Baseline Defense Methods: We use two typical alert workload reduction rate for the covered portion (reduction),
 reduction methods and the incomplete D EEP DRAC (i.e., non- and the overall workload reduction rate, including uncovered
 GNN, Non-Pretrained, Unsupervised) as baselines. alerts (overall). Furthermore, we evaluate performance in the
 a) Alert Throttling: In the context of alert throttling, automated analysis stage in terms of accuracy, recall, prewhen an event is repeatedly triggered within a specific time cision, the F1-score, and the percentage of alerts where the
 frame, only one consolidated alert is presented to the operator. model underestimates the risk level (underestimation). The

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6453

 TABLE IV
 W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION R ESULTS . T HE AVERAGE W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION OF D EEP DRAC C OMPARED WITH BASELINE M ETHODS . OVERALL
 R EPRESENTS THE OVERALL W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION R ATE D URING THE M ANUAL A NALYSIS S TAGE . U NDERESTIMATION (U NDER .) I NDICATES
 THE P ROPORTION OF A LERTS W HOSE R ISK L EVELS A RE I NCORRECTLY U NDERESTIMATED D URING THE AUTOMATED F ILTERING S TAGE .
 T HE F ORMULAS FOR OVERALL AND U NDER . A RE D EFINED B OTTOM THIS TABLE . H IGHLIGHTED A RE THE T OP F IRST (RED),
 S ECOND (YELLOW), AND T HIRD (GREEN) R ESULTS

 experimental results on the DARPA’99 and EIPGC datasets are IDS2017, EIPGC, and DARPA’99 datasets, respectively. A
 presented in Table IV. The following subsections detail how detailed evaluation of the pattern clustering quality under this
 these results are obtained and provide corresponding analyses. setting is provided in Supplementary Material Appendix A.
 1) Manual Analysis Stage: In this subsection, we evaluate b) Number of Samples: For a single risk level pattern
 D EEP DRAC starting without any prior knowledge of the cluster, operators can dispose of the entire cluster by sampling
 pattern clusters. In the manual analysis stage (Section III-D), any security event. However, there are also pattern clusters
 D EEP DRAC reduces the workload by allowing operators to containing different risk levels, which we refer to as bad
 analyze a small number of security events within pattern pattern clusters. For bad pattern clusters, a single sample
 clusters rather than examining all alerts. analysis is not sufficient to address the whole cluster, but
 a) Coverage: For D EEP DRAC, the coverage is the per- requires further investigation by the operator. Operators need
 centage of alerts contained in the pattern cluster and the two to analyze a certain number of samples to identify bad pattern
 outlier types not covered by the model: (i) Those where the clusters, ensuring the reliability of the alert disposition results.
 basic pattern contains fewer than Nbasic security events lack The probability of successfully identifying whether a pattern
 generality and are more likely to have been formed by chance. cluster is a bad pattern cluster is as follows:
 (ii) Noise points generated during the initial clustering process.
 X N|r|
 
 Setting Nbasic = 5 to identify outliers, D EEP DRAC achieves P(bad|N s ) = 1 − s
 (11)
 Ne
 
 coverage rates of 89.17%, 89.37%, and 95.86% on the CIC- r∈Pc Ns

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6454 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 captures both temporal and spatial correlations among alerts,
 enabling more efficient compression. This advantage results
 in fewer security events that require manual analysis, as
 evidenced by the “Events” column in Table IV. In particular,
 for the EIPGC dataset, which contains alerts generated in a
 complex network topology, D EEP DRAC demonstrates a clear
 advantage over DeepCASE by leveraging spatial information.
 This leads to a significant performance improvement, achieving a 19.08% higher overall workload reduction compared
 with the second-best method, DeepCASE.
 Fig. 6. Probability of identifying bad pattern clusters (pattern clusters
 containing security events with different risk levels), which varies with the
 2) Automated Analysis Stage: In the automated analysis
 number of samples taken by the operators for each cluster. stage (Section III-D), the newly arrived alerts are processed
 by D EEP DRAC to generate security events and patterns.
 Then, D EEP DRAC recommends disposition methods and
 where Ne is the number of security events contained in a pat- event descriptions for the new alerts by matching with the
 tern cluster Pc , r ⊂ Pc represents a set of security events within pattern knowledge base, enabling automatic disposition. It is
 a single risk level and |r| ≥ N s ; otherwise, P(bad|N s ) = 1. important to note that misclassifications in the recommenda-
 According to (11), the change in the probability of identifying tion results include both overestimations and underestimations.
 bad pattern clusters as the number of samples increases on Although overestimating risk will reduce workload reduction,
 the EIPGC dataset is shown in Fig. 6. D EEP DRAC can it is generally preferable to underestimating, as missing true
 successfully identify bad pattern clusters with a probability threats can lead to more serious consequences in real-world
 of 96.20% by sampling eight security events for each pattern security scenarios. Table IV lists the matching results of
 cluster on the EIPGC dataset. If the number of sampling events D EEP DRAC and the two baseline methods, from which we
 is 18, the probability of successfully identifying bad pattern draw the following conclusions:
 clusters reaches 98%. Additionally, in the experiments, the
 highest risk level is used as the risk level of bad pattern (i) D EEP DRAC provides the most accurate recommendaclusters, which is consistent with the way alerts are processed tions for alert disposition. Across all three datasets,
 in reality. D EEP DRAC nearly always achieves the best perforc) Workload Reduction: We conduct a real-world sim- mance in terms of accuracy, recall, precision, and F1
 ulation of D EEP DRAC. To ensure a fair comparison with score. The only exceptions are recall on the EIPGC and
 other methods, we set the sampling number of all methods CIC-IDS2017 datasets (0.47% and 0.01% below the top
 to the minimum value at which the probability of identifying performer, respectively) and precision on EIPGC (0.69%
 the bad pattern cluster exceeds 96%. For the covered alerts lower than the top performer).
 of D EEP DRAC, the reduction is the percentage reduction in (ii) D EEP DRAC captures more attacks within the alerts
 workload when alerts are disposed of based on pattern clusters: while maintaining an extremely low underestimation
 N s × Nclusters rate. Although D EEP DRAC does not achieve the lowest
 reduction = 1 − (12) underestimation rate, it consistently maintains a low rate
 Ncover
 of no more than 0.04% across all datasets. Meanwhile,
 where N s , Nclusters and Ncover are number of security events
 except for slightly fewer matched attack counts than
 sampled from each pattern cluster Pc , the number of Pc
 Alert throttling (which has limited accuracy) on CICand the number of covered alerts, respectively. D EEP DRAC
 IDS2017, D EEP DRAC captures the most attacks among
 achieves a reduction of 98.85%, 97.77%, and 99.75% in analthe three methods when matching the same number of
 ysis workload on the DARPA’99, EIPGC, and CIC-IDS2017
 alerts on the other two datasets. The ability to maintain
 datasets, respectively. For all alerts, the overall work reduction
 an underestimation rate below 0.04% and an accuracy
 is measured as follows:
 rate exceeding 97% while capturing more attack alerts
 N s × Nclusters + Nuncover
 Overall = 1 − (13) indicates that the recommendations of D EEP DRAC are
 Nall more precise and robust. In contrast, although Deepwhere Nall is the total number of alerts, and Nuncover refers to CASE attains a slightly lower underestimation rate, it
 the number of security events that are not covered. captures significantly fewer attacks and exhibits much
 As shown in Table IV, D EEP DRAC consistently achieves lower accuracy (80.77% on EIPGC and 61.94% on CICthe highest overall reduction in alert analysis workload across IDS2017), indicating that it tends to overestimate the
 all three datasets, with reductions exceeding 95%. The effec- severity of alerts excessively.
 tiveness of D EEP DRAC in reducing alert analysis workload (iii) The GNN module, pretraining strategy and fine-tuning
 primarily stems from its two-stage alert compression process: strategy of D EEP DRAC are all effective and indispensfirst aggregating raw alerts into security events, and then able. D EEP DRAC(non-GNN) shows severe degradation,
 grouping these events into pattern clusters. Compared to alert with a recommendation accuracy of only 14.99% on
 throttling based on alert similarity and DeepCASE based the DARPA’99, far below the 97.96% achieved by
 on event sequences, the graph-based design of D EEP DRAC D EEP DRAC. Similarly, D EEP DRAC(non-pretrained)

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6455

 Fig. 7. Performance of D EEP DRAC (both pretrained and non-pretrained versions) when fine-tuned with labeled samples of different sizes on the DARPA’99
 and EIPGC datasets. 1) D EEP DRAC has the ability for unsupervised learning. When the train data size is 0, the pretrained model achieves over 90% accuracy
 and recall on both datasets. 2) D EEP DRAC can learn from a few labeled samples. When the train data size is 1%, 5% and 10%, the pretrained model shows
 improvements in both accuracy and recall (in contrast, the non-pretrained model does not show such improvements on the EIPGC and CIC-IDS2017 datasets).
 3) D EEP DRAC can quickly approach the model’s performance limit. When the training data size reaches 20%, the pretrained model reaches its performance
 limit on the EIPGC dataset, and on the other two datasets, both its accuracy and recall are within 3% of the best results.

 and D EEP DRAC-unsupervised (non-finetuned) also fail non-pretrained model fails to learn meaningful information on
 to reach the performance of D EEP DRAC. the two more complex datasets, showing improvement only
 Answer to RQ1: D EEP DRAC can effectively reduce the on the relatively simpler DARPA’99 dataset. In contrast, the
 workload of alert analysis and significantly outperforms the pretrained model can effectively leverage a small number of
 two baseline defense methods. In addition to recommending labeled data, achieving significantly improved accuracy and
 disposal methods, D EEP DRAC also provides descriptions recall across all three datasets with only 5% or 10% of
 of security events, maintaining interpretability. The practical the labeled data. Third, the experimental results show that
 implications of D EEP DRAC for SOC operators are illustrated D EEP DRAC can quickly reach the model’s performance limit.
 in Appendix B of the Supplementary material. When the train data size is 20%, the pretrained model reaches
 its performance limit on the EIPGC dataset, and on the other
 two datasets, both its accuracy and recall are within 2% and
 C. RQ2: Can Our Approach Remain Effective With a Few 3% of the best results, respectively.
 Labeled Samples Without Relying on a Large Number of Answer to RQ2: Benefiting from the pretraining strategy,
 Labeled Samples? D EEP DRAC remains effective with a few labeled samples
 To answer RQ2, we evaluate the effectiveness of D EEP - and can quickly reach its performance limit as the number
 DRAC using different sizes of labeled samples, with a of samples increases without relying on a large amount of
 particular focus on its performance when only a few labeled labeled data.
 samples are available. It should be noted that due to the attack
 alerts in CIC-IDS2017 being concentrated in several DoS
 security events, and both pretrained and non-pretrained models D. RQ3: Can Our Approach Accurately Reconstruct Security
 being able to effectively identify these events, the performance Events From Raw Alerts?
 difference between the two models at the alert level is minimal. To answer RQ3, we evaluate the quality of the security
 Therefore, we further evaluate them at the event level for the events generated based on the partitioning of the alert graph.
 CIC-IDS2017 dataset, while retaining alert level evaluation for We conduct comparisons across three datasets via several comthe other two datasets. munity detection algorithms, including Girvan-Newman (GN),
 As shown in Fig. 7, we fine-tune D EEP DRAC using labeled Label Propagation Algorithm (LPA), Louvain, and Leiden.
 samples ranging from 0% to 100% and evaluate the perfor- Since the enhanced Louvain algorithm applies a secondary
 mance of the pretrained model and the non-pretrained model refinement over the Louvain results, we additionally include
 in the automated analysis stage. First, the experimental results a nested application of the Louvain algorithm (denoted as Dshow that D EEP DRAC has the ability for unsupervised learn- Louvain) as a comparative baseline.
 ing. When the training data size is 0, meaning that no labeled A necessary condition for alerts contained in a security
 samples are involved in the training, the pretrained model event being part of the same security event is that these alerts
 achieves accuracy and recall rates above 90% on both datasets share the same risk level. The distribution of risk levels for
 and even approaching the performance of the non-pretrained the security event in three datasets is shown in Table V.
 model with 100% train data size. Since the non-pretrained Across all three datasets, D EEP DRAC achieves high-quality
 model starts with randomly initialized parameters and lacks reconstruction of security events from raw alerts: over 98% of
 the ability to perform meaningful matching at 0%, we begin the constructed events consist of alerts sharing the same risk
 its evaluation from the 1% setting. Second, the experimental level, and these events collectively contain more than 95% of
 results show that D EEP DRAC can learn from a few labeled all alerts. When we relax the constraint to allow grouping
 samples, whereas the non-pretrained model struggles to do so. alerts with adjacent risk levels (e.g., low and medium, or
 When the training data size is less than or equal to 10%, the medium and high), this percentage increases to over 96%.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6456 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V further clusters events into three clusters (pattern clusters)
 Q UALITY E VALUATION OF S ECURITY E VENT R ECONSTRUCTION F ROM using GNN embeddings, which capture detailed information
 R AW A LERTS such as the distribution (distri.) of attacks and the number of
 compromised nodes, making cluster boundaries more distinct.
 By sampling eight security events from each cluster, SOC
 operators determined that pattern clusters #1 and #2 are
 triggered by internal personnel accessing websites potentially
 containing XSS vulnerabilities via the NAT server, which are
 non-malicious and thus classified as low-risk (monitor but
 no action required). In contrast, pattern cluster #3 involves
 attackers using distributed IP addresses for frequent XML
 injection attempts, indicating clear malicious intent, prompting
 IP blocking. The triggering causes and disposal strategies are
 stored in D EEP DRAC’s pattern knowledge base. Finally, when
 new security events match pattern clusters #1 and #3, D EEP -
 DRAC immediately recommends corresponding risk levels
 and disposal strategies for operators’ reference. If operators
 trust D EEP DRAC’s strategies for these clusters, D EEP DRAC
 can automatically deploy the response actions.

 V. D EFENSE AND D ISCUSSION
 A. Time Efficiency Analysis
 To evaluate the practical feasibility of D EEP DRAC in
 real-world scenarios, this section presents an analysis of its
 runtime performance and scalability when dealing with alerts
 of different scales. We use the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, which
 Overall, D EEP DRAC consistently delivers the best perfor- contains a diverse range of attack categories, as the source
 mance among all the evaluated methods, with particularly large of alert data. To assess time consumption, we evaluate both
 margins over the second-best approaches on the EIPGC and the model inference and training stages across varying alert
 CIC-IDS2017 datasets. In fact, on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, scales, with Nalert = 1 ∼ 500K. The results show that during
 the time intervals between different categories of attacks are the model training stage, even when trained with 500K alerts,
 relatively long, and there are only two risk levels: false positive the GNN can complete training on a single NVIDIA GeForce
 and high risk (corresponding to attacks). Therefore, security RTX 3090 GPU in 27.8 minutes (compared to 35 minutes for
 events composed of alerts of a single risk level are equivalent DeepCASE). This is because that the GNN model is designed
 to those composed of alerts with the same triggering cause, as a lightweight model with only 71,719 parameters. During
 and D EEP DRAC achieves 96.58% accurate reconstruction on the model inference stage, D EEP DRAC achieves efficient prothem. The primary reconstruction challenges for the CIC- cessing of large-scale alerts while maintaining near-linear time
 IDS2017 dataset arise from botnet events. Among all 59 complexity. Additionally, compared to the standard Louvain
 security events involving two risk levels, 41 events (accounting algorithm, it exhibits better scalability under high alert volfor 69.49%) are composed of botnet alerts and false positive umes. Relevant experimental results and theoretical analyses
 alerts. The potential impact of these mixed events is further are provided in Appendix C of the Supplementary material.
 discussed in Section V-B.
 Answer to RQ3: D EEP DRAC can accurately reconstruct B. Detection Performance Across Attack Categories
 security events from raw alerts, achieving over 95% recovery
 accuracy for single-risk security events on all datasets. This section discusses the attack-specific detection performance of D EEP DRAC to provide deeper insights into its
 strengths and limitations. We evaluate D EEP DRAC across all
 E. From Pattern to Disposition: A DeepDRAC Case Study attack scenarios in the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, focusing on the
 We present a representative case from the EIPGC dataset to recall and false-positive rate (FPR) for each attack category.
 illustrate how D EEP DRAC provides interpretable descriptions The FPR refers to the proportion of samples that do not belong
 for security events and enables automated alert disposition to a given attack category but are incorrectly predicted as that
 through pattern-based analysis. category.
 First, D EEP DRAC categorizes security events reconstructed Table VI in the Supplementary material presents the perfrom raw alerts into basic patterns, each of which provides an formance of D EEP DRAC across different attack scenarios.
 overview of the event. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the basic pattern Since Snort3 detected only a very limited number of SQL
 in this case indicates that multiple unknown IP addresses injection alerts (19 out of 685,560), no recommendation could
 attempted XSS and injection attacks targeting an internal be matched for this category. For the remaining 12 attack cat-
 NAT server. Second, within this basic pattern, D EEP DRAC egories, recommendations were successfully generated during

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS 6457

 Fig. 8. A case study in D EEP DRAC: Pattern-based analysis and automated disposition in D EEP DRAC. An example from the EIPGC dataset illustrates
 how D EEP DRAC provides summary descriptions for security events through basic patterns, clusters them into three fine-grained pattern clusters using GNN
 embeddings, and recommends appropriate risk levels and disposal strategies.

 testing. The recommendation results show that D EEP DRAC attack category and a 50% chance of being mislabeled as
 performs excellently in five attack categories: PortScan, SSH- BENIGN. We then retrain the best performing D EEP DRAC
 Patator, Web-Brute Force, DoS Slowloris, and FTP-Patator, model from Section IV-B using the corrupted training set and
 achieving a 99% recall rate while maintaining an FPR below evaluate its performance in terms of overall alert reduction,
 0.1%. For the remaining seven attack categories with relatively recommendation accuracy, and recommendation recall. Fig.
 lower performance, we analyze the sources of false positives 11 in the Supplementary material presents the performance of
 and the types of missed predictions, as detailed in Table D EEP DRAC under varying proportions of mislabeled data:
 VII in the Supplementary material. The analysis leads to the (i) Recommendation Accuracy: When the mislabeled data
 following conclusions: size is ≤ 10%, fine-tuning still has a positive effect,
 (i) D EEP DRAC confuses four categories of DoS attacks resulting in higher accuracy than the model without fine-
 (DDoS, DoS Hulk, DoS Slowhttptest, and DoS Gold- tuning. When the mislabeled data size exceeds 10%,
 enEye) but can distinguish DoS from other attack fine-tuning begins to negatively impact accuracy. Howscenarios. Four DoS attack categories serve as the pri- ever, even with 100% mislabeled data, the pretrained
 mary sources of false positives, and the categories of knowledge remains effective: GNN embeddings still
 missed predictions are the same. Owing to attack char- contribute positively, and the accuracy remains higher
 acteristics similar to DoS (a large number of requests than that of the non-GNN model.
 in a short time), a small number of PortScan events are (ii) Recommendation Recall: The recall is barely affected by
 also confused with DoS attacks. the mislabeled data size and remains consistently above
 (ii) Limited by the extremely scarce training data for the 99%.
 Web-XSS and infiltration attack categories, D EEP DRAC (iii) Although the ability of D EEP DRAC to reduce the alert
 has very limited detection capabilities for them. analysis workload decreases as the amount of mislabeled
 (iii) D EEP DRAC performs the worst on botnet (Bot) attacks, data increases, D EEP DRAC still reduces the analysis
 failing to distinguish them from BENIGN alerts. Further workload by 97% even when the mislabeled data size is
 analysis reveals that D EEP DRAC reconstructs 56 secu- 100%. This capability comes mainly from reconstructing
 rity events containing Bot alerts, among which 41 are raw alerts into security events, which greatly compresses
 mixed with BENIGN alerts. This causes these security the analysis scale. In particular, the event reconstruction
 events to exhibit characteristics of both BENIGN and stage is entirely based on unlabeled data and is decoubotnet alerts, making it difficult for D EEP DRAC to pled from GNN training.
 differentiate between them. Overall, even in the presence of mislabeled data, D EEP -
 DRAC still performs effectively. This robustness benefits
 from the combined effect of multiple D EEP DRAC modules,
 C. Robustness and Stability of the Model including unsupervised security event reconstruction, the GNN
 In the historical alerts of the SOC, there may be mislabeled pretraining strategy, and hierarchical clustering of security
 data. This section analyzes the impact of mislabeled data on events (which first requires matching basic patterns before
 D EEP DRAC. We simulate the process of operators labeling clustering based on GNN embeddings).
 security events via D EEP DRAC by introducing controlled
 label noise into the CIC-IDS2017 training set. Specifically, VI. C ONCLUSION
 we randomly select between 1% and 100% of the data for In this work, we develop a novel alert validation method,
 corruption, employing the following strategy: 1) If a BENIGN D EEP DRAC, which quickly disposes of alerts through event
 security event is selected, it is randomly relabeled as an reconstruction and pattern recommendation. We confirm the
 arbitrary attack category; 2) if an attack security event is efficiency of alert disposal via event reconstruction and patselected, it has a 50% chance of being mislabeled as another tern recommendation while preserving interpretability well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 6458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Extensive experimental results demonstrate that D EEP DRAC [19] A. AlEroud and G. Karabatis, “Beyond data: Contextual information
 can reduce the workload of alert analysis more effectively fusion for cyber security analytics,” in Proc. 31st Annu. ACM Symp.
 Appl. Comput., Apr. 2016, pp. 73–79.
 than the two baseline methods can. In addition, the fact that [20] Q. Cheng, C. Wu, and S. Zhou, “Discovering attack scenarios via
 D EEP DRAC does not rely on expert knowledge or extensive intrusion alert correlation using graph convolutional networks,” IEEE
 labeled training data highlights its potential as a useful tool Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1564–1567, May 2021.
 [21] Y. Liu et al., “A context-aware clustering approach for assisting operators
 for real-world security operations centers. In the future, we in classifying security alerts,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 51, no. 1,
 plan to enhance the recognition of rare categories by lever- pp. 153–171, Jan. 2025.
 aging synthetic sample generation techniques and refining the [22] M. E. Aminanto, L. Zhu, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue,
 “Combating threat-alert fatigue with online anomaly detection using
 enhanced Louvain algorithm to better handle complex attack isolation forest,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process., Sydney,
 scenarios such as Botnets. NSW, Australia. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2019, pp. 756–765.
 [23] J. Mink et al., “Everybody’s got ML, tell me what else you have:
 Practitioners’ perception of ML-based security tools and explanations,”
 R EFERENCES in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 2068–2085.
 [24] S. Fortunato, “Community detection in graphs,” Phys. Rep., vol. 486,
 [1] F. B. Kokulu et al., “Matched and mismatched SOCs: A qualitative nos. 3–5, pp. 75–174, Feb. 2010.
 study on security operations center issues,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. [25] U. N. Raghavan, R. Albert, and S. Kumara, “Near linear time algorithm
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1955–1970. to detect community structures in large-scale networks,” Phys. Rev. E,
 [2] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 76, no. 3, Sep.
 automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2007, Art. no. 036106.
 2019, pp. 1–15. [26] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, “Community structure in social
 [3] K. Bhukar et al., “Dynamic- X-Y: A tool for learning dynamic alert and biological networks,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, no. 12,
 suppression policies in AIOps,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. pp. 7821–7826, Jun. 2002.
 Netw. (COMSNETS), Jan. 2024, pp. 291–293. [27] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, “Finding and evaluating community
 structure in networks,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat.
 [4] T. Ahmed, A. Shah, M. Kolla, and R. Yellasiri, “Reduction of alert
 Interdiscip. Top., vol. 69, no. 2, Feb. 2004, Art. no. 026113.
 fatigue using extended isolation forest,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Forensics,
 [28] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast
 Anal., Big Data, Secur. (FABS), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–5.
 unfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mechanics: Theory
 [5] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
 Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008.
 qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
 [29] J. Han, J. Pei, and Y. Yin, “Mining frequent patterns without candidate
 Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
 generation,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 1–12, May 2000.
 [6] X. Wang, X. Yang, X. Liang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, and X. Gong,
 [30] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii,
 “Combating alert fatigue with AlertPro: Context-aware alert prioritiand U. Alon, “Network motifs: Simple building blocks of complex
 zation using reinforcement learning for multi-step attack detection,”
 networks,” Science, vol. 298, no. 5594, pp. 824–827, 2002.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103583.
 [31] S. Wernicke and F. Rasche, “FANMOD: A tool for fast network motif
 [7] CISCO.(2019). Anticipating the Unknowns–chief Information Secudetection,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1152–1153, May 2006.
 rity Officer (CISO) Benchmark Study. [Online]. Available: https://
 [32] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
 ebooks.cisco.com/story/anticipating-unknowns/
 “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. 34th Int.
 [8] G. Ho, A. Sharma, M. Javed, V. Paxson, and D. Wagner, “Detecting Conf. Mach. Learning, vol. 70, 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
 credential spearphishing in enterprise settings,” in Proc. 26th USENIX [33] V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, L. Thomas, Y. Bengio, and X. Bres-
 Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 469–485. son, “Graph neural networks with learnable structural and positional
 [9] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri- representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021,
 Doudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by attention pp. 1–15.
 mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, [34] L. Rampásek, M. Galkin, V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, G. Wolf, and
 pp. 7783–7793, 2024. D. Beaini, “Recipe for a general, powerful, scalable graph transformer,”
 [10] J. He, C. Tang, W. Li, T. Li, L. Chen, and X. Lan, “BR-HIDF: An in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2022, pp. 14501–14515.
 anti-sparsity and effective host intrusion detection framework based [35] W. Hu et al., “Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks,” in
 on multi-granularity feature extraction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–18.
 Security, vol. 19, pp. 485–499, 2024. [36] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 [11] C. Zha et al., “A-NIDS: Adaptive network intrusion detection system convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
 based on clustering and stacked CTGAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics [37] P. Velič kovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 3204–3219, 2025. Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 [12] T. V. Ede et al., “DEEPCASE: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of Represent., Jan. 2017, pp. 1–12.
 security events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022, [38] Z. Wang, J. Chen, and H. Chen, “EGAT: Edge-featured graph attention
 pp. 522–539. network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Bratislava, Slovakia.
 [13] N. Hubballi and V. Suryanarayanan, “False alarm minimization tech- Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Sep. 2021, pp. 253–264.
 niques in signature-based intrusion detection systems: A survey,” [39] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. S. Zemel, “Gated graph
 Comput. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1–17, Aug. 2014. sequence neural networks,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2015, pp. 1–20.
 [14] A. A. Ramaki, A. Rasoolzadegan, and A. G. Bafghi, “A systematic [40] W. Jin et al., “Self-supervised learning on graphs: Deep insights and
 mapping study on intrusion alert analysis in intrusion detection systems,” new direction,” 2020, arXiv:2006.10141.
 ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 1–41, May 2019. [41] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning
 [15] M. Husák, M. Cermák, M. Laštovicka, and J. Vykopal, “Exchanging on graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 security events: Which and how many alerts can we aggregate?,” in Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023.
 Proc. IFIP/IEEE Symp. Integr. Netw. Service Manage. (IM), May 2017, [42] F. Costa and K. D. Grave, “Fast neighborhood subgraph pairwise
 pp. 604–607. distance kernel,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jun.
 [16] X. Luo et al., “BiCAM: A bidirectional contextualized attentive model 2010, pp. 255–262.
 for analyzing the correlation of heterogeneous security events,” IEEE [43] Y. Li, C. Gu, T. Dullien, O. Vinyals, and P. Kohli, “Graph matching
 Trans. Rel., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 2640–2654, Jun. 2025. networks for learning the similarity of graph structured objects,” in Proc.
 [17] Y. Liu, X. Shu, Y. Sun, J. Jang, and P. Mittal, “RAPID: Real-time Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 3835–3845.
 alert investigation with context-aware prioritization for efficient threat [44] (1999). DARPA Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset. [Online]. Availdiscovery,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, able: https://archive.ll.mit.edu/ideval/data/1999data.html
 pp. 827–840. [45] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 [18] J. Liu et al., “Context2 Vector: Accelerating security event triage via a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 context representation learning,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 146, Jun. in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), vol. 1, 2018,
 2022, Art. no. 106856. pp. 108–116.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.