IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2511614

Detecting Multivariate Time Series Anomalies With
 Cascade Decomposition Consistency
 Ruoheng Li , Zhongyao Liu , Xi Zhu , Lin Li , and Xianbin Cao , Senior Member, IEEE
 Abstract— Multivariate time series anomaly detection is crucial costs through predictive maintenance. Similarly, in healthcare,
in sensitive domains such as cybersecurity and grid moni- the early detection of anomalies in heart rate variability, blood
toring, significantly contributing to the reliability and safety glucose levels, and respiratory patterns can be lifesaving for
of system operation. However, current methods suffer from
inadequate utilization of decomposed time series, insufficient patients, facilitating timely medical interventions [6].
mining of contextual dependencies within the time series, and The early methods of anomaly detection relied on stalimited robustness against anomalies during training. To address tistical techniques such as extreme value theory [9] and
these limitations, we propose the consistency-enhanced normal- statistical tests [4], [10]. However, as data has become
izing flow (ConFlow) model, which utilizes the consistency of high-dimensional and non-stationary, these statistical methods
decomposed time series and contextual temporal embedding
to enhance the discriminative ability of the flow model. First, have become less effective due to their strict assumptions about
to refine the extraction of time series components, we propose data distribution. To overcome these drawbacks, predictiona cascade decomposition and mixing module that iteratively based [11], [12] and reconstruction-based methods [13] that
decouples the time series. Second, these components are mapped are empowered by deep learning methods have emerged. These
to Gaussian distributions through the context-aware normalizing
 techniques rely on clean data to learn normal representations
flow, incorporating both inter- and intra-series information into
the density estimation. Third, the density consistency among and identify data with significant prediction or reconstrucdecomposed time series is measured to reweight the estimation, tion errors as anomalies. However, labeled data is costly,
while highly inconsistent series are viewed as anomalies and and clean datasets are often difficult to obtain, which limits
masked during training to improve model robustness. Finally, the adaptability of these methods. In contrast, density-based
anomalies are detected using reweight density estimation. Expermethods are less dependent on labels and quality of training
iments on five widely used datasets in the time series anomaly
detection field demonstrate the superiority of our method over data, identifying data distributed in the sparse regions as
state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches. anomalies through density estimation. Nevertheless, classical
 Index Terms— Consistency measurement, density estimation,
 techniques in this category, such as kernel density estimation
normalizing flow, time series anomaly detection, time series (KDE) [10] and Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) [14],
decomposition. face challenges in effectively managing high-dimensional
 time series.
 I. I NTRODUCTION In recent years, density-based approaches have turned to
 normalizing flow models, a type of deep generative model
T IME series exist in various forms in different domains,
 such as electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings [1],
industrial sensor outputs [2], and flight trajectories [3]. The
 that enables flexible density estimation through an invertible
 transformation [16], [17]. Normalizing flows were first introduced for time series anomaly detection by GANF [18], which
ability to detect anomalies in time series data is paramount for
 augments the flow model with a directed acyclic graph to better
ensuring operational efficiency and reliability [4]. For examcapture temporal dependencies, thus improving the accuracy
ple, in motor fault diagnosis [5], time series anomaly detection
 of the estimation. However, GANF estimated the density for
facilitates the early identification of irregular motor behaviors,
 all series using a unified distribution, ignoring the specific
preventing unexpected downtime and reducing maintenance
 characteristics of individual series. To address this limitation,
 Received 1 August 2024; revised 30 October 2024; accepted 10 November MTGFLOW [19] was proposed, mapping different time series
2024. Date of publication 3 March 2025; date of current version 13 March into distinct Gaussian distributions. However, MTGFLOW
2025. This work was supported in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under Grant 4254101 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation overlooked intra-series temporal information, limiting the estiof China under Grant 62373029. The Associate Editor coordinating the review mation accuracy of the normalizing flow. The above methods
process was Dr. Mahnoosh Tajmirriahi. (Corresponding author: Xi Zhu.) still share some limitations that need improvement.
 Ruoheng Li, Zhongyao Liu, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao are with the School of
Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, 1) Insufficient utilization of decomposed time series: Time
China, also with the Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology of Near Space
Information System, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of series can be decomposed into low-frequency trend
China, Beijing 100191, China, also with the National Engineering Laboratory and high-frequency seasonal components (as shown in
for Comprehensive Transportation Big Data Application Technology, Beijing Fig. 1) [20], offering detailed and diverse views for
100191, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of CNS/ATM, Beijing
100191, China (e-mail: ruohengli@buaa.edu.cn; zhongyaoliu@buaa.edu.cn; temporal analysis [21]. However, effectively utilizing
zhuxi@buaa.edu.cn; xbcao@buaa.edu.cn). decomposed components to enhance anomaly represen-
 Lin Li is with the National Computer Network Emergency Response tation in density-based methods remains under-explored.
Technical Team, Coordination Center of China, Beijing 100029, China
(e-mail: lilin@cert.org.cn). 2) Insufficient mining of contextual dependencies in time
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3547479 series: Anomalies typically exhibit different correlations
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 This article is organized as follows. Section II reviews
 the related work on time series decomposition and anomaly
 detection. Section III details our findings on the density
 inconsistency of anomalous time series and provides some
 background information on the normalizing flow models.
 Section IV presents a detailed description of the proposed
 model, followed by extensive experiments that demonstrate
 the performance of the proposed model in Section V. Finally,
Fig. 1. Original time series as well as the trend and seasonal components
extracted from it through seasonality-trend decomposition [7]. Both of the Section VI summarizes this article and presents some limitaoriginal series are selected from the PSM dataset [8]. tions of our work.

 II. R ELATED W ORKS
 with their adjacent time points [22]. Current anomaly
 detection methods primarily focused on modeling tem- Considering that time series decomposition serves as the
 poral correlation between different series but overlooked foundation of ConFlow, we survey the approaches of time
 the contextual information within individual time series, series decomposition before reviewing the time series anomaly
 degrading the accuracy of density estimation and detection methods.
 anomaly detection.
 3) Limited robustness against anomalies during model A. Time Series Decomposition
 training: Normalizing flows do not depend heavily on Time series typically consist of multiscale periods and
 a clean training set. However, a training set with many diverse underlying patterns [20]. Decomposition techniques
 abnormal time series may cause models to misinterpret can help to separate these patterns [23], thereby improving
 frequent anomalous patterns as normal. Therefore, the data utility and feature representation quality. In recent years,
 strategy should be designed to enhance model tolerance decomposition has become integral to various time series tasks
 against anomalies. such as forecasting, classification, and anomaly detection,
 To address the above challenge, we propose consistency- contributing to several SOTA methods like TimeMixer [24]
enhanced normalizing flow (ConFlow). Compared with and FEDformer [25].
previous works that based on the normalizing flow Commonly used time series decomposition methods include
model [18], [19], we further utilize time series decomposition
 discrete wavelet transformation [26] and seasonality-trend
and find that abnormal decomposed time series often show
 decomposition [27], both of which divide time series into
poor consistency in density estimation (details elaborated in
 high-frequency seasonal components and low-frequency trend
Section III). We utilize this generalizable characteristic of
 components [28]. Wu proposed a seasonality-trend decomposianomalies and design a consistency-mask loss reweight modtion block [7] using moving average pooling to separate trend
ule to enhance model robustness and discriminative ability.
 and seasonal components. This method is simple to implement
Additionally, we encode contextual relevance within individual
 and integrate with deep learning models, offering a fast and
time series using self-attention, which captures subtle variascalable solution for time series decomposition.
tions in time series so as to help anomaly detection. Overall,
 Recently, the time series decomposition module has been
our model contains three key innovative components. First,
 incorporated into several prediction-based and reconstructiona cascade decomposition and mixing module to iteratively
 based time series anomaly detection methods, such as
refine the discriminative decomposed components. Second,
 MEGA [20] and TimesNet [29], achieving improved perforcontext-aware normalizing flow that embeds both inter- and
 mance by combining anomaly scores across different decomintra-series correlation for accurate density estimation. Third,
 posed components. However, effectively utilizing decomposed
a consistency-mask loss reweight module that utilizes the
 time series in density-based anomaly detection methods
consistency of decomposed components to enhance model
 remains a challenge. Decomposition often leads to varying
robustness and discriminative ability.
 density estimations and inconsistent anomaly scores, as shown
 Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
 in Fig. 2. Simply combining derived anomaly scores from the
 1) We propose an enhanced normalizing flow model that original series and its decomposed components can produce
 utilizes cascade decomposition consistency and con- confounded results and achieve poor anomaly discriminative
 textual dependencies within time series to improve ability [as shown in Fig. 2(d)]. Thus, exploring a gendetection accuracy and robustness. eralizable anomaly representation of decomposed series is
 2) We incorporate a self-attention mechanism to capture essential to enhance the discriminative ability of density-based
 contextual correlations and design a loss reweight and methods [30].
 mask module that utilizes the density inconsistency of
 anomalies to enhance model performance.
 3) We validated the effectiveness of our approach on B. Time Series Anomaly Detection
 five benchmark datasets, demonstrating superior perfor- Generally, time series anomaly detection models can be
 mance compared to eight state-of-the-art (SOTA) time classified into supervised and unsupervised ones. Superseries anomaly detection methods. vised models rely on high-cost human labels, thus making
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

Fig. 2. Normalized anomaly scores on PSM test set [8] achieved by the MAF [15] for (a) original, (b) trend, and (c) seasonal time series. (d) Score
accumulation depicts the normalized score sum of (a)–(c). The overlap (magenta) between the normal (indigo) and abnormal (salmon) histograms indicates
the discriminative ability of the model.

unsupervised methods preferable in most cases. Specifi- map complex distributions into standard ones, thereby
cally, unsupervised methods can be broadly classified into facilitating density estimation and anomaly detecthree types. tion [18], [19]. However, the performance of normal-
 1) Prediction or reconstruction-based methods, which aim izing flow on time series detection has not been fully
 to learn representations of normal sequences and identify exploited. Further efforts should be made by exploring
 anomalies based on prediction [31] or reconstruction more temporal features of series and improving model
 errors [32], [33]. Recent advanced architectures like robustness.
 Transformer enhance these methods with improved
 global and local perception ability on time series, III. P RELIMINARY
 thereby boosting anomaly detection performance. Exam- In this section, we present our experiments and findings
 ples include TranAD [34] and DTADD [35]. Generative on the consistency feature of anomalies within decomposed
 models, such as autoencoder [20], [33], [36] and gen- series and provide some background information about norerative adversarial network (GAN) [37], [38], [39], also malizing flow.
 demonstrate their strong ability in representation learning and reconstruction. However, these models often
 rely on a training set without anomalies to learn nor- A. Consistency Among Decomposed Time Series
 mal representation [37], which can reduce the general We measured the density consistency among time series
 applicability of these methods. and their decomposed components. The density was estimated
 2) Distance-based methods, such as local outlier factors using masked autoregressive flows (MAFs) [15], a variant of
 (LOFs) [40] and isolation forests [41], which identify normalizing flow. Specifically, we first progressively decomanomalies by high pairwise distances between series posed the series in each detection window (set to 60 timestep)
 features. However, these methods struggle to handle into trend and seasonal components using average pooling [7].
 complex, high-dimensional data due to the curse of The original series and their decomposed components were
 dimensionality. As the dimensionality increases, the input into MAF to map distributions. We used the trained
 pairwise distance between any two points becomes model to estimate the density of both the original and decomnearly equal, making it difficult to distinguish between posed series. We then calculated the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
 normal and anomalous points. Although some methods, divergence between their density estimation, with higher KL
 such as DeepSVDD [42] and DeepSAD [43], extend the divergence indicating lower consistency. Experiments were
 traditional distance-based approaches by incorporating conducted on five datasets: PSM [8], SWaT [45], WADI [46],
 deep learning methods, they still face challenges in MSL [31], and SMD [32].
 handling extremely high-dimensional spaces and need We applied the bootstrap method [47] to calculate 95%
 a relative clean training set to learn a hypersphere to confidence intervals (CIs) of the KL divergence sum of normal
 separate anomalies from normal data. and abnormal series. The number of bootstrap samples was set
 3) Density-based methods, which identify anomalies as to align with the number of specific series. We recorded the
 observations with low density by density estima- CIs, means, and medians of the KL divergence sums in Table I.
 tion. These approaches do not impose restrictions on Additionally, Fig. 3 provides a comparative visualization for
 data distribution and offer high adaptability. Classical normal and abnormal series. The scatterplot compares detailed
 density-based methods such as kernel density esti- KL divergence between the different components. The boxplot
 mate [10] and GMMs [44] struggle with complex, compares the KL divergence sum between normal and abnorhigh-dimensional data. DAGMM [14] improves the mal series.
 GMMs by combining it with autoencoder but still has Overall, the results show that the density consistency
 limitations when applied to multivariate time series. for normal time series is significantly higher than that for
 Normalizing flows can address these issues [17], lever- anomalous series. As shown in Table I and Fig. 3, noraging reversible and differentiable transformations to mal time series generally exhibit lower KL divergence with
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE I
 S TATISTIC OF KL D IVERGENCE S UM A MONG D ECOMPOSED T IME S ERIES

Fig. 3. Comparison of KL divergence among normal and abnormal decomposed series on PSM, SWaT, SMD, MSL, and WADI datasets. The 3-D scatterplot
shows the KL divergence of density estimation between trend/original, seasonal/original, and seasonal/trend series. Boxplot compares the KL divergence sum
for normal (blue) and abnormal (orange) series, with extreme outliers filtered out and box width proportional to the number of series. (a) PSM. (b) SWaT.
(c) SMD machine-1-1. (d) MSL. (e) WADI.

narrower CIs, indicating higher density consistency. For exam- data density distribution of its decomposed components.
ple, in the PSM dataset, the mean of KL divergence sum In these cases, the decomposed components of a normal
for normal series is 0.226, with 95% CI of 0.208–0.245, series may also show low-density consistency due to their
while the mean for anomalous series shows a significant inherent instability, which reduces the effectiveness of using
increase as 5.017, with 95% CI as 3.248–7.134. Similar density consistency as a distinguishing factor of an anomaly.
trends are observed in the SWaT, SMD, MSL, and WADI Despite this limitation, density consistency can differentidatasets. In some datasets, the mean of KL divergence for ate frequency variations of the spike-like signals, measuring
anomalous series can be significantly affected by extreme 13.82 for the higher-frequency spike [Feature 6 in Fig. 4(a)]
outliers, resulting in a high mean value while the median and 8.18 for the lower-frequency spike [Feature 6 in Fig. 4(b)].
remains much lower. For instance, the median for anomalous This also indicates the effectiveness of density consistency
series in MSL is 0.086, similar to that of normal series in detecting frequency-related anomalies within spike-like
(0.081). This occurs because anomaly labels are applied signals.
to entire windows of multivariate series instead of individ- To conclude, although using density consistency among
ual series. As shown in Fig. 4(a), several series (such as decomposed series to represent anomalies has certain limi-
Features 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7) are labeled as anomalous but display tations, it remains a valuable and generalizable representation
the same pattern and exhibit low KL divergence. to identify anomalies.
 We also find that density consistency has limitations in helping discriminate anomalies within the datasets where normal
series exhibit inconsistent patterns. For instance, in Fig. 4(b), B. Normalizing Flow Models
Feature 6 is a normal series but displays inconsistent spike- Density-based methods identify anomalies as data points
like patterns, resulting in high KL divergence among the with low density in the data distribution. Normalizing flow
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

Fig. 4. Illustration of (a) abnormal and (b) normal series selected from MSL dataset, with KL divergence sum among their decomposed series marked above
figures. In MSL, the time series are named by features, labeled as Feature 1, Feature 2, Feature 3, Feature 4, and so on, corresponding to different sensor
measurements.

 w and trend components x w . These
Fig. 5. Overview of ConFlow. Time series in a detection window xow are first decomposed and mixed to extract seasonal xmh ml
components are then processed to encode conditional information Csw between and within series, followed by MAF that is used for mapping distributions.
s ∈ {o, ml, mh} represents the original, trend, and seasonal components, and Agg. denote aggregate information from different series. After that, density
consistency among decomposed series is measured and used for loss reweight and training mask, where the reweight loss represents anomaly scores.

models facilitate this process by mapping data from com- of series. No restrictions are placed on the training data.
plex distribution x ∈ R D into simpler standard distribution Detection is performed on a detection window of size T ,
z ∈ R D , resulting in more straightforward density estima- sliding with a step size of S. If any point within the sliding
tion [48] and easier anomaly detection. By normalizing flow, window w is anomalous, the window is marked as anomawe can transform the observed data and compute its likelihood lous. Our goal is to learn the conditional normalizing flow
using the change of variable formula F : (X |C) → Z (C is the conditional information) to estimate
 ∂ fθ the density of time series. The estimated density is used for
 PX (x) = PZ (z) det (1) anomaly detection.
 ∂xT
where PZ (z) is the target distribution, z = f θ (x) is the
transformation function, and | det(∂ f θ /∂ x T )| is the Jacobian B. Overall Structure
determinant of the transformation. Anomalies can be detected Fig. 5 illustrates the proposed model, comprising three
when the likelihood PX (x) falls below a threshold ζ primary components.
 ∂ fθ 1) Cascade decomposition and mixing module: This mod-
 PX (x) = PZ (z) det <ζ (2)
 ∂xT ule aims to extract refined trend and seasonal time series
where ζ is chosen based on the expected density of normal components from the original time series xow ∈ R K ×T .
data. It first decomposes xow into trend and seasonal components through a multilevel decomposition. Then, the
 decomposed trend and seasonal time series at different
 IV. P ROPOSED M ODEL
 decomposition levels are combined to represent each
A. Problem Statement component.
 We focus on unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly 2) Context-aware normalizing flow model: This module
detection. The dataset consists of multiple unlabeled time aims to encode information and mapping distributions
series X = [X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X K ], where K denotes the number for time series. First, the temporal embedding of series is
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 encoded through a long short-term memory (LSTM) net- D. Context-Aware Normalizing Flow
 work. The series relationship is then quantified by their After decomposition, time series and their decomposed
 similarity, constructing a graph that is used for aggre- components are processed through context-aware normalizing
 gating inter-series information. Next, a self-attention flow, which first captures information between and within time
 mechanism is applied to the temporal embedding to series. The embedded information is then input into MAF to
 extract intra-series contextual information. Finally, this map distributions.
 information is integrated as the conditional input for For each detection window w, LSTM is first applied on
 MAF, used for mapping Gaussian distributions Z o , Z ml , series to obtain a temporal encoding
 and Z mh .
 w w w
 , Hs,t−1 .
 
 3) Consistency-mask loss reweight module: This module Hs,t = LSTM xs,t (9)
 aims to utilize the density inconsistency of anomalies w
 Hs,t ∈ R K ×D represents the temporal encoding at t, with
 to enhance model robustness and discriminative ability. s ∈ {o, ml, mh} representing the original, trend, and seasonal
 Since anomalous time series shows lower density con- time series, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } representing the time step, and
 sistency among its decomposed components, consistency D representing the hidden dimension.
 is directly used for loss reweight to enhance represen- To quantify the relationships among multivariate series,
 tation of anomalies. Additionally, series with extremely we follow MTGFLOW [49] and model series as nodes and
 high inconsistency scores are masked during training to similarities between nodes as directed edges, which composes
 enhance model tolerance against anomalies. a directed graph allowing for self-loops. For each pair of series
 w
 The detailed descriptions of these modules are provided as xs,i , xs,w j ∈ RT (where i, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K }), the similarity
follows. directed from node i to node j is given by
 
  w ⊤ √ 
 w
 exp xs,i Ms,i xs, j Ms, j / T
C. Time Series Cascade Decomposition and Mixing w
 es,i = (10)
 j 
 w
  w ⊤ √ 
 / T
 PK
 Inspired by Autoformer [7], in each detection window w, k=1 exp x s,i Ms,i x s,k Ms,k
we decompose the series xow into trend and seasonal components using average pooling. This process separates the where Ms,i , Ms, j , Ms,k ∈ RT ×T are learnable matrices for
low-frequency trend and high-frequency seasonality, formu- linear projection, and T is for numerical stability. The function
lated as exp(·) transforms the similarity scores into positive values,
 w
 facilitating normalization. The similarity values es,i j form the
 xlw = Avg Pool Padding xow adjacency matrix of the graph
 
 (3)
  w w w
 x hw = xow − xlw .
 
 (4) es,11 es,12 · · · es,1K
 w
  es,21 w w
 es,22 · · · es,2K 
 w
 Here, xlw and x hw represent the trend and seasonal com- As =  . . . . . (11)
  
  .. .. .. .. 
ponents, Avg Pool(·) denotes average pooling, Padding(·)
 
 w w w
represents reflection padding, which handles boundary con- es,K 1 es,K 2 · · · es,K K
ditions by mirroring edge values. We use the adjacency matrix to aggregate temporal infor-
 We perform a cascade decomposition to distill more mation from high-related series, defined as
nuanced information. Specifically, low-frequency series are
decomposed to yield smoother patterns, while high-frequency C gws,t = Aw w
 s Hs,t . (12)
series are further decomposed to extract more fluctuating Considering anomalies typically exhibit different correlation
patterns with their adjacent timesteps compared with the normal ones,
 a self-attention mechanism is applied on the window-level
 xlwi = Avg Pool Padding xlwi−1
 
 (5) temporal embedding Hsw ∈ R K ×T ×D to capture the intra-series
 w w w
 
 x h i = x h i−1 − Avg Pool Padding x h i−1 (6) contextual information within each series. For series k, its
 contextual information can be formulated as
where xlwi and x hwi represent the trend and seasonal components w w
  w w ⊤ !
 H Q Hs,k K s
achieved at the ith decomposition level. The decomposed C hws,k = softmax w
 Vsw
 s,k s
 √ Hs,k (13)
components across different levels are finally combined to D
represent the specific components
 where Q w w w
 s , K s , Vs ∈ R
 D×D
 are the learnable matrices of
 c linear transformation, and D is the model dimensionality and
 w
 αxlwi
 X
 xml = (7) used for numerical stability.
 i=1 The final conditional information at time t is obtained by
 c
 w integrating the above information
 αx hwi
 X
 xmh = (8)
 w w
 = ReLU C gws,t Ws,1 + Hs,t−1 Ws,2 + C hws,t Ws,3 Ws,4 (14)
 
 i=1 Cs,t
 w
where α = 1/c represents the weighting factor for each level, where Cs,t ∈ R K ×T ×D , and Ws,1 , Ws,2 , Ws,3 , Ws,4 ∈
 D×D
and c is the number of decomposition levels. R represent the weights for inter-series aggregation,
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

temporal information, intra-series information, and sum of the Algorithm 1 Training Process of ConFlow
embedding, respectively. N
 Input: Training set {X }i=1 , window size T , stride size S,
 Based on the conditional encoding, we stack MAF models decomposition level c, learning rate η, mask
to map distribution for each series. The density estimation for threshold β, and epoch_num;
series k in detection window w is given by Output: Optimized parameters θ and anomaly scores for
 T   each detection window;
 w w
 Y
 PX s,k (xs,k )= PZ s,k,t f θs,k xs,k,t | Cs,k,t · Js,k,t (15) Initialize: Parameters θ; detection windows (based on T
 t=1
 ! and S);
 ∂ f θs,k for e ∈ [1, epoch_num] do
 Js,k,t = det ⊤ . (16) 1) Use cascade decomposition and mixing module to
 w
 ∂ xs,k,t w
 generate time series set {xow , xml w
 , xmh } via Eqs.(3)
 to (8);
 Here, f θs,k represents the autoregressive function of MAF,
 2) Encode inter- and intra-series information using
Js,k,t is the Jacobian determinant of f θs,k , and Cs,k,t represents
 the context-aware encoder for time series via Eqs.(9)
the conditional information for series k at t. Z s,k is the target
 to (14);
mapping distribution that follows a normal distribution:
 3) Generate the density estimations PX o , PX ml , and
 Z s,k ∼ N (µs,k , I ), µs,k ∼ N (0, 1) (17) PX mh for time series using MAF via Eqs.(15) to (17);
 4) Measure the consistency Lkl among the density
with mean µs,k sampled from a standard normal distribution, estimations based on Eq.(19);
and I representing the identity covariance matrix. 5) Reweight the loss Lo with Lkl based on Eq.(20).
 The reweight loss serves as the anomaly score;
E. Consistency-Mask Loss Reweight 6) Mask series with Lkl exceeds the threshold β, and
 update the model parameters θ;
 The training objective of flow models is to maximize the
joint probability of observed data, aligning the generative
distribution closer to the true distribution. Therefore, the basic
loss function in each mini-batch can be formulated as a Boolean tensor Mb is generated to mask series with a
 N K
 consistency score exceeding β during training.
 1 XX w Therefore, in each mini-batch, the final loss can be formumin Ls (ϑ) =
 
 − log PX s,k xs,k (18)
 ϑ N K w=1 k=1 lated as
 N K
where s ∈ {o, ml, mh}, ϑ represents all model parameters, N is 1 XX w w
 min L f (ϑ) = .
  
 Mb −log PX o,k xo,k +Lkl xo,k
the batch size, and K is the number of multivariate series. ϑ N K w=1 k=1
 For each detection window, we get three density estimations (21)
 w
(original, trend, and seasonal). Density consistency for xo,k is
measured by summing the KL divergences between the density F. Training and Testing
estimations of original, trend, and seasonal components
 The training process of ConFlow can be summarized in
 w w
 PX j,k x wj,k . (19)
 X
 Lkl (xo,k )= Algorithm 1.
  
 KL PX i,k xi,k
 i, j∈{o,ml,mh} The anomaly score of each series at time t is measured by
 i̸= j its reweight density
 Since anomalous decomposed series often exhibit inconsis- w w
 .
  
 w = − log P
 Sxk,t X o,k x o,k,t + Lkl xo,k,t (22)
tent density estimation, consistency is directly used for loss
reweight, penalizing inconsistency and enhancing the anomaly The anomaly score for each detection window is the average
score. The reweight loss function can be denoted as of the series involved
 K
 N K 1 X w w
 .
  
 1 XX w w
 Sw = − log PX o,k xo,k + Lkl xo,k (23)
 minLr w (ϑ) = .
  
 − log PX o,k xo,k + Lkl xo,k K k=1
 ϑ N K w=1 k=1
 Anomalies can be identified by setting a threshold ζ . The
 (20)
 series with scores exceeding ζ are classified as anomalies. ζ is
 Even though flow models can be built with contaminated determined based on the overall scores of the training series,
training data, we found that clean training data can still for instance, by using the interquartile range (IQR) method,
improve the performance of the model with one-class classi- setting ζ as Q 3 + 1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ). Q 3 and Q 1 represent the
fication [49]. To mitigate the impact of extremely anomalous 75th and 25th percentiles of the overall score, respectively.
samples during training, we propose a mask strategy based on
the density inconsistency of anomalies. In each mini-batch, G. Complexity Analysis
 w
series with high consistency loss Lkl (xo,k ) are masked during We measure the asymptotic upper bound of computational
training to reduce their impact. The masking threshold β complexity for each detection window using big O notacan be set as a fixed value or percentile value. Specifically, tion [50], represented by a function of the input and omitting
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

constant factors and lower order terms. For each detection TABLE II
window, the input of the model is related to the number of DATASET I NFORMATION
series K , the window size T , and the model dimension D.
 We first analyze the time complexity of ConFlow, denoted
as T (K , T, D). The cascade decomposition and mixing
module has a time complexity linear with the input
time series, represented as O(K × T ). The context-aware
encoding module encompasses several operations having
certain time complexity: temporal encoding by LSTM
O(K × T × D 2 ) [51], graph construction via similarity calculation O(K 2 × T × D), inter-series information
aggregation O(K 2 × T × D), and intra-series correlation datasets collected from 38 machines within an internet comusing self-attention O(K × T 2 × D) [52]. Subsequently, the pany. WADI [46] includes data from 123 actuators in a water
MAF maps the distributions with a time complexity of distribution testbed.
O(K × T × D 2 ) [53]. The consistency-mask loss reweight Instead of using the conventional clean training set in
module involves: mask generation O(K × T × log(K T )) most previous work [22], we followed the dataset partitioning
and loss reweight operations O(K × T ). The dominant terms strategy proposed by GANF [18] to obtain a contaminated
in the time complexity depend on the relative sizes of but realistic training set. Specifically, we divided the original
K , T , and D, and can be denoted as: T (K , T, D) = test set into training, validation, and testing sets by a ratio
O(max(K × T 2 × D, K 2 × T × D, K × T × D 2 )). of 6:2:2. In this way, all datasets contain both normal and
 Space complexity measures the storage usage abnormal sequences, better reflecting real-world scenarios.
as the input increases. The cascade decomposition Detailed statistics on the training and testing datasets, includand mixing module requires O(K × T ) space. The ing timestamps and anomaly ratios, are provided in Table II.
context-aware encoding module involves: temporal 2) Baselines: To assess the performance of ConFlow,
encoding by LSTM O(K × T × D) [51], graph we compared it against eight SOTA methods commonly used
construction O(K 2 × T × D), inter-series information in multivariate time series anomaly detection. These baselines
aggregation O(K × T × D), and intra-series correlation were selected to represent three core categories of anomaly
calculation O(K × T 2 × D). The MAF module utilizes detection techniques mentioned in Section II: distance-based,
O(K × T × D) space. Both the mask generation and reconstruction-based, and density-based methods. Specifically,
the loss reweight module require O(K × T ) space. The DeepSVDD and DeepSAD are distance-based methods that
dominant terms in the space complexity also depend on the map normal time series into a hypersphere, identifying the
relative sizes of K , T , and D, which can be denoted as: data outside the hypersphere as anomalies. ALOCC, USAD,
S(K , T, D) = O(max(K × T 2 × D, K 2 × T × D)). and FITS are reconstruction-based methods that trained on
 clean data to learn normal representations, detecting anoma-
 V. E XPERIMENTS lies by reconstruction errors. Lastly, DAGMM, GANF, and
 MTGFLOW are density-based methods that align closely
 This section presents various experiments that answer the with ConFlow by identifying the data points distributed in
following questions about our model ConFlow. low-density regions as anomalies. These methods were chosen
 Q1: Accuracy: How accurately does our method detect for their representativeness and evaluated under a unified
 anomalies compared to other baselines? Can our model dataset setting.
 pinpoint anomalous portions of the time series? A brief introduction to each baseline is as follows.
 Q2: Robustness: How robust is our model when dealing 1) DeepSVDD [42]: A distance-based method that maps
 with contaminated data with different ratios? How do normal data into a predefined hypersphere using a deep
 different hyperparameters impact model performance? neural network, with data outside this boundary detected
 Q3: Explainability: How and why do the modules designed as anomalies.
 in our model improve anomaly discriminative ability? 2) DeepSAD [43]: An extension of DeepSVDD utilizes
 labeled data to enhance anomaly detection performance.
 3) ALOCC [54]: A reconstruction-based approach uses
A. Experimental Details GANs to reconstruct time series so that anomalies are
 We begin by detailing our experimental setup, covering identified based on reconstruction error.
dataset configurations, baseline models, and related settings 4) USAD [55]: A reconstruction-based method employs a
in experiments. two-phase autoencoder architecture, detecting anomalies
 1) Dataset Setup: We selected five publicly available based on reconstruction deviations.
datasets to evaluate model performance. SWaT [45] measures 5) FITS [56]: A reconstructed-based methods that empow-
51 sensors from a real-world industrial water treatment facility. ered by representation ability of frequency interpolation.
PSM [8] comprises 25 distinct features of server nodes from an 6) DAGMM [14]: A density-based method that combines
eBay application. MSL [31] consists of data from 55 sensors a deep autoencoder with a GMM to enhance the density
on NASA’s Mars rover. SMD [32] contains 38 small-scale estimation ability.
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS OF C ON F LOW IN C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS

 7) GANF [18]: A density-based model that integrates (AUC-ROC), precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score (F1),
 Bayesian Networks with flow models, identifying data evaluating different aspects of model performance. AUC-ROC
 in low-density regions as anomalies. captures the trade-off between true positive and false positive
 8) MTGFLOW [19]: An improved variant of GANF, map- rates across different thresholds, with higher values indicating
 ping different time series into different distributions to better discriminative performance. AUC-ROC is evaluated
 improve detection accuracy. based on the anomaly scores assigned by the model. Following
 3) Experimental Setting: All experiments were conducted the methodology of MTGFLOW [19], we reported the average
on an Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS server with 192 GB of memory, and standard deviation of AUC-ROC over five random seed
an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU at 3.10 GHz, and a GeForce settings.
RTX 3090 graphics card. In the comparison study, we set In contrast, precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score (F1)
the anomaly detection window size to 60 and the stride size evaluate model detection performance based on a specific
to 10 for all experiments. Our model was implemented in point-level threshold. A detection window is classified as
PyTorch version 1.7.1 with CUDA 12.4. Each model was abnormal if any timestep within the window exceeds the
trained for 40 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a learning threshold. Consistent with MTGFLOW [19], we set the threshrate of 0.002 and a weight decay of 0.0005. The hidden old as Q 3 + 1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ) of the anomaly scores from the
dimension for all modules was set to 32. For the batch size, training sets. Point-adjusted strategy was employed [20], [56]
we used 512 for the SWaT dataset and 256 for the other when evaluating P, R, and F1.
datasets. Similarly, the decomposition level was set to 3 for
both SWaT and WADI datasets, and to 2 for the others. B. Performance Comparison
Detailed parameter settings of our model are provided in 1) Performance Analysis: We compared ConFlow with
Table III. For the baseline methods, we used publicly available eight baselines, and the results are recorded in Table IV
implementations under the contaminated training setting. The (AUC-ROC) and Table V (P, R, and F1 scores). ConFlow
code for DeepSVDD, DeepSAD, ALOCC, and GANF was consistently outperformed all baselines in AUC-ROC across all
obtained from [57], while the code for USAD, DAGMM, datasets, achieving improvements over the second-best method
FITS, and MTGFLOW was obtained from [58], [59], [60], (MTGFLOW) of 5.5% on SWaT, 2.6% on PSM, 1.1% on
and [61], respectively. We retained their original network MSL, 1.0% on SMD, and 0.7% on WADI. ConFlow also
parameters and trained them for 40 epochs to ensure a fair demonstrated stable performance across five random expericomparison. ments, with the standard deviation of AUC-ROC remaining at
 For the parameter selection of our model, we aligned a low level. In terms of F1 score (Table V), ConFlow achieved
the general parameters such as window size, stride size, competitive performance against the best-performing baselines
learning rate, weight decay, batch size, block size, and (FITS and MTGFLOW), with improvements of 6.03% on
hidden dimension with those of the SOTA density-based SWaT, 0.75% on MSL, 0.32% on SMD, and 1.14% on
method MTGFLOW (as recorded in Table III). After fixing WADI. ConFlow attained the best recall across all datasets
these parameters, we treated others, such as decompo- by leveraging the inconsistency feature of anomalies, without
sition level and mask ratio, as tunable hyperparameters, sacrificing much precision.
whose values are optimized through extensive experiments. We further analyzed the performance of the models accord-
Specifically, we evaluated decomposition levels from the set ing to their categories. First, distance-based methods such
{1, 2, 3, 4} on all datasets, while the mask ratio was chosen as DeepSVDD and DeepSAD showed poor performance on
from {Q 2 , Q 3 , Q 3 + 1.5 × IQR} for each mini-batch. The all metrics across datasets because they lacked mechanisms
optimal decomposition levels identified were 3 for SWaT and to encode temporal dependencies. Moreover, DeepSVDD
WADI, and 2 for PSM, MSL, and SMD. The best mask requires clean datasets to learn a hypersphere that surrounds
ratio was consistently found to be Q 3 + 1.5 × IQR for all normal representations. However, the contaminated training
datasets. Besides, in our parameter study, we show how block sets in our setting disrupted the construction of a discrimsize, window size, decomposition level, and mask ratio affect inative hypersphere. Second, reconstruction-based methods
performance of our model. like ALOCC and USAD also exhibited poor performance as
 4) Evaluation Metrics: We assessed model performance they lacked the ability to capture subtle variations among
using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve time series. Conversely, FITS outperformed ALOCC and
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF AUC-ROC (%) B ETWEEN C ON F LOW AND BASELINE M ODELS

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF P RECISION (%), R ECALL (%), AND F1 S CORES (%) B ETWEEN C ON F LOW AND MTGFLOW

Fig. 6. Comparison of anomaly scores rated by MTGFLOW and ConFlow for four selected series segments. True classification consists of the segments
of true positive and true negative. Anomaly thresholds for ConFlow (blue) and MTGFLOW (black) are marked in each sub-figure. (a) SWaT Segment 1.
(b) SWaT Segment 2. (c) PSM Segment 1. (d) PSM Segment 2.

USAD by leveraging the robust representation capabilities five different random seeds (standard deviation of AUC-ROC
of frequency interpolation, achieving the highest F1 score decreases 0.9% on SMD compared with MTGFLOW), primaron the PSM dataset. However, its discriminative ability on ily due to the consistency-mask strategy that enhance model
different thresholds (AUC-ROC) remained unsatisfactory, pri- robustness.
marily because a contaminated training set compromised its We further visualized the normalized anomaly scores rated
discriminative performance. Third, density-based methods, by ConFlow and MTGFLOW in selected time segments,
with the exception of DAGMM, showed good discriminative as illustrated in Fig. 6. In each sub-figure, the true anomaperformance (AUC-ROC). The unsatisfactory performance of lous segments are highlighted with a red background. The
DAGMM was mainly due to its shortcomings in capturing blue and black dashed lines represent the anomaly scores
relationships between time series. GANF and MTGFLOW from MTGFLOW and ConFlow, with horizontal dashed lines
exhibited threshold-invariant discriminative ability since they denoting the anomaly thresholds. False positives and false
assign anomaly scores based on the probability of the time negatives are marked in orange and red for MTGFLOW,
series. However, these methods had limitations in exploring and yellow and brown for ConFlow. As shown in Fig. 6(a),
the generalizable and contextual features of anomalies, degrad- ConFlow was more sensitive to anomalies with more true
ing the detection ability. ConFlow outperformed GANF and positives and true negatives, which is due to the contextual
MTGFLOW on both F1 scores and AUC-ROC across all five embedding that models intra-series dependency. MTGFLOW
datasets, attributed to its utilization of cascade decomposition had a higher false positive rate and a false negative rate [as
consistency and contextual information embeddings. Further- shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c)] due to the lack of representation
more, ConFlow demonstrated consistent performance across of anomalies.
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

 ConFlow/(C, L, M) indicates the model without all three
 modules.
 The ablation results are presented in Table VI. The base
 model, ConFlow/(C, L, M), achieved performances of 84.7%
 on SWaT and 85.3% on PSM. Among the individual modules,
 incorporating only the loss reweight module [ConFlow/(C,
Fig. 7. Performance comparison of AUC-ROC between MTGFLOW and
ConFlow under different training contamination ratios. Line represents the
 M)] provided the most significant improvement, enhancing
mean value and shadow represents the standard deviation. (a) SWaT. (b) PSM. performance by 3.5% on SWaT and 1.7% on PSM. This
 indicates that the loss reweight module (L) is the most effective
 single module, especially on the SWaT dataset. Combining the
 2) Robustness Comparison Under Different Contaminated loss reweight module with the context-aware encoding module
Ratios: We divided the training data of SWaT and PSM into [ConFlow/(M)] resulted in further improvements, achieving
training sets with varying contamination ratios to evaluate the a 4.6% increase on SWaT and 2.1% on PSM. Including
model’s robustness under different contamination rates, while all modules (ConFlow) yielded the best performance, with
keeping the testing set fixed. The training set anomaly ratio improvements of 5.6% on SWaT and 3.0% on PSM comfor SWaT ranges from 5.2% to 17.6%, and for PSM, it ranges pared to the base model. These results demonstrate that
from 23.2% to 38.7%. The anomaly ratios of the testing sets the loss reweight module significantly enhances performance,
are 5.2% for SWaT and 30.2% for PSM. and combining it with other modules leads to further gains,
 We compared the model performance of ConFlow with particularly on the SWaT dataset.
MTGFLOW under training set with different contamina- 2) Visualization of Context-Aware Encoding Module: We
tion ratios. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The shaded visualized the intra-series contextual encoding of four selected
areas in the figures indicate the standard deviations of series (Series 1, Series 2, Series 3, and Series 24) from
model performance across five random seeds. Generally, Con- the PSM dataset, as shown in Fig. 9. For each detection
Flow demonstrates more robust and superior performance. window, the attention embeddings were calculated using the
Compared to MTGFLOW, our model consistently maintains normalized sum of the attention scores. As depicted in the
higher AUC-ROC scores. In the SWaT dataset [Fig. 7(a)], figure, different segments of the time series exhibited distinct
as the contamination ratio increases, the standard deviation of patterns, and their contextual embeddings evolved over time.
MTGFLOW shows an increasing trend, while that of ConFlow Notably, the context-aware encoding for anomalies displayed
remains low. In PSM dataset [Fig. 7(b)], the performance of different patterns.
ConFlow is more stable compared to MTGFLOW, with the Specifically, for Series 1, both the time series values and
standard deviation consistently remaining at a low level. the attention embeddings showed a relatively stable pattern
 most of the time. However, the attention scores signifi-
C. Result Visualization cantly increased during certain time intervals (i.e., timestamps
 13 000–14 000, 16 000–17 000, and 28 000–29 000), where a
 Anomalies can be traced back to individual sensors based
 potential contextual and point anomalies appeared during these
on anomaly scores. We selected six sensors in SWaT and
 periods. Similarly, Series 2, 3, and 24 also exhibit unique
visualized their anomaly scores and corresponding original
 attention embeddings when anomalies occur.
time series (Fig. 8). The thresholds are marked on the right
side of each subplot. Notably, some sensors exhibited similar
responses to the same anomaly. For example, AIT502 and E. Parameter Study
FIT504 showed related analogous reactions. This similarity
 We tested different hyperparameters to evaluate the robustmay suggest that these sensors were highly connected to
 ness of the model.
each other and experienced cascade failures. Additionally,
anomalies do not occur across all sensors. For example, 1) Decomposition Level, Window Size, and Flow Block:
LTT101 shows an anomalous pattern on the first and fourth We analyzed the impact of various hyperparameters, including
true labels, while others do not. LIT301 shows an anomalous decomposition level, window size, and the number of flow
pattern on the last true label, whereas other sensors remain model blocks.
unaffected. First, we fixed the window size at 60 and varied the
 decomposition levels and the number of flow blocks to assess
 their effects on model performance. The results are shown
D. Module Ablation and Visualization in Table VII. A larger model (with more flow blocks) may
 In this section, we perform an ablation study to evaluate the lead to overfitting and does not necessarily improve detection
effectiveness of the module design. performance, especially when the number of blocks exceeds
 1) Module Ablation: We evaluated the effectiveness of two. Moreover, a higher decomposition level does not always
the modules designed in ConFlow by testing various com- enhance model performance, and the optimal decomposition
binations on the PSM and SWaT datasets. The modules level varies across datasets. Specifically, with a fixed number
include context-aware encoding (C), loss reweight (L), and of flow blocks, a two-level decomposition is optimal for the
consistency-mask (M). ConFlow without specific modules PSM dataset, while a three-level decomposition is best for the
is denoted as ConFlow/(module abbreviation). For example, SWaT dataset.
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 8. Six series selected from SWaT and their corresponding anomaly scores.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 S TUDY OF M ODULE A BLATION PARAMETER S TUDY OF B LOCK N UMBER AND D ECOMPOSITION L EVEL

 TABLE VIII
 PARAMETER S TUDY OF B LOCK N UMBER AND W INDOW S IZE

Fig. 9. Four series selected from PSM test set and corresponding attention
embedding. the best performance with four flow blocks and a window size
 of 40, while SWaT demonstrates optimal performance with
 two flow blocks and a window size of 100. These findings
 Next, we fixed the decomposition level (3 for SWaT and suggest that selecting an appropriate window size is crucial
2 for PSM) and conducted experiments with various detection and should be tailored to the characteristics of each specific
window sizes and number of flow blocks to assess model dataset.
robustness. The results are presented in Table VIII. For the 2) Consistency-Mask Ratio Analysis: We further evaluated
PSM dataset, detection performance degrades as the window the model’s performance using different consistency mask
size increases, whereas for the SWaT dataset, performance ratios (Table IX). Q 2 represents the 50th percentile of the
improves with larger window sizes. Specifically, PSM achieves consistency score in each mini-batch, while Q 3 represents the
LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY 2511614

 TABLE IX [8] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn-
 PARAMETER S TUDY OF M ASK R ATIO chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Singapore, Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
 [9] L. Haan and A. Ferreira, Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction, vol. 3.
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2006.
 [10] M. Rosenblatt, “Curve estimates,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 42, no. 6,
 pp. 1815–1842, Dec. 1971.
 [11] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
 [12] K. Guo, N. Wang, D. Liu, and X. Peng, “Uncertainty-aware LSTM based
 dynamic flight fault detection for UAV actuator,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
75th percentile. For both datasets, increasing the mask ratio (in [13] Z. Zhang et al., “STAD-GAN: Unsupervised anomaly detection on mulother words, lowering the mask threshold) does not improve tivariate time series with self-training generative adversarial networks,”
model performance. The model achieves the best performance ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–18, Oct. 2023.
 [14] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsuwhen the mask threshold is set at Q 3 +1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ). This pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
phenomenon may be attributed to the contamination ratio of Feb. 2018, pp. 1–11.
the original training set. The training set contamination ratio is [15] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked autoregressive
 flow for density estimation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
23.1% for PSM and 17.7% for SWaT. A high mask ratio may vol. 30, Dec. 2017, pp. 2338–2347.
reduce the proportion of normal series in training, leading to [16] C. Horvat and J.-P. Pfister, “Denoising normalizing flow,” in Proc. Adv.
performance degradation. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 9099–9111.
 [17] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, “Normalizing flows: An
 introduction and review of current methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 VI. C ONCLUSION Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3964–3979, Nov. 2021.
 [18] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 In this work, we proposed ConFlow, an unsupervised detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
anomaly detection approach for multivariate time series. Con- Jan. 2022, pp. 1–20.
Flow is a density-based approach that utilizes the density [19] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate
inconsistency and contextual features of anomalies to enhance time series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4963–4971.
the discriminative ability of the Flow model. Extensive [20] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms other graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
baselines in detecting anomalies in multivariate time series. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
 [21] L. Shen, Z. Yu, Q. Ma, and J. T. Kwok, “Time series anomaly detection
ConFlow can accurately pinpoint anomalous positions within with multiresolution ensemble decoding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
time series and maintains stable performance across varying Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 9567–9575.
contamination ratios. [22] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 While ConFlow demonstrates good performance across series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–17.
most datasets, we identified a limitation when applied Con- [23] Z. Li, H. Yan, F. Tsung, and K. Zhang, “Profile decomposition based
Flow to datasets where normal time series exhibit inconsistent hybrid transfer learning for cold-start data anomaly detection,” ACM
patterns (such as spike-like signals in MSL). Future work will Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1–28, Dec. 2022.
 [24] S. Wang et al., “TimeMixer: Decomposable multiscale mixing for
focus on enhancing the model’s robustness to such natural time series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
inconsistencies. Additionally, we are exploring methods for May 2024, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?
detecting early anomalies which are similar with normal id=7oLshfEIC2
 [25] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FedFormer:
behavior. Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
 R EFERENCES [26] Z. Chen, Y. Lou, P. He, P. Xu, and X. Zhang, “Magnetic anomaly
 detection based on attention-Bi-LSTM network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 [1] X. Chen et al., “Removal of muscle artifacts from the EEG: A review Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
 and recommendations,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19, no. 14, pp. 5353–5368, [27] Q. Wen, J. Gao, X. Song, L. Sun, H. Xu, and S. Zhu, “Robust-
 Jul. 2019. STL: A robust seasonal-trend decomposition algorithm for long time
 [2] R. Huang, J. Li, W. Li, and L. Cui, “Deep ensemble capsule network series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, no. 1, Jul. 2019,
 for intelligent compound fault diagnosis using multisensory data,” IEEE pp. 5409–5416.
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2304–2314, May 2020. [28] Z. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, G. Trajcevski, T. Zhong, and F. Zhou,
 [3] J. Chen et al., “Deep reinforcement learning based resource allocation “Learning latent seasonal-trend representations for time series forein multi-UAV-aided MEC networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, casting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
 no. 1, pp. 296–309, Jan. 2023. pp. 38775–38787.
 [4] V. Barnett and T. Lewis, Outliers in Statistical Data, vol. 3, no. 1. [29] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet:
 New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1994. Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in
 [5] G. Niu, X. Dong, and Y. Chen, “Motor fault diagnostics based on Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2022, pp. 1–8.
 current signatures: A review,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, [30] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
 pp. 1–19, 2023. attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 [6] H. Cui, C. Li, A. Liu, R. Qian, and X. Chen, “A dual-branch interactive detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 fusion network to remove artifacts from single-channel EEG,” IEEE Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–12, 2024. [31] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 [7] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nontransformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 Proc. NIPS, vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 22419–22430. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
2511614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[32] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly [56] Z. Xu, A. Zeng, and Q. Xu, “FITS: Modeling time series with
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural 10k parameters,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2024,
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data pp. 1–17.
 Min., Anchorage, AK, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [57] E. Dai and J. Chen. (2022). GANF. [Online]. Available: https://github
[33] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Yang, Z. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Unsupervised machine .com/EnyanDai/GANF
 anomaly detection using autoencoder and temporal convolutional net- [58] M. A. Z. F. Galati and J. Audibert. (2020). USAD—Unsupervised
 work,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022. Anomaly Detection on Multivariate Time Series. [Online]. Available:
[34] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer https://github.com/manigalati/usad
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. [59] D. S. Tan and Y. Li. (2018). Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. Model for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in PyTorch. [Online]. Avail-
[35] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks able: https://github.com/EnyanDai/GANF
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based [60] Z. Xu. (2024). FITS: Frequency Interpolation Time Series Analysis
 Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849. Baseline. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/VEWOXIC/FITS
[36] X. Huang, F. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Lin, H. Liu, and H. Fan, “KalmanAE: [61] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng. (2023). MTGFLOW.
 Deep embedding optimized Kalman filter for time series anomaly [Online]. Available: https://github.com/username/repository_name
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[37] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial recon- Ruoheng Li received the B.S. degree from Nanstruction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, jing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
 pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023. Nanjing, China, in 2020, the B.S. degree from the
[38] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “GAN-based Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology University,
 anomaly detection for multivariate time series using polluted training Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2020, and the M.S.
 set,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219, degree with Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
 Dec. 2023. Astronautics, in 2023. She is currently pursuing
[39] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly detec- the Ph.D. degree with Beihang University, Beijing,
 tion and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation China.
 graph-based encoder–decoder GAN,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., Her current research interests include data science
 vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022. and intelligent transportation.
[40] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Zhongyao Liu received the B.E. degree from
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104. the School of Mechanical and Power Engineering,
[41] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2024.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Aug. 2008, pp. 413–422. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
[42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
 Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. Beihang University, Beijing, China.
 His current research interests include deep
[43] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
 learning.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2019, pp. 1–9.
[44] D. A. Reynolds, “Gaussian mixture models,” Encyclopedia Biometrics,
 vol. 741, nos. 659–663, pp. 1–5, 2009.
[45] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int. Xi Zhu received the B.E. degree in electronic and
 Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Secur., vol. 10242, G. Havarneanu, R. Setola, information engineering and the M.E. degree in con-
 H. Nassopoulos, and S. Wolthusen, Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer, trol science and engineering from Beijing University
 2017, pp. 88–99. of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010 and 2013,
[46] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in signal and
 distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical information processing from Beihang University,
 systems,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CySWater, Apr. 2017, pp. 25–28. Beijing, in 2018.
 He is currently an Associate Researcher with the
[47] T. Hesterberg, “Bootstrap,” Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev., Comput. Statist., School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
 vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 497–526, 2011. Beihang University. His research interests include
[48] J. Ren et al., “Likelihood ratios for out-of-distribution detection,” in multivariate time series analysis, spatiotemporal data
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–9. mining, and target behavior cognition.
[49] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, Lin Li received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024. science and technology from Beihang University,
[50] I. Chivers, J. Sleightholme, I. Chivers, and J. Sleightholme, “An intro- Beijing, China, in 2018.
 duction to algorithms and the big O notation,” in Introduction to He is currently a Senior Engineer with CNCERT,
 Programming With Fortran: With Coverage of Fortran 90, 95, 2003, Beijing. His current research interests include AI and
 2008 and 77. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2003, pp. 359–364. network information security.
[51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[52] F. D. Keles, P. M. Wijewardena, and C. Hegde, “On the computational
 complexity of self-attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Algorithmic Learn.
 Theory, Jan. 2022, pp. 597–619.
[53] G. Papamakarios, E. Nalisnick, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and Xianbin Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B. Lakshminarayanan, “Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling B.E. and M.E. degrees in computer applications and
 and inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 22, no. 57, pp. 1–64, information science from Anhui University, Hefei,
 Jan. 2021. China, in 1990 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D.
[54] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end one- degree in information science from the University of
 class classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, Science and Technology of China, Hefei, in 1996.
 pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021. He is currently a Professor with the School of
[55] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” University, Beijing, China. His current research
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020, interests include intelligent transportation systems,
 pp. 3395–3404. air traffic management, and intelligent computation.