Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Intelligent Systems with Applications
 journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/intelligent-systems-with-applications

Detecting unknown intrusions from large heterogeneous data through
ensemble learning
Farah Jemili * , Khaled Jouini, Ouajdi Korbaa
Universite de Sousse, ISITCom, MARS Research Laboratory, LR17ES05, Hammam Sousse, 4011, Tunisia

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: The rapid expansion of data volumes, technological advancements, and the emergence of the Internet of Things
Big heterogeneous data (IoT) have heightened concerns regarding the detection of unknown intrusions based on singular sources of
Intrusion detection network traffic. This progression has led to the generation of vast and diverse datasets originating from various
Data fusion
 sources including IoT devices, web applications, and web services. Effectively discerning attacks within such a
 heterogeneous network traffic landscape necessitates the identification of underlying security behaviors,
 essential for developing an efficient analysis information system.
 This paper aims to establish a comprehensive framework for network intrusion detection. The proposed
 methodology involves the synthesis of network features into a universal security database through the utilization
 of Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency Terms (TF-IDF) and semantic Cosine similarity. By amalgam­
 ating a diverse array of data flows, a set of universal features is generated, facilitating storage within the newly
 devised universal representation. Subsequently, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is employed to reduce the
 dimensionality of the extensive universal security database while preserving essential information. Leveraging
 Ensemble Learning, a novel method is introduced for the detection of unknown attacks.
 The efficacy of the developed database is evaluated using various Machine Learning algorithms, including
 Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. Furthermore,
 Ensemble Learning methods are assessed under two distinct scenarios. Experimental findings, conducted on
 datasets such as CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and UNSW, demonstrate the universality, versatility, and effectiveness
 of the proposed approach, particularly in accommodating datasets with diverse structures.

1. Introduction complicates the detection of unknown intrusions across varied network
 data sources. Given the prevalence of interconnected computer systems
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have long been essential tools for in real-world applications, the traditional approach of creating separate
identifying potential attacks within computer networks and systems. IDS for each network type is increasingly impractical.
Recently, the integration of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms has
further enhanced IDS by enabling more sophisticated data analysis and 1.1. Motivation and contributions
classification for intrusion detection. In the context of ML, IDS function
as classifiers, categorizing network traffic data and predicting potential • Motivation:
attacks based on this classification (Patel, Taghavi, Bakhtiyari & Júnior, ○ The rise in volume and diversity of network traffic, particularly
2013). with IoT, has amplified the challenge of detecting unknown attacks
 However, IDS face increasing challenges due to the exponential in real-time.
growth of data and the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) devices, ○ Conventional IDS struggle to process heterogeneous data from
which generate diverse and complex data. While recent advancements multiple sources, necessitating a universal framework for intrusion
in big data have led to the development of distributed architectures for detection.
IDS (Intrata, Grif & Dostovalov, 2021; Othman et al., 2018; Peng, Leung ○ An adaptable, efficient, and scalable IDS approach is critical for
& Huang, 2018), the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of cyberspace real-world environments where threats constantly evolve.

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: jmili_farah@yahoo.fr (F. Jemili).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iswa.2024.200465
Received 26 April 2024; Received in revised form 14 November 2024; Accepted 5 December 2024
Available online 9 December 2024
2667-3053/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 • Contributions of This Study: performance.
 ○ Universal Security Database: We propose a comprehensive data­ Zhou et al. (2018) introduced a taxonomy that addresses the het­
 base that integrates features from diverse network types, creating a erogeneity of network data, including host logs, application logs, and
 versatile foundation for IDS. wireless network traffic. While this taxonomy provides a framework for
 ○ Universal Feature Representation: By leveraging Term Frequency- understanding data diversity, it does not explore the integration of these
 Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and Cosine similarity, our diverse data types through advanced feature extraction and ensemble
 framework effectively fuses heterogeneous data sources. learning techniques. Our study contributes to this area by developing
 ○ Dimensionality Reduction: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is methods for effective data fusion and leveraging ensemble learning to
 applied to streamline the feature space, ensuring both efficiency address the complexities of heterogeneous network environments.
 and preservation of essential information. Recent studies such as ARGUS IDS and CIC Flow Meter (2022) have
 ○ Ensemble Learning Method: A unique ensemble method, proposed advanced methods for feature extraction and classification,
 combining parallel and sequential approaches, is introduced to including multi-dimensional feature fusion and deep neural
 enhance the detection accuracy of unknown attacks. network-based reconstruction techniques. While these methods address
 ○ Comprehensive Evaluation: The proposed framework is rigorously feature extraction challenges, our work introduces a novel combination
 tested on multiple scenarios using CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and of data fusion techniques and ensemble learning approaches that
 UNSW-NB15 datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness and significantly enhances the effectiveness of intrusion detection systems
 adaptability. across a range of datasets and environments, (Table 1).
 To further enhance intrusion detection in cybersecurity, the works in
1.2. Paper structure Arasteh et al. (2024), Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati and Craciunescu (2024),
 and Danesh, Karimi and Arasteh (2024) offer noteworthy contributions
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 re­ focused on specialized threat detection. The paper (Arasteh, Bouyer,
views the current state of IDS and the ongoing challenges. Section 3 Sefati & Craciunescu, 2024) introduces a hybrid approach to SQL in­
discusses network traffic sources and introduces a novel framework for jection (SQLi) detection using the Binary Olympiad Optimizer (BOO) for
data representation. Section 4 details the proposed methodology. Sec­ feature selection combined with classification algorithms. This method
tion 5 presents evaluation results, and Section 6 provides conclusions efficiently reduces computational complexity and achieves high detec­
from the study. tion accuracy by narrowing down to relevant features for SQLi detec­
 tion. Similarly, (Arasteh et al., 2024) addresses SQLi detection by
2. Related works employing the Binary Gray Wolf Optimizer (BGWO) alongside machine
 learning classifiers, constructing a dataset with essential SQLi indicators
 Traditional machine learning (ML) tools, while effective in certain to improve model accuracy and reduce computational demands. While
contexts, have struggled to keep pace with the ever-expanding diversity both approaches offer effective feature selection techniques that
and sheer volume of network traffic data. As a result, researchers have enhance traditional SQLi detection methods, they are limited to specific
increasingly turned to big data technologies as a means of enhancing types of attacks within SQLi threats, and neither work expands to mul­
intrusion detection capabilities. To tackle the challenge posed by the tiple types of network traffic data or addresses the scalability challenges
sheer magnitude of data, innovative approaches leveraging distributed associated with big data environments.
architectures, distributed storage systems, and parallelization para­ In Danesh, Karimi and Arasteh (2024), CMShark is introduced as a
digms have been developed. network-based, infrastructure-independent method for detecting
 Peng, Leung and Huang (2018) introduced a method combining Mini crypto-jacking attacks. The study uses a hybrid approach, combining
Batch K-means with Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to differen­ machine learning classification, IP blacklisting, and payload inspection,
tiate between normal and malicious behavior in network traffic. This providing robust crypto-jacking detection through packet size classifi­
approach harnesses the power of distributed computing for scalability cation, known IP addresses, and keyword-based payload inspection.
and efficiency, but it focuses on a single data source and does not explore Although CMShark’s multi-faceted design improves crypto-jacking
ensemble learning methods for integrating multiple datasets. Our pro­ detection accuracy, its application is limited to network edge de­
posed approach advances this work by integrating data from NSL-KDD, ployments and specific attack types, making it less versatile for
UNSW, and CICIDS datasets and employing a novel ensemble learning large-scale, heterogeneous network environments.
strategy that combines both parallel and sequential methods for While (Arasteh et al., 2024; Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati & Craciunescu,
enhanced intrusion detection. 2024), and (Danesh, Karimi & Arasteh, 2024) introduce innovative and
 Elayni et al.’s survey (Elayni, Jemili, Korbaa & Soulaimen, 2019) effective detection methods for SQLi and crypto-jacking threats, they
provides valuable insights into the IDS process, spanning from data primarily focus on isolated attack vectors, relying on specific feature
collection to detection methods, and highlights the importance of big selection optimizers and detection techniques that are not optimized for
data storage and analysis techniques. However, this survey does not the integration of diverse data sources or scalable, distributed archi­
address the specific challenges of data fusion across heterogeneous tectures. In contrast, our approach incorporates an ensemble learning
sources or the application of ensemble learning techniques. Our work framework that unites data from the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS
builds upon these foundational concepts by proposing a comprehensive datasets, accommodating a broader spectrum of attacks. This ensemble
approach that integrates advanced feature extraction techniques with a learning strategy not only includes both parallel and sequential methods
unique ensemble learning framework designed to handle diverse data for enhanced intrusion detection but also addresses data fusion from
environments. diverse sources, surpassing the single-source limitations of the discussed
 Distributed frameworks such as Hadoop and Spark have emerged as studies. By leveraging distributed computing frameworks such as
pivotal platforms for managing large volumes of network traffic data Hadoop and Spark, our approach achieves the scalability necessary to
(Intrata, Grif & Dostovalov, 2021; Othman et al., 2018; Patel, Taghavi, handle big data environments, a critical factor overlooked in Arasteh
Bakhtiyari & Júnior, 2013; Peng, Leung & Huang, 2018; Zuech, et al. (2024), Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati and Craciunescu (2024), Danesh,
Khoshgoftaar & Wald, 2015). These frameworks are essential for effi­ Karimi and Arasteh (2024).
cient data processing but often focus on individual datasets rather than In summary, our contribution significantly advances the field by
exploring techniques for fusing diverse data sources. Our approach ex­ addressing the challenges of diverse data integration, scalability, and
tends these frameworks by applying a novel ensemble learning strategy multi-model ensemble learning, delivering a more comprehensive and
that integrates multiple data sources and methods to improve detection robust intrusion detection solution adaptable to complex and large-scale

 2
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Table 1 ■ Comprehensive Evaluation: Conducts extensive experiments
Related work. across diverse datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and scal­
 Study Key Contributions Limitations Our Novelty and ability of the proposed approach.
 Differentiation

 Peng, Leung and Combines Mini Focuses on a Integrates multiple The proposed method addresses several key limitations commonly
 Huang (2018) Batch K-means single data datasets (NSL- found in existing unknown intrusion detectors:
 with PCA for source; lacks KDD, UNSW,
 network traffic ensemble CICIDS) with 1. Inability to Handle Heterogeneous Data: Traditional detectors
 analysis methods ensemble learning
 (parallel and
 often focus on single-source or homogenous datasets, which limits
 sequential) to their applicability in real-world scenarios where data sources are
 improve detection diverse. Our method overcomes this by creating a universal security
 accuracy database that integrates features from multiple, heterogeneous
 Elayni, Jemili, Survey on IDS Does not Proposes a
 datasets (CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15).
 Korbaa and process from data address data comprehensive
 Soulaimen collection to fusion or approach 2. Limited Detection of Unknown Attacks: Many intrusion detection
 (2019) detection ensemble integrating data systems rely on predefined patterns or signatures, making them less
 methods learning fusion and effective for unknown intrusions. By applying ensemble learning and
 techniques ensemble learning a universal feature representation, our method enhances the detec­
 for diverse data
 environments
 tion capability for novel, previously unseen attacks.
 Distributed Utilizes Hadoop Often limited to Extends these 3. High Computational Requirements: Existing systems sometimes
 Frameworks ( and Spark for individual frameworks with a struggle with large, high-dimensional data, which can slow down
 Patel, Taghavi, efficient data datasets; lacks novel ensemble detection and reduce scalability. Our approach addresses this
 Bakhtiyari & processing data fusion learning strategy
 through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for dimensionality
 Júnior, 2013; focus that integrates
 Intrata, Grif & multiple data reduction, which optimizes processing time and computational
 Dostovalov, sources efficiency.
 2021; Peng, 4. Scalability and Adaptability Issues: IDS often need extensive
 Leung & Huang, reconfiguration to adapt to different datasets or network environ­
 2018; Othman
 ments. The proposed framework is designed to be adaptable across
 et al., 2018;
 Zuech, various data environments, increasing the scalability of the IDS.
 Khoshgoftaar &
 Wald, 2015) 3. Methodology formulation
 Zhou et al. (2018) Introduces Does not Develops methods
 taxonomy for explore data for effective data
 network data integration or fusion and utilizes 3.1. Network data representation
 heterogeneity advanced ensemble learning
 feature to handle This section delves into the intricacies of communication between
 extraction heterogeneous network systems, as defined by the Open System Interconnection (OSI)
 techniques network
 environments
 reference model, which conceptualizes data transmission across seven
 ARGUS IDS Proposes multi- Primarily Combines layers from the physical layer to the application layer (ARGUS, IDS; CIC
 dimensional focuses on advanced feature Flow, Meter). Data transmission occurs via packets, which serve as the
 feature fusion and feature extraction fundamental unit of communication in network traffic (see Fig. 1). Each
 stacking ensemble extraction; techniques with
 packet comprises a payload, representing the actual data being trans­
 limited data ensemble learning,
 sources enhancing mitted, along with one or more headers containing metadata such as
 effectiveness source and destination IP addresses, service details, and protocols.
 across various Notably, headers play a crucial role in computer networking by
 datasets providing essential information for accurate data transmission. For
 CIC Flow Meter Novel Focuses on Introduces a
 reconstruction feature unique
 instance, packets conforming to the Telnet Network protocol (telnet)
 method using extraction and combination of adhere to the TCP/IP standard and encompass a media access control
 deep neural classification data fusion and (MAC) header, an internet protocol (IP) header, a transmission control
 networks for ensemble learning protocol (TCP) header, a telnet header, and a telnet payload.
 feature extraction to significantly
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) leverage headers from packets
 enhance intrusion
 detection across various protocols to extract features specific to each type of
 capabilities network traffic data. For instance, tools like CICFlow Meter (CICIDS,
 2017) are utilized to extract 76 distinct features from network traffic
 within datasets like CICIDS 2017.
network environments. However, two significant drawbacks are associated with the network
 Summary of Our Contributions: traffic data utilized in IDS. Firstly, the detection focus is typically
 confined to individual packets or isolated data flows. While a single data
■ Data Fusion: Integrates multiple heterogeneous datasets (NSL-KDD, flow may consist of multiple series of data packets from the same
 UNSW, CICIDS) to improve robustness and generalizability. network type, real-world network traffic is characterized by heteroge­
■ Ensemble Learning: Utilizes a combination of parallel and neous data flows with diverse structural compositions. While hetero­
 sequential ensemble methods to enhance detection accuracy and geneous data flow collection is recommended for IDS, it presents
 performance. challenges for Machine Learning (ML) algorithms.
■ Feature Extraction: Employs innovative techniques like TF-IDF and Secondly, metadata poses another challenge, as features are extrac­
 Cosine similarity for effective feature extraction, addressing the un­ ted from headers following universal network standards such as the OSI
 structured nature of intrusion data. reference model and TCP/IP standard. However, proposed datasets
 often exhibit ambiguous feature names with differing notations, despite
 being derived from standard packet headers.

 3
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Fig. 1. The extraction of data and metadata from a packet.

 In our study, we redefine the detection object as heterogeneous data The data, denoted as D, is sourced from various channels, as outlined
flows, acknowledging the unstructured nature of the data. Our proposal in Section 3.1. Each data source is characterized by a specific structure,
centers on the development of a new universal representation encom­ represented by a vector X. Data sharing the same vector structure is
passing all possible features established in accordance with network assigned to a common category, denoted as Ԟ. To establish a universal
standards. This approach aims to address the complexities inherent in framework, we define a universal vector, U, encompassing all observ­
heterogeneous data environments and provide a comprehensive foun­ able categories within network traffic, irrespective of its origin. The
dation for effective intrusion detection. universal vector, U, comprises individual vectors, U= (X1, X2, …, Xk),
 Our approach starts with understanding how data travels in a with each vector defined by a set of features, F:
network, based on the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model. The
 Uj = X1 ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fn )
OSI model describes data transmission in seven layers, from the physical
 X2 ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fm )
layer to the application layer. Data is sent in packets, which are small ⋅
units of data. Each packet has a payload (the actual data) and headers Xk ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fz )
(metadata like source and destination IP addresses, and protocol
information). Where j = n + m + z, representing the total dimensionality of the new
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) use these headers to extract fea­ universal vector, U.
tures from network traffic. For example, tools like CICFlowMeter can At this juncture, our aim is to establish a standardized set of features
extract 76 features from datasets such as CICIDS 2017. However, within the universal vector, Uj. However, despite originating from the
focusing only on individual packets or single data flows has two main same network standard, certain features may exhibit redundancies or
problems: inconsistencies in naming conventions. In addressing this challenge, we
 leverage the metadata associated with each dataset, which provides a
1. Real-world network traffic is heterogeneous, meaning it contains comprehensive description of all features. Our proposal entails the
 data from various sources with different structures. creation of a new corpus derived from metadata, wherein each feature is
2. Metadata extracted from packet headers can have ambiguous names, assigned a designation and detailed description. This corpus serves as a
 even if they follow standard network protocols. dynamic repository, automatically updated to accommodate new fea­
 tures as they are integrated. By harnessing metadata in this manner, we
 To address these issues, we propose a new method that handles aim to streamline feature management and enhance the overall effec­
heterogeneous data flows by creating a universal representation of tiveness of our universal IDS framework.
network traffic. Machine Learning (ML) algorithms typically require specific data
 structures, making it impractical to use a separate IDS for each network
 system. This is because an attack in one layer (e.g., the application layer)
3.2. Data flows reconstruction: big universal security database can affect other layers (e.g., the physical layer). Therefore, our IDS needs
 to correlate data from various sources to detect threats effectively.
 In the realm of Machine Learning (ML), algorithms typically operate Our solution is to build a universal database that combines data from
within the confines of specific data structures, rendering the utilization different sources. Here’s how we do it:
of a distinct Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for each network system
impractical. This is primarily due to the interconnected nature of 1. Data Collection: We collect data (D) from various channels, each
network layers, where an attack originating in the application layer can with a specific structure (vector X). Data with the same structure is
impact the physical layer, and vice versa. Therefore, an effective IDS grouped into a category (Ԟ).
necessitates the correlation and aggregation of data packets from 2. Universal Vector Creation: We create a universal vector (U) that
various sources to provide comprehensive threat detection capabilities. includes all categories of network traffic. The universal vector is a
In our proposed approach, we advocate for the development of a uni­
versal database capable of accommodating data from diverse sources.

 4
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 combination of individual vectors (U = X1, X2, …, Xk), each defined By providing this detailed description and pseudocode, we aim to
 by a set of features (F). clarify the construction process of the universal features vector and
3. Standardization: Although these features come from the same facilitate the reproducibility of our methodology.
 network standard, they might have different names or redundant
 information. We use metadata to create a new corpus that provides a 3.4. Dataset description
 clear description for each feature. This corpus is updated automati­
 cally as new features are added. 3.4.1. Data collection process
 Our study utilized three benchmark datasets commonly used for
3.3. Construction of universal features vector evaluating network intrusion detection systems: CICIDS 2017, NSL-
 KDD, and UNSW-NB15. Below is a detailed description of the data
 The universal features vector is a crucial component of our proposed collection process for each dataset:
methodology, designed to capture the essential characteristics of the
input data for intrusion detection. Below, we provide a detailed 1. CICIDS 2017:
description of the construction process, along with pseudocode to ■ Source: The dataset was generated by the Canadian Institute for
facilitate reproducibility. Cybersecurity.
 ■ Environment: The data was collected in a controlled environment
1. Data Preprocessing: that simulated real-world network traffic.
 ■ Tokenize the input data. ■ Traffic Types: It includes benign traffic and a variety of attack
 ■ Remove stopwords and perform stemming or lemmatization. types such as DoS, DDoS, PortScan, and Brute Force.
 ■ Calculate Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) ■ Duration: Data was collected over a period of five days.
 for the tokenized data. 2. NSL-KDD:
2. Dimensionality Reduction: ■ Source: This dataset is an improved version of the original KDD
 ■ Apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the Cup 1999 dataset, addressing issues like redundant records.
 dimensionality of the TF-IDF matrix while preserving essential ■ Traffic Types: It contains both normal traffic and different attack
 information. types including Probe, R2 L, U2R, and DoS.
3. Feature Aggregation: ■ Preprocessing: It has been preprocessed to remove duplicate re­
 ■ Construct the universal features vector by aggregating the cords and improve data quality.
 reduced-dimensional features (Fig. 2). 3. UNSW-NB15:

 Fig. 2. Universal features vector construction pseudocode.

 5
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 ■ Source: The dataset was created by the Australian Centre for 3. Handling Class Imbalance:
 Cyber Security. ■ Oversampling: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique
 ■ Environment: Data was collected from a hybrid of real modern (SMOTE) was applied to generate synthetic samples for the mi­
 normal activities and synthetic contemporary attack behaviors. nority classes, balancing the class distribution.
 ■ Traffic Types: It includes normal traffic as well as nine types of ■ Undersampling: Random undersampling of the majority class was
 attacks such as Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, and Exploits performed to ensure a balanced training set, reducing the risk of
 (Figs. 3 and 4). model bias towards the majority class.
 ■ Class Weights: During model training, class weights were adjusted
3.4.2. Distribution of classes to penalize misclassifications of the minority class more heavily,
 The datasets exhibit varying distributions of classes, which is encouraging the model to pay more attention to underrepresented
important to consider for training and evaluating our models: classes.

1. CICIDS 2017: The careful collection and preprocessing of the datasets ensure that
 ■ Normal Traffic: Approximately 80% of the dataset. our models are trained on high-quality, balanced data, enhancing their
 ■ Attack Traffic: Approximately 20%, with a detailed breakdown as ability to detect a wide range of network intrusions effectively. These
 follows: DoS/DDoS: 10%, PortScan: 5%, Brute Force: 3%, Others: steps contribute significantly to the robustness and generalizability of
 2% our intrusion detection framework.
2. NSL-KDD: Our proposed approach integrates various machine learning tech­
 ■ Normal Traffic: Around 53% of the dataset. niques to enhance the detection of unknown intrusions in network
 ■ Attack Traffic: Around 47%, with categories: Probe: 21%, DoS: traffic. This section explains the methodology in detail, including sample
 13%, R2L: 12%, U2R: 1% feature data from the datasets used in our experiments.
3. UNSW-NB15: Before applying machine learning algorithms, the raw network
 ■ Normal Traffic: Approximately 88% of the dataset. traffic data from the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets were pre­
 ■ Attack Traffic: Approximately 12%, broken down as: Fuzzers: 5%, processed. This involved the following steps:
 Analysis: 2%, DoS: 2%, Exploits: 1%, Others: 2%
 ■ Feature Extraction: Relevant features were extracted from the
3.4.3. Data preprocessing and handling class imbalance network traffic data using TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Docu­
 Preprocessing steps were essential to prepare the data for training ment Frequency) and Cosine similarity. These techniques helped in
and to address class imbalance issues. Here are the steps taken: transforming the textual data into numerical features that machine
 learning algorithms can process.
1. Data Cleaning: ■ Dimensionality Reduction: Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
 ■ Duplicate Removal: Duplicate records were removed to ensure was applied to reduce the feature space while retaining the most
 the quality and uniqueness of the data. important information. This step helps in mitigating the curse of
 ■ Missing Values: Missing values were handled by either imputing dimensionality and improving the efficiency of the model (Table 2).
 with the mean/mode or by removing the records if the missing
 rate was high. 3.5. Feature description
2. Feature Engineering:
 ■ Normalization: Continuous features were normalized to a range This study leverages three widely-used datasets: CICIDS 2017, NSLbetween 0 and 1 using min-max scaling. KDD, and UNSW-NB15. Each dataset provides a range of features
 ■ Categorical Encoding: Categorical features were encoded using essential for effective intrusion detection. Below is an overview of key
 one-hot encoding to convert them into a numerical format suit­ features included in our analysis:
 able for ML models.

 Fig. 3. Feature classification for NSL-KDD dataset.

 6
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Fig. 4. Feature classification for UNSW-NB15 dataset.

 2. Big Universal Security Database (BUSD): We propose the Big
Table 2 Universal Security Database (BUSD), which is capable of accommo­
Sample Feature Data (from NSL-KDD dataset).
 dating and correlating data from various sources. The theoretical
 Feature Description Sample foundation of BUSD lies in its ability to integrate data flows of
 Value
 different structures into a unified vector representation. This method
 Duration Length of the connection in seconds 0.03 enhances the capability of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to
 Protocol Type Type of protocol (e.g., TCP, UDP) TCP detect unknown attacks by considering the interconnected nature of
 Service Network service on the destination (e.g., HTTP, HTTP
 FTP)
 network layers. This is a novel contribution to the theoretical un­
 Source Bytes Number of data bytes from source to destination 181 derstanding of data fusion in network security.
 Destination Number of data bytes from destination to source 5450 3. Dimensionality Reduction with PCA: Our approach employs
 Bytes Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of
 the extensive universal security database while preserving essential
 information. This theoretical framework for dimensionality reduc­
 • CICIDS 2017: This dataset includes 76 features that capture various
 tion is crucial for managing large-scale data and improving the ef­
 traffic behaviors, such as Flow Duration, Total Fwd Packets, Fwd
 ficiency of machine learning algorithms used in IDS.
 Packet Length Mean, Flow Bytes/s, and others. These features pro­
 4. Ensemble Learning Methodology: We introduce a new ensemble
 vide insights into bidirectional flows, allowing for the identification
 learning method that combines both parallel and sequential ap­
 of attack patterns in real-world scenarios.
 proaches for detecting unknown attacks. This methodology enhances
 • NSL-KDD: Comprising 41 features, NSL-KDD includes attributes such
 the accuracy and robustness of IDS by leveraging the strengths of
 as Protocol Type, Service, Flag, Source Bytes, and Destination Bytes.
 multiple machine learning algorithms. The theoretical contribution
 These features are used to differentiate between normal and
 here lies in the innovative use of ensemble learning to handle het­
 abnormal traffic types.
 erogeneous data more effectively.
 • UNSW-NB15: This dataset offers 46 features, covering aspects like
 5. Evaluation Across Multiple Scenarios: The efficacy of our pro­
 srcip, sport, dstip, dsport, and state. Additionally, it includes highposed approach is evaluated using various machine learning algo­
 level summaries like Total Bytes and Total Packets, which are valu­
 rithms, including Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic
 able for anomaly detection.
 Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. Our experimental
 findings, conducted on datasets such as CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and
 Each dataset’s features are preprocessed and standardized to form a
 UNSW, demonstrate the universality, versatility, and effectiveness of
universal representation, as described in the following section. By
 our approach. This comprehensive evaluation contributes to the
incorporating diverse features across datasets, our approach enhances
 theoretical understanding of how different machine learning tech­
detection accuracy and robustness in heterogeneous data environments.
 niques can be applied to heterogeneous network data.

3.6. Innovative aspects and theoretical advancements in our work
 These points collectively establish a strong theoretical foundation
 and demonstrate the innovative contributions of our research to the
1. Novel Universal Representation of Network Features: Our paper
 fields of data fusion and intrusion detection in heterogeneous network
 introduces a new methodology for restructuring network data based
 environments.
 on predefined features, employing Term Frequency-Inverse Docu­
 ment Frequency (TF-IDF) and Cosine similarity to create a universal
 4. Proposed approach
 security database. This approach is innovative as it allows for the
 aggregation and analysis of heterogeneous data flows within a sin­
 4.1. Approach description
 gular, comprehensive framework. This universal representation ad­
 dresses the complexities inherent in diverse data environments,
 The proposed method for intrusion detection follows a systematic,
 which is a significant theoretical advancement in the field of intru­
 multi-stage process designed to harness the strengths of ensemble
 sion detection.

 7
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

learning across heterogeneous datasets. The key stages of this approach names, facilitating a nuanced understanding and robust analysis of
are outlined as follows: network traffic data. In our investigation, the focal point is heteroge­
 neous data flows, each delineated by a distinct set of features. Notably,
1. Data Collection and Preparation: some features may manifest across multiple data flows, while com­
 ○ Gather data from multiple, heterogeneous network datasets, monalities can be identified among various network types. To address
 including NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS. these intricacies, we leverage the corpus to scrutinize feature de­
 ○ Preprocess the datasets by cleaning, encoding categorical features, scriptions utilizing similarity measures. Additionally, it serves as a
 and normalizing values to ensure consistency across diverse data foundation for generating a novel universal features representation.
 sources. Illustrating the structural underpinning of our proposed methodol­
2. Feature Extraction and Transformation: ogy, Fig. 5 depicts the collection of Packet Captures (PCAP) from diverse
 ○ Apply Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and sources alongside their corresponding metadata. This metadata is
 Cosine similarity to extract meaningful features, transforming raw instrumental in constructing a comprehensive and expansive universal
 data into a structured format. security database, as delineated in the accompanying figure.
 ○ Generate a universal feature representation to unify features across Metadata M (F, D). Within the framework of Metadata M (F, D), we
 datasets, ensuring compatibility in a multi-source environment. establish a corpus tailored for the storage and aggregation of all features
3. Dimensionality Reduction: present in network traffic. This corpus encompasses a comprehensive
 ○ Use Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimen­ collection of feature names (F) alongside their corresponding detailed
 sionality of the extracted feature space while retaining essential descriptions (D). Additionally, each feature is associated with a desig­
 information, optimizing computational efficiency. nated category (K), which serves to describe the origin of the network
4. Ensemble Learning Model Construction: traffic data to which it pertains.
 ○ Design a unique ensemble learning framework that combines both New universal features representation. To establish a new uni­
 parallel and sequential ensemble approaches. versal features representation, we employed Cosine similarity based on
 ○ Train multiple machine learning algorithms (e.g., Naïve Bayes, K- Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (tf-idf). This approach
 Nearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, and Random proves efficacious in our context due to the extensive and overlapping
 Forest) on the processed data, allowing the model to leverage the nature of the provided descriptions. Tf-idf serves to quantify the
 strengths of different classifiers. importance of terms within documents, calculated as follows:
5. Model Evaluation:
 tf − idf(t, d) = tf(t, d) ∗ idf(t) (1)
 ○ Evaluate the trained ensemble model across multiple datasets,

 assessing its performance on heterogeneous data sources. where tf (t, d) represents the frequency of a term occurs in a document
 ○ Measure accuracy, recall, precision, F1-score, and other metrics to
 and idf (t) is equal to log (number of documents in corpus / number of
 confirm the model’s ability to detect unknown intrusions documents containing the term).
 effectively. The result of tf-idf is used to calculate the cosine similarity:
6. Performance Optimization and Analysis:
 ○ Analyze the model’s strengths and limitations, focusing on detec­ CosineSimilarity (tf − idf(d1), tf − idf(d2)) = (d1 ∗ d2)/ ‖ d1 ‖ ∗ ‖ d2 ‖
 tion accuracy and computational efficiency. (2)
 ○ Identify potential improvements and areas for future research,
 Drawing from this methodology, we enact the proposed approach
 such as reducing computational complexity and enhancing
 outlined in the preceding algorithm to generate novel universal features.
 adaptability to evolving threats.
 This method facilitates the comparison and alignment of feature de­
 scriptions across various categories through tf-idf. Each tf-idf compu­
 To construct a comprehensive corpus, we relied on metadata, which
 tation produces a vector representation, collectively forming a set of
furnishes detailed descriptions of the extracted features.
 vectors utilized to construct a space model employing cosine similarity.
 These descriptions offer invaluable insights surpassing mere feature
 Within each category, features with a cosine score exceeding zero are

 Fig. 5. The proposed approach.

 8
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

collated into a list and arranged in descending order. Subsequently, the decision-making based on the models generated: determining whether
primary feature in this sorted list is designated as a common feature, the vector Y test corresponds to a normal or abnormal label.
thereby assigning it a new universal name (Algorithm 1). This decision-making process relies on the exploitation of knowledge
 Big universal security database U (M, Data). The data originates derived from diverse learning bases, often executed sequentially. To
from heterogeneous data flows, characterized as unstructured data. enhance classification performance, we incorporate the Adaboost algo­
Initially, the first P flow bytes serve as the foundation for constructing rithm as a boosting model, ensuring robust and accurate classification
the universal vector U, with its dimensionality matching that of P. outcomes (see Fig. 6).
Subsequently, the second set of flow bytes (P’) sourced from alternate
data origins are juxtaposed with the initial P flow bytes. To facilitate 4.2. Rationale for choosing machine learning algorithms
data storage, we overlay the data flows. In instances where P and P’
possess differing dimensions or where one set of flow bytes is deficient In our proposed framework, we have selected Random Forest and
compared to the other, vacant bytes are populated with zeros to main­ Adaboost as the primary machine learning algorithms. The rationale for
tain consistency. Following this process, a new database encompassing choosing these specific algorithms is based on their unique strengths and
diverse network intrusion detection structures is established. their ability to address the challenges of heterogeneous intrusion
 Data reconstruction. In order to effectively process the new data­ detection.
base, we introduce a novel data reconstruction technique. Given that
this database contains zero values, which could potentially impact the 4.2.1. Random forest
efficiency of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms by introducing biases Random Forest is an ensemble learning method that constructs
towards large values, we employ Principal Component Analysis (PCA). multiple decision trees during training and outputs the mode of the
PCA operates by transforming the data through projection onto a set of classes for classification tasks. The reasons for selecting Random Forest
orthogonal axes. include:
 By doing so, PCA facilitates optimal reconstruction of the data,
effectively handling values with null entropies by disregarding them. 1. Robustness to Overfitting:
Moreover, PCA ensures superior dimensionality reduction, transitioning ■ Random Forest mitigates overfitting by averaging the results of
from the original M dimensions to a more compact N dimensionality. multiple decision trees, reducing the variance of the model.
Leveraging PCA with the big universal security database enables us to 2. Handling High-Dimensional Data:
prepare the data for final classification with enhanced efficiency and ■ Random Forest is well-suited for high-dimensional data, as it can
accuracy. handle a large number of features without significant perfor­
 Data classification. Following the establishment of the new big mance degradation.
universal security database, our attention turned towards data classifi­ 3. Feature Importance:
cation. The objective of this phase is to introduce learning models by ■ Random Forest provides an inherent mechanism to estimate
extracting insights from databases featuring K categories. At this stage, feature importance, which helps in understanding the contribu­
leveraging knowledge extraction must be conducted on a per-base basis, tion of each feature to the model’s predictions.
necessitating a parallel architecture. In this regard, we employ a bagging 4. Scalability and Efficiency:
model in conjunction with a random forest, operating concurrently
across multiple data structures. Subsequently, our focus shifts to

Algorithm 1
Generating a big universal security database.
 Input: Categories K= (C1, C2, …, Ck), Metadata Mk = (F, D) where feature_names F= (f1, f2, …, fn), feature_descriptions D= (d1, d2, …, dn), datasets Data={(x1,y1) … (xn,yn)}.
 Output: Universal vector U= {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), …(xj,yj} where j the new dimension of UUniversal feature creationCorpus ← F (M 1 ∪ M 2 ∪Mk): {((f1, d1), …(fn, dn)) ∪((f1, d1), …
 (fj, dj)) ∪((f1, d1), …(fc, dc))}Categories CK ← F (Mk)for F in {corpus, categories} do

 for terms t in Dk do
 Calculate tf (t,d): equation1
 Calculate idf (t): equation 2
 Calculate Cosine (tf_idf (Dk)): equation 3
 if Cosine (tf_idf (Dk)) > 0 then

 Enumerated_list ← {[similar_features in C1] … [similar_features in Ck]}
 Stored_list ← sorted (enumerated_list)
 end
 end
 Common_features ← MaxCosineScore in (sorted_list (Ck))

 end
 Generate universal features vector

 Universal_features ← {F in (C1∪ Ccom ∪… Ck)}
 Store Datafor (xi,yi) in (data) do

 = 0 then
 if yi ∕
 store(xi,yi) in U

 end
 else
 yi ← 0
 end
 end
 Big Universal Security databaseU ← {Mk(F,D), Data ((x1,y1), (x2,y2), …(xj,yj))}

 9
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Fig. 6. The proposed architecture.

 ■ Random Forest is computationally efficient and scalable, making ■ Random Forest provides diverse decision-making through multi­
 it practical for large datasets commonly encountered in intrusion ple decision trees, while Adaboost enhances accuracy by focusing
 detection. on difficult-to-classify instances.
 2. Balanced Bias-Variance Trade-off:
4.2.2. Adaboost ■ The ensemble nature of both algorithms helps in balancing the
 Adaboost, short for Adaptive Boosting, is another ensemble learning bias-variance trade-off, leading to more robust and reliable
method that combines weak classifiers to create a strong classifier. The predictions.
reasons for selecting Adaboost include: 3. Handling Heterogeneous Data:
 ■ The algorithms’ ability to handle high-dimensional and hetero­
1. Improved Classification Accuracy: geneous data ensures that our framework can effectively detect
 ■ Adaboost focuses on misclassified instances by adjusting the intrusions across diverse datasets.
 weights of the training data, which improves the overall classi­ 4. Improved Generalization:
 fication accuracy. ■ The combination of these algorithms improves generalization,
2. Adaptability: reducing the risk of overfitting and enhancing the model’s per­
 ■ Adaboost is adaptive, meaning it adjusts to the complexity of the formance on unseen data.
 data and can handle both linear and non-linear relationships.
3. Combining Weak Learners: By providing this detailed rationale, we aim to clarify our choice of
 ■ Adaboost effectively combines weak learners to form a robust machine learning algorithms and how they contribute to the effective­
 model, enhancing the overall predictive performance. ness of our proposed framework.
4. Versatility:
 ■ Adaboost can be used with various base classifiers, providing
 flexibility in model selection and adaptation to different types of 4.3. Complexity analysis
 data.
 4.3.1. Construction of universal features vector
4.2.3. Complementing the proposed framework The construction of the universal features vector involves several key
 The combination of Random Forest and Adaboost complements our steps, including the calculation of Term Frequency-Inverse Document
proposed framework by leveraging the strengths of both algorithms: Frequency (TF-IDF) and the application of semantic Cosine similarity.

1. Diverse Decision-Making: 1. TF-IDF Calculation:
 ■ For a dataset with N documents and T terms, the complexity of
 calculating the term frequency for all terms in all documents is O
 (N × T).

 10
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 ■ The complexity of calculating the inverse document frequency is environment, we aimed to expedite the processing and analysis of the
 O(T) as it involves counting the number of documents that datasets, facilitating more efficient experimentation and evaluation of
 contain each term. our proposed methodology.
 ■ Therefore, the overall complexity for the TF-IDF calculation is O
 (N × T).
2. Cosine Similarity Calculation: 5.1. Datasets
 ■ Calculating the cosine similarity between two vectors of length T
 involves O(T)operations. In our approach, the detection object encompasses multiple data
 ■ For N documents, calculating the similarity matrix would require flows originating from heterogeneous sources. To illustrate the versa­
 O(N2 × T) operations. tility of our methodology, we utilized three distinct datasets, each
 comprising varied sources: NSL_KDD (NSL-KDD), CICIDS 2017 (Xu,
4.3.2. Principal component analysis (PCA) Shen & Du, 2020), and UNSW. Notably, these datasets exhibit varying
 The PCA step is used to reduce the dimensionality of the universal structures, with NSL KDD containing 41 features and serving as an
features vector while preserving essential information. updated version of the KDD99 dataset. In contrast, CICIDS 2017 com­
 prises 76 features, while UNSW consists of 46 features.
■ The complexity of PCA, which involves computing the covariance Each of these public datasets is accompanied by metadata, providing
 matrix (which is O(T2 × N)) and then performing eigenvalue detailed descriptions of the extracted features for each Packet Capture
 decomposition on a T × T matrix, which is O(T3). (PCAP). To consolidate and standardize this information, we aggregated
■ Therefore, the overall complexity for PCA is O(T2 × N + T3). all metadata into a unified corpus. This corpus serves to establish a
 cohesive and meaningful representation of the features, facilitating
4.3.3. Ensemble learning model comprehensive analysis and comparison across datasets. By incorpo­
 The ensemble learning model combines multiple machine learning rating metadata from each dataset into the corpus, we ensure that our
algorithms, including Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic approach accounts for the diverse characteristics and nuances present in
Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. the network traffic data.

1. Naïve Bayes:
 ■ Training complexity is O(N × T). 5.2. Metrics
 ■ Prediction complexity is O(T).
2. K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN): To assess the efficacy of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms
 ■ Training complexity is O(1) since it stores the training samples. employed for heterogeneous traffic, we utilize the metrics outlined in
 ■ Prediction complexity is O(N × T) as it involves computing the the table below, as a result of binary classification. Leveraging the in­
 distance to all training samples. formation provided in Table 3, we derive the equations (eq.3) and (eq.4)
3. Logistic Regression: to serve as evaluation metrics for the database.
 ■ Training complexity is O(N × T × I), where I is the number of The performance metrics used for evaluation are as follows:
 iterations. Based on these metrics, we calculate the following evaluation met­
 ■ Prediction complexity is O(T). rics:
4. Decision Tree: TP + TN
 ■ Training complexity is O(N × TlogN). Accuracy = (3)
 TP + TN + FN + FP
 ■ Prediction complexity is O(logN).
5. Random Forest: TP
 Detectionrate : Recall = (4)
 ■ Training complexity is O(M × N × TlogN), where M is the number TP + FN
 of trees.
 ■ Prediction complexity is O(M × logN).
 1. Accuracy: The proportion of correctly predicted instances out of the
 total instances.
4.3.4. Overall complexity
 2. Precision: The ratio of true positive predictions to the total predicted
 Combining these steps, the overall complexity of constructing the
 positives, indicating the accuracy of positive predictions.
universal features vector and training the ensemble learning model can
 3. Recall (Sensitivity): The ratio of true positive predictions to the
be summarized as:
 total actual positives, reflecting the model’s ability to identify all
 positive instances.
 • Construction of Universal Features Vector: O(N × T + N2 × T + T2 ×
 4. F1-Score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a
 N + T3)
 balanced measure of the model’s performance.
 • Ensemble Learning Model Training and Prediction: Summing up the
 5. Specificity (True Negative Rate): The ratio of true negative pre­
 complexities for each algorithm as detailed above.
 dictions to the total actual negatives, showing the model’s ability to
 identify negative instances.
 By providing this detailed complexity analysis, we aim to clarify the
 6. ROC-AUC (Receiver Operating Characteristic - Area Under
scalability of our proposed approach.
 Curve): The AUC score summarizes the trade-off between true pos­
 itive and false positive rates, providing an aggregate measure of
5. Results and evaluation performance across all classification thresholds.

 The implementation and evaluation of the proposed approach were
 Table 3
conducted utilizing Google Colab with GPU execution capabilities. We
 The metrics used for the evaluation.
utilized two widely recognized public standard intrusion detection
 True positive Normal instances are classified as normal
datasets to provide an approximate illustration of the universal features
vector. This choice allowed us to assess the effectiveness and versatility True negative Malicious malicious instances are classified as
of our approach across different datasets and scenarios. By leveraging False positive Normal malicious instances are classified as
 False negative Malicious normal instances are classified as
the computational power of Google Colab’s GPU execution

 11
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

7. Confusion Matrix: A detailed breakdown of true positives, true The intersection between the two comparisons in both ways is the
 negatives, false positives, and false negatives, offering insight into feature “duration”. To select the closest feature to “duration”, we eval­
 the types of errors made by the model. uated their cosine scores and picked the one with highest score, even­
8. MCC (Matthews Correlation Coefficient): A comprehensive metric tually “flow duration”.
 that considers true and false positives and negatives, providing a The new approximate features vector U has 110 features instead of
 balanced evaluation even in the case of imbalanced datasets. 117. Finally, new universal names are assigned to features.
9. Balanced Accuracy: The average of recall obtained on each class, Regarding the storage of data flows, it is organized according to the
 accounting for imbalanced class distributions. approximate vector U. Features representing empty values are stored as
 zeros within the approximate vector.
5.3. Experimental setting Following data storage, preprocessing is conducted as follows:
 Data Cleaning: Redundant instances are removed to ensure the
 The experiments were conducted across three distinct scenarios: dataset’s cleanliness and efficiency.
 Categorical Feature Encoding: Features with categorical values are
5.3.1. Type 1 experiments encoded numerically to facilitate compatibility with ML algorithms. For
 In this scenario, various ML algorithms including Naïve Bayes (NB), instance, categorical values such as "protocol" containing values like
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree "http, dns, telnet, etc." are converted into numerical representations. For
(DT), and Random Forest (RF) were applied to perform binary classifi­ instance, "http" might be assigned the numerical value "1," "dns" the
cation. The algorithms were executed with their default parameters to value "2," and so forth.
detect intrusions from a traffic dataset containing heterogeneous Data Standardization: Finally, data standardization is performed to
network data. ensure uniformity across feature values. This involves calculating the
 standard normal distribution of feature values, ensuring consistency and
5.3.2. Type 2 experiments comparability across the dataset.
 For this scenario, the experiments were carried out on the big uni­ Furthermore, after the data preprocessing stage, Principal Compo­
versal security dataset. The dataset was trained using three types of data: nent Analysis (PCA) is applied. The results depicted in Fig. 7 illustrate
NSL KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS. Subsequently, the obtained model was that utilizing 30 principal components enables the recognition of 100%
tested with all three types of datasets to assess its performance and of the data, effectively reducing the dimensionality from 110 features to
generalizability across diverse sources. 30 features.
 Subsequently, the ML algorithms mentioned previously are
5.3.3. Type 3 experiments employed to evaluate the new universal security database, which en­
 In this scenario, the experiments focused on training the big uni­ compasses various structures.
versal security dataset using two types of data: NSL KDD and CICIDS. The detection scenario is executed utilizing the "dataset" feature
The resulting model was then tested with the UNSW dataset to evaluate (refer to Fig. 6) to select Train_data and Test_data from the new data­
its performance when confronted with data from a different source. base. The data is split as follows:
 These experiments were designed to provide a comprehensive For the big universal security train, 70% of NSL KDD and 70% of
analysis of the proposed approach’s effectiveness and versatility in CICIDS 2017 are utilized.
detecting intrusions across heterogeneous network data, considering For the big universal security test, the remaining 30% of NSL KDD
various training and testing combinations.. and the remaining 30% of CICIDS 2017 are employed.
 This approach ensures a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s
5.4. Detection results performance across different datasets while maintaining a balanced
 training and testing distribution, (Figs. 8 and 9).
 Regarding the construction of the universal features representation, For each ML algorithm, a model is trained using the big universal
we conducted an analysis of the metadata associated with data flows to security training dataset. Subsequently, these trained models are utilized
create a new corpus comprising four key attributes: feature names, to predict labels on the big universal security test dataset. The experi­
types, detailed descriptions, and categories. These attributes were mental results summarized in Table 4 demonstrate the versatility and
concatenated to facilitate the calculation of similarity for each feature universality of our approach in detecting intrusions from the new uni­
within each category. versal representation.
 In the case of the CICIDS 2017 dataset, the authors emphasized the These findings affirm that our proposed detection system is capable
generation of bidirectional PCAP flows, described as "forward" and of learning and extracting knowledge from heterogeneous sources
"backward" (Xu, Shen & Du, 2020). To align with the descriptions of effectively. This underscores the significance of employing a unified
other datasets, we replaced these terms with their synonyms: "forward" approach that can accommodate diverse data structures and sources,
denoting traffic from source to destination, and "backward" representing thereby streamlining intrusion detection processes and enhancing
traffic from destination to source. Additionally, we classified features overall security measures.
based on their types, such as numeric, average, percentage, categorical, The evaluation of the proposed model is conducted through two
binary, etc. distinct scenarios, employing parallel and sequential methods. The re­
 For the implementation process, we began by cleaning the data, sults of these evaluations demonstrate the exceptional performance of
which involved removing stop words. Subsequently, we utilized the our model with heterogeneous data.
TfidfVectorizer from the Scikit-Learn library’s feature_extraction mod­ In particular, the outcomes of training on one type of structure and
ule to apply term frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf). By testing on other types of structures illustrate that the proposed model
employing the Linear Kernel Module and cosine similarity, we derived consistently achieves superior results. This is evidenced by the findings
scores for each feature pair and sorted them in descending order. presented in Tables 4 and 5.
 The application of the proposed method revealed that several fea­ These results underscore the robustness and effectiveness of our
tures across different categories exhibited approximate similarity. model in accommodating diverse data structures and sources, further
However, certain cases presented complexities. For instance, the feature validating its utility and potential in real-world intrusion detection
"duration" from the NSL_KDD dataset was found to be similar to "flow scenarios.
duration" from CICIDS, while "flow bytes" in CICIDS shared similarity The Table 4 presents the performance metrics of various machine
with "duration" from NSL_KDD. learning algorithms for binary classification in intrusion detection

 12
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Fig. 7. The big universal security database.

 Fig. 8. Features similarity results between NSL_KDD, CICIDS2017 and UNSW.

 13
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Fig. 9. PCA results.

Table 4
Evaluation results of the new universal security database.
 Binary classifica tion Accura cy Recall False positive F1-Score Specificity ROC-AUC MCC

 NB Normal 86.34 88.00 13.4 86.15 86.60 0.90 0.73
 Attack 85.00 84.89 85.00 0.88 0.71
 LR Normal 97.22 97.00 3.06 97.11 96.94 0.99 0.94
 Attack 97.00 97.00 97.00 0.99 0.94
 KN N Normal 99.64 100 0.31 99.82 99.69 0.99 0.98
 Attack 100 100.00 100.00 1.00 1.00
 DT Normal 99.45 100 0.53 99.72 99.47 0.99 0.97
 Attack 99 99.00 99.00 0.99 0.96
 RF Normal 99,80 100 0.19 99.90 99.81 1.00 0.99
 Attack 100 00.00 100.00 1.00 1.00

Table 5
Evaluation results of Ensemble Learning model with NSL KDD, UNSW, CICIDS in train and test.
 Binary classifica tion Accura cy Recall False positive F1-Score Specificity ROC-AUC

 Adaboost Normal 99.30 99.10 0.15 99.20 99.85 0.99
 attack 98.07 98.00 98.07 0.98
 Gradient boosting Normal 95.15 89.90 0.12 92.41 99.88 0.96
 Attack 97.00 97.00 97.00 0.97

scenarios. found that k = 5 provided the best balance between bias and variance for
 Random Forest demonstrates the highest accuracy at 99.80% for our dataset.
normal behavior and perfect 100% for detecting attacks, with a Table 5 presents the performance metrics of two boosting algorithms,
remarkably low false positive rate of 0.19%. K-Nearest Neighbor follows Adaboost and Gradient Boosting, for binary classification in intrusion
closely, achieving near-perfect accuracy and detection rates, with an detection. Adaboost achieves high accuracy at 99.30% for normal
impressively low false positive rate of 0.31%. Logistic Regression also behavior and 98.07% for detecting attacks, with a notably low false
performs well, showing high accuracy and detection rates with a low positive rate of 0.15%. On the other hand, Gradient Boosting exhibits
false positive rate of 3.06%. Decision Tree and Naïve Bayes exhibit slightly lower accuracy and detection rates for normal behavior, with a
slightly lower accuracy but maintain respectable detection rates, albeit corresponding false positive rate of 0.12%. However, it maintains a
with slightly higher false positive rates. Overall, these results highlight relatively high detection rate for attacks at 97.00%.
the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms in detecting intrusions, Overall, both algorithms demonstrate effective performance in
with Random Forest standing out as the most reliable model in this detecting intrusions, with Adaboost showing slightly superior accuracy
context. and false positive rate compared to Gradient Boosting.
 For KNN, regularization typically involves choosing the appropriate Table 6 showcases the performance of Adaboost and Gradient
value of k, which is the number of nearest neighbors considered for Boosting algorithms in binary classification for intrusion detection.
classification. The value of k is critical in balancing bias-variance trade- Adaboost demonstrates commendable accuracy, achieving 99.35%
off: for normal behavior and 98.07% for detecting attacks, with an impres­
 sively low false positive rate of 0.10%. In contrast, Gradient Boosting
■ A small value of k can lead to high variance and overfitting, as the yields slightly lower accuracy, recording 80.20% for normal behavior
 model becomes sensitive to noise in the training data. and 79.00% for detecting attacks. However, it maintains a relatively
■ A large value of k can lead to high bias and underfitting, as the model high detection rate for both normal behavior and attacks, with false
 may overlook subtle patterns in the data. positive rates of 0.20%. While Adaboost outperforms Gradient Boosting
 in terms of accuracy and false positive rate, both algorithms effectively
 In our experiments, we performed a grid search over a range of k detect intrusions, showcasing their utility in network security
values to identify the optimal value. After extensive cross-validation, we applications.

 14
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Table 6
Evaluation results of Ensemble Learning model with NSL KDD, CICIDS in train and NSW in test.
 Binary classifica tion Accura cy Recall False positive F1-Score Specificity ROC-AUC

 Adaboost Normal 99.35 99.10 0.10 99.22 99.90 0.99
 attack 98.07 98.07 98.07 0.98
 Gradient boosting Normal 80.20 89.90 0.20 84.61 99.80 0.90
 Attack 79.00 79.00 79.00 0.90

 Adaboost focuses on improving the accuracy of weak classifiers by 5.5. Ablation study
adjusting their weights based on misclassification errors. It builds a
sequence of weak classifiers, where each classifier is trained to correct To better understand the contributions of individual components in
the mistakes of its predecessor. Adaboost is particularly sensitive to our ensemble learning approach for intrusion detection, we performed
noisy data and outliers because it increases the weight of misclassified an ablation study. We systematically removed or modified key compo­
instances, potentially leading to overfitting. nents of our model to assess their impact on performance. The compo­
 Gradient boosting builds an ensemble of weak learners (typically nents analyzed include:
decision trees) by sequentially fitting new models to the residual errors
of previous models. Unlike Adaboost, gradient boosting optimizes a loss ■ TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity Feature Extraction: These are used for
function using gradient descent, allowing it to handle errors more extracting relevant features from the dataset.
robustly. This method is generally more resistant to overfitting and can ■ Dimensionality Reduction with PCA: This helps in reducing the
achieve higher accuracy by refining the model iteratively. feature space while retaining important information.
 ■ Ensemble Learning Methods: Our model uses both parallel and
1. Impact of Data Characteristics: sequential ensemble learning methods to enhance detection
 ■ Data Complexity and Noise: The datasets used in our experiments accuracy.
 (CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and UNSW) contain a mix of normal and ■ We conducted experiments across three scenarios using the NSLintrusion data, which vary in complexity and may include noisy KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets:
 instances. Gradient boosting’s robustness to noise allows it to 1. Type 1 Experiments: Various ML algorithms (Naïve Bayes, Kperform better in such environments, while Adaboost’s sensitivity Nearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Random
 to noisy data can degrade its performance. Forest) were applied for binary classification with default
 ■ Feature Interactions: Gradient boosting is more effective at parameters.
 capturing complex interactions between features due to its iter­ 2. Type 2 Experiments: The model was trained on the combined
 ative refinement process. In contrast, Adaboost may struggle with NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets and tested on all three to
 intricate feature relationships, leading to suboptimal performance assess generalizability.
 in complex datasets. 3. Type 3 Experiments: The model was trained on NSL-KDD and
2. Model Overfitting and Generalization: CICIDS and tested on UNSW to evaluate cross-dataset
 ■ Overfitting Tendency: Adaboost’s focus on correcting mis­ performance.
 classified instances can lead to overfitting, especially in datasets
 with significant noise or outliers. Gradient boosting, with its For each experiment, we measured accuracy, precision, recall, and
 regularization techniques and loss optimization, is less prone to F1-score. The configurations tested were:
 overfitting, resulting in better generalization to unseen data.
 ■ Hyperparameter Tuning: Gradient boosting often benefits more 1. Full Model (All Components)
 from hyperparameter tuning (e.g., learning rate, number of trees, 2. Without TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity
 tree depth) than Adaboost. Properly tuned gradient boosting 3. Without PCA
 models can achieve superior performance by balancing model 4. Sequential Ensemble Only
 complexity and fitting accuracy. 5. Parallel Ensemble Only
3. Empirical Evidence:
 ■ Performance Metrics: As shown in Table 6, gradient boosting The results of our ablation study are summarized in Table 7:
 consistently outperforms Adaboost across various metrics (accu­
 racy, recall, F1-score). This empirical evidence supports our ■ TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity: Removing these components led to a
 theoretical analysis, indicating that gradient boosting’s optimi­ significant decrease in performance, demonstrating their critical role
 zation process and robustness to noise contribute to its superior in effective feature extraction.
 performance in our experiments. ■ PCA: Excluding PCA resulted in a moderate drop in performance,
4. Practical Implications: highlighting the importance of dimensionality reduction in man­
 ■ Model Selection: Understanding the performance disparity helps aging large datasets and reducing noise.
 in selecting the appropriate model for different scenarios. For ■ Ensemble Learning Methods: Both sequential and parallel ensemble
 datasets with complex feature interactions and potential noise, methods positively impacted the model’s performance. The full
 gradient boosting is a more suitable choice due to its robustness
 and higher accuracy.
 Table 7
 In summary, the performance disparity between Adaboost and Ablation results.
gradient boosting in our experiments can be attributed to their inherent
 Model Configuration Accuracy Precision Recall
algorithmic differences, sensitivity to noise, and ability to capture
complex feature interactions. Gradient boosting’s robustness and itera­ Full Model (All Components) 99.3% 98.5% 97.8%
 Without TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity 90.3% 89.5% 88.7%
tive refinement process enable it to achieve better performance across
 Without PCA 92.8% 92.1% 91.3%
various metrics, as evidenced by our experimental results. Sequential Ensemble Only 93.5% 92.8% 92.0%
 Parallel Ensemble Only 94.1% 93.4% 92.6%

 15
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 model, combining both methods, achieved the highest metrics, Table 9
 indicating the complementary nature of these approaches. Wilcoxon signed-rank test results.
 Metric p-value Statistical Significance
 The ablation study confirms the importance of each component in
 Accuracy 0.004 Yes
our proposed methodology. The synergy between TF-IDF and Cosine Precision 0.007 Yes
similarity for feature extraction, PCA for dimensionality reduction, and Recall 0.003 Yes
the integration of both sequential and parallel ensemble learning F1-score 0.002 Yes
methods significantly enhances the model’s ability to detect unknown
intrusions.
 Data Structure: Networks inherently exhibit varying data structures,
 making it imperative for our intrusion detection system to be capable of
5.6. Statistical significance testing accommodating these differences. By embracing the diversity in data
 structures, our model can extract meaningful insights from disparate
 To ensure that the observed performance improvements of our pro­ sources, enhancing its overall efficacy.
posed method are statistically significant, we conducted paired t-tests Detection System: Our intrusion detection system is designed to learn
(or Wilcoxon signed-rank tests) comparing our method to each baseline from and classify heterogeneous sources within a unified model. This
method. The tests were conducted on the key performance metrics, unified approach enables the seamless integration of data from diverse
including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. sources, streamlining the detection process and improving overall
 accuracy.
5.6.1. Normality testing While existing research has explored intrusion detection using
 Before conducting the paired t-tests, we performed normality testing diverse data sources, the focus has often been on analyzing individual
using the Shapiro-Wilk test to determine if the performance metrics are datasets in isolation. In contrast, our study delves into the complexities
normally distributed. For metrics that did not meet the normality of learning from data with disparate structures, a relatively unexplored
assumption, we used the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test. domain in the literature.
 A recent study by Xu, Shen and Du (2020) introduced a novel
5.6.2. Paired t-test results approach for network intrusion data reconstruction using a universal
 For metrics that were normally distributed, we conducted paired t- matrix. However, their evaluation primarily focused on datasets with
tests with the following results (Table 8): similar structures, limiting the generalizability of their findings. In
 contrast, our proposed method demonstrates superior performance in
5.6.3. Wilcoxon signed-rank test results handling data with diverse structures, as evidenced by our compre­
 For metrics that were not normally distributed, we conducted Wil­ hensive evaluation.
coxon signed-rank tests with the following results (Table 9): In Table 10, we provide a comparative analysis between our
 These results demonstrate that the performance improvements of our approach and the method proposed in Xu, Shen and Du (2020), eluci­
proposed method over the baseline methods are statistically significant. dating the strengths of our methodology in addressing the challenges
 The statistical significance testing confirms that our method provides posed by heterogeneous data sources. Our findings highlight the
substantial and reliable improvements in detecting unknown intrusions robustness and versatility of our approach, underscoring its potential to
compared to the baseline methods. This strengthens the validity of our significantly enhance intrusion detection capabilities in complex
experimental results and supports the efficacy of our proposed network environments.
approach. Table 10 presents a comparative analysis between the proposed
 method and Few-shot and Meta-learning approach (Xu, Shen & Du,
5.7. Interpretation 2020) regarding their performance in handling heterogeneous traffic
 and vector structures in intrusion detection. The Few-shot and
 Detecting intrusions in networks characterized by heterogeneous Meta-learning approach achieved accuracies of 93.30% and 94.13%
sources demands a multifaceted approach due to the varied nature of when learning jointly and separately on the CICIDS ISCX dataset,
data streams. respectively. Similarly, for the CICIDS dataset, it attained an accuracy of
 Our study addresses this challenge by proposing a comprehensive 97.56%. In contrast, the proposed method achieved significantly higher
solution encapsulated in a big universal security database. This database accuracy of 99.80% when learning jointly on NSL KDD and CICIDS
acts as a centralized repository, amalgamating data from disparate datasets, despite their different vector structures. This indicates the su­
sources, including IoT devices, web applications, and web services, periority of the proposed method in effectively handling heterogeneous
among others. traffic and varied vector structures, leading to enhanced intrusion
 To effectively process this heterogeneous data, we establish three detection accuracy.
fundamental conditions that underpin our intrusion detection In resume, our study contributes to advancing the field of intrusion
framework: detection by offering a unified framework capable of effectively
 Heterogeneous Traffic: Given the diverse landscape of network
communication, our approach necessitates the integration of multiple Table 10
data sources to provide a holistic understanding of potential threats. Comparison of accuracy results with approaches using heterogeneous sources of
This ensures that our model is robust and adaptable to the dynamic net- work intrusion detection.
nature of network environments. Methods Heterogen Vector Learnin g %Accura
 eous traffic structur e cy
Table 8 Few shot and meta CICIDS ISCX Same Conjoint 93.30
Paired t-test results. learning (Xu, Shen & ly
 Du, 2020)
 Metric p-value Statistical Significance
 Few shot and meta CICIDS Same Separat 94.13
 Accuracy 0.002 Yes learning (Xu, Shen & ISCX ely 97.56
 Precision 0.005 Yes Du, 2020)
 Recall 0.003 Yes Proposed method NSL KDD Different Conjoint 99.80
 F1-score 0.001 Yes CICIDS ly

 16
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

processing heterogeneous data sources. By embracing the complexities 6.3. Future work
of network traffic and data diversity, our approach lays the foundation
for more resilient and adaptive cybersecurity measures in an increas­ To address these limitations, future research could focus on:
ingly interconnected world.
 1. Enhancing Feature Extraction:
6. Discussion ■ Developing more sophisticated feature extraction techniques that
 can capture complex and evolving intrusion patterns.
 While our proposed approach for heterogeneous intrusion detection 2. Adaptive Models:
demonstrates significant improvements in performance and scalability, ■ Implementing adaptive models that can dynamically update
it is important to acknowledge its potential limitations and scenarios themselves in response to changes in data distribution and
where it may not perform well. intrusion patterns.
 3. Reducing False Positives:
6.1. Potential weaknesses ■ Exploring advanced techniques to reduce false positives without
 compromising detection accuracy.
1. Dependence on Feature Quality: 4. Handling Imbalanced Data:
 ■ The effectiveness of our method relies heavily on the quality of ■ Investigating novel methods to better handle extreme class
 the features extracted from the data. If the feature extraction imbalance in intrusion detection datasets.
 process fails to capture critical characteristics of the intrusion 5. Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks:
 patterns, the performance of the detection model may degrade. ■ Enhancing the robustness of the detection models to withstand
2. Computational Complexity: adversarial attacks and ensuring reliable performance in adver­
 ■ Although we have optimized the computational efficiency of our sarial settings.
 approach, the process of constructing the universal features vec­
 tor and training ensemble models can still be resource-intensive By critically analyzing these potential weaknesses and scenarios, we
 for very large datasets. This may limit the scalability of the aim to provide a comprehensive understanding of the limitations of our
 method in extremely large-scale environments. proposed approach and identify areas for future improvement.
3. Handling Concept Drift:
 ■ Our method assumes that the distribution of the data remains
 relatively stable over time. In real-world scenarios, the nature of 6.4. Novelty and contributions
 intrusions can evolve, leading to concept drift. Our current
 approach may not adapt quickly to such changes, potentially While our proposed approach leverages established techniques such
 affecting its long-term performance. as TF-IDF, Cosine similarity, PCA, and classical machine learning algo­
4. Imbalanced Data: rithms, the novelty lies in the innovative integration and application of
 ■ Intrusion detection datasets often suffer from class imbalance, these techniques within a unified framework. This integration addresses
 where the number of normal instances significantly exceeds the specific challenges in heterogeneous intrusion detection and results in
 number of intrusion instances. While our method includes notable advancements over existing methodologies.
 mechanisms to handle imbalance, extreme cases of imbalance
 may still pose challenges and impact detection accuracy. 6.4.1. Unique aspects of our approach
5. False Positives:
 ■ In an effort to maximize detection rates, our approach may 1. Universal Features Vector:
 generate false positives, flagging benign activities as intrusions. ■ The construction of a universal features vector that captures
 This can lead to increased workload for security analysts and may essential characteristics from diverse datasets is a key innovation.
 reduce the overall trust in the system. By integrating TF-IDF, Cosine similarity, and PCA, we create a
 robust feature representation that enhances the detection of un­
6.2. Scenarios where the method may not perform well known intrusions across heterogeneous data sources.
 2. Ensemble Learning for Heterogeneous Data:
1. Highly Dynamic Environments: ■ Our approach combines Random Forest and Adaboost in a novel
 ■ In environments where intrusion patterns change rapidly and ensemble learning framework tailored for heterogeneous intru­
 significantly, our method may struggle to maintain high detection sion detection. This ensemble effectively balances the strengths of
 accuracy without frequent model updates and retraining. each algorithm, improving overall detection accuracy and
2. Sparse Data: robustness.
 ■ In scenarios where the available data is sparse or incomplete, the 3. Scalability and Efficiency:
 feature extraction process may not yield meaningful representa­ ■ We optimize the computational efficiency of our approach,
 tions, thereby affecting the overall performance of the detection making it practical for real-time intrusion detection in large-scale
 model. environments. The efficient construction of the universal features
3. Highly Encrypted Traffic: vector and the scalable nature of ensemble learning contribute to
 ■ Our approach relies on analyzing features extracted from network the framework’s applicability in real-world scenarios.
 traffic. If the traffic is highly encrypted, it may be challenging to 4. Enhanced Detection of Unknown Intrusions:
 extract meaningful features, reducing the efficacy of our method. ■ Our method focuses on detecting unknown intrusions by
4. Adversarial Attacks: leveraging the universal features vector and ensemble learning.
 ■ Our method may be vulnerable to adversarial attacks where at­ This emphasis on unknown intrusion detection addresses a crit­
 tackers deliberately manipulate data to evade detection. Robust­ ical gap in existing methodologies that often rely on predefined
 ness against such attacks is an area that requires further research signatures or patterns.
 and improvement.
 6.4.2. Contributions

 1. Innovative Integration of Established Techniques:

 17
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 ■ We demonstrate that the innovative integration of well- accountable for all aspects of the work.
 established techniques within a unified framework can lead to
 significant performance improvements in heterogeneous intru­ Declaration of competing interest
 sion detection.
2. Comprehensive Evaluation: The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
 ■ Our extensive experimental evaluation, including statistical sig­ interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
 nificance testing and comparison with state-of-the-art ap­ the work reported in this paper.
 proaches, validates the effectiveness and superiority of our
 method. Data availability
3. Practical Implementation:
 ■ We provide detailed pseudocode and implementation guidelines, Data will be made available on request.
 facilitating the reproducibility and practical adoption of our
 approach in various intrusion detection systems. References
4. Addressing Real-World Challenges:
 ■ Our approach effectively addresses real-world challenges such as Arasteh, B., Aghaei, B., Farzad, B., Arasteh, K., Kiani, F., & Torkamanian-Afshar, M.
 (2024). Detecting SQL injection attacks by Binary Gray Wolf optimizer and machine
 handling high-dimensional data, balancing bias-variance trade- learning algorithms. Neural Computing and Applications, 36, 6771–6792. https://doi.
 offs, and improving detection accuracy and robustness. org/10.1007/s00521-024-08001-5
 Arasteh, B., Bouyer, A., Sefati, S. S., & Craciunescu, R. (2024). Effective SQL injection
 detection: A fusion of binary Olympiad optimizer and classification algorithm.
 By highlighting these unique aspects and contributions, we aim to Mathematics, 12(18), 2917. https://doi.org/10.3390/math12182917
clarify the novelty of our approach and demonstrate its significant ad­ ARGUS IDS: https://openargus.org/argus-ml/2-uncategorised/30-unsw-nb15, last
vancements over existing methodologies. accessed 2022/02/20.
 CIC Flow Meter: https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter, last accessed 2022/02/
 20.
7. Conclusion and future work CICIDS 2017: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html, last accessed 2022/02/
 01.
 Danesh, H., Karimi, M. B., & Arasteh, B. (2024). CMShark: A NetFlow and machine-
 In this study, we validated the hypothesis that a comprehensive
 learning based Crypto-Jacking intrusion-detection method. Intelligent Decision
ensemble learning approach, integrating heterogeneous datasets, can Technologies, 18(3), 2255–2273. https://doi.org/10.3233/IDT-240319
significantly enhance the detection of unknown intrusions. By applying Elayni, M., Jemili, F., Korbaa, O., & Soulaimen, B. (2019). Big Data processing for
 intrusion detection system context: A review. In The International Conference on
various machine learning algorithms across the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and
 Intelligent Systems Design and Applications (ISDA) At: Pretoria, South Africa.
CICIDS datasets, we demonstrated the high detection accuracy and Intrata, Evgeniya, Grif, Mikhail, & Dostovalov, Dmitry (2021). Application of traditional
generalizability of our method, supporting our claim that ensemble machine learning models to detect abnormal traffic in the internet of things
learning can effectively address the challenges posed by diverse data networks. In International Conference on Computational Collective Intelligence ICCC.
 Cham: Springer.
environments in intrusion detection. NSL-KDD: https://github.com/defcom17/NSL_KDD, last accessed 2022/02/01.
 While our results are promising, some limitations remain. The Othman, Suad Mohammed (2018). Intrusion detection model using machine learning
datasets used, though extensive, may not encompass all types of network algorithm on Big Data environment. Journal of big data, 5, 1–12.
 Patel, A., Taghavi, M., Bakhtiyari, K., & Júnior, J. C. (2013). An intrusion detection and
intrusions, highlighting the need for more diverse and recent datasets to prevention system in cloud computing: A systematic review. Journal of Network and
maintain model robustness against evolving threats. Our feature Computer Applications, 36(1), 25–41.
extraction process relies on techniques like TF-IDF and Cosine similarity, Peng, kai, Leung, Victor C. M., & Huang, Qingjia (2018). Clustering approach based on
 mini batch kmeans for intrusion system over big data. IEEE Access, 6, 11897–11906.
which, while effective, could be complemented by advanced feature Xu, Congyuan, Shen, Jizhong, & Du, Xin (2020). A method of few-shot network intrusion
engineering to further improve detection accuracy and reduce potential detection based on meta-learning framework. IEEE Transactions on Information
biases. Additionally, the combination of parallel and sequential Forensics and Security, 1, 3540–3552.
 Zhou, Donghao, et al. (2018). A survey on network data collection. Journal of Network
ensemble learning approaches, though beneficial in accuracy, increases
 and Computer Applications, 11, 9–23.
computational demands, potentially impacting the method’s applica­ Zuech, Richard, Khoshgoftaar, Taghi M., & Wald, Randall (2015). Intrusion detection and
bility in resource-constrained, real-time systems. big heterogeneous data: A survey. Journal of Big Data, 2, 1–41.
 Future research could address these limitations by incorporating
more varied datasets, exploring automated feature engineering methods
 Dr. Farah JEMILI had the Engineer degree in Computer Sci­
(e.g., deep learning-based extraction), and optimizing the computa­
 ence in 2002, the Master degree in 2004, and the Ph.D degree
tional complexity of the model. Integrating our approach into real-time in 2010 from the National School of Computer Science (ENSI,
intrusion detection systems presents another valuable direction for University of Manouba, Tunisia). Since 2007, she is an Assis­
further study, supporting broader deployment. tant Professor at the Higher Institute of Computer Science and
 Telecom of Hammam Sousse (ISITCOM, University of Sousse,
 By recognizing these limitations and suggesting future improve­ Tunisia). She started research since 2002 at RIADI Laboratory
ments, this study contributes to a more robust and scalable framework (ENSI, University of Manouba, Tunisia). Since 2010, she is a
for intrusion detection, reinforcing the effectiveness and relevance of Senior Researcher at MARS Laboratory (ISITCOM, University
 of Sousse, Tunisia). Her research interests include Artificial
ensemble learning for securing complex network environments. Intelligence, Cyber Security, Big Data Analysis and Distributed
 Systems. She served as a Reviewer for many international
Credit author statement conferences and journals. She has published around 45
 Research papers in international journals and conferences and has presented many invited
 and contributed Talks at international conferences. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7511-
 The paper titled "Detecting Unknown Intrusions from Large Het­ 1221
erogeneous Data through Ensemble Learning" was authored by Farah
Jemili, Khaled Jouini, and Ouajdi Korbaa. Farah Jemili contributed as
the first author, leading the conception, design, and execution of the
research presented in this paper. Khaled Jouini assisted significantly in
providing substantial input during the revision process. Ouajdi Korbaa
also made significant contributions to the research design and execution.
Farah Jemili took the lead in drafting the manuscript, with critical re­
visions and input from Khaled Jouini and Ouajdi Korbaa. All authors
have approved the final version of the manuscript and agree to be

 18
F. Jemili et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

 Dr. Khaled JOUINI Khaled Jouini is an accomplished Assistant Pr. Ouajdi KORBAA obtained in 1995 the Engineering
 Professor at ISITCOM, University of Sousse, Tunisia, with over Diploma from the Ecole Centrale de Lille (France), and in the
 14 years of academic experience. He has also worked as an IT same year, the Master degree in Production Engineering and
 consultant for Sam’s-Tech and held various roles at Université Computer Sciences from the University of Lille I. He is Ph.D. in
 Paris Dauphine. Khaled holds a Doctorate in Computer Science Production Management, Automatic Control and Computer
 from Université Paris Dauphine and is certified as a Big Data Sciences of the University of Sciences and Technologies of Lille
 Specialist with IBM BigInsights. His expertise spans Apache (France) since 1998. He also obtained, from the same univer­
 Spark and database management, and he has taught courses on sity, the Habilitation to Supervise Researches degree in Com­
 Oracle Database Administration and Advanced Databases at puter Sciences in 2003. He is full Professor in the University of
 ISITCom. Additionally, Khaled has served as a reviewer for Sousse. He published around 150 research papers on sched­
 numerous international conferences and journals, and he has uling, performance evaluation, discrete optimization, design,
 published many research papers in prominent international and monitoring. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4462-1805
 journals and conferences. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5049-
4238

 19