10652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Detection of Unknown Attacks Through Encrypted
 Traffic: A Gaussian Prototype-Aided Variational
 Autoencoder Framework
 Qianwei Meng , Jing Tao, Qingjun Yuan , Guangsong Li , Yongjuan Wang , Bing Gao, and Siqi Lu

 Abstract—The identification of encrypted network traffic Index Terms—Intrusion detection system, unknown attack,
presents a pivotal challenge in detecting unknown malicious encrypted traffic.
traffic. Unlike closed-set identification, which primarily classifies known traffic classes, detecting unknown malicious traffic
necessitates both accurate classification of known traffic and I. I NTRODUCTION
the identification of previously unseen traffic classes. Existing
methods often face difficulties in effectively constraining the
distribution size of known classes in the representation space
and frequently misclassifying unknown classes as known. To
 W ITH the rapid advancements in deep learning technologies, encrypted traffic classification methods have
 achieved remarkable progress in applications such as applicaaddress these challenges, we propose Open-Detect, a robust tion classification, website fingerprinting, and encrypted video
theoretical framework for detecting unknown malicious traffic, content recognition [1], [2], [3], [4]. Despite the successes
which leverages advanced deep learning techniques, such as
variational autoencoders and Gaussian prototypes. Open-Detect of deep learning in these areas, several significant challenges
introduces two primary constraints: a generative constraint, persist. One critical issue lies in the dynamic and evolving
which enhances intra-class compactness, and a discriminative nature of network environments. Traditional intrusion detecconstraint, which optimizes inter-class separation. These con- tion systems often rely on closed-set classification models that
straints collectively mitigate the risks of misclassifying known are ill-equipped to identify unknown attacks effectively. These
classes and failing to detect unknown classes. In Open-Detect, models frequently misclassify malicious traffic from unknown
network flows are transformed into grayscale images, and each
known traffic class is mapped to a unique Gaussian prototype in
 categories as benign, thereby introducing serious security
the latent space. This design ensures tight clustering of samples vulnerabilities [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Consequently, there
within the same class and clear separation of samples between is an urgent need for models that not only excel in accurately
different classes. The detection of unknown malicious traffic is classifying known traffic patterns but also possess robust
performed based on the distance between samples and these mechanisms for detecting and identifying unknown malicious
prototypes. Extensive experiments conducted on multiple publicly traffic. Addressing this challenge requires the development
available datasets substantiate the efficacy of Open-Detect. The of advanced models capable of detecting unknown traffic,
results reveal significant improvements in intra-class compactness
and inter-class separation, enabling superior performance in both
 which is increasingly recognized as an essential component
closed-world and open-world scenarios, particularly for detecting of modern network security frameworks.
unknown malicious traffic. Our code is available at: https:// Currently, methods for detecting unknown traffic can be
github.com/niebikong/Open-Detect broadly categorized into two approaches: discriminative [11],
 [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] and generative methods [18],
 [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]. Discriminative methods primar-
 Received 9 December 2024; revised 22 May 2025, 30 July 2025, ily focus on learning decision boundaries between different
and 1 September 2025; accepted 15 September 2025. Date of publication
19 September 2025; date of current version 14 October 2025. This work was
 categories by modeling the conditional probability P(Y | X),
supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program which represents the probability of assigning a label Y to
of China under Grant 2023YFB2705000, in part by the National Natural a sample X. While effective at classification, these methods
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62276091, and in part by the Natural prioritize distinguishing between known categories without
Science Foundation of Henan under Grant 252300420992. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was capturing the underlying data distribution. As a result, their
Dr. Ming Li. (Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan.) reliance on decision boundaries may limit their ability to detect
 Qianwei Meng, Guangsong Li, Yongjuan Wang, Bing Gao, and Siqi Lu are complex or unknown traffic patterns. Conversely, generative
with Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology and the
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, Information
 methods aim to model not only decision boundaries but also
Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China. the data generation process, providing a holistic understand-
 Jing Tao is with the MoE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and ing of the distributional characteristics of known categories.
Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: By capturing the mechanisms behind data generation, these
jtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
 Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Net- methods construct flexible models that accurately represent
works and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, known categories while enabling the detection of unknown
China, and also with Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography traffic. However, despite their advantages, generative methods
Technology and the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of are still constrained by two main limitations:
Education, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
(e-mail: gcxyuan@outlook.com). (i) The distribution of known class representations is
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3612141 often not compact, while the space allocated for unknown
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10653

Fig. 1. Comparison of decision boundaries. In Scenario (a), the absence of intra-class compactness causes samples from known classes to overlap with other
known classes, leading to frequent misclassifications. Scenario (b) demonstrates incremental improvement, with intra-class compactness partially achieved;
however, insufficient inter-class separation still leads to significant misclassification errors, particularly when unknown classes are identified as known. Finally,
Scenario (c) highlights the effectiveness of Open-Detect, which achieves both intra-class compactness and inter-class separation, reducing the likelihood of
misclassifications for both known and unknown traffic.

classes may be too limited. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the Open-Detect leverages variational autoencoders (VAEs) and
representation space of known classes traffic tends to be overly Gaussian prototypes to achieve fine-grained classification of
expansive, failing to achieve intra-class compactness. This known traffic categories and effective detection of unknown
results in insufficient similarity between samples of the same malicious traffic [27], [28]. We propose two key constraint
class. For example, while [19] attempts to address this issue mechanisms to achieve this goal: generative constraints and
by constructing a skewed dataset that restricts the input space discriminative constraints. The generative constraints map
for known classes and reserves space for unknown classes, traffic of known categories to Gaussian prototypes in the
this objective is not directly optimized during training. Conse- latent space, ensuring that samples from the same category
quently, the distribution of known classes remains inadequately are tightly clustered, thereby enhancing intra-class compactcompressed, which often leads to the misclassification of ness and improving classification accuracy for known traffic.
known class traffic. Conversely, the discriminative constraints enforce that the
 (ii) Models often misclassify unknown classes as known latent variables of each sample are as close as possible to
classes, leading to ineffective inter-class separation and the Gaussian prototype of its true label while simultaneously
reduced detection accuracy, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). promoting separation between prototypes of different classes
For instance, Zen-tor [20] and [21] address this by gener- in the latent space. This promotes better inter-class separaating synthetic unknown traffic with GANs. However, the tion, enhancing the model’s ability to detect unknown traffic.
core challenge is that the distribution of unknown traffic is By combining both generative and discriminative constraints,
unknowable, as actual unknown traffic cannot be directly Open-Detect not only improves the identification of known
obtained, leading to high misclassification rates. Similarly, the traffic categories but also significantly enhances the model’s
author in [24] assumes normal data is tightly clustered while capability to discriminate between unknown traffic classes,
malicious data is dispersed, using this to synthesize unknown thereby boosting its generalization capability and robustness
traffic. However, malicious data often overlaps with normal in real-world applications.
traffic, especially with TLS-encrypted traffic mimicking nor- The main contributions of our work are summarized as
mal behavior, making differentiation and data augmentation follows:
more difficult and limiting detection accuracy improvement.
 To address the two key challenges illustrated in Fig. 1 • We propose a novel theoretical framework for detect-
(c), an effective approach involves optimizing model perfor- ing unknown malicious traffic, called Open-Detect. This
mance by minimizing intra-class differences while maximizing framework integrates a variational autoencoder architecinter-class differences. Minimizing intra-class differences helps ture with both generative and discriminative constraints,
cluster samples within the same class more tightly in the enabling effective detection of previously unseen malirepresentation space, enhancing class distinction and reduc- cious traffic.
ing misclassification. This improves the model’s accuracy in • We theoretically prove that intra-class compactness in
recognizing known categories and clarifies the boundaries Open-Detect can reduce misclassification between known
between them. At the same time, maximizing inter-class classes and lower the probability of misclassifying
differences boosts separation between known and unknown unknown class malicious traffic as known classes.
categories, enhancing the model’s sensitivity to previously • Open-Detect improves the identification of unknown
unseen or anomalous traffic. As a result, the distribution of categories by learning multiple Gaussian prototypes to
known traffic categories becomes more compact, while the represent known classes within the latent space. This
gap between known and unknown categories widens [25], design ensures precise classification of known categories
[26]. This strategy helps the model better capture subtle while maintaining robust detection capabilities for previdifferences between normal and abnormal traffic, ultimately ously unseen malicious traffic.
improving detection accuracy, particularly in complex, real- • We rigorously evaluate the performance of Open-Detect
world scenarios. on two public datasets, demonstrating that our proposed
 In this paper, we introduce Open-Detect, a model specif- method outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches
ically designed for detecting unknown malicious attacks. in both closed- and open-world scenarios.
10654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 R ELATED W ORK : D ISCRIMINATIVE AND G ENERATIVE M ETHODS FOR U NKNOWN T RAFFIC D ETECTION

 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In and unknown traffic based on confidence levels. Signature-
Sec. II, we review related work on unknown traffic detection. based intrusion detection systems (IDS) and anomaly-based
Sec. III presents a mathematical formulation of the problem IDS are specifically engineered to secure vehicular networks.
and introduces an optimization method. In Sec. IV and V, The anomaly-based IDS employs two biased classifiers to minwe provide a detailed description of the proposed model and imize false negatives (FNs) and false positives (FPs), thereby
theoretical justification. Sec. VI discusses the experiments enhancing the detection rate (DR) and reducing the false
conducted and their results. Finally, Sec. VII and VIII offers alarm rate (FAR) [14]. The SEEN framework [35] organizes
a summary of the paper’s discussion and conclusion. unknown traffic detection into three stages: discovery, clustering, and model updating. GradBP [36] leverages gradient
 II. R ELATED W ORK backpropagation to effectively detect zero-day applications.
 Furthermore, [30] demonstrates that robust regularization can
 Existing techniques for detecting unknown traffic can significantly enhance model performance, proposing three
be broadly categorized into two primary types: genera- methodologies grounded in k-logit neighbor distances. Reftive unknown traffic detection methods and discriminative erence [31] develops a robust traffic representation method
unknown traffic detection methods. In this section, we present that generates a Traffic Aggregation Matrix (TAM) using
a concise overview of key related works, which are summa- packet counts and time series to fully capture key informarized in Table I. tion features leaked in the traffic. Reference [33] integrates
 multiple machine learning/deep learning models into a single
A. Discriminative Unknown Traffic Detection Methods framework using heterogeneous ensemble learning, addressing
 the coexistence of unknown attacks and adversarial attacks in
 Discriminative models are designed to learn the categoriza- fine-grained attack detection scenarios.
tion boundaries of data directly, enabling them to distinguish
effectively between different classes. These models often
employ classification layers specifically tailored for unknown B. Generative Unknown Traffic Detection Methods
traffic detection. One of the simplest techniques involves Generative models are designed to learn the distribution of
rejecting samples with low confidence based on the output known data classes, enabling them to generate and categorize
probability from the SoftMax layer [15]. However, such data based on this learned representation. Many generative
threshold-based approaches rely heavily on expert-defined methods leverage probabilistic graphical models and autoenthresholds, making them time-consuming, labor-intensive, and coders. However, a common limitation of these models is
prone to biases. This reliance on thresholds also introduces their inability to effectively differentiate between known and
instability in detecting unknown traffic, particularly in dynamic unknown classes [37].
or unpredictable network environments. The Trident framework [18] employs multiple autoencoder-
 The work presented in [32] addresses the challenge of based single-class classifiers to achieve granular detection
unknown traffic detection in the presence of class imbalance of unknown traffic and facilitate incremental updates to
by leveraging cost-sensitive matrices and the prediction con- the response model. CVAE-EVT [22] frames the finefidence of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on samples. In grained known/unknown intrusion detection problem as a
contrast, [15] introduces an automated learning framework that two-stage minimization problem. The first stage involves findupdates the training dataset by distinguishing between known ing a scoring measure that minimizes the empirical risk of
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10655

misclassifying known attacks. The second stage uses Extreme approximated by the training data D as:
Value Theory (EVT) to model the distribution of reconstruc- N
tion errors to distinguish between known and unknown attacks. 1 X
 Robserved = min L ( f (xi ; θ) , yi ) . (3)
Similarly, the study in [23] introduces a density-based cluster- θ N
 i=1
ing algorithm inspired by the FSFDP method [34] to detect
unknown attacks. To address the challenges posed by a single For unknown class traffic, we define the unknown space
threshold, [38] develops precise decision boundaries tailored and the unknown risk as follows, using the known class
to each known class. In scenarios lacking prior information training samples D, the unknown space can be defined as
about unknown attacks, [20] and [24] leverage neural networks Ω = S − ∪ x∈D σ(x), where σ represents the local feature
to synthesize unknown traffic, effectively converting the open- space generated by the training samples x, and S encompasses
world problem into a closed-world classification challenge. all the unknown spaces and the remaining space. Consider
 a measurable recognition function f , where f (x) = 1 for
C. Summary recognition of the class y of interest and f (x) = 0 when y
 is not recognized. The unknown risk can be defined as
 The aforementioned studies have significantly advanced the
field of unknown traffic detection, offering valuable insights R
 f (x; θ) dx
and methodologies. However, they often fail to address the Ω
issue of known classes not being compactly distributed within Runknown ( f ) = R . (4)
the representation space. This lack of compactness can lead to f (x; θ) dx
 S
insufficient allocation of space for unknown classes, increasing
the risk of misclassifying unknown classes as known ones. Indeed, the purpose of minimizing the observation risk
 Robserved is to ensure the accurate classification of known
 III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND M ODELING classes while minimizing the unknown risk Runknown aims to
 reduce the likelihood of the model misclassifying unknown
A. Problem Statement
 classes as known, thereby improving the overall performance
 We define the unknown traffic detection problem as follows: of the model in open-world scenarios. However, Robserved and
given a labeled training set D = {(x1 , y1 ) , (x2 , y2 ) , . . . , (xN , yN )} Runknown are closely related; minimizing the observation risk
with N instances and C known classes (yi ∈ Y = {1, 2, . . . , C}), contributes to reducing the unknown risk. The joint optimizathe objective is to learn a model f : D → {1, 2, . . . , C, C + 1} tion objective can thus be defined as
that can classify instances in a test set with potential unknown
classes. The model f has two objectives: (1) to classify known argmin{Runknown ( f ) + ηRobserved ( f (D))}, (5)
classes accurately, and (2) to assign unknown instances to class f

C + 1, effectively distinguishing them as unknown traffic. where η is a regularization constant. It can be observed that
 Eq. 5 has the same meaning as Eq. 1.
B. Problem Modeling The key to solving the problem of classifying known classes
 Theoretically, we formulate the problem of unknown traffic and detecting unknown classes lies in identifying a measurable
detection uniformly as recognition function f , with f defined as in Eq. 5. Since
 unknown and observed risks are coupled to each other in
 argmax [I (F; Cknown ) − αH (Cunknown |F)] , (1) the function f , an effective f must characterize not only the
 F
 boundaries that classify known classes, but also the boundaries
where F represents a specific feature of the network flow, C that distinguish between known and unknown classes.
denotes the traffic classes, I (;) indicates the mutual informa- This formulation introduces a dual challenge: first, finding
tion, and H (·) denotes entropy. By learning an effective feature a suitable recognition function f that can accurately identify
representation that maximizes the mutual information within unknown categories while maintaining the classification accuknown classes while minimizing the uncertainty of unknown racy of known categories, and second, addressing the difficulty
classes, the model can accurately identify and reject samples of selecting an appropriate regularization constant to balance
belonging to the open world. the trade-off between the unknown risk and the observed risk.
 As shown in Eq. 1, this formula aims to optimize the This trade-off is particularly challenging in practice due to
feature representation such that: (1) It maximizes the mutual the coupled nature of the two risks. To provide sufficient
information with the known classes, ensuring that the features flexibility and decouple the two risks, two separate functions
are well aligned with the traffic patterns of the known classes. are employed [22].
(2) It minimizes the entropy of the unknown classes, ensuring that the model can confidently reject flows that do not g∗1 = argmin Robserved (g1 (x))
belong to any of the known traffic classes, thus improving the g1 :x→y∈Y
model’s ability to handle open-world samples. In this paper, Z
we transform the optimization problem of Eq. 1 into a problem = argmin L (x, y, g1 (x)) p (x, y) dxdy
 g1 :x→y∈Y
of minimizing Observed Risk and Unknown Risk. X×Y
 In the context of unknown traffic detection, for known Z
classes of traffic D, (x, y) ∼ P, f (x; θ) ∈ RY , our goal is to = argmin L (x, y, g1 (x)) λp (x|y) p (y)
 
minimize Observed Risk Robserved , g1 :x→y∈Y
 X×Y
 Robserved = min E L ( f (x; θ) , y) , + (1 − λ) p (y|x) p (x) dxdy,
 
 (2) (6)
 θ (x,y)∼P
10656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 2. Overview of the Open-Detect framework for unknown network traffic detection.

where L (x, y, g (x)) is the loss function defining the penalty separation, discriminative constraints are applied to ensure
for misclassified samples x, that Gaussian prototypes of different traffic classes are well-
 ( separated in the latent space. This is accomplished by learning
 0, g (x) = y the intrinsic distributions of the known class features z and
 L (x, y, g (x)) = , (7)
 1, g (x) , y minimizing p (y|x). The unknown traffic detection module
 employs distance-based metrics. If the distance between a
p (x, y) denotes the joint distribution of samples and labels,
 given network flow and the nearest Gaussian prototype in
and the following decomposition is done in Eq. 6:
 the latent space exceeds a predefined threshold, the flow is
 p (x, y) = λp (x|y) p (y) + (1 − λ) p (y|x) p (x) . (8) classified as unknown. Conversely, if the flow is closer to a
 known Gaussian prototype, it is classified as the corresponding
Based on Eq. 6, known traffic class.
 g∗2 (x) = Runknown g2 |y = g∗1 (x) .
 
 argmin (9)
 g2 :x→y∈Y∪{C+1} B. Feature Extraction
 Based on Eq. 6 and 9, the optimization objective defined To capture the fine-grained behavior of encrypted network
in Eq. 5 translates into modeling p (x, y), which effectively traffic, we convert raw traffic into grayscale images [39],
involves modeling p (x|y) and p (y|x). Given the inherent [40]. First, we organize the traffic into flows, each comprising
encoder-decoder structure of autoencoders, we chose to imple- packets of a specific protocol. Packets within a flow carry
ment the model using VAEs. essential information about interactions between two hosts,
 including connection establishment, data transfer, and overall
 IV. O UR A PPROACH communication patterns.
 This section details the proposed Open-Detect model. Flow-level features are critical for characterizing network
 behavior and enhancing traffic classification. To preserve relevant information while reducing noise, we exclude non-IP
A. Overview protocols such as ARP and DHCP and strip the Ethernet frame
 To address the challenges of detecting unknown network header from the data link layer. Each packet is divided into
traffic, we propose a method using Gaussian prototypes. As a header and a payload: the header covers the network and
illustrated in Fig. 2, Open-Detect consists of three principal transport layers, while the payload, immediately following the
components: a feature extraction module, a Gaussian prototype transport header, consists entirely of application-layer data.
construction module, and an unknown traffic detection module. Notably, payload data is not always encrypted; for instance,
The feature extraction module processes network flow data Client Hello and Server Hello packets contain key plaintext
by converting the raw bytes of the flow into a grayscale information from the TLS handshake.
image representation. This transformation preserves the rich For a flow l = (l1 , l2 , . . . , ln ), we select the first k packets
features inherent in the network flow while enabling further and extract a specific number of bytes from each for further
analysis. The Gaussian prototype construction module utilizes processing. Specifically, we take the first k1 bytes from the
a CVAE, which maps each known traffic class to a Gaussian packet’s IP header and the first k2 bytes from the payload. If
prototype in the latent space. This method achieves both inter- the number of bytes is insufficient, we pad the gap with the
class separation and intra-class compactness. For intra-class value 0 × 00. Additionally, to mask the IP address field, we
compactness, a generative model is trained with generative replace it with the value 0.0.0.0. The total number of bytes
constraints, minimizing p (x|y) to obtain latent variables z used for each flow is calculated as L = k ∗ (k1 + k2 ). These
with representative and discriminative features. For inter-class bytes are then converted into integers ranging from 0 to 255 for
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10657

 Specifically, we consider the use of negative log-likelihood
 to model the distribution of a known class of samples pθ (x, y),
 Loss = E − log pθ (x, y) ,
 
 (10)
 x,y∼D

 where
 log pθ (x, y) = λ log pθ (x|y) p (y) + (1 − λ) log pθ (y|x) p (x) .
 (11)
 The hyperparameter λ is used to balance these two important
 terms. Specifically, pθ (x|y) is associated with the generation
 task and represents the generative constraints of the model
 given the label y, while pθ (y|x) is linked to the classification
 Fig. 3. Grayscale-based representation of network flows. task and represents the discriminative constraints of the model
 given the sample x [48].
subsequent analysis. In this paper, we define L as the number 1) Generative Constraints: The objective of the model’s
of squares, which is used to convert a sequence of bytes of generative constraints is to approximate pθ (x|y), given the
length L into a two-dimensional grayscale image [41], [42], label y, in a generative manner to produce a more effi-
[43]. The parameters k, k1 , and k2 are hyperparameters, and cient feature representation. A standard CVAE maps each
we set their values to 8, 80, and 48, respectively. known class to a Gaussian prototype in the latent space,
 Related work shows that machine learning and deep learn- ensuring that samples from the same class are tightly clusing methods can effectively extract latent information from tered, thereby promoting intra-class compactness. Similar to
ciphertext: early studies classified ciphertext sequences by traditional CVAE-based methods, we optimize pθ (x|y) using
directly feeding them into RNNs [44]; later works improved optimal variational inference to derive the following Evidence
classification performance by constructing ciphertext fea- Lower Bound (ELBO) function [49]:
tures or converting ciphertext into images, utilizing models
 Z
such as SVM, CNN, and CNN-Transformer [45]. ET-BERT LELBO = log pθ (x|y) = log pθ (x, z|y) dz
[46] transforms encrypted traffic data into a format suitable Z
 pθ (x, z|y)
for BERT pretraining through tokenization and other pre- = log qφ (z|x, y) dz
 qφ (z|x, y)
processing steps, learning statistical patterns and semantic   
 pθ (x, z|y)
representations. Overall, these studies support the feasibility ≥ Eqφ (z|x,y) log , (12)
of converting network flows (including both plaintext and qφ (z|x, y)
ciphertext) into grayscale images for analysis. Notably, while where qφ (z|x, y) represents the inference process and pθ (x, z|y)
the converted grayscale images contain some ciphertext infor- represents the generation process.
mation, deep learning models can still learn the differences qφ (z|x, y) = qφ (z|x), where x ∈ Prototypey . In the inference
between various cryptographic components and parameters process, qφ (z|x) represents the encoded feature of the sample
[47]. Therefore, retaining part of the ciphertext in the payload x, which forms a Gaussian distribution in the latent space. This
is justified, as confirmed in the subsection VI-E. encoding is achieved by the encoder using the reparameteri-
 As shown in Fig. 3, which illustrates the effect of converting zation trick [49].
different traffic classes into images, there are noticeable dif- We have pθ (x, z|y) = p (z|y)
ferences between the images corresponding to various traffic  pθ (x|z). In the generation
 process, p (z|y) ∼ N z; µ y , I , represents sampling from a
classes. In the figure, white dots typically represent pixel Gaussian distribution, where µ y is the mean associated with
values of 255, indicating the brightest areas of the image, while the class y. The term pθ (x|z) denotes the decoder, which
black dots represent pixel values of 0, indicating the darkest reconstructs the input samples from the latent variable z.
areas. Intermediate gray values correspond to varying bright- Therefore, we have
ness levels between 0 and 255. The effective representation of   
network traffic is a prerequisite for ensuring the effectiveness pθ (x, z|y)
 LELBO ≥ Eqφ (z|x,y) log
of the model. qφ (z|x, y)
 qφ (z|x)
 = Eqφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − Eqφ (z|x) log
C. Gaussian Prototype Construction p (z|y)
 = Eqφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − KL qφ (z|x) || p (z|y)
 
 We use the CVAE to learn latent distribution features within
a supervised learning framework. The CVAE combines varia- = L1 − L2 , (13)
tional Bayesian inference with an encoder-decoder architecture
to effectively capture these features. As illustrated in the where x ∈ Prototypey .
Fig. 2, the Gaussian prototype construction module consists The first term, L1 , represents the reconstruction loss:
of an encoder, decoder, and multiple Gaussian prototypes. The L1 = Eqφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) = x0 − x 2 , (14)
encoder maps known class distributions into the latent space to
extract features, while the decoder generates samples from this which measures how well the decoder reconstructs the input
space to approximate the original distribution. The Gaussian samples, encouraging the encoded feature z to capture rich
prototypes represent each known class in the latent space. representations of x.
10658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 The second term, L2 , represents the KL divergence between Algorithm 1 The Training Process of Open-Detect
the approximate posterior and the prior over the latent Input: Set of labeled data D, hyperparameters λ, γ, d, k, k1 ,
variable z: k2 ,
 Output: The encoder qφ (z|x) and the decoder pθ (x|z).
 L2 = KL qφ (z|x) || p (z|y)
 
 1: Convert raw network flows into grayscale images.
 = KL N (z; µ x , σ x ) || N z; µ y , I
 
 2: Calculate the generative constraints loss LELBO according
 d to Eq. 13.
 1 Xh 2 i
 = µi (x) − µyi + σ2i − log σ2i − 1 , (15) 3: Compute the discriminative constraints loss based on
 2 Eq. 18.
 i=1
 4: Calculate the overall loss Loss using Eq. 20, and update
where d is the dimension of the latent space, which ensures
that the latent variable z follows a Gaussian distribution. the network parameters.
Moreover, it encourages z to be close to the Gaussian prototype associated with the label y, thus promoting intra-class
compactness. where z ∈ qφ (z|x). In summary, minimizing qφ (y|x) encourages
 2) Discriminative Constraints: Intuitively, the generative the latent variable z to move closer to the Gaussian prototype
constraints ensure that the latent variable z remains close to the of its corresponding class, while simultaneously increasing the
Gaussian prototype corresponding to its label. This promotes distance to the prototypes of other classes. This optimization
a compact intra-class distribution, where samples of the same process effectively promotes inter-class separation.
class are tightly clustered in the latent space. Simultaneously, Since pθ (y|x) is intractable to compute, we use variational
inter-class separation is crucial to ensure that the Gaussian inference with qφ (y|x) to approximate pθ (y|x). The terms p (y)
prototypes of different classes are sufficiently distinct. This and p (x) are independent of the model parameters and can be
separation enhances the model’s ability to accurately detect omitted. Therefore, we have:
unknown or outlier traffic by capturing meaningful class
 log pθ (x, y) = λ log pθ (x|y) p (y) + (1 − λ) log pθ (y|x) p (x)
boundaries within the latent space.
 In contrast, the discriminative constraints aim to keep the ≃ λ log pθ (x|y) + (1 − λ) log qφ (y|x) , (19)
latent variable z away from the Gaussian prototypes of dif- Consequently, the overall loss function is:
ferent classes. Essentially, while the generative constraints
 Loss = E − log pθ (x, y)
 
focus on promoting intra-class compactness, the discriminative
 x,y∼D
constraints enforce inter-class separation. Like the generative
 ≃ λ E − log pθ (x|y)
 
constraints, these discriminative constraints can be imple- x,y∼D
mented through Bayesian inference, further guiding the latent
 + (1 − λ) E − log qφ (y|x) ,
 
variable to effectively distinguish between classes. (20)
 x,y∼D
 We have:
 Z where the hyperparameter λ controls the trade-off between
 log qφ (y|x) = log qφ (y, z|x) dz these two objectives. The training process of Open-Detect is
 Z shown in Algorithm 1.
 = log qφ (z|x) q (y|z) dz, (16)
 D. Unknown Traffic Detection
where qφ (z|x) represents the encoded feature of the sample Once the generative and discriminative constraints are satisx, forming a Gaussian distribution in the latent space through fied, the encoder, which approximates qφ (z|x), and the decoder,
the encoder using the reparameterization trick. q (y|z) is the which approximates pθ (x|z), are trained. Simultaneously, the
distribution probability of the latent variable z across the C parameters of the Gaussian prototypes corresponding to each
Gaussian prototypes. The closer z is to the Gaussian prototype, class are learned. The detection of unknown traffic is based
the higher the probability of y being assigned to that class. on distance, achieved by calculating the distance between the
 Since both the latent variable z and the Gaussian prototype latent variable z and the Gaussian prototypes. The following
follow a Gaussian distribution, we define the following prob- steps are performed to detect unknown traffic: (i) The grayscale
ability formula: image x of the flow is obtained through the feature extraction
 module. (ii) The corresponding latent space representation z
 q (y|z) = q (z ∈ Prototypei ) is obtained via qφ (z|x). (iii) The distance dist from the latent
 exp (γ (−dis (z, Prototypei ))) variable z to the nearest Gaussian prototype is computed:
 = PC , (17)
 k=1 exp (γ (−dis (z, Prototypek )))
 dist = min dis (z, Prototypei ) . (21)
 Prototypei
where dis (z, Prototypei ) = KL N (µ x , σ x ) || N µ y , I , γ is
 
a hyperparameter. If and only if the two distributions are The predicted label y pred is determined as follows,
identical, the KL divergence is equal to zero and is always (
non-negative. class i, dist < threshold
 y pred = , (22)
 Considering the above, we have: unknown, dist ≥ threshold
 exp (γ (−dis (z, Prototypei ))) Here, the threshold is set to ensure that 95% of the samples
 log qφ (y|x) = log PC , (18)
 in the validation set are classified into known classes.
 k=1 exp (γ (−dis (z, Prototypek )))
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10659

 V. T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION where α represents the significance level (typically α = 0.05).
 In this section, we provide a theoretical proof that intra-class The upper bound on misclassification probability to known
compactness can reduce the misclassification error of known classes satisfies:
classes, as well as the misclassification error of unknown class. C
 (kµ − µ k2 − τk )2
 X  
 Theorem 1: Let di j = kµi − µ j k denote the distance between Punk→known ≤ exp − u 2 k . (34)
 8σu kµu − µk k2
prototypes of classes yi and y j , and σ2x be the latent variable k=1
variance. The probability of misclassification satisfies: Proof: Misclassification occurs when an unknown sample
 d 2
 ! satisfies the decision criterion for any known class yk :
 i j
 Pi→ j
 err ≤ exp − . (23)
 8σ2x kzu − µk k2 ≤ τk . (35)
 Proof: Consider a sample x from class yi , whose latent Substituting the latent variable decomposition zu = µu + u
variable follows: where u ∼ N (0, σ2u I):
 z = µi + ,  ∼ N (0, σ2x I). (24) kµu − µk + u k2 ≤ τk . (36)
 Misclassification to class y j occurs when: Expanding the quadratic form yields:
 kµi +  − µ j k < kk .
 2 2
 (25) kµu − µk k2 + 2u> (µu − µk ) + ku k2 ≤ τk . (37)
 Expanding the left-hand side and simplifying: Under the practical assumptions that: (1) inter-class distance
 √
 duk = kµu −µk k significantly exceeds τk , and (2) the unknown
 (µi − µ j + ) (µi − µ j + ) <  
 > >
 2
 class distribution is compact (σu small), we can ignore the
 kµi − µ j k2 + 2 > (µi − µ j ) < 0. (26) second-order term ku k2 to obtain the dominant condition:
 This yields the necessary condition for misclassification: 2u> (µu − µk ) ≤ τk − duk
 2
 . (38)
 1
  > (µi − µ j ) < − kµi − µ j k2 . (27) Rearranging terms reveals:
 2
 Define ∆µ = µi − µ j . The left-hand side constitutes a linear
 2
 duk − τk
 u> (µk − µu ) ≥ . (39)
combination of Gaussian variables: 2
 Let ∆µ = µk −µu . The left-hand side represents a zero-mean
  > ∆µ ∼ N 0, σ2x k∆µk2 .
 
 (28)
 Gaussian variable:
 Standardizing this random variable:
 u> ∆µ ∼ N (0, σ2u k∆µk2 ). (40)
  > ∆µ
 η= ∼ N (0, 1). (29) Standardizing this quantity:
 σ x k∆µk
 The misclassification condition transforms to: u> ∆µ
 η= ∼ N (0, 1). (41)
 k∆µk σu k∆µk
 η<− . (30)
 2σ x The misclassification condition becomes:
 Applying the tail bound for the standard normal distribution 2
 duk − τk
[50]: η≥ . (42)
 2σu duk
 1
 Φ(−t) ≤ √ e−t /2 ≤ e−t /2 , t > 0.
 2 2
 (31) Substituting duk = k∆µk, we express the threshold as:
 2πt
 duk τk
The second inequality holds when t > √12π ≈ 0.3989. In Open- η≥ − . (43)
Detect, where the latent space compactness σ x → 0 and inter- 2σu 2σu duk
class separation di j increases, the parameter t = k∆µk 2σ x naturally Applying the Gaussian tail bound with parameter t = 2σ
 duk
 −
satisfies t  0.3989 (empirically verifiable), thus validating τk u
 yields:
 2σu duk
the inequality scaling. 2 !
 Substituting t = k∆µk τk
 
 2σ x gives: 1 duk
 Punk→k ≤ exp − − . (44)
 
 k∆µk
  
 k∆µk2
  2 2σu 2σu duk
 Pi→
 err
 j
 = Φ − ≤ exp − . (32)
 2σ x 8σ2x Simplifying the exponent:
  
 (d2 − τk )2
 
 From Theorem 1, it can be seen that as the distance between Punk→k ≤ exp − uk 2 2 . (45)
prototypes, ∆µ, increases and the intra-class variance, σ2x , 8σu duk
decreases, the misclassification error of known classes also Finally, applying the union bound (Boole’s inequality)
decreases. across all C known classes [51]:
 Theorem 2: Let zu ∼ N (µu , σ2u I) denote the latent variable of C 2
 − τk )2
  
an unknown class sample xu , and τk be the detection threshold
 X (duk
 Punk→known ≤ exp − 2
 . (46)
for known class yk satisfying: k=1
 8σ2u duk
 Pz∼N (µk ,σ2k I) kz − µk k2 ≤ τk ≥ 1 − α,
 
 (33) 
10660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II
 DATASET S UMMARY OF USTC-TFC2016 AND M ALICIOUS TLS

 From Theorem 2, it can be seen that intra-class compactness flipping. The same hyperparameters were applied across all
reduces the misclassification probability through a dual mech- datasets: λ = 0.005, γ = 1, d = 128, k = 8, k1 = 80, k2 = 48,
anism. First, by compressing the variance of known classes and the Adam optimizer. We divided the dataset into training,
(σk → 0), the threshold τk → 0, which increases the effective validation, and testing in the ratio of 8:1:1.
distance of duk2
 − τk . Secondly, by increasing the inter-class 3) Methods in Evaluation: We compared Open-Detect with
distance duk , the exponential decay rate accelerates, making eight baseline models, encompassing both closed-world and
Punk→known → 0. open-world methods. The details of these baseline models are
 as follows:
 VI. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS (i) Closed-world methods:
 In this section, we present and discuss our experimental • ET-BERT [46] is based on the Transformer model,
results, focusing on the following questions: pretraining contextualized datagram-level representations
 • RQ1. How does the Open-Detect model perform in from large-scale unlabeled data and fine-tuned with a
 classifying known class traffic? small amount of labeled data.
 • RQ2. How effective is the Open-Detect model in detect- • IIT [53] is designed with intra- and inter-flow attention
 ing unknown malicious traffic? modules to fully exploit intra- and inter-flow relationships
 • RQ3. Does Open-Detect perfectly achieve intra-class for accurate identification of Decentralized applications.
 compactness and inter-class separation? • FastTraffic [54] uses the raw bytes in the packet as input
 and employs only three layers of MLP to achieve fast
A. Experiment Settings classification.
 1) Datasets: In our experiments, we utilize two public • GraphDApp [55] converts the packet length sequence
datasets: USTC-TFC20161 and Malicious TLS.2 The raw of a DApp network flow into a traffic interaction graph,
pcap traffic from these datasets is processed using the method transforming the classification problem into a graph clasdescribed in the feature extraction subsection, transforming the sification task, and utilizing a graph neural network-based
traffic into images for model construction and training. Details classifier with an MLP.
of the datasets are summarized in Table II. • ACID [56] employs low-dimensional embeddings generated by a lightweight neural network equipped with
 • USTC-TFC2016: This dataset comprises two primary
 multiple kernel layers. This approach effectively discategories: normal and abnormal traffic. The normal traftinguishes between different classes in malware traffic
 fic includes ten categories (e.g., Gmail, FTP), while the
 classification using adaptive clustering techniques.
 abnormal traffic also contains ten categories (e.g., Cridex,
 Geodo). (ii) Open-world methods:
 • Malicious TLS: This dataset contains 24 different categories of cyberattacks collected from real networks • RoFi [31] enhances robustness to packet direction and
 between 2018 and 2021. All traffic in this dataset is timing by using a TAM, providing a more robust repencrypted using TLS. resentation of traffic than existing website fingerprinting
 2) Implementation Details: All experiments are performed defense strategies. RoFi outperforms existing WF attacks
on an Ubuntu 20.04 system equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold in open-world scenarios.
5218R CPU@2.10GHz 80GB RAM and a Tesla V100 32GB • Trident [18] trains a one-class classifier for each known
GPU. Python 3.10.13 and Pytorch 2.1.1 are used to build our class, enabling it to handle both sample and class incremodel. We used Resnet18 [52] as the encoder, paired with a ments. It facilitates fine-grained unknown traffic detection
mirror ResNet18 structure as the decoder. Data augmentation and model incremental updates.
techniques included random center cropping and random level • RFG-HELAD [33] combines a DNN with contrastive
 learning to create a K-classification model and employs a
 1 https://github.com/yungshenglu/USTC-TFC2016 distance-based out-of-distribution detection algorithm for
 2 https://github.com/gcx-Yuan/Malicious TLS identifying unknown attacks.
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10661

 TABLE III
 E VALUATION S CENARIOS

 TABLE IV
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON A MONG F IVE C LOSED W ORLD M ETHODS ON USTC-TFC2016 AND M ALICIOUS TLS DATASETS .
 R ESULTS A RE IN THE F ORMAT AVG .(±S TD .) O BTAINED OVER 5-F OLD . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLDFACE

 • CVAE-EVT [22] proposes a two-stage learning method
 that combines CVAE and EVT for fine-grained
 known/unknown intrusion detection.

B. Closed World performance(to RQ1)
 The closed-world accuracy of a model is positively correlated with its open-world recognition capability. Improving the
closed-world performance can, therefore, enhance the model’s
open-world ability [57]. To this end, we first evaluate the
closed-world performance of Open-Detect. Fig. 4. Confusion matrices of Open-Detect on USTC-TFC2016 and Mali-
 Table IV reports the performance of Open-Detect alongside cious TLS datasets, where the vertical axis represents the true labels and the
 horizontal axis indicates the predicted labels.
several baseline methods on two public datasets. From the
Table, it is evident that Open-Detect achieves classification
 outstanding closed-set performance, providing a solid foundaaccuracies of 99.28% and 99.02% for the USTC-TFC2016
 tion for its open-world capabilities.
and Malicious TLS datasets, respectively, outperforming all
other methods. Among the baselines, ET-BERT achieves suboptimal results, with F1 scores of 99.16% and 98.87%, C. Open World performance(to RQ2)
falling 0.1 percentage points short of Open-Detect. However, To assess the detection performance of our proposed Open-
ET-BERT has a significantly larger number of parameters Detect model when dealing with unknown class traffic, we
compared to Open-Detect, resulting in lower classification designed eight experimental scenarios using two datasets. Each
efficiency. While RFG-HELAD is an open-world model, its scenario varied in the proportion of unknown classes, as
performance on closed sets is unsatisfactory. IIT, on the detailed in Table III. For the first six scenarios, we randomly
other hand, performs relatively well, leveraging the attention selected different numbers of traffic classes to create the
mechanism to fully capture intra- and inter-flow relationships. training set, resulting in test sets with one to five unknown
 Fig. 4 presents the confusion matrix of Open-Detect on classes of traffic. Additionally, in Scenario C-1 and Scenario
two public datasets. As shown in Fig. 4, on the USTC- C-2, one dataset was used for training, while all classes
TFC2016 dataset, Open-Detect misclassified only a small from the other dataset were designated as unknown classes.
number of samples as aliases, with more than half of the This approach aimed to effectively evaluate and enhance the
categories being ideally classified. On the Malicious TLS model’s ability to address evolving and previously unseen data
dataset, Open-Detect misclassified 17.8% of M22 samples in real-world applications.
as M14, yet correctly classified the remaining 20 categories Overall, the model performs well across these scenarwith 100% accuracy. These results demonstrate Open-Detect’s ios, effectively distinguishing between normal and malicious
10662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF T HREE O PEN -W ORLD M ETHODS IN S CENARIO A, W ITH R ESULTS P RESENTED
 AS AVG . (±S TD .) OVER 5-F OLD . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED

traffic. However, in Scenarios A and B, performance gradually the Malicious TLS dataset, testing three known/unknown
declines as the number of unknown categories increases. category splits: 23/1, 21/3, and 19/5.
The introduction of more unknown categories complicates As shown in Table VI, Open-Detect achieved remarkable
the detection task, reducing the model’s ability to classify detection accuracies of 90.20%, 90.34%, and 85.94% in Sceall types of traffic accurately. At an FPR of 0.1, the TPR narios B-1, B-2, and B-3, respectively, along with f1 scores of
reaches its highest point, indicating that in some cases, a 90.71%, 89.62%, and 85.97%. These results are notably supehigher FPR is accepted to improve malicious traffic detection rior to those of other methods, demonstrating Open-Detect’s
(i.e., increasing the TPR). This trade-off reflects a common robust detection capability and balanced performance. Even
challenge in security system design: balancing the risk of FPs in Scenario B-3, where the number of unknown categories
against the cost of missed detections. increases, Open-Detect maintains its accuracy and f1 score at
 1) Performance on Scenario A: To comprehensively eval- 85.94% and 85.97%, respectively, showcasing its robustness
uate our proposed method, we benchmarked Open-Detect in managing complex data distributions.
against various baseline methods and state-of-the-art models While CVAE-EVT performs sub-optimally across all sceusing the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. In this context, we exam- narios, it consistently falls short of Open-Detect’s results.
ined three arrangements of known/unknown category splits: Trident and RFG-HELAD exhibit even more pronounced per-
19/1, 17/3, and 15/5. formance degradation, especially as the number of unknown
 Table V illustrates that Open-Detect outperforms all other categories grows. This is particularly evident in Scenario B-3,
methods, achieving detection accuracies of 98.20%, 89.22%, where their accuracy and f1 scores are substantially lower than
and 95.51% in the three scenarios, respectively. In contrast, those of Open-Detect and CVAE-EVT.
CVAE-EVT, the closest competitor, yielded accuracies of 3) Performance on Scenario C: Finally, we compared
89.82%, 87.18%, and 82.45% across the same scenarios. Open-Detect with several baseline methods and state-of-the-art
While CVAE-EVT demonstrates competitiveness in certain models across two datasets, USTC-TFC2016 and Maliaspects, a substantial performance gap remains relative to cious TLS, analyzing two known/unknown category splits:
Open-Detect. Conversely, Trident and RFG-HELAD fall sig- 24/20 and 20/24. The results of the detection performance
nificantly short of expectations in these scenarios, with both comparison in Scenarios C-1 and C-2 are detailed in Table VII.
accuracy and f1 score lagging considerably behind Open- In Scenario C-1, Open-Detect exhibits remarkable per-
Detect and RoFi. formance with an accuracy of 93.31% and an f1 score
 As the number of unknown classes increases, Open-Detect’s of 93.56%, significantly outperforming competing methods.
performance shows a slight decline. However, it continues to Notably, Open-Detect’s accuracy and f1 score are approxioperate at a high efficacy level, exemplified by a 95.51% accu- mately 4.72% and 6.33% higher than those of RFG-HELAD,
racy for the 15/5 Scenario. This underscores the model’s robust respectively. In Scenario C-2, Open-Detect’s performance is
detection capabilities, even when confronted with a greater even more exceptional, achieving an accuracy of 97.45% and
variety of unknown traffic. In contrast, models like CVAE- an f1 score of 98.65%, figures that far exceed those achieved
EVT, Trident, and RFG-HELAD exhibit markedly poorer by other methods. Compared to RFG-HELAD, Open-Detect’s
performance as the number of unknown categories rises. The accuracy and f1 score are approximately 16.62% and 20.46%
increasing presence of unknown categories complicates the higher, respectively.
feature space, introducing greater intricacy and variability. The CVAE-EVT model performs exceptionally well in
Each newly introduced unknown category presents unique Scenario C-2, achieving an accuracy of 91.52% and an f1 score
feature patterns, some of which may resemble known traf- of 93.14%, ranking second only to Open-Detect. Meanwhile,
fic, thereby blurring decision boundaries and complicating RoFi maintains relatively stable performance across both sceclassification tasks. Open-Detect effectively mitigates these narios, although there remains a notable gap when compared to
challenges by maintaining intra-class compactness and ensur- the superior results of Open-Detect. Trident, on the other hand,
ing clear inter-class separation properties, enabling it to exhibits more volatility in its performance. In Scenario C-1, its
consistently outperform competitors. accuracy and f1 score are 78.51% and 77.51%, respectively,
 2) Performance on Scenario B: We evaluated Open-Detect with a slight improvement in Scenario C-2 to 81.56% and
against various baselines and state-of-the-art models using 85.31%. This inconsistency is attributed to Trident’s exclusive
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10663

 TABLE VI
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF T HREE O PEN -W ORLD M ETHODS IN S CENARIO B, W ITH R ESULTS P RESENTED
 AS AVG . (±S TD .) OVER 5-F OLD . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED

 Fig. 5. Effect of different thresholds on Open-Detect.

 TABLE VII feature extraction time is the time required to convert the raw
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF T HREE O PEN -W ORLD traffic into a grayscale image.
 M ETHODS IN S CENARIO C, W ITH R ESULTS P RESENTED AS AVG . Table VIII presents the feature extraction time and the
 (±S TD .) OVER 5-F OLD . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED
 average detection time per network flow for different methods.
 Open-Detect requires an average of 1.13ms per network flow,
 which is better than Trident’s 1.18ms and slightly higher than
 the 0.82ms of the CVAE-EVT model. RFG-HELAD, using a
 DNN model, achieves the fastest speed. Trident maintains multiple single-class one-class learners, which results in slightly
 lower detection efficiency. Overall, Open-Detect does not have
 a significant disadvantage in detection efficiency compared to
 the current methods.

 TABLE VIII D. Results Visualization (to RQ3)
 AVERAGE T ESTING T IMES OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS 1) Visualizing Threshold Effects: Fig. 5 demonstrates the
 impact of varying thresholds on the Open-Detect model across
 three scenarios: A-2, B-2, and C-1. In each subplot, the horizontal axis represents the normalized scores of the samples.
 The red curve corresponds to the scores of known categories,
 and the blue curve pertains to unknown categories. The vertical
 axis indicates the proportion of samples corresponding to these
 scores. The Normalized Score is calculated as dist/threshold,
 where dist is the distance of a test sample from the nearest
 Gaussian prototype in the latent space. The black dashed line
reliance on reconstruction error for detecting unknown traffic, represents the threshold at which test samples are classified as
which limits its capacity to effectively manage complex and unknown traffic. If the distance dist of a test sample exceeds
diverse unknown categories. the set threshold, it is classified as unknown traffic.
 We divide the complexity of the model into two aspects: In all three scenarios, it is evident that most distances,
feature extraction time and classifier prediction time. FET dist, for known categories fall below the set threshold, while
stands for Feature Extraction Time, which refers to the time many scores for unknown categories surpass this threshold.
required for converting the raw traffic into a grayscale image. This underscores the model’s effectiveness in distinguishing
The prediction time refers to the time spent in classifying each between known and unknown categories, driven by the proflow, while the total time is the sum of feature extraction time nounced score differences. Open-Detect successfully achieves
and classifier prediction time. In the Open-Detect model, the this differentiation by maintaining intra-class compactness and
10664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 6. Feature visualization of known and unknown classes on the Malicious TLS dataset, where the unknown class is represented by red dots in each
subplot. In Scenario B-1, the numbers 0 to 22 represent known classes, and 23 represents the unknown class M3. In Scenario B-2, 21 represents the unknown
classes M0, M1, and M2. In Scenario B-3, 19 represents the unknown classes M0, M1, M2, M3, and M4.
 TABLE IX
 T HE A BLATION S TUDY OF O PEN -D ETECT IN S CENARIO B, W HERE ACCURACY AND F1-S CORE R EPRESENT
 THE D ETECTION M ETRICS FOR U NKNOWN M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC

ensuring inter-class separation. This capability is evident not particularly among known categories that show less overlap
only in scenarios with fewer known and unknown categories with unknown ones.
but also in scenarios with an increased number of unknown
categories, where the model continues to deliver high detection
performance. E. Ablation Experiment
 Overall, the Open-Detect model effectively utilizes the To further validate the design of Open-Detect, we conducted
distance dist as a discriminative criterion, achieving clear sep- an ablation study to evaluate the contribution of each compoaration between known and unknown categories by selecting nent in Open-Detect. The corresponding results are shown in
appropriate thresholds. Table IX.
 1) Model-Level Ablation: The discriminative constraint, by
 maximizing the inter-class distance, enforces separation of
 2) Feature Space Analysis: Fig. 6 illustrates the feature known classes. However, the absence of a generative constraint
distribution of test samples in the latent space across three for intra-class compression causes the distribution range of
scenarios (Scenario B-1 to Scenario B-3) using the Mali- samples from the same class to expand in the feature space.
cious TLS dataset. In these visualizations, the darkest red Despite this, the discriminative constraint still maintains interscatter points represent the unknown categories. class separation, ensuring that the Open-Detect model retains
 In Scenario B-1, the unknown class consists of a single a certain level of detection capability. The detection accuracy
category, with classes 22 and 6 showing minimal overlap of Open-Detect is above 56.53%.
with the unknown class. As the number of unknown cate- If Open-Detect only has the generative constraint, the genergories increases, Scenario B-2 includes three classes within ative constraint increases feature compactness by compressing
the unknown category, and classes 9 and 6 exhibit slight the intra-class distribution. However, without the discriminaoverlap with the unknown category. By Scenario B-3, when the tive constraint for inter-class separation, known classes overlap
number of unknown categories increases to five, the overlap in the feature space, making it impossible to distinguish
between known and unknown categories expands further, with between different classes. This results in a significant degraclasses 7, 9, 17, and 18 showing more substantial overlap with dation in model performance. In Scenarios B-1 to B-3, the
the unknown category. AUROC value is below 68.05%.
 This progression indicates that as the number of unknown 2) Data-Level Ablation: When all header bytes in the data
categories grows, the difficulty for Open-Detect in distinguish- packet are omitted, the detection performance of unknown
ing between known and unknown categories increases, which malicious traffic significantly decreases. In all three scenarios,
could lead to more frequent misclassification. Nevertheless, the detection accuracy drops by 21.09% to 40.06%. This
despite this challenge, Open-Detect continues to maintain a indicates that key fields in the header play a decisive role
relatively strong ability to differentiate between categories, in detecting unknown malicious traffic.
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10665

 TABLE X
 T HE F IELDS C ORRESPONDING TO THE F OUR M OST I MPORTANT P IXELS

 Fig. 7. The original image, gradient heatmap, and overlay image of Arachni
 Regarding the data packet payload, the ablation results show traffic.
that from Scenario B-1 to Scenario B-3, the detection accuracy
drops by 26.56% to 32.93%. For encrypted TLS traffic, both As shown in Fig. 7, the original image is a 32×32 grayscale
the header and the payload contain a large amount of key image input into the model. In the Gradient Heatmap, the
information. red/yellow pixels represent high-importance areas (gradient
 When the IP address is not anonymized, there is still a values close to 1), while the blue/black pixels represent lownoticeable decline in detection accuracy. This phenomenon importance areas (gradient values close to 0). The overlay
validates the necessity of anonymizing the original traffic: image superimposes a semi-transparent red heatmap on the
identification information, such as IP addresses, introduces original grayscale image background, intuitively showing the
domain-dependent bias during model training. key field locations. By analyzing the Gradient Heatmap, we
 After replacing all encrypted content in the payload with identify the four most important pixel positions (sorted by
0 × 00, we find that the detection performance of unknown rows) as 475, 473, 471, and 469. As shown in Table X, these
malicious traffic still decreases to varying extents. This sug- positions correspond to the key fields in the fourth packet
gests that the encrypted payload still contains some key (Client Hello).
information and cannot be completely discarded. This also These feature combinations form the fingerprint of arachni
validates the effectiveness of directly constructing grayscale traffic, which is the key basis for the Open-Detect model to
images from the payload (including both plaintext and cipher- accurately identify such threats.
text) as proposed in this paper.
 VII. D ISCUSSION A ND L IMITATIONS
F. Explainability A. Feature Extraction
 To make Open-Detect more interpretable, we use the gra- The grayscale image representation inherently fails to capdient method to compute the gradients of the Open-Detect ture the temporal dynamic features of network flows. This
model with respect to the input pixels. The gradient method limitation arises from its implementation of statically aggreis a differential-based model explanation technique, and its gating packet byte sequences into 32 × 32 images, which does
core principle is to quantify the importance of pixels, or fields not include inter-packet timing interval information.
in a data packet, by calculating the partial derivative of the
model’s output with respect to the input pixels. Given an input B. Limitations
grayscale image x ∈ R32×32 and a model f , for a target class
c, the importance of pixel (i, j) is calculated as: The model training requires substantial GPU memory,
 which limits its efficient deployment on low-resource devices.
 ˇ ∂ fc (x) ˇ
 ˇ ˇ
 However, we can effectively reduce the model’s GPU memory
 Ii, j = ˇˇ ˇ,
 ∂xi, j ˇ usage through model quantization, without compromising its
 performance.
where fc (x) represents the model’s output score for class c.
The mathematical interpretation of this formula is:
 • The partial derivative ∂x∂ fc
 indicates the rate of change of C. Future Works
 i, j
 the model’s output due to a unit change in pixel xi, j . Our work did not consider adversarial evaluation of
 • The absolute value ensures that both positive and negative advanced obfuscation techniques such as TLS 1.3, VPN,
 gradients are equally important (increasing or decreasing and Tor traffic. In an open network environment, these three
 a pixel value can both affect the prediction). types of traffic pose significant challenges to the detection of
 Finally, the importance map is normalized: unknown malicious traffic. Fully encrypted traffic can lead to
 the loss of key bytes, causing detection methods based on
 Ii, j − min(I) raw bytes to potentially fail. In future work, we will explore
 Iˆi, j =
 max(I) − min(I) detection methods for unknown malicious traffic targeting
 these advanced obfuscation techniques.
to obtain an importance map in the range [0,1]. If a small
perturbation to a pixel significantly alters the model’s output,
that pixel is considered crucial for the decision. This approach VIII. C ONCLUSION
is used to calculate the most important feature fields in a data In this study, we proposed a novel model for detecting
packet. unknown malicious traffic, called Open-Detect, which is built
 The following is an explanation using Arachni malware upon a comprehensive theoretical framework and utilizes
traffic as an example: CVAE to classify known traffic classes and detect unknown
10666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

traffic classes. Open-Detect is a generative model that, com- [20] Y. Gu, Y. Lai, and Y. Wang, “Zen-tor: A zero knowledge knownpared to existing generative models, relies on generative unknown traffic classification method,” in Proc. GLOBECOM - IEEE
 Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 885–890.
constraints to achieve intra-class compactness while using dis- [21] X. Li, B. Feng, T. Zang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, and J. Ma, “Facing unknown:
criminative constraints to achieve inter-class separation. This Open-world encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive preapproach effectively minimizes the risk of misclassification training,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2023,
for both known and unknown classes. Experimental results on pp. 1255–1260.
 [22] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
real-world datasets demonstrate that Open-Detect outperforms variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
all current closed-world and open-world methods, achieving learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
superior performance in both known class classification and detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
 2021.
unknown class detection. [23] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, W. Li, W. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Unknown attack traffic
 classification in SCADA network using heuristic clustering technique,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2625–2638,
 R EFERENCES Sep. 2023.
 [24] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for
[1] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2309.04798.
 TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., [25] J. Ma, Q. Chai, J. Liu, Q. Yin, P. Wang, and Q. Zheng, “XTQA: Spanvol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023. level explanations for textbook question answering,” IEEE Trans. Neural
[2] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 16493–16503, Nov. 2024.
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. [26] J. Ma et al., “Robust visual question answering: Datasets, methods, and
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446. future challenges,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46,
[3] Q. Yuan et al., “Multi-agent for network security monitoring and warn- no. 8, pp. 5575–5594, Aug. 2024.
 ing: A generative AI solution,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 114–121, [27] Y. Zhao, C. Xia, T. Wang, M. Liu, and Y. Li, “Few-shot encrypted
 Sep. 2025. malicious traffic classification via hierarchical semantics and adaptive
[4] X. Wang et al., “Entropy-regulated cross-modal generative fusion prototype learning,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy
 for multimodal network intrusion detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 126, Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2024, pp. 399–409.
 Feb. 2026, Art. no. 103581. [28] W. Cai, C. Hou, M. Cui, B. Wang, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “Incremental
[5] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN: encrypted traffic classification via contrastive prototype networks,” Com-
 Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for net- put. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110591.
 work intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, [29] Z. Liu, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Towards open world traffic
 pp. 1156–1167, 2024. classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Secur., Chongqing,
[6] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: China, Nov. 2021, pp. 331–347.
 A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic [30] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne,
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, “Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,”
 2023. Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109991.
[7] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework [31] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting website
 for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
 Secur.), 2023, pp. 589–606. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624.
[8] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic [32] Z. Gao, J. Li, L. Wang, Y. He, and P. Yuan, “CM-UTC: A cost-sensitive
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., matrix based method for unknown encrypted traffic classification,”
 vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023. Comput. J., vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 2441–2452, Jul. 2024.
[9] K. Wang et al., “BARS: Local robustness certification for deep learning [33] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
 based traffic analysis systems,” in Proc. NDSS, 2023, doi: 10.14722/ robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
 ndss.2023.24508. heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
[10] T. Lu and J. Wang, “DOMR: Toward deep open-world mal- vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
 ware recognition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, [34] A. Rodriguez and A. Laio, “Clustering by fast search and find of density
 pp. 1455–1468, 2024. peaks,” Science, vol. 344, no. 6191, pp. 1492–1496, Jun. 2014.
[11] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult, [35] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid
 “Toward open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., of the unseen: A Siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic
 vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013. discovery,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2020,
[12] C. Geng, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Recent advances in open set pp. 1–7.
 recognition: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, [36] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day
 no. 10, pp. 3614–3631, Oct. 2021. traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,”
[13] R. Chen, L. Luo, X. Wang, B. Ren, D. Guo, and S. Zhu, “Knowing IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118,
 the unknowns: Network traffic detection with open-set semi-supervised Dec. 2021.
 learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 110630. [37] E. Nalisnick, A. Matsukawa, Y. Whye Teh, D. Gorur, and B. Lakshmi-
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid narayanan, “Do deep generative models know what they don’t know?,”
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet 2018, arXiv:1810.09136.
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. [38] S. Le, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, and H. He, “An adaptive classification and
[15] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application updating method for unknown network traffic in open environments,”
 filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. Comput. Netw., vol. 238, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 110114.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405. [39] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba:
[16] Q. Meng et al., “Beyond known threats: A novel strategy for isolating Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
 and detecting unknown malicious traffic,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 89, mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct.
 Mar. 2025, Art. no. 103920. 2024, pp. 1–11.
[17] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe: [40] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 A unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 based on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
 Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024. [41] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
[18] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer- encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI),
 detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619. Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48.
[19] H. He, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, S. Le, and Z. Zhao, “A data skew-based [42] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 unknown traffic classification approach for TLS applications,” Future classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
MENG et al.: DETECTION OF UNKNOWN ATTACKS THROUGH ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC: A GAUSSIAN PROTOTYPE-AIDED VAE FRAMEWORK 10667

[43] P. Sun, X. Yun, S. Li, T. Yin, C. Si, and J. Xie, “AdvTG: An adversarial Qingjun Yuan is currently a Post-Doctoral
 traffic generation framework to deceive DL-based malicious traffic Researcher with the MoE Key Laboratory for Intellidetection models,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2025, pp. 3147–3159. gent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong
[44] E. Ahmadzadeh, H. Kim, O. Jeong, N. Kim, and I. Moon, “A deep University. He is also a Lecturer with Henan Key
 bidirectional LSTM-GRU network model for automated ciphertext Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology,
 classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 3228–3237, 2022. Information Engineering University. His research
[45] R. Xie, X. Chen, X. Zhang, and G. Shi, “Block cipher algorithm interests include side-channel analysis and encrypted
 identification based on CNN-transformer fusion model,” in Proc. Chin. traffic analytics.
 Conf. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis. (PRCV), 2024, pp. 97–110.
[46] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT:
 A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
 pp. 633–642.
[47] H. Hu and K. Yuan, “Identification of cryptographic algorithms based
 on CNN,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput., Artif. Intell. Control Eng.,
 Jan. 2025, pp. 182–186. Guangsong Li received the Ph.D. degree from
[48] J. Liu, J. Tian, W. Han, Z. Qin, Y. Fan, and J. Shao, “Learning mul- Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
 tiple Gaussian prototypes for open-set recognition,” Inf. Sci., vol. 626, Technology. He is currently a Professor with Henan
 pp. 738–753, May 2023. Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Tech-
[49] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on variational autoencoders,” 2016, nology. His research interests include blockchain
 arXiv:1606.05908. security, security protocol, information security, and
[50] Mathematics Stack Exchange. (2014). Normal Distribution Tail Prob- formal methods.
 ability Inequality. [Online]. Available: https://math.stackexchange.com/
 users/6179/did, https://math.stackexchange.com/q/988835
[51] E. Seneta, “On the history of the strong law of large numbers and Boole’s
 inequality,” Historia Mathematica, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 24–39, Feb. 1992.
[52] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[53] Q. Meng et al., “IIT: Accurate decentralized application identification
 through mining Intra- and inter-flow relationships,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 394–408, Feb. 2025. Yongjuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
[54] Y. Xu, J. Cao, K. Song, Q. Xiang, and G. Cheng, “FastTraffic: A Information Engineering University in 2009. She
 lightweight method for encrypted traffic fast classification,” Comput. is currently working with Henan Key Laboratory
 Netw., vol. 235, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109965. of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main
[55] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- research interests include cryptographic analysis and
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using cyberspace security.
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[56] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
 Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[57] S. Vaze, K. Han, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Open-set recognition:
 A good closed-set classifier is all you need?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Represent. (ICLR), 2022.

 Bing Gao received the master’s degree from
 Chongqing University. He is currently working with
 Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
 Qianwei Meng is currently pursuing the Ph.D. Technology. His research interests include combinadegree with Henan Key Laboratory of Network torial mathematics and encrypted traffic analysis.
 Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering
 University. His research interests include network
 security and unknown traffic detection.

 Jing Tao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in Siqi Lu received the Ph.D. degree from Henan Key
 automatic control from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology.
 Xi’an, China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He He is currently a Lecturer with Henan Key Labis currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the oratory of Network Cryptography Technology. His
 Systems Engineering Institute. He is a Teacher with research interests include blockchain security, formal
 Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests methods, security protocol, and big data security.
 include internet traffic measurement and modeling,
 traffic classification, abnormal detection, and botnet.