280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

 Detection of Voltage Droop-Induced Timing Fault
 Attacks Due to Hardware Trojans
 Jonti Talukdar , Akshay Vyas , and Krishnendu Chakrabarty , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Recent breakthroughs in heterogeneous integration arising from within the system, e.g., through rogue or untrusted
(HI) using 2.5-D/3-D packaging technology have led to several chiplets. Threats can also arise from outside the system, e.g.,
advances in the semiconductor industry, increasing yield while through an untrusted end-user [3]. Attacks may be launched
reducing overall cost and time-to-market. However, the diversification of the HI supply chain has led to several sources of distrust with the objective of either stealing the IP (IP theft) or
due to the use of black-boxed third-party intellectual property disrupting the normal functioning of the system [denial of
(IP), outsourced fabrication, assembly and test facilities during service (DoS)]. For example, untrusted chiplets in a system
the design and manufacturing process. We demonstrate the can deliberately affect the functioning of trusted chiplets by
susceptibility of chiplet IPs to timing failure due to voltage droop increasing the levels of electromagnetic interference (EMI)-
in the power distribution network (PDN) induced by the insertion
of chiplet level ring-oscillator (RO)-based hardware Trojans. We induced voltage fluctuations or affect the power distribution
present an end-to-end methodology for design, placement, and networks (PDNs) by introducing voltage droops through maliinsertion of RO-based Trojans in chiplet designs followed by cious modifications in the design [4]. Similarly, an attacker can
characterizing their contribution to the dynamic voltage droop steal IP by extracting the point-to-point interconnects across
induced within the on-chip PDN. We quantify this PDN impact chiplet IPs and observing data transfers between chiplets
on timing paths and develop a systematic method to rank the
susceptibility of different data paths toward a voltage droop through physical side-channels, such as data buses on the
event. We utilize this presilicon security analysis framework to interposer or scan chains [5], [6].
evaluate voltage droop-based attack susceptibility for a variety In this work, we explore the security challenges arising from
of IPs, including some from the CEP benchmark. We also the integration of chiplets that contain malicious modifications.
develop a machine learning-guided time-series anomaly detection We first review existing solutions for runtime security and
framework to detect voltage droop-based anomalies on functional
workloads running on different benchmarks, demonstrating the identify their shortcomings [7], [8]. A key shortcoming is
effectiveness of an convolutional autoencoders in detecting voltage the assumption of a secure runtime environment during funcdroop-induced timing anomalies. tional operation, which limits the scope of existing protection
 Index Terms—2.5D ICs, anomaly Detection, autoencoders, schemes to threats arising from within the system and restrict
hardware Trojans, runtime security, voltage droop. them to solutions implemented at a bus-level, e.g., rogue
 chiplets issuing malicious instructions to make unauthorized
 requests to memory addresses [8]. We describe a more comprehensive threat model that considers the relevant attack surfaces
 I. I NTRODUCTION applicable for chiplet IPs that may be part of a heterogeneously
 HE GLOBALIZATION of the integrated circuit (IC) integrated system. We next demonstrate the susceptibility of
T supply chain has led to considerable challenges in intellectual property (IP) security. Of particular concern is the
 such IPs to timing failure due to voltage droop in the PDNs.
 Based on the proposed threat model, malicious modifications,
vulnerability to IP theft through attacks, such as counterfeiting, such as the insertion of ring oscillators (ROs), can be made
IC overbuilding, netlist reverse-engineering, as well as the to chiplets fabricated throughout the untrusted supply chain.
vulnerability, to runtime security due to malicious design These ROs, when triggered, can induce voltage droop in the
modifications [1], [2]. Security challenges associated with the PDNs across both chiplets as well as the interposer. This
integration of chiplets on an interposer can lead to threats can exacerbate the delay of functional paths in the design,
 potentially leading to timing failure during runtime.
 Manuscript received 21 October 2023; revised 6 April 2024 and 5 June
2024; accepted 15 June 2024. Date of publication 24 June 2024; date of
 We present an end-to-end vertically integrated EDA toolflow
current version 26 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the that leverages existing industry tools to support the design,
Semiconductor Research Corporation under Grant 3199.001, by CHIMES, layout, and full-chip simulation of chiplet IPs using the
one of the seven centers in JUMP 2.0, an SRC Program sponsored by DARPA
under Grant 3136.005; and in part by the National Science Foundation under
 ASAP 7-nm standard cell library. We utilize this toolflow to
Grant CNS-2011561. This article was recommended by Associate Editor analyze the voltage-droop induced on the PDN due to the
J. Rajendran. (Corresponding author: Jonti Talukdar.) activation of RO-based Trojans inserted in chiplets. We next
 Jonti Talukdar is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA (e-mail:
 evaluate the voltage droop susceptibility of functional timing
jonti.talukdar@duke.edu). paths by derating each timing path based on the worst-case
 Akshay Vyas and Krishnendu Chakrabarty are with the School of Electrical, voltage droop experienced by the design running a functional
Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
85287 USA.
 workload. This framework can be used as a presilicon security
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2024.3418395 verification tool to identify potential functional paths that are
 1937-4151 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 281

Fig. 1. Sources of distrust arising from the globalized supply chain along with their associated threats: IP vendors, COTS chiplets, untrusted foundries, test
facilities, and end users [5].

susceptible to voltage droop-induced timing failures due to the sources that may be internal to the system (untrusted or rogue
malicious modifications in the supply chain. We also evaluate chiplets) or external in nature (untrusted end users) (Fig. 1).
the sensitivity of the voltage droop anomalies as a function Rogue or Untrusted IP: Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
of the number of Trojans inserted in the chiplets of varying IPs may be sourced from different manufacturers and thirdsizes. In addition, we develop a machine learning-based time party IP distributors. As a result, without proper trust and
series anomaly detection framework that utilizes autoencoders authentication, an untrusted chiplet with rogue IP may exercise
to detect anomalous voltage droop values triggered due to the unauthenticated functions through the shared interconnects
activation of RO-based hardware Trojans during runtime. We implemented on the interposer. Since rogue IPs may have
also investigate the performance of autoencoders in detecting access to the data being transferred through the interconnect,
voltage droop anomalies induced by non RO-based Trojans, they may intercept, interrupt, modify, or fabricate the data
such as glitch-based power wasting circuits, demonstrating the flowing through the common interconnect. Untrusted IPs may
effectiveness of the ML-based method in detecting voltage include malicious modifications that can cause timing failures
droop anomalies for different Trojan types. due to PDN voltage droop, as demonstrated in this work.
 The main contributions of this article are as follows: Untrusted End-Users: While rogue chiplets with may pose
1) we demonstrate the susceptibility of chiplet IPs to timing threats that are internal to the functioning of the system,
failure due to voltage droop in the PDN through insertion untrusted end users may present threats external to the system.
of RO-based Trojans and glitch-based power wasting circuits; In such a scenario, IP theft is the most prominent threat
2) we develop an end-to-end EDA methodology for design, posed by an untrusted end user because they may try to
layout, post-layout voltage droop characterization and timing exploit both physical and scan-based side channels, as well
deration analysis of various chiplet designs with hardware as traditional approaches, such as netlist reverse engineering
Trojan inserted; 3) we develop a convolutional autoencoder- (RE), to achieve their objectives. Threats arising from rogue
based time series anomaly detection framework to identify or untrusted chiplets are likely to be targeted at disruption
anomalous voltage droop values across chiplet PDNs arising of service while those arising from untrusted end users are
from RO-based and glitch-based hardware Trojans; and 4) we targeted toward IP theft.
perform a security analysis for different numbers of chipletbased Trojan insertions in IPs of various sizes. B. Prior Work on IP Security
 The remainder of this article is organized as follows: In [8], a root-of-trust (RoT) system is proposed to protect
Section II reviews background and prior work. Section III against system-level threats through the use of a security monpresents the RO-based Trojan design and its characterization. itor that implements security policies, also known as hardware
Section IV presents the overall end-to-end flow for voltage security features or HWSFs, that monitor against malicious
droop analysis. Section V presents the security evaluation for access of the system’s shared memory resources in real
timing deration on different IP-level functional workloads. time. The protocol consists of policies that manage memory
Section VI presents the time series anomaly detection in volt- access in a fully controlled setting, ensuring shared memory
age droop data across different benchmarks IPs. Section VII transactions emanating from trusted and untrusted chiplets
presents a discussion on mitigating voltage droop-based are segregated and verified. This protocol is implemented
attacks and Section VIII concludes this article. through a secure transaction monitor (TRANSMON) that is
 also implemented as part of the active interposer. Similarly,
 another security scheme focuses on achieving runtime security
 II. BACKGROUND AND P RIOR W ORK
 by enforcing system level runtime monitoring of a chiplets
A. Security Threats in Heterogeneous Supply Chain through a secure network-on-chip (NoC) architecture, which is
 Emerging threats for heterogeneous integration (HI) systems implemented in a trusted setting [9]. This NoC runs a protocol
can be aimed at either IP theft or disruption of functionality called Hybrid Link protocol or HL protocol and supports both
during runtime. These threats can be mounted from untrusted point to point and broadcast mode.
282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

 Existing RoT-based solutions focus on protection against that work to either detect or prevent such RO-induced timing
malicious modifications or system level threats arising from attacks during runtime.
untrusted chiplets or IP theft [5]. This is ensured through A technique to detect Trojans that specifically impact circuit
the following: 1) a secure interposer that is fabricated in a path delay has been proposed in [19]. This method uses clock
trusted environment and 2) runtime monitoring protocols that frequency sweeping to generate delay signatures for different
are integrated with the chiplet and enforced by the secure logic paths in the design. These signatures can be impacted
interposer. These security policies are aimed at preventing by a Trojan’s load capacitance, thereby allowing designers to
malicious modification of shared memory and ensure data identify delay-based Trojans. Vakil et al. [20] extended this
integrity. However, these methods fail to consider attacks that work by improving the timing model to account for delay noise
may be mounted through PDN characteristics such as voltage and uses a neural network to track process drift. However, both
droops. As such side-channel attacks remain outside the scope these methods remain workload agnostic and fail to account
of bus-based security solutions, they can manifest as timing for situations where dynamic workloads may induce timing
failures in functional datapaths of the design. Thus, there exists failure during runtime. These methods also do not provide a
a need for a side-channel vulnerability assessment framework. learnable mechanism to track the state of the IP during runtime
 and detect attacks in functional mode. Individual current-
C. Threats Due to Voltage Droop-Based Power Side sensing path delay monitors that convert current activity on
Channels local power grid into a timing pulse have also been proposed
 to screen delay-based hardware Trojans [21]. These monitors
 Prior work in power-based side channel security has focused
 can be integrated with current comparators calibrated to reduce
on exploiting information leakage through the collection of
 the impact of process variations and deployed in clusters
numerous power traces with the objective of launching differconnected to scan chains. This method relies on the use of
ential cryptanalysis attacks against cryptographic IP [10]. Such
 scan chains to detect Trojans, thereby preventing the ability
cryptanalysis-based attacks are targeted to reveal encryption
 to detect them during runtime in functional mode. In [22], an
keys. Cryptographic applications have been shown to be
 accurate characterization of path delays is performed while
easily susceptible to power-based side channel attacks due to
 also modeling worst-case IR drop in power rails. This IR dropcorrelation between the total power consumed by an IP and
 aware timing characterization is then used to suggest design
the cryptographic workload being run on the IP [11]. The
 optimizations to improve circuit power and performance.
importance of on-chip PDNs in the context of such power-
 However, these optimization-based methods [22], [23] in IP
based side channel attacks has also been investigated [12].
 design can lead to narrower margins on many timing paths,
 The increasing use of secure programmable hardware,
 making such designs even more susceptible to workloadincluding FPGAs, as on-chip security engines has also motidriven voltage droop events. Zeng et al. [24] presented a
vated the analysis of power-based side-channel attacks for
 method to calibrate ROs under the presence of IR-drop for
programmable logic. Gnad et al. [13] showed voltage droop
 hardware Trojan detection, but it also does not consider
due to the insertion and activation of ROs as an effecdynamic workloads or timing impact on path delays.
tive method to induce runtime faults, leading to functional
 The prior methods discussed above also do not perform a
failure of cloud-based FPGAs. In [14], the effectiveness
 Trojan-based sensitivity analysis to deal with scenarios where
of asynchronous ROs to launch voltage-based timing faildynamic loading conditions of the IP may cause Trojans,
ures on FPGA-based deep learning accelerators has been
 which originally have minimal impact on path delays, to cause
demonstrated. Both these attacks exploit RO-based malicious
 timing failure due to dynamic changes in workload. They
modifications to introduce timing failures. Designing methods
 also do not include a learnable method to characterize Trojan
have also been studied to mitigate such power-based side chanbehavior in dynamic runtime conditions, and therefore have
nel leakage in FPGA settings. In [15], ROs were repurposed to
 limited applicability for runtime detection.
act as sensors that remain sensitive to changes in the voltage
droop. These sensors can be implemented at the PCB level to
monitor voltage droop, but they remain susceptible to errors E. Threat Model
and noise. In [16], an active fence of ROs is inserted between
 As discussed in Section II-A, there exist multiple sources of
the victim and the attacker IP that creates an additional layer of
 distrust in the paradigm of heterogeneously integrated systems.
workload-independent voltage fluctuations, thereby reducing
 Therefore, the threat model assumes the following: 1) use of
the susceptibility to correlation-based power analysis attacks.
 black-boxed COTS IPs with limited visibility to the internals
 of the IP, allowing attackers to insert malicious modifications
D. Limitations of Prior Work on Voltage Droop-Induced in the design and 2) use of untrusted foundries and OSATs
PDN Security for chiplet/IP fabrication. Thus, the integrated system can
 Voltage droop-based attacks and countermeasures for both be vulnerable to attacks mounted by either the COTS IP
cryptographic and FPGA-based use-cases have been studied designers, untrusted foundry, or OSAT facilities. Without an
in prior work [17], [18]. Attacks, such as [17], exploit the effective solution to protect the different IPs in the design,
timing vulnerability of FPGA platforms to on-chip voltage it is impossible to guarantee the security of a heterogeneous
droop events triggered by on-board ROs. While ROs are used system, given that many of its components are sourced from
to cause timing failure, no countermeasures are proposed in untrusted entities.
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 283

Fig. 2. Example RO design that can be inserted in a malicious chiplet.

 Exhaustive security verification of black-box IPs is challenging; it might not always be possible for system integrators
to visually inspect and verify such blocks. Thus, it is possible
for untrusted users to make malicious modifications that can
then be triggered during functional operation of the design, Fig. 3. (a) Illustration of layout for a 31-stage RO with mesh-type PDN
leading to DoS type attacks. For this study, we focus on and (b) distribution of Vdroop for the same RO across a range of values from
 1.2 mV (blue) to 11.9 mV (orange).
modifications made within the same chiplet. Prior work has
shown that these modifications can be introduced through
foundry side engineering change order (ECO) flows that make
layout level modifications within third-party chiplets [25],
[26], [27], [28].

 III. RO-BASED T ROJANS IN F UNCTIONAL IP S
 ROs are widely used for a variety of in-silicon applications, including process characterization, aging monitoring,
and lifecycle management [29], [30], [31]. The voltage carried
across a PDN droops due to variable loading characteristics
across the PDN. The voltage droop Vdroop across a power line
is proportional to the resistance of the line along with the Fig. 4. Percentage change in voltage droop at four different locations within
 the FIR chiplet due to a 31-stage RO, evaluated across four different switching
inductive impedance across the same line. Inductive effects activities (denoted by α) of the IP.
arise from rapid differences in the electrical current and is
influenced by both spatial and temporal circuit switching untrusted interposer. Existing work considers the interposer to
activity, which in turn is dependent on system behavior. Thus, be the hardware RoT, assuming it to be fabricated in a trusted
Vdroop = IR + L(di/dt). environment. However, we consider the most conservative
 ROs, when triggered, act as fast switching components threat model, which includes the design and fabrication of
drawing significant amount of current and inducing voltage both chiplets and the interposer in untrusted environments,
droop in the power rails for downstream logic. This can thereby making it easy for attackers to place such RO-based
exacerbate the delay of timing critical paths in the design. modifications within the design.
This voltage droop induced timing deration is quantified as The ROs inserted in the design can impact the voltage droop
follows [32]: dynamically. As an illustration, we evaluate the impact of a
 1 − VVnom
 th 31-stage RO on the worst-case voltage droop when the RO is
 Tdroop = Tnom × Vth
 (1) inserted in a single chiplet implementing the FIR filter IP from
 1− the common evaluation platform (CEP) benchmark suite [33]
 (Vnom −Vdroop )
 as illustrated in Fig. 4. We insert the RO at the center of the
where Vnom is the nominal supply voltage and Tnom is the path
 FIR chiplet and evaluate the change in the worst-case voltage
delay without any voltage droop. For the ASAP 7-nm process,
 droop across four different locations in the FIR chiplet through
Vnom = 1.1 V and Vth = 0.15 V.
 static power analysis. In static power analysis, we vary the
 switching activity, also known as the activity factor (α), of the
A. Characterizing RO-Induced Voltage Droop inputs and sequential elements in the design. This evaluation
 In this section, we describe the design and architecture of is done for different values of activity factor and meant to
an example RO-based Trojan that can be potentially inserted simulate a variety of loading conditions on the IP. Higher
into a chiplet or the interposer. Fig. 2 illustrates the design of the value of α, greater is the switching activity of the IP.
a 3-stage RO. Each RO is triggered by an AND gate that is The input and sequential activity factors are together varied
driven by an enable signal. The standard cells used for the RO from 0.3 and 0.7. The four locations are picked from the
design share the same PDN as the functional logic within the standard cells located at the center of the four quadrants of the
chiplet (and the interposer if it is of the active type), thereby FIR chiplet, when it is partitioned in equal halves vertically
inducing voltage droop for the functional logic downstream. and horizontally across the center. Details of the evaluation
Fig. 3 illustrates the layout (a) and voltage droop distribution methodology are presented in the next section.
(b) for every standard cell in a 31-inverter RO. Each inverter in RO Sensitivity: Note that the voltage droop value can vary
the RO chain has a total internal power consumption of about for the same location depending on the dynamic loading
49.3 mW, with the 31-inverter RO occupying a footprint of conditions imposed on the system due to change in inputs
39.09 μm2 . The small footprint makes it easy to insert such over time. Thus, it is important to analyze variations in the
ROs in black-boxed chiplet IPs as well as insertion within the voltage droop across a variety of system specific switching
284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

activity. This implies that at any given time, the functional
state of the IP determines the sensitivity of the voltage droop.
Similarly, for a given state of the IP, different locations in the
IP are susceptible to different values of voltage droop. Thus,
Vdroop is a function of the input state of the system as well as
the location. Thus, the presilicon evaluation of the worst-case
voltage droop can help in evaluating likely regions or hotspots Fig. 5. PDN insertion flow using Cadence Innovus.
most susceptible to timing failure.

 IV. VOLTAGE D ROOP -BASED PDN A NALYSIS is closest to its maximum possible operational frequency,
 In this section, we describe how existing RTL-to-GDSII called fmax . Static power analysis only requires specifying
flows (using standard industry EDA tools, such as Synopsys the switching activity for both inputs and sequential cells,
design compiler and Cadence Innovus) can be utilized to respectively, ranging between 0.1 and 0.9. Dynamic analysis
perform timing-aware voltage droop analysis. The overall needs a functional workload that is specified within the Verilog
methodology that we have developed can perform design, testbench customized for an individual chiplet based on its
layout, and post-layout voltage droop and timing analysis for functional specifications.
chiplet IPs that could be later integrated in 2.5-D/3-D systems.
 C. Case Study—FIR Filter Chiplet
A. Tool Specific Layout Details We utilize the above tool flow to evaluate the voltage droop
 The system-level RTL is synthesized using Synopsys DC. for the FIR chiplet through static analysis. The FIR chiplet
We rely on the ASAP 7-nm standard cell library for our consists of a 32-bit digital FIR filter that has been obtained
RTL-to-GDSII flow. The different chiplet IPs can be either from the CEP benchmark suite [33]. We use the ASAP 7-nm
black-boxed COTS IPs or designed in house. The chiplets library for the flow. Note that ASAP7 is a predictive PDK and
are then passed through the floorplanning stage followed by implemented designs may contain DRC errors specific to the
micro-bump assignment, place, and route; all done using libraries used. A list of such DRC errors and justification for
Cadence Innovus. All designs are based on the ASAP 7-nm their waivers is provided in [34]. This has no impact on voltage
PDK. The μ-bump pitch considered is 20 μm. The bottom six droop analysis.. The chiplet aspect ratio is set at 0.7 which is
metal layers of the ASAP back-end-of-line (BEOL) stack are very close to 1. This allows for a more uniform distribution of
used for intrachiplet routing to create hard chiplet macros. The microbumps, which are responsible for connecting the input
μ-bump arrays for the chiplets are placed on metal-7 (M7) as and output pins of the chiplet to the interposer, across the
pin constraints for interposer routing. entire area of the chiplet. Power stripes are also added along
 both horizontal and vertical directions. A single pair of power
B. Chiplet PDN Design and Voltage Droop Analysis pins are inserted at the center of the design, for VDD and
 PDN Architecture: Chiplet PDN is implemented through the VSS , respectively. No routing constraints are placed other than
insertion of VDD and VSS stripes. Sets of VDD and VSS lines are microbump insertion at M7.
placed in an alternating fashion with a fixed spacing between When Voltus is executed, the chiplet-level voltage droop is
the two. The power stripes are inserted in metal layers M5 and evaluated for a full range of input activity factors. Fig. 6 shows
M6. The set-to-set distance between each set of alternating the step-by-step breakdown of the entire flow for chiplet-
VDD and VSS lines is also predefined as 5 μm for both M6 level voltage droop evaluation with respect to the FIR chiplet
and M7. Stripes along M6 run in the X-direction while stripes design. Chiplet-level voltage droop values are evaluated for
along M5 run in the Y-direction. VDD and VSS rings enclose four different input activity factors: (0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7).
each chiplet. Note that blue indicates the lowest-voltage droop while red
 Fig. 5 illustrates the PDN insertion flow using Cadence indicates region of maximum voltage droop. We observe that
Innovus. Power rings can also be inserted in such designs. as the distance from the power pins (blue regions at the center
Following PDN insertion, the chiplet level routing is per- of the chip) increases, the voltage droop values also increase.
formed that generates the final outputs. The worst-case voltage droop across the chip is in the range
 Once the PDN insertion is completed and the final GDSII of 9 mV to 60 mV.
files are generated, the voltage droop analysis workflow can be
invoked through Cadence Voltus, which supports both static V. S ECURITY A NALYSIS —E VALUATING VOLTAGE
and dynamic power analysis. Our flow supports voltage droop D ROOP -I NDUCED T IMING FAILURE
evaluation through static power analysis (vector-less) using In this section, we present the overall security verification
activity factors (α) that specify switching activity of sequential methodology for ranking functional timing paths in the design
cells and inputs, that can range between 0.1 and 0.9. Our flow based on their susceptibility to the worst-case PDN voltage
also supports voltage droop evaluation through dynamic power droop through dynamic power analysis. We evaluate the
analysis (vector-based) using value change dump (VCD) derating factor for each timing-critical path with ROs inserted
files that are generated from functional Verilog testbenches in the chiplets and present an approach to rank functional
for the chiplet designs being evaluated. The chiplet is first timing paths based on the voltage droop impact. Since voltage
designed to operate on a particular clock frequency which drooping in chiplet PDNs is a dynamic phenomenon that
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 285

Fig. 6. Illustration of the end-to-end design and voltage droop evaluation toolflow, including the chiplet floorplan output, PDN placement output, chiplet
layout output, and voltage droop output across four activity factors for the FIR chiplet.

changes with time depending on the type of workload running on their security requirements. The total time incurred in
on the IP, it is important to perform timing deration analysis calculating path derating factors is directly proportional to the
of chiplet logic paths while simulating functionally accurate number of instances in each path and the total number of paths
workloads. These functional workloads must be determined in the design. Thus, the total time for calculating the path
based on the chiplet’s functional specifications. Therefore, we derating factors is directly proportional to the total number
ensure that the workloads used for timing deration studies of instances in all the paths in P. Thus, the designers can
using vector-based voltage droop analysis are characterized limit the total number of paths in P based on the following
to represent the functional use-case of the IP and match the factors.
type of input vectors the IP will experience during functional 1) Slack Threshold: The minimum value of slack that is
operation in-field. deemed necessary for all the paths in the design. This
 is determined based on the system requirements and
A. Timing Deration Due to Voltage Droop operating clock frequency. All paths with slacks lower
 than the threshold are subject to timing deration analysis.
 Let P denote the set of all timing paths in a chiplet. Let
 2) Functional Criticality: Certain paths in the design might
us consider the ith path, pi ∈ P, such that its nominal path
 be functionally critical and are subject to timing deration
delay is given by tnom,i . For a given workload W running on
 analysis [40].
the chiplet with an average activity factor of α, the worst-
 3) Voltage Droop Distribution: The distribution of the
case voltage droop for all standard cells in the path pi will
 worst-case voltage droop for the chiplet design can
change the total path delay to tW ,i such that tW ,i = tnom,i +
 be obtained using the methodology presented in this
tdroop,W , where tdroop,W is the Vdroop induced timing deration
 article. Designers can then identify instances in the
factor added to the overall delay. Using this approach, we
 layout that experience worst-case voltage droop above a
evaluate the timing deration metric for the different paths
 given threshold (say 10% of nominal voltage droop), and
in the design. Depending on its size and the process node
 paths containing those instances, for timing deration.
used for fabrication, a chiplet can have a large number of
timing paths [35]. For example, design supported by Intel’s
 B. Security Analysis Methodology
Foveros 3-D packaging technology may contain hundreds
of thousands of paths [36], [37]. As a result, depending We propose a presilicon security analysis frameon design complexity, security engineers can restrict this work/methodology that can generate a ranked list of paths that
evaluation to the N most critical timing paths in the design. are most susceptible to timing failure due to voltage droop
Furthermore, functionally critical paths that may not be timing in the PDN induced through malicious modifications. The
critical but require security coverage (e.g., paths responsible security analysis consists of the following steps.
for FSM control logic, paths in fan-out cones of primary 1) Generating the layout of the 2-D chiplet IP including
outputs [38], [39]), can also be added to this analysis. For PDN.
every standard cell instance in the path, we obtain the worst- 2) Extracting the timing report of all the critical paths
case voltage droop experienced by that instance upon the through Cadence Tempus.
activation of the RO-based Trojan. This worst-case voltage 3) Running Trojan-free voltage droop simulation to identify
droop value is obtained through dynamic vector-based analysis the distribution of worst-case voltage droop.
while running a functionally characterized workload on the 4) Inserting RO blocks within the design and extracting
IP. In our analysis, without loss of generality the value of worst-case voltage droop for different workloads (static
N is set to 100. As the voltage droop data used to evaluate or dynamic). Note that for dynamic analysis, a workload
timing degradation is obtained from workload-based post- consists of the application of functionally correct inputs
layout simulation, an accurate estimate of the timing derating to the chiplet IP based on its system specifications
factor tdroop,ω can be obtained. through a Verilog testbench.
 The selection of timing paths to be included for timing 5) Evaluating timing deration due to worst-case voltage
deration in P can be carried out by the designers based droop for the timing (and security) critical paths.
286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

 Fig. 8. Gaussian distribution of the sample space of all functional input
 patterns associated with the FIR filter.

 considered to be a part of Ij as they are global signals for
 any IP. Furthermore, the length of the time series workload
 or input sequence, l, can be set depending on the number of
Fig. 7. Methodology for ranking timing-critical paths due to voltage droop
through dynamic power analysis. input samples required for time series data analysis. For our
 experiments, l = 1000, i.e., every workload consists of a series
 Parasitic extraction is done on the post-layout netlists using of 1000 samples. Dynamic voltage droop analysis can now be
Cadence Innovus, following which Cadence Tempus is used run any window of consecutive input samples in WX to obtain
to perform timing analysis. The overall security analysis the worst-case voltage droop value due to switching activity
methodology is illustrated in Fig. 7. We begin with chiplet caused by inputs in that window. The window size, , can vary
designs, such as FIR, IIR, or 3DES IPs from the CEP from 2 (worst-case voltage droop between two consecutive
benchmark suite. The chiplets for each of these IPs are inputs patterns) to l (worst-case voltage droop across all input
designed through Cadence Innovus using the ASAP 7-nm patterns in WX ). Note that time series voltage droop values can
PDK. The gate-level netlists are generated using Synopsys be obtained for an IP X, running a workload WX , by setting
Design Compiler. Following chiplet design, the post-layout  = 2. This is given by VX = [V1−2 , V2−3 , V3−4 , . . . , Vl−1−l ],
parasitics are extracted for running timing analysis using where V1−2 is the worst-case voltage droop value between
Cadence Tempus, which provides a detailed timing report. ROs I1 and I2 . Time series voltage droop data, VX , will be used
are then inserted in the layout and Cadence Voltus is used to for runtime anomaly detection described later in Section VI.
obtain the worst-case voltage droop for all the instances in For timing deration analysis, we utilize the worst-case voltage
the design using both static (vector-less) and dynamic (vector- droop across the entire workload. Therefore,  = l for timing
based) power analysis. For dynamic power analysis, Synopsys deration analysis. This voltage droop data can be obtained for
VCS is used to generate the chiplet’s VCD file, which is every cell instance in a chiplet logic path.
based on its functional Verilog testbench. The VCD file along To ensure that the workload used for dynamic Vdroop analwith the chiplet layout is then used by Voltus to evaluate ysis is as close to functional in-field specification for the IP,
workload specific voltage droop. Using the voltage droop data, we further characterize WX into two modes of operation, busy
all the timing paths reported through Cadence Tempus are mode (WX,busy ) and bursty mode (WX,bursty ). In busy mode,
re-evaluated, taking into account the timing derating factor the IP receives input transactions (input patterns) consecutively
computed from the instance-level voltage droop data. This with no idle time in between. Every input, Ij in WX,busy ,is
analysis allows us to analyze the timing degradation due to sampled from a Gaussian distribution of all possible input
RO-induced voltage droop for the selected paths in the design. samples. In bursty mode, the inputs patterns sampled from
 the same Gaussian distribution are interspersed with periods
C. Workload Characterization for Vector-Based Voltage of low-switching activity (α = 0.1). As a result, depending
Droop Analysis on the burst factor, β ∈ [0, 1], the workload WX,bursty
 As described earlier, it is essential to match the vector- can have a fraction of inputs (given by β) sampled from a
based inputs (used during dynamic voltage droop analysis) as Gaussian distribution with the other inputs having α of 0.1.
closely as possible to the type of inputs experienced by the Fig. 8 illustrates the distribution of functional input patterns
IP during functional operation. As a result, the workload for associated with the FIR filter, which is part of the CEP
an IP X, represented as WX , is characterized by a sequence benchmark suite. Note that X-axis represents the decimal value
of l input patterns, such that WX = [I1 , I2 , . . . , Il ]. Here, Ij associated with the 32-bit input vector for the FIR filter.
corresponds to the jth input pattern/vector in the workload or
sequence WX . Since every sample Ij in the workload WX is D. Results and Evaluation
applied consecutively, WX can also be considered to be time 1) Benchmark Setup: We illustrate this methodology on
series data. The size or width of the input pattern/vector Ij chiplet designs obtained from the CEP and OpenCores benchis determined by the size of the primary inputs associated mark suites. We utilize the chiplet design flow presented in
with the IP X. Note that clock and reset signals are not Section IV to design five different chiplets, namely, the FIR
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 287

 TABLE I
filter, IIR filter, 3DES, MD5, and JPEG encoding chiplet IPs. C HIPLET S IZES FOR CEP AND O PEN C ORES E VALUATION B ENCHMARKS
All chiplet designs being analyzed range from small to large I MPLEMENTED U SING ASAP7 PDK
sized IPs with the JPEG encoder being the largest design with
an area of 1, 546, 240 μm2 , the MD5 benchmark having an
area of 217, 800 μm2 , the FIR filter having an area of 5318
μm2 , the IIR filter having an area of 8812 μm2 , and the
3DES IP being the smallest at about 3272 μm2 . Table I shows
the relative size of every chiplet in terms of the number of
standard cells, pin count, X and Y dimensions, and total area.
We clarify that for voltage droop analysis, the active chiplet
area is enclosed by power and ground rings with multiple PG
 We observe that for certain paths in the design, the timing
pins placed along the periphery of the ring.
 impact is much more significant, sometimes even leading
 2) Evaluation Approach: The chiplets are designed to run
 to timing failure. This is because although a path is not
functional workloads (for dynamic power analysis) that are
 originally timing critical, part of its logic passes through
obtained from the Verilog unit simulation testbench supplied
 the region experiencing the worst-case voltage droop in the
with the CEP and OpenCores benchmark suites for IP validachiplet. As a result, running this analysis for the selected
tion. The Verilog testbench exercises the IP’s functional inputs
 paths in the design provides designers with insights into
based on the IP specifications. The workloads are designed
 potential regions on the chip that may be susceptible to timing
based on the approach outlined in Section V-C. Two workloads
 failures. This is made possible by combining both voltage
are run, WX,busy and WX,bursty . Note that all the designs are run
 droop information obtained from the 2.5-D layout along with
at their corresponding fmax frequencies. Based on the sampling
 accurate timing reports obtained using parasitic files extracted
of the workloads, the stimulus files for the testbenches are
 post-layout.
generated in Verilog. The DSP chiplets (FIR and IIR filters)
accept input data packets to perform FIR and IIR-based cross
correlation operations while the 3DES chiplet computes the E. PDN Voltage Droop Sensitivity for Variable Trojan Counts
ciphertext, respectively, for a set of plaintext input patterns. In this section, we evaluate the sensitivity of PDN voltage
RO-based Trojans are also inserted with their enable pins droop on the number of Trojans inserted in every chiplet.
connected to the system-level reset pin such that the ROs are We vary the number of RO-based Trojans embedded in every
triggered whenever the reset pin is deasserted, ensuring that chiplet and analyze the percentage change in voltage droop
the Trojans are activated as soon as the design is brought out as a function of Trojan count. We also evaluate the average
of the reset state. As the voltage droop in the PDN fluctuates percentage degradation in the N worst-timing paths due to
with the functional workload, we collect the worst-case voltage Trojan insertion for every benchmark. This evaluation is done
droop data through Voltus for both workloads. The voltage on a mixed workload, WX,mix , which consists of equal number
droop data obtained through power PDN rail simulations is of samples taken both WX,busy and WX,bursty and interspersed
then used to calculate the derating factors for the N-worst- uniformly to represent a general functional use case for every
timing paths in the design (N being 100 for this analysis). chiplet IP. This ensures that a realistic workload setting is
 3) Experimental Results: We evaluate the average timing maintained for the evaluation of voltage droop-induced timing
degradation for the 100 worst-timing paths, due to different degradation for every IP. Fig. 9 (Top) shows the increasing
numbers of ROs inserted in the 2.5-D chiplet design. We also trend in PDN voltage droop as the number of embedded
evaluate the number of paths that lead to a timing violation Trojans is increased from one to thirty. The bottom figure
due to the ROs inserted in the chiplets. All experiments were shows a corresponding increasing trend in the percentage
conducted on an Intel Xeon Gold CPU running at 2.1 GHz. degradation of the N worst-timing paths (N = 100) due
For the largest benchmark, the average CPU runtime for volt- to Trojan-induced change in Vdroop . Note that inserting a
age droop analysis using Cadence Voltus was approximately single RO-based Trojan introduces an average degradation
four minutes. Similarly, timing analysis using Cadence Tempus of 0.5%–0.8% in critical timing paths across the chiplets
took less than two minutes. Table II shows the percentage being evaluated. Increasing the Trojan count to three and five
degradation in timing for the 100 worst paths, i.e., paths with increases the percentage degradation to approximately 1.5%.
least amount of slack, in the different chiplet designs due to We start observing timing path violations in IIR and FIR IPs
the insertion and activation of different number of RO units. at the insertion of five Trojans with three and six violations,
We report both the average degradation in the 100 worst-paths, respectively. Two and seven violations are observed in 3DES
μN,worst and also the standard deviation in the percentage and MD5 chiplets at the insertion of seven Trojans with none
degradation across the 100 worst-paths, σN,worst . The timing before.
impact increases with the number of RO units inserted. This Susceptibility of Designs to RO-Based Trojan Insertion:
is because increasing the number of ROs in the design also From the discussion above, it is evident that as little as
increases the amount of voltage droop in the design. five RO-based Trojans when triggered in sync can cause
 Table II also presents the number of paths with timing timing failure in certain chiplets. These RO-induced timing
violation as a result of RO activation. We also analyze the failures can also be exacerbated for designs with narrow
impact of the ROs on the worst-affected paths in the design. timing margins, making such designs more sensitive to even
288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

 TABLE II
 P ERCENTAGE D EGRADATION IN N-W ORST-T IMING PATHS D UE TO T ROJAN -I NDUCED VOLTAGE D ROOP T IMING D EGRADATION I S E VALUATED
 FOR WX,busy AND WX,bursty W HILE RUNNING AT fmax , W ITH N = 100

 VI. D ETECTING VOLTAGE D ROOP ATTACKS USING
 T IME -S ERIES A NOMALY D ETECTION
 In the previous section, we demonstrated the effectiveness of RO-induced voltage droop in causing timing
 degradation for critical paths in chiplets. In this section,
 we present an ML-guided method to detect such voltage
 droop attacks in time series data using convolutional autoencoders [41]. We also highlight our approach to minimize
 false positives while demonstrating the effectiveness of convolutional autoencoders for time series attack detection in
 voltage droop data across several benchmarks from the CEP
 suite.

 A. Time Series Anomaly Detection Using Autoencoders
 Autoencoders are neural networks that learn to reconstruct
 the supplied input sample, thereby producing a mapping
 between the reconstructed input sample and itself [41]. This is
 achieved by downsampling an input feature vector, x through
 an encoder architecture, Eθ to generate a latent space vector,
Fig. 9. (Top) Percentage change in Vdroop and (bottom) percentage z. This is then upsampled through a decoder architecture, Dφ
degradation in 100 worst-timing paths, as a function of increasing number of
Trojans in the design. to regenerate a feature vector, x which is the same size as the
 input vector, x. The autoencoder can then be trained to minimize the reconstruction loss for an input sample, x i , such that
 minφ,θ {L(φ, θ ; xi )}, where L(φ, θ ; xi ) = (1/N) N i=1 ||xi −
a small number of Trojan embeddings. Recent work has Dφ (Eθ (xi ))||22 . Here, || · || is used as the L2 norm, N is the
shown that there exist several pathways for attackers to insert number of samples used for training. Autoencoders can learn
malicious modifications in the design through the use of ECOs, the distribution of a set of samples on which they are trained.
layout level modifications, and trust-gaps within the supply As a result, if a sample x, supplied to the trained autoencoder
chain [25], [26], [27]. Furthermore, ROs are widely used in belongs to the same distribution, the value of L(φ, θ ; x) will be
silicon for a variety of applications, such as process character- very low for that sample. Therefore, an autoencoder can also
ization, aging monitoring, and Silicon lifecycle management be used identify anomalous data as the value of L(φ, θ ; x) for
[29], [30], [31]. Due to the prevalence of on-chip ROs, it is such samples will be very high. After training an autoencoder
easier for attackers in an untrusted supply chain to reconfigure to in-distribution data, a reconstruction loss threshold, can be
a certain subset of nets and derive a trigger signal from an identified. If L(φ, θ ; x) < , the incoming sample is classified
internal net in the design, making the process of malicious as nonanomalous. However, if L(φ, θ ; x) > , the sample is
modification for RO-based Trojans easier. classified as anomalous.
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 289

Fig. 10. Training and evaluation methodology for detecting anomalies in time series voltage droop data, including the sampling window for time series data
and the architecture of the convolutional autoencoder.

 Consider a time series sequence of l data samples given by is set to the reconstruction loss of the sample with the max-
 = [γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γl ]. We can train autoencoders on time series imum value in the set UX,train . Therefore, = max{UX,train }.
data by batching the continuous sequence of input samples This ensures that a time-series window during evaluation is
into groups based on a sliding window whose size is given flagged as anomalous only if the reconstruction loss for that
by δ. Assuming that this moving window has a stride of s, sample is higher than the maximum loss obtained on the
the number of training samples is then given by [(l − δ)/s]. training samples. Furthermore, to reduce the number of false
The size of the input and output layers of the autoencoder is positives, a history-based approach is also utilized, where a
determined by the window size, δ. voltage droop sample associated with the ith window, Vi , is
 not considered anomalous until L(φ, θ ; Vi ) > and the loss
B. Methodology for Detecting Voltage Droop Attacks of at least eight previous sample windows was also greater
 We develop a time series anomaly detection framework to than , i.e., L(φ, θ ; Vi−j ) > ∀ j : (1 ≤ j ≤ 8), where j
detect voltage droop attacks in chiplet PDNs using convolu- iterates through the previous eight samples leading up to the
tional autoencoders. The voltage droop values are sampled ith sample.
from standard cells that are part of timing critical paths in the
chiplet design. The time series voltage droop data, VX , consists C. Results and Evaluation
of 500 samples with the sampling window size, δ = 16, and We evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed autoencoder
stride, s = 1. As a result, the size of the autoencoder’s input architecture on time series voltage droop data collected across
and output layers is 16 × 1. The autoencoder consists of three different chiplet IPs from the CEP benchmark suite. Time
intermediate layers with filter sizes 7 × 1 × 32, 7 × 1 × 16, series data is collected for the FIR, IIR, 3DES, and MD5
and 7 × 1 × 32, respectively. Note that the padding after each chiplet IPs across two different functional workload types,
layer is adjusted such that the X − Y size of the intermediate WX,busy and WX,bursty . The autoencoder is trained on infeature maps remains the same at 7 × 1. However, the feature distribution data, i.e., data with Trojans not activated. For every
depth is changed after every layer. The first intermediate IP, two anomaly detection models are trained, one each for the
layer upsamples the feature depth to 16 × 32. The second type of workload running on the IP. The training sets of voltage
intermediate layer downsamples the feature vector to a latent droop data, i.e, VX,busy and VX,bursty , contain a sequence of
space of size 16×16. This is then upsampled again by the third 500 Vdroop samples. The models are trained for 150 epochs
intermediate layer to create a feature map of size 16 × 32. The with a learning rate of 0.001. Training on average takes less
final filter is responsible to shrink the output feature map to than 4 min for all the benchmarks. Training is done on an
match the depth of the input feature at 16×1. Fig. 10 illustrates Intel Xeon Gold CPU running at 2.1 GHz. The trained models
the overall architecture of the convolutional autoencoder. are then evaluated on a test set containing time series voltage
 As described in Section V-C, time series voltage droop droop data associated with the corresponding workloads with
data for an IP is collected, with and without the activation different number of Trojans activated. For both busy and bursty
of Trojans. The autoencoder is trained on nonanomalous mode of workloads, four test sets are created for evaluation,
voltage droop data, also known as in-distribution voltage with 15, 20, 25, and 30 Trojans activated at a time in each
droop data. Let the set UX,trian contain the reconstruc- of the test set, respectively. The test set also consists of 500
tion loss of the voltage droop samples in the training voltage droop samples, with Trojans activated for 25% of the
dataset for the IP X, VX,train . Therefore, UX,train = time and triggered randomly in the sequence.
[L(φ, θ ; V1 ), L(φ, θ ; V2 ), . . . , L(φ, θ ; VN )], where N is the The effectiveness of the convolutional autoencoder in
number of samples in the training dataset. The loss threshold detecting voltage droop anomalies stems from its ability to
290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

 Fig. 12. Voltage droop anomalies detected by the convolutional autoencoder
 model in time series data.
Fig. 11. Training (left) and testing (right) loss histograms for the 3DES and
FIR chiplet IPs. Note that the loss threshold derived from the training loss
histogram can be used to form a clear separation between anomalous data (in
red) and nonanomalous data samples in the testing loss histograms.
 TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE OF C ONVOLUTIONAL AUTOENCODER M ODELS T RAINED
 ON B USY AND B URSTY M ODE W ORKLOADS . T WO M ODELS A RE
T RAINED , O NE E ACH T YPE OF W ORKLOAD . T HESE A RE E VALUATED ON
 T EST S ETS C ONTAINING D IFFERENT N UMBER OF ACTIVE T ROJANS

 Fig. 13. Separation in the reconstruction loss distribution of anomalous and
 nonanomalous samples for the IIR chiplet with a variety of RO-based Trojans
 ranging from 3, 5, 7, and 15 ROs.

 Table III shows the performance evaluation of the trained
 anomaly detection models on different test sets. For every IP,
 two models are trained, one each for the type of workload
distinguish between the distribution of an anomalous volt- running on the IP. Similarly, for every workload, there exist
age droop sample from a nonanomalous one. This can be four test sets that contain time series data with different
evaluated by distinguishing the reconstruction loss between a number of Trojans activated at a time. For each test set, the set
nonanomalous Vdroop sample and an anomalous Vdroop sample number of Trojans are randomly activated for 25% of the time.
in the test set. To analyze this, we first plot the training loss From Table III, it is clear that the convolutional autoencoder
histogram associated with the data samples in the training models achieve very high accuracy when evaluated on different
set. Fig. 11 shows the training loss histogram and the derived number of activated Trojans across both busy and bursty mode
reconstruction loss threshold for both the FIR and 3DES workloads for all chiplet IPs. The false positives and test
chiplets running busy workloads. Note that the loss threshold, escape values are also less than 2%, with no false positives
 in some scenarios. Fig. 12 shows the voltage droop anomalies
 FIR = 0.002. Similarly, 3DES = 0.0015. We observe that
these reconstruction loss thresholds, when superimposed on detected by the convolutional autoencoder model for the 3DES
the test loss histogram, are very effective in distinguishing and FIR chiplets on the test set evaluating 15 active Trojans
between anomalous data points and nonanomalous data points. on a busy workload.
Observe that most of the outliers in case of both 3DES
and FIR chiplets have a loss value much greater than their D. Intuitive Explanation of Autoencoder’s Performance
corresponding loss thresholds. This indicates that the convo- The convolutional autoencoder is able to achieve good
lutional autoencoder is effective in separating in-distribution anomaly detection performance in dynamic operational setdata samples (nonanomalous data on which training took tings. This is due to the model’s ability to separate anomalous
place) from out-of-distribution data samples (anomalous data and nonanomalous distributions so well in the latent space. As
samples). a case study, we analyze the difference in the distribution of
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 291

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF THE C ONVOLUTIONAL AUTOENCODER M ODELS
 T RAINED ON M IXED W ORKLOADS FOR A LL B ENCHMARK IP S
 E VALUATED ON T EST S ETS C ONTAINING D IFFERENT N UMBER
 OF RO- AND G LITCH -BASED T ROJANS

Fig. 14. Glitch-based power wasting hardware Trojan.

reconstruction loss for anomalous and nonanomalous samples
for IIR chiplet with 15, 7, 5, and 3 active Trojans, respectively,
while running a mixed workload, WIIR,mix . As shown in
Fig. 13, we plot the mean of both the distributions (μbenign ,
μanomaly ) and observe a clear and significant separation
between the two points. We next observe that the anomalous
distribution is skewed significantly with μanomaly lying beyond
the 3σ point from μbenign , with less than 1% of anomalous
samples lying within 3σ of μbenign . Furthermore, we also
evaluate the kurtosis score for both the distributions, which is
the fourth standardized moment of a distribution and is given perform this analysis on IPs running on mixed workloads
by K(X) = E(([(X − μ)]/σ ))4 . A higher-kurtosis score is (WX,mix ) as described in Section V-E. The convolutional
indicative of a highly peaked distribution while a lower score is autoencoder’s Trojan detection performance is evaluated on
indicative of a greater spread. For IIR IP, K(Xbenign,7 ) = 11.86 three different test sets that contain both anomalous and
and (Xanomaly,7 ) = 1.62. Similarly, K(Xbenign,15 ) = 22.10 nonanomalous time series data. From the RO-induced Vdroop
and (Xanomaly,15 ) = 2.87. These values also suggest that the susceptibility assessment done earlier in Section V-E, we recall
autoencoder can create highly peaked and narrow distributions that some chiplets start exhibiting timing violations around
for nonanomalous samples (higher K(X)), thereby making the activation of five or more Trojans. Thus, to perform a
the detection of anomalous samples that are well separated practical assessment of the autoencoder performance on both
from these distributions easier (lower K(X)). A similar trend Trojan designs, we activate three, five, and seven Trojans
is followed for lower Trojan counts with K(Xbenign,5 ) = randomly over 25% of the time the three evaluation test sets,
9.15, (Xanomaly,5 ) = 0.75, and K(Xbenign,3 ) = 7.05 and respectively. Table IV summarizes the convolutional autoen-
(Xanomaly,15 ) = 0.43. coder’s performance across both Trojan types. We observe that
 the model performs significantly well in case of both Trojan
 types, achieving close to 90% anomaly detection accuracy in
 VII. D ISCUSSION case of both five and seven Trojan insertions. Furthermore,
A. Time-Series Anomaly Detection on Non-RO Trojans we also observe that the model’s test escape is significantly
 low even for three and five Trojan insertions. The high-
 So far, we have analyzed the effectiveness of ROs in causing
 false positive rate for three Trojans can be explained due
PDN voltage droop events leading to timing failure. ROs
 to the increasing overlap of the tail distributions of both
offer several advantages, including 1) high-switching activity;
 nonanomalous and anomalous distributions, which can also
2) ease of insertion and masking among large number of other
 be seen in Fig. 13. It is important to note that as the Trojan
ROs that are part of the design; and 3) relatively simply design.
 count decreases, there is greater overlap in tail distributions
To investigate the effectiveness of the autoencoder-based time
 of both anomalous and nonanomalous samples, with μanomaly
series anomaly detection model against non-RO Trojans, we
 shifting closer to the 3σ threshold of the nonanomalous
implement a glitch-based power wasting Trojan as shown in
 distribution. This close proximity of an anomalous sample to
Fig. 14. This Trojan is a variant of a power hammering circuit
 a benign sample is also indicative of a lesser likelihood of
proposed in [42]. When the Trigger signal is enabled, a chain
 timing path violation occurring for such scenarios. In fact,
of six inverters is used to generate multiple variable delay
 the convolutional autoencoder is effective at catching voltage
glitches at the output of the XOR gate, which drives a power
 droop anomalies that have a greater likelihood of causing
wasting block comprising of a chain of 10 additional inverters
 timing violations due to their increased separation from the 3σ
that propagate the glitch. The frequency of glitch generation
 corner of the nonanomalous distribution, which is also why
is N/2 times that of the input clock, where of N refers to
 the model’s test escape is low.
the number of inputs to the XOR gate. In our implementation,
N = 4, thereby producing two glitches every clock cycle.
As compared to RO-based Trojan, the glitch-based Trojan B. Mitigating PDN Voltage Droop Attacks
generates almost twice the amount of switching activity and As discussed in Sections II and III, the nature of the threat
has an area footprint comparable to the RO-based Trojan. model for HI assumes the use of untrusted COTS IP, which
 We compare the performance of our time series anomaly can lead to untrusted chiplets being integrated in the system.
detection model for both RO- and glitch-based Trojans. We As RO-based Trojans are significantly small in size, they
292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

can be easily incorporated into chiplets being fabricated and
tested across third-party locations. Furthermore, due to their
size and independence from control FSMs, such malicious
modifications can easily sneak past existing security mechanisms that rely on mere visual inspection. Furthermore, even
formal security verification techniques, such as logic equivalence checking, cannot guarantee security against Trojans Fig. 15. Worst-case voltage droop across the FIR chiplet for different location
that impact functional behavior through power-based side and number of PG pins inserted in the PDN (blue-minimum at 0 V, redmaximum at 90 mV). (a) One PG pin at center; (b) three PG pins with one
channels [43]. This necessitates the need for nonobtrusive inserted at center and two in top half; (c) five PG pins across four corners
design-level safe guards that can ensure the security of the and one in center; and (d) seven PG pins inserted with three across both left
overall HI system during runtime, especially against power- and right halves, and one in center.
based side channel attacks. As voltage droop across a power
rail is directly affected by the ability of that rail to supply multiple chiplets in HI systems can also be explored as part
power to its load, the higher the driving capacity of the rail, of future work.
the lower is the voltage droop. We propose the use of power
and ground pins (PG pins) to mitigate the impact of voltage VIII. C ONCLUSION
droop-based attacks. The voltage droop distribution across a
 We have presented the shortcomings associated with existchiplet is determined by the dynamic loading conditions on
 ing security solutions targeted toward runtime IP security and
the power and ground rails for the different instances (and/or
 developed a methodology for the design, synthesis, layout, and
regions) within the chiplet. The closer an instance is to a PG
 simulation of voltage droop events for chiplet IPs. We have
pin, the lower is the voltage droop experienced by that instance
 described a method to analyze the susceptibility of chiplet IPs
(and/or region) under dynamic loading conditions.
 toward voltage droop-based PDN timing attacks, resulting in
 In order to prevent voltage droop-based PDN side-channel
 timing failure during functional runtime. We have developed
attacks, PG pins can thus be systematically inserted in locaa convolutional autoencoder-based method that can detect
tions that are: 1) experiencing high-voltage droop, also known
 voltage droop anomalies in time series data, caused by ROas voltage droop hotspots and 2) susceptible to timing failure
 based hardware Trojans in chiplet PDNs. This method achieves
due to significantly low slack, i.e., have lower tolerance for
 very high accuracy with minimal amount of false positives and
voltage droop events. Inserting PG pins systematically across
 test escape.
a chiplet not only reduces the susceptibility of specific paths
to voltage droop-induced timing failure, but also reduces the
worst-case value of voltage droop throughout the entire chiplet R EFERENCES
itself. Fig. 15 shows the worst-case voltage droop distribution [1] J. Talukdar, S. Chen, A. Das, S. Aftabjahani, P. Song, and
for the FIR chiplet for a variety of PG pin configurations. Note K. Chakrabarty, “A BIST-based dynamic obfuscation scheme for
that the worst-case voltage droop is maximum in Fig. 15(a), resilience against removal and oracle-guided attacks,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Test Conf. (ITC), 2021, pp. 170–179.
which has only one PG pin. Meanwhile, the worst-case voltage [2] K. Xiao, D. Forte, Y. Jin, R. Karri, S. Bhunia, and M. Tehranipoor,
droop distribution is much less and more evenly spread out “Hardware trojans: Lessons learned after one decade of research,” ACM
for the case with seven PG pins as shown in Fig. 15(d). Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2016.
 [3] Technical Working Groups, “Heterogeneous integration roadmap:
 The methodology for inserting PG pins across chiplets can Security,” in Proc. IEEE Electron. Packag. Soc., 2021, pp. 1–73.
enhance security against voltage droop-based PDN timing fault [4] M. S. M. Khan et al., “Secure interposer-based heterogeneous integraattacks. This is because there are two limiting factors that tion,” IEEE Design Test, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 156–164, Dec. 2022.
 max : The maximum limit of the [5] J. Talukdar, A. Chaudhuri, J. Kim, S. K. Limt, and K. Chakrabarty,
affect timing degradation. Vdroop “Securing heterogeneous 2.5-D ICs against IP Thef through dynamic
 min : The minimum slack threshold
worst-case voltage droop. tslack interposer obfuscation,” in Proc. IEEE DATE, 2023, pp. 1–2.
that must be required to meet timing requirements. [6] J. Talukdar, A. Chaudhuri, and K. Chakrabarty, “TaintLock: Preventing
 IP theft through lightweight dynamic scan encryption using taint bits,”
 Given the list of paths P that must meet the timing in Proc. IEEE Eur. Test Symp. (ETS), 2022, pp. 1–6.
 min and the worst-case value V max that needs to
requirement tslack [7] W. Chen and B. Bottoms, “Heterogeneous integration roadmap: Driving
 droop
be tolerated, we can compute the worst-case timing derating force and enabling technology for systems of the future,” in Proc. IEEE
 Symp. VLSI Technol., 2019, pp. T50–T51.
factors for the paths in P. Based on this computation, we [8] M. Nabeel et al., “2.5-D root of trust: Secure system-level integraobtain a new list Pderated , which contains a list of paths out tion of untrusted chiplets,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 11,
of which some may now have become susceptible to timing pp. 1611–1625, Nov. 2020.
 path [9] H. Park et al., “Design flow for active interposer-based 2.5-D ICs and
 min ). We can now identify the instances
failure (if tslack < tslack study of RISC-V architecture with secure NoC,” IEEE Trans. Compon.,
belonging to these susceptible paths within the chiplet layout, Packag. Manuf. Technol., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 2047–2060, Dec. 2020.
and insert PG pins to power and ground rails belonging to [10] F. Schellenberg et al., “Remote inter-chip power analysis side-channel
 attacks at board-level,” in Proc. IEEE ICCAD, 2018, pp. 1–7.
those instances to prevent the adverse impact of voltage droop. [11] G. L. Ding, J. Chu, L. Yuan, and Q. Zhao, “Correlation electromagnetic
This method provides designers the ability to guarantee timing analysis for cryptographic device,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific–Asia Conf.
security against voltage droop-based attacks given the worst- Circuits, Commun. Syst., 2009, pp. 388–391.
 [12] X. Wang et al., “Role of power grid in side channel attack and powercase voltage and timing thresholds. The impact of Trojans grid-aware secure design,” in Proc. 50th Annu. Design Autom. Conf.,
inserted in the active interposer and shared PDNs across 2013, pp. 1–9.
TALUKDAR et al.: DETECTION OF VOLTAGE DROOP-INDUCED TIMING FAULT ATTACKS 293

[13] D. R. E. Gnad et al., “Voltage drop-based fault attacks on FPGAs using [38] A. Chaudhuri, J. Talukdar, J. Jung, G.-J. Nam, and K. Chakrabarty,
 valid bitstreams,” in Proc. 27th Intl. Conf. Field Programmable Logic “Fault-criticality assessment for AI accelerators using graph convolu-
 Appl. (FPL), 2017, pp. 1–7. tional networks,” in Proc. IEEE DATE, 2021, pp. 1596–1599.
[14] A. Boutros, M. Hall, N. Papernot, and V. Betz, “Neighbors from [39] A. Chaudhuri, C.-Y. Chen, J. Talukdar, S. Madala, A. K. Dubey, and
 hell: Voltage attacks against deep learning accelerators on multi-tenant K. Chakrabarty, “Efficient fault-criticality analysis for AI accelerators
 FPGAs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Field-Programmable Technol. (ICFPT), using a neural twin,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Test Conf. (ITC), 2021,
 2020, pp. 103–111. pp. 73–82.
[15] N. Gattu, M. N. I. Khan, A. De, and S. Ghosh, “Power side channel [40] A. Chaudhuri, J. Talukdar, F. Su, and K. Chakrabarty, “Functional
 attack analysis and detection,” in Proc. IEEE ICCAD, 2020, pp. 1–7. criticality analysis of structural faults in AI accelerators,” IEEE
[16] J. Krautter, D. R. E. Gnad, F. Schellenberg, A. Moradi, and Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 12,
 M. B. Tahoori, “Active fences against voltage-based side channels in pp. 5657–5670, Dec. 2022.
 multi-tenant FPGAs,” in Proc. IEEE ICCAD, 2019, pp. 1–8. [41] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
[17] J. Krautter, D. R. E. Gnad, and M. B. Tahoori, “FPGAhammer: Remote autoencoders,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD, 2017, pp. 665–674.
 voltage fault attacks on shared FPGAs, suitable for DFA on AES,” [42] K. Matas et al., “Power-hammering through glitch amplification–attacks
 IACR Trans. Cryptograph. Hardw. Embedded Syst., vol. 2018, no. 3, and mitigation,” in Proc. IEEE FCCM, 2020, pp. 65–69.
 pp. 44–68, 2018. [43] M. Eslami, J. Knechtel, O. Sinanoglu, R. Karri, and S. Pagliarini,
[18] H. Nassar, P. Machauer, D. R. E. Gnad, L. Bauer, M. B. Tahoori, and “Benchmarking advanced security closure of physical layouts: ISPD
 J. Henkel, “Covert-hammer: Coordinating power-hammering on multi- 2023 contest,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Phys. Design, 2023, pp. 256–264.
 tenant FPGAs via covert channels,” in Proc. ACM FPGA, 2024, p. 43.
[19] K. Xiao, X. Zhang, and M. Tehranipoor, “A clock sweeping technique
 for detecting hardware trojans impacting circuits delay,” IEEE Design
 Test, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 26–34, Apr. 2013.
[20] A. Vakil et al., “LASCA: Learning assisted side channel delay
 Jonti Talukdar received the B.Tech. degree in elecanalysis for hardware trojan detection,” in Proc. ISQED, 2020,
 tronics and communication engineering from Nirma
 pp. 40–45.
 University, Ahmedabad, India, in 2018, and the
[21] Y. Cao, C.-H. Chang, and S. Chen, “A cluster-based distributed active M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer
 current sensing circuit for hardware trojan detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. engineering from Duke University, Durham, NC,
 Forensics Security, vol. 9, pp. 2220–2231, 2014. USA, in 2020 and 2024 respectively.
[22] A. Vakil, H. Homayoun, and A. Sasan, “IR-ATA: IR annotated timing His Ph.D. thesis is on securing heterogeneously
 analysis, a flow for closing the loop between PDN design, IR analysis integrated (HI) 2.5-D/3-D ICs against IP theft. He
 & timing closure,” in Proc. IEEE ASPDAC, 2019, pp. 152–159. has worked extensively on developing low-cost solu-
[23] S. Beheshti-Shirazi et al., “A reinforced learning solution for clock tions for IP obfuscation, repurposing on-chip test
 skew engineering to reduce peak current and IR drop,” in Proc. IEEE architecture for security, runtime memory and IP
 GLSVLSI, 2021, pp. 181–187. security, and testing of AI accelerator hardware and mixed-signal circuits.
[24] Z. Zeng, L. Li, W. Zhou, J. Yang, and Y. He, “IR-drop calibration for He has also spent time as a Research Intern with Intel, Santa Clara, CA,
 hardware trojan detection,” in Proc. IEEE ISCID, 2020, pp. 418–421. USA; Synopsys, Sunnyvale, CA, USA; and NVIDIA, Santa Clara. He is
[25] A. Hepp et al., “A pragmatic methodology for blind hardware trojan currently a Senior DFX Engineer with NVIDIA. His research interests lie at
 insertion in finalized layouts,” in Proc. IEEE ICCAD, 2022, pp. 1–9. the intersection of hardware security, test, and applied machine learning for
[26] T. Perez, M. Imran, P. Vaz, and S. Pagliarini, “Side-channel trojan silicon security, health, and lifecycle management.
 insertion—A practical foundry-side attack via ECO,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2021, pp. 1–5.
[27] M. S. U. I. Sami et al., “Advancing trustworthiness in systemin-package: A novel root-of-trust hardware security module for
 heterogeneous integration,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 48081–48107,
 2024. Akshay Vyas received the B.E. degree in electron-
[28] X. Wei, Y. Diao, and Y.-L. Wu, “To detect, locate, and mask hardware ics and communication engineering from Mumbai
 trojans in digital circuits by reverse engineering and functional ECO,” University, Mumbai, India, in 2019, and the M.S.
 in Proc. 21st Asia South Pacific Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC), 2016, degree in electrical engineering with Arizona State
 pp. 623–630. University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2024.
[29] D. Sengupta and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Estimating circuit aging due to His research interests lie in hardware security and
 BTI and HCI using ring-oscillator-based sensors,” IEEE Trans. Comput.- silicon lifecycle management.
 Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1688–1701, Oct.
 2017.
[30] M. Bhushan, A. Gattiker, M. B. Ketchen, and K. K. Das, “Ring
 oscillators for CMOS process tuning and variability control,” IEEE
 Trans. Semicond. Manuf., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 10–18, Feb. 2006.
[31] T.-H. Kim et al., “Silicon odometer: An on-chip reliability monitor for
 measuring frequency degradation of digital circuits,” IEEE J. Solid-State
 Circuits, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 874–880, Apr. 2008. Krishnendu Chakrabarty (Fellow, IEEE) received
[32] S.-C. Hung et al., “Power supply noise-aware scan test pattern reshaping the B.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute
 for at-speed delay fault testing of monolithic 3-D ICs,” in Proc. IEEE of Technology, Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India, in
 Asian Test Symp. (ATS), 2020, pp. 1–6. 1990, and the M.S.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the
[33] B. Tan et al., “Benchmarking at the frontier of hardware security: University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in
 Lessons from logic locking,” 2020, arXiv:2006.06806, 1992 and 1995, respectively.
[34] “ASAP7 DRC violations and waiver justification.” 2024. [Online]. He is currently the Fulton Professor of
 Available: https://shorturl.at/fLQ89 Microelectronics with the School of Electrical,
[35] M. Ahmad, J. DeLaCruz, and A. Ramamurthy, “Heterogeneous inte- Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State
 gration of chiplets: Cost and yield tradeoff analysis,” in Proc. IEEE University (ASU), Tempe, AZ, USA. He is also
 EuroSimE, 2022, pp. 1–9. the Director of the ASU Center on Semiconductor
[36] S. R. Srinivasa et al., “Design methodology for scalable 2.5-D/3- Microelectronics and the CTO of the Department of Defense Microelectronics
 D heterogenous tiled chiplet systems,” in Proc. IEEE ISQED, 2022, Commons Southwest Advanced Prototyping Hub. His current research
 pp. 1–4. projects include design-for-testability of 2.5-D/3-D integrated circuits and
[37] W. Gomes et al., “8.1 lakefield and mobility compute: A 3-D heterogeneous integration; hardware security; AI accelerators; microfluidic
 stacked 10-nm and 22FFL hybrid processor system in 12× biochips; and AI for healthcare.
 12mm 2, 1mm package-on-package,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, 2020, Prof. Chakrabarty is a Fellow of ACM and AAAS, and a Golden Core
 pp. 144–146. Member of the IEEE Computer Society.