10528 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Disentangled Dynamic Intrusion Detection
 Chenyang Qiu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Guoshun Nan , Member, IEEE, Hongrui Xia , Zheng Weng,
 Xueting Wang, Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Xiaofeng Tao , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Jun Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS) DIDS-MFL. For few-shot NIDS, our DIDS-MFL achieves a 71.91%
monitors network traffic for malicious activities, formingthe front- –125.19% improvement in average F1-score over 14 baselines and
line defense against increasing attacks over information infrastruc- shows versatility in multiple baselines and multiple tasks.
tures. Although promising, our quantitative analysis shows that
existing methods perform inconsistently in attacks (e.g., 18% F1 Index Terms—Intrusion detection, network security.
for the MITM and 93% F1 for DDoS by a GCN-based state-ofthe-art method), and perform poorly in few-shot intrusion detections (e.g., dramatically drops from 91% to 36% in 3D-IDS, I. INTRODUCTION
and drops from 89% to 20% in E-GraphSAGE). We reveal that
the underlying cause is entangled distributions of flow features. NAUTHORIZED attempts like password cracking [1],
This motivates us to propose DIDS-MFL, a disentangled intrusion
detection approach for various scenarios. DIDS-MFL involves two
key components: a double Disentanglement-based Intrusion De-
 U man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM) [2], and denial-ofservice (DoS) [3] are known as the network attacks [4], tartection System (DIDS) and a plug-and-play Multi-scale Few-shot geting an organization’s digital assets with the intention of
Learning-based (MFL) intrusion detection module. Specifically, data leakage or the execution of harmful deeds. These attacks
the proposed DIDS first disentangles traffic features by a non- are frequently perceived as network anomalies [5] due to their
parameterized optimization, automatically differentiating tens and distinct characteristics that differ from standard traffic patterns.
hundreds of complex features. Such differentiated features will be
further disentangled to highlight the attack-specific features. Our
 An alarming statistic [6] notes that 31% companies across the
DIDS additionally uses a novel graph diffusion method that dynam- globe experience a daily average of at least one cyber attack, a
ically fuses the network topology for spatial-temporal aggregation frequency amplified by the proliferation of mobile online busiin evolving data streams. Furthermore, the proposed MFL involves ness endeavors. The situations necessitate an intelligent system
an alternating optimization framework to address the entangled deployment to assist network administrators in the automated
representations in few-shot traffic threats with rigorous derivation. MFL first captures multi-scale information in latent space
 segregation of these anomalies from the vast sea of internet
to distinguish attack-specific information and then optimizes the traffic. A network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS) [7],
disentanglement term to highlight the attack-specific information. which monitors network traffic and identifies malicious activ-
Finally, MFL fuses and alternately solves them in an end-to-end ities, facilitates administrators to form the frontline defense
way. To the best of our knowledge, DIDS-MFL takes the first step against increasing attacks over information infrastructures (e.g.,
toward disentangled dynamic intrusion detection under various
attack scenarios. Equipped with DIDS-MFL, administrators can
 sensors and servers). Hence, NIDS is widely applied in many
effectively identify various attacks in encrypted traffic, including information systems of governments and e-commercial business
known, unknown, and few-shot threats that are not easily detected. sectors [8]. Fig. 1 demonstrates how NIDS builds a frontline
Comprehensive experiments show the superiority of our proposed defense against two network attacks, protecting systems from
 potential cyber threats.
 Received 11 December 2024; revised 5 June 2025; accepted 25 July 2025. Existing NIDS can be categorized into two types, i.e.,
Date of publication 4 August 2025; date of current version 3 October 2025. signature-based ones [9], [10], [11] and anomaly-based
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Devel- ones [12], [13], [14]. The former detects network attacks based
opment Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2902200, and in part by the
General Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant on pre-defined patterns or known malicious sequences stored
62471064. Recommended for acceptance by M. L. Zhang. (Corresponding in a database, such as the number of bytes in traffic. These
author: Guoshun Nan.) patterns in the NIDS are referred to as signatures. The lat-
 Chenyang Qiu, Guoshun Nan, Hongrui Xia, Zheng Weng, Xueting
Wang, and Xiaofeng Tao are with the National Engineering Research Cen- ter anomaly-based NIDS learns to track attacks with machine
ter for Mobile Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and learning techniques. Early statistical approaches [2], [3], such
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with Beiyou Shen- as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression (LR),
zhen Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: cyqiu@bupt.edu.cn; nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn; kphchrls@bupt.edu.cn; wengzheng@bupt.edu.cn; wx- and Decision Tree (DT), rely on carefully designed handcrafted
tyuki@bupt.edu.cn; taoxf@bupt.edu.cn). features to learn classification boundaries. Recent deep learning-
 Meng Shen is with the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China based methods [15], [16] use millions of neural parameters
(e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn).
 Jun Liu is with the School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster to mine the knowledge underlying the training samples, and
University, LA14YW Lancaster, U.K. (e-mail: j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk). have achieved great success in automatically modeling complex
 Our code is available at https://github.com/qcydm/DIDS-MFL. correlations for tens and thousands of features. The state-of-the-
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3595671, provided by the authors. art E-GraphSAGE [17] employs graph convolution networks
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3595671 (GCNs) to learn the feature representations for better prediction.
 0162-8828 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10529

 such a phenomenon as the entangled distribution of statistical
 features. To analyze the reason for performance variations of
 acknowledged attacks during testing, we use Pearson correlation
 heat map [21] to visualize the representations of MITM and
 DDoS respectively, where the representations are generated by
 the encoder of E-GraphSAGE. Fig. 2(e) and 2(f) demonstrate
 the two correlation maps. Interestingly, we observe that the
 coefficients of MITM representations are much larger than those
 of DDoS. We further compare MITM with other attacks, includ-
Fig. 1. Illustration of two network attacks DoS and MITM. DoS floods the ing Backdoor and Dos, and find those high coefficients in the
target with massive traffic to overwhelm an online service, and MITM eavesdrops representation will lead to lower intrusion detection scores. We
on the communication between two targets and steals private information. An
NIDS can be easily deployed in a single location to collect statistical features refer to such a phenomenon as the entangled distribution of
and alert administrators for potential threats. representational features, which can be considered as another
 main cause for the degradation of attack classification.
 For the second challenge, we observe that the NIDS ap-
 Although promising, existing NIDS approaches face two proaches still perform poorly when combining the state-ofchallenges in detecting traffic threats accurately: the-art few-shot learning methods, as shown in Fig. 3(b). For
 r Challenge 1. The existing NIDS methods yield extremely the meta-learning-based MBase [22], we attribute the poor
 inconsistent results in identifying distinct attacks: For sta- performance to the limited anomaly types in network traffic.
 tistical methods, Fig. 2(a) demonstrates that the detection Effective meta-learning approaches typically necessitate vast
 performance of an SVM-based method [18] for an un- types of few-shot anomalies, which are more aligned with the
 known attack1 can be as low as 9% in terms of F1 on field of computer vision and natural language processing [23],
 the CIC-ToN-IOT [19] dataset. While the model achieves [24], [25], [26]. Therefore, we focus on the similarity-based
 40% F1 in declaring another unknown threat (DDoS) on the method BSNet [27] and uncover why BSNet outperforms DIDS.
 same benchmark. Regarding the deep learning-based meth- We depict the t-SNE visualizations of their respective learned
 ods, Fig. 2(d) demonstrates that E-GraphSAGE achieves a representations. As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), we observe
 lower than 20% F1 score for MITM attacks and a higher that the representations of BSNet in different attack types are
 than 90% F1 score for DDoS on the CTC-ToN-IOT dataset. more separated in the latent space. It can be inferred as one
 r Challenge 2. The existing NIDS approaches struggle to of the main causes of higher F1 scores in BSNet. Following
 detect few-shot traffic threats accurately: In practical sce- this thread, we further depict their representation correlations
 narios, the strengthening of defensive measures and the via correlation heatmaps. We have found that the representaconsequent escalating trend of cyber threats have inevitably tions of BSNet are more entangled than DIDS as shown in
 caused the rise of new-type attacks with a limited instance Fig. 4(c) and (d). Aligning with the disentanglement studies in
 number, referred to as few-shot traffic threats. However, our Challenge 1, we attribute the main obstacle to the performance
 empirical observations reveal that the NIDS methods have improvement of BSNet to the entangled representations. More
 dramatic performance deterioration in few-shot scenarios, discussions on the above empirical studies are available in
 as shown in Fig. 3(a), e.g., our previous work DIDS [20] Appendix 18.3.
 dramatically drops from 91.57% under supervised learning In light of the discussions, we raise two critical questions:
 setting to 36.12% under the few-shot learning setting over r Q1: How can an intrusion detection model automatically
 the CIC-ToN-IoT dataset, and similarly, EURLER and address the first challenges, i.e., two entangled distribu-
 E-GraphSAGE have an average F1-scores lower to 36.26% tions, to benefit the detection of both unknown and known
 under the few-shot learning setting. attacks?
 For the first challenge, we depict feature distributions and vi- r Q2: Can a few-shot intrusion detection method automatisualize the representations to investigate the underlying cause of cally learn the representations as separated in latent space,
why existing methods perform inconsistently for various attacks, simultaneously as disentangled among representation
including unknown ones and known ones. Fig. 2(b) and (c) depict elements?
statistical distributions of the two unknown attacks for the SVM- Achieving Q1 is challenging. To mitigate the issue of the first
based model during testing. We observe that feature distributions entangled distribution, we need to differentiate tens and thouof MITM attacks are entangled, while the ones of DDoS are more sands of features involved in real-time network traffic, without
separated. It can be inferred that statistical distributions of traffic prior knowledge of the statistical distributions. Such a problem
features are one of the main underlying causes of performance is largely under-explored in the field of NIDS. For the second
variations. Separated distributions benefit the unknown attack entangled distribution, there are some remotely related methidentification, while entangled ones are indistinguishable and ods [28], [29], [30] in other fields, including computer vision
unable to help the NIDS to make accurate decisions. We refer to and natural language processing. However, these approaches
 mainly focus on object-level representation learning, and hence
 1 The unknown attacks referred to in this paper are never appeared new type they are hardly directly applied to intrusion detection to tackle
of attacks in training set this challenge.
10530 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. Quantitative analysis on CIC-TON-IOT. (a) Comparisons of detecting various attacks, which are regarded as an unknown type in evaluation. Specifically,
we train an SVM model without using the data points of these attacks, and evaluate the instances of these attacks on the test set. (b) and (c) show the feature
distributions of two attacks, MITM and DDoS, respectively. (d) Comparisons of detecting various known attacks on the previous state-of-the-art deep learning
model E-GraphSAGE, (e) and (f) are correlation maps of representations of the two attacks, where the representations are generated by E-GraphSAGE.

 original-scale information of representations, while ignoring
 their multi-scale information to help few-shot traffic separated in
 latent space. We also provide formal definitions and illustrative
 figures for each case of entanglement and disentanglement in
 Appendix 11.
 To address the above two questions, we propose a novel
 model called Disentangled dynamic Intrusion Detection System
Fig. 3. (a) Performance comparisons among different intrusion detection with Multi-scale Few-shot Learning (DIDS-MFL). Specifically,
methods with normal-size traffic and few-shot traffic. (b) F1-score comparisons DIDS-MFL has two critical components: DIDS and MFL. The
between DIDS few-shot learning and two SOTA few-shot learning baselines.
We repeat the above comparisons 10 times. former DIDS disentangles the statistical flow features with a
 non-parametric optimization, aiming to automatically separate
 entangled distributions for representation learning. We refer to
 this step as statistical disentanglement. Then DIDS further learns
 to differentiate the representations by a regularization function,
 aiming to highlight the salient features for specific attacks with
 smaller coefficients. We refer to this step as representational disentanglement. DIDS finally introduces a novel graph diffusion
 module that dynamically fuses the graph topology in evolving
 traffic. The latter MFL is a flexible plug-and-play module for
 few-shot detection matching multiple NIDS baselines. We first
 optimize the multi-scale traffic representations in latent space
 to distinguish attack-specific information. Then we propose
 an element-wise disentanglement term to highlight the attackspecific information. Finally, we alternately solve them in an
 end-to-end framework.
 Extensive experiments on five benchmarks show the superiority of our DIDS-MFL. The main contributions are:
 r We propose DIDS-MFL, aiming to mitigate the entangled
 distributions of flow features for NIDS in various practical
Fig. 4. The correlation map and the t-SNE visualization of representations scenarios, e.g., known, few-shot, and unknown attacks2 . To
generated by DIDS and BSNet on CIC-ToN-IoT dataset.
 the best of our knowledge, we are the first to quantitatively
 analyze such an interesting problem and empirically reveal
 Second, the difficulties of Q2 lie in two aspects: 1. tack- the underlying cause in the intrusion detection field.
ling Q2 involves two optimization terms, a disentanglement r As for DIDS, we present a double disentanglement scheme
term, and a latent space term. How to optimize them into an for differentiating the general features of various attacks
end-to-end framework is under-explored in NIDS and few-shot and highlighting the attack-specific features, respectively.
learning. 2. As for latent space optimization, existing similaritybased methods [27], [31], [32] mainly focused on utilizing the 2 More details on unknown attack detection are available in Appendix 17.1.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10531

 We additionally introduce a novel graph diffusion method introduces a total correlation penalty. CausalVAE [48] takes a
 for dynamic feature aggregation. significant step by integrating causal reasoning, allowing for
 r As for MFL, we propose a fusion-based framework by interventions in the generative process. Disentangled Graph
 capturing multi-scale information and disentangling repre- Neural Networks are another active area, where methods aim
 sentations. We alternately solve them with rigorous deriva- to learn independent node representations decoupled from the
 tion for few-shot intrusion detection. As a plug-and-play graph structure, e.g., GD-GAN employs a GAN framework to
 module, MFL also shows versatility in multiple baselines disentangle the latent factors of variation in graph data, allowing
 and downstream tasks. for controllable generation of new graph structures and node
 r Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on var- features. Some recent approaches [49], [50], [51], [52] capture
 ious benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of DIDS- the intrinsic factors in graph-structured data. Most related to our
 MFL and provide some helpful insights for effective NIDS work is DisenLink [52], which disentangled the original features
 in various practical scenarios. into a fixed number of factors, with selective factor-wise message
 passing for better node representations. While our DIDS uses a
 II. RELATED WORK double disentanglement method, which first disentangles the statistical features via non-parametric optimization, and then learns
A. Network Intrusion Detection System to highlight the attack-specific features with a regularization.
 Existing NIDS can be classified into two groups, i.e.,
signature-based ones [9], [10], [11] and anomaly-based C. Dynamic Graph Convolution Networks
ones [12], [13], [14], [33]. Signature-based intrusion detection Dynamic graph convolution networks (GCNs) focus on evolvsystems (IDS) rely on identifying known attack patterns or ing graph streams. There is a line of early studies in GCNs
signatures. These systems are adept at recognizing established on dynamic graphs, which incorporate temporal information
threats, where the attack signatures are predefined, employing into graphs. These methods can be categorized into the spatiorule sets to match against network traffic for indicative malicious temporal decoupled ones [38], [39], [53] and the spatio-temporal
activities. However, their dependency on signature databases coupled ones [40], [54], [55], [56]. The former employs two
poses a limitation, as they are typically ineffective against novel separate modules to capture temporal and spatial information,
or zero-day attacks that do not yet have a defined signature. In e.g., DynGCN [57] performs spatial and temporal convolutions
contrast, the anomaly-based ones do not rely on prior knowl- interleaved, updating model parameters to adapt to new graph
edge of attack signatures. They leverage machine learning or snapshots, DIDA [58] Handles spatio-temporal distribution
statistical techniques to model normal network behavior and shifts by discovering invariant patterns and using intervention
flag deviations as potential threats. Anomaly detection holds the mechanisms to eliminate spurious impacts. The latter incorpoadvantage of identifying unknown attacks and adapting to new rates spatial-temporal dependencies by proposing a synchronous
threat patterns. The anomaly-based ones involve statistical meth- modeling mechanism, e.g., AST-GCN [59] adapts the graph
ods [2], [3] and deep learning-based ones [15], [16]. Early deep structure and convolutional filters based on the temporal context
learning studies model the traffic as independent sequences [34], to capture the evolving relationships in dynamic graphs, TD-
[35], [36], [37]. Recent popular studies rely on GCN to aggregate GCN [60] uses temporal difference learning to update spatialtraffic information [38], [39], [40]. Most related to our work temporal graph convolutional filters, capturing the changes in
is Euler [41], which builds a series of static graphs based on graph structure and node states over time. Our DIDS is mainly
traffic flow and then performs information aggregation. Our inspired by the GIND [55], which adaptively aggregates infor-
DIDS differs from the above methods in two aspects: 1) We mation via a non-linear diffusion method. The key difference
build dynamic graphs rather than static ones, and such a dynamic between our GCN approach and GIND is: we introduce the
aggregation can capture fine-grained traffic features for attack non-linear graph diffusion method into a multi-layer graph that
detection. Furthermore, we fuse the network layer information considers the network topology for dynamic intrusion detection.
into our graph aggregation. 2) We introduce a double disentanglement scheme, including statistical disentanglement and D. Few-Shot Learning
representational one, to benefit the detection of both known and
unknown attacks. Few-shot learning is a machine learning paradigm designed
 to enable a model to learn from a small number of training
 instances and generalize effectively to unseen data. The ex-
B. Disentangled Representation Learning isting few-shot learning methods can be divided into two cat-
 Disentanglement aims to learn representations that separate egories: meta-learning-based ones [61], [62], [63], including
the underlying explanatory factors responsible for variation meta-learning-based NIDS approaches [64], [65], [66], [67],
in the data. Previous studies [42], [43], [44], [45] focus on and similarity-based ones. Meta-learning-based methods focus
the generative models by employing constraints on the loss on learning a model that can adapt to new tasks with limited
functions, such as β-VAE [46] modifying the VAE framework data. These methods often involve a meta-training phase where
to emphasize the independence of latent variables. Beta-VAE the model learns to learn from a variety of tasks, followed by
achieves disentanglement by introducing a trade-off term be- a meta-testing phase where the model rapidly tunes to a new
tween reconstruction and KL divergence, while FactorVAE [47] task. In contrast, the similarity-based ones rely on measuring
10532 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

the similarity or distance between the query instances and the we can obtain the destination identity for the device j. We
support set to make predictions without necessitating vast types denote vi and vj as the source and destination nodes respectively.
of few-shot samples. The similarity-based ones can also be Secondly, li denotes the layer of device i, and li = 0 indicates
grouped into augmentation-based ones [68], [69], [70], [71], that i is a terminal device such as a PC, a server, or an IoT
[72], metric learning-based ones [31], [32], [73], [74], [75], device. Here li = 1 indicates that i is an intermediate device
and other similarity-based few-shot learning methods [76], [77], such as a router in the communication link. Specifically, we
[78], [79]. Recent popular few-shot learning methods mainly assign devices with the router address 192.168.0.1 or with many
focused on utilizing multiple learning metrics, or prototype stable connections in layer 1. Then t refers to the timestamp of
completion. The most related to us is BSNet [27]. Ours differs traffic and Δt indicates the traffic duration time. Finally, Fij (t)
from it in two aspects: first, we emphasize the importance is the traffic features.
of preserving multi-scale intrinsic representation information,
rather than optimizing the original-scale information; second,
we propose a joint optimization scheme to generate separated C. Problem Formulation
and disentangled representations to make few-shot threats dis- 1) Dynamic Traffic Intrusion Detection: We first define the
tinguishable. devices as nodes and the communications with timestamps
 Finally, this work is an extension version form [20]. In [20], between any pair of devices as edges. We use T to represent
we address the performance inconsistency issue caused by the maximum timestamp. An Edge sequence E is denoted by
entangled features on sufficient training data. More practical {E t }Tt=1 , where each E t represents a network traffic. Also,
scenarios is collecting attack traffic with limited instances. It is after each edge, there is a corresponding multi-layer graph,
more challenging compared to [20] with involving double opti- then the corresponding multi-layer graph stream G takes the
mization goals. To this end, this paper proposes an alternating form of {G t }Tt=1 , where each G t = (V t , E t ) represents the
optimization framework MFL to address the entangled repre- multi-layer graph at timestamp t. A multi-layer adjacency masentations in few-shot traffic threats with rigorous derivation. trix At ∈ Rm×n represents the edges in E t , where ∀(i, j, w) ∈
The proposed MFL is also a plug-and-play few-shot intrusion E t , At [i][j] = wij and wij is the weight of the matrix. The goal
detection module that is compatible with other NIDS methods. of intrusion detection is to learn to predict the edge E t as a benign
 traffic or an attack in binary classification, and a specific type
 III. PRELIMINARIES under the multi-classification.
 2) Few-Shot Intrusion Detection: Given a few-shot intrusion
A. Multi-Layer Graphs
 detection task T = {Ctr , Cte }, where Ctr is a training set with
 To model the sophisticated traffic network topology, we few-shot traffic, and Cte is a test set. Our goal is to design a fewformally define the multi-layer graphs. First, we consider a shot module to accurately classify the samples in Cte by few-shot
single-layer network modeled by a graph G = (V, E, ω), where learning on Ctr . Ctr includes two key components, support set and
V is the set of nodes and E ⊂ V × V is the set of edges. Here query set. The former provides the few-shot traffic information
ω : V × V → R is an edge weight function such that each edge to the model, and the latter contains new instances for model
euv ∈ E has a weight ωuv . Then the multi-layer graph can be evaluation and optimization. The query set can be sampled from
defined as follows: the support set for the traffic-limited scenarios. Specifically, we
 ⎛ ⎞ conduct N -way K-shot intrusion detection, N -class traffic with
 A(1,1) · · · A(1,k) · · · A(1,m)
 ⎜ . .. .. .. .. ⎟ K samples, i.e., 5, in the support set. The few-shot intrusion
 ⎜ .. . . . ⎟
 ⎜ . ⎟ detection model aims to conduct accurate detection in the query
 ⎜ ⎟
 A = ⎜ A(l,1) · · · A(k,k) · · · A(l,m) ⎟ . (1) set, while the only available reference is the few-shot traffic in
 ⎜ ⎟
 ⎜ .. .. .. .. .. ⎟ the support set.
 ⎝ . . . . . ⎠
 A(m,1) · · · A(m,k) · · · A(m,m)
 IV. MODEL
where Ai,i refers to the intra-layer adjacency matrix and
 In this section, we present the DIDS-MFL, which consists of
Ai,j (i = j) refers to cross-layer adjacency matrix.
 five main modules. Fig. 5 shows the architecture of our proposed
 model. Next, we dive into the details of these modules.
B. Edge Construction
 We have constructed a multi-layer dynamic graph by defining
the devices as nodes and the communications between two A. Statistical Disentanglement
devices as edges. To construct the edge relationships in the As we discussed in Section I, statistical distributions of traffic
multi-layer graph, we first transform the Netflow data to edges features are one of the main underlying causes of performance
by the following definition: variations. i.e., separated distributions benefit the unknown attack identification, while entangled ones are indistinguishable
 Eij (t) = (vi , li , vj , lj , t, Δt, Fij (t)). (2)
 and thus unable to help the NIDS to make accurate decisions.
First, we concatenate the source IP and source port in the original Therefore, our aim is there to disentangle the traffic features and
traffic flows as the source identity for the device i. Similarly, make them distinguishable.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10533

Fig. 5. Overview of the proposed DIDS-MFL, which consists of five modules. 1) Edge construction module builds edges based on traffic flow. 2) Statistical
disentanglement module differentiates values in vectors to facilitate the identification of various attacks. 3) Representational disentanglement module learns to
highlight attack-specific features. 4) Multi-Layer graph diffusion module fuses the network topology for better aggregation over evolving dynamic traffic. 5)
Multi-scale few-shot learning module aims to few-shot traffic threats detection. Finally, traffic classifier takes the traffic representation as an input to yield the
detection results. DIDS takes the first four steps and flows through the orange arrows to the classifier, while DIDS-MFL takes the five steps by flowing through the
blue arrows to the classifier.

 To separate the features of traffic without any prior knowledge, problem into an SMT problem with an optimization objective
we formulate the differentiation as a constrained non-parametric (6) and a subjection (7) to approximate the optimal results.
optimization problem and approximate the optimal results by
solving the Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) [80]. We per- w = arg max wN FN − w1 F1
form a min-max normalization on the edge feature Fij (t). For
convenience, we denote the normalized edge feature as F, and N
  −1
Fi is the i-th normalized element. + 2wi Fi − wi−1 Fi−1 − wi+1 Fi+1 , (6)
 We need a weight matrix w to generate the disentangled repre- i=2
sentation of F. Our key optimization objectives are to minimize subjects to:
the mutual information between the elements of traffic features ⎧
and also bound the range of w when we perform aggregation. ⎪
 ⎪ wi ∈ [Wmin , Wmax ]
 ⎨ N
We start by constraining the weight matrix w with the range of w n
 i=1 i i ≤ B
 (7)
the superposition function as follows: ⎪
 ⎪w F ≤ wi+1 F(i+1)
 ⎩ i i
 N
 2wi Fi ≤ wi−1 Fi−1 + wi+1 Fi+1 .
 
 Wmin ≤ wi ≤ Wmax (1 ≤ i ≤ N ), wi Fi ≤ B, (3) The subjection in (7) ensures variants’ ranges and the orderi=1 preserving property of generated representation. It also ensures
where Wmin , Wmax and B are constants, N is the edge feature symbols when removing the absolute value sign. The detailed
dimension. We then constrain the order-preserving properties of explanation of why (6) can generate the disentangled represengenerated representations: tation is available in Appendix 7.
 Specifically, we employ (6) as an optimization objective, i.e.,
 wi Fi ≤ wi+1 Fi+1 (1 ≤ i ≤ N − 1). (4) loss function, and utilize Adam optimizer to solve it. Then we can
 Finally, we maximize the distance between components in generate the disentangled edge representation hi,j , which can be
the vector w, consequently minimizing the mutual information expressed as hi,j = w F, where the symbol represents the
between each two feature elements. In this way, we can disentan- Hadamard product.
gle the distribution of element-wised features. The optimization Equipped with the above non-parametric optimization, we
objective can be expressed as follows: can differentiate tens and hundreds of complex features of various attacks, mitigating the entangled distribution of statistical
 w = arg max(wN FN − w1 F1 features. Such statistically disentangled features facilitate our
 N −1 model to be more sensitive to various attacks.
 
 − |2wi Fi − wi+1 Fi+1 − wi−1 Fi−1 |). (5)
 i=2 B. Representational Disentanglement
We are unable to determine the convexity of the optimization So far we have constructed edges and statistically differenobject due to its closed form. Therefore, we transform the above tiated the features of traffic flows hi,j = w F. This module
10534 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

generates contextualized node representations X from edge The above regularization encourages the model to learn
representations hi,j by using the temporal information. This smaller coefficients between every two elements of node repinvolves three steps: resentations. Such representations can be more differentiated.
 1) Generating updating messages: For an incoming traffic As the module is supervised by the signal of a specific attack,
flow, we will build an edge or update the corresponding edge, it can learn to highlight the attack-specific features, so as to
which may lead to a dramatic change in the node representations improve the detection accuracy, as discussed in Section I. By
involved in this interaction. We can update the node represen- doing so, we are able to mitigate the entangled distribution of
tations by utilizing this change. Therefore, we name the abrupt representational features as mentioned at the beginning.
change an updating message and denote it as c(t). Specifically,
we generate c(t) by incorporating historical memory and disen- C. Multi-Layer Graph Diffusion
tangled edge representation hi,j . The messages of node i and j
are as follows: So far, we have generated the dynamic disentangled node
 representations with temporal information. For further fusing
      
 ci (t) = Msg mi t− , mj t− , t, Δt, li , lj , hi,j , (8) the multi-layer topological structure information, we propose
   −  −  a multi-layer graph diffusion module. Please note that we still
 cj (t) = Msg mj t , mi t , t, Δt, li , lj , hi,j , (9) preserve the disentangled property by the following customized
 designs.
where hi,j is the disentangled edge representation. Δt is the We utilize the following graph diffusion method to fuse the
edge duration time, li , lj is the layer marks of edge, mi (t− ) is topological information in evolving graph streams, which can
the historical memory of the two interacting nodes, where t− is a capture the fine-grained spatial-temporal coupled information.
historical time point, compared to the existing time point t, Msg The previous dynamic intrusion detection methods may lose
is a learnable function, and we use RNN. The initial memory this information in separated time gaps, due to the employed
mi (0) is 0, ∀i ∈ V . Specifically, RNN aims to generate the time-window or snapshots-based methods. More discussions on
new memory message c(t) combining the historical memory the ‘dynamic’ and superiority of the proposed graph diffusion
m(t− ) and disentangled representation hij by learnable weight approach compared to the previous methods, are available in
matrices and gating mechanism. Appendix 17.2.
 2) Updating node memory: We update the node memory by 
merging the latest message with the historical memory and then ∂t X = F (X, Θ)
 (12)
encode the merging information, which can be expressed as X(0) = 0,
follows:
    where F is a matrix–valued nonlinear function conditioned on
 mi (t) = Mem ci (t), mi t− , (10) graph G, and Θ is the tensor of trainable parameters. The above
 (12) establishes the foundation for spatial-temporal coupled
where Mem is an encoder, and here we use GRU. We similarly information modeling.
update the memory of node j via (10). Specifically, GRU intro- Specifically, we aim to amplify the important dimensions of
duces Reset Gate and Update Gate to better generate the updated disentangled representations and depress the influence of trivial
node memory mi (t) by fusing historical memory mi (t− ) and feature elements in the diffusion process. To formulate this
new memory message ci (t). GRU considers both long-term and process, we consider PM (PeronaMalik) diffusion [81], a type
short-term dependencies, thus mitigating the vanishing gradient of nonlinear filtering. It can be expressed as:
issue in temporal models.  ∂x(u,t)
 3) Generating second disentangled node representations: We ∂t = div[g(|∇x(u, t)|)∇x(u, t)]
 (13)
can generate the node representation by utilizing the updated x(u, 0) = 0,
memory in (10), and the representation of node i in time t can
be expressed as xi (t) = xi (t− ) + mi (t), where xi (t− ) is the where div is the divergence operator, ∇ is the gradient operator,
historical representation of node i. In this way, we obtain the and g is a function inversely proportional to the absolute value
dynamic node representations of traffic in an evolving time flow. of the gradient.
The representation of node j can also be generated in a similar Before formally formulating the multi-layer graph diffusion,
way. The initial value of node representations X(0) is 0. we propose the following spatial-temporal influence coefficient
 We aim to preserve the disentangled property in node repre- sij ∈ S between nodes i,j in tij time. The coefficient matrix
sentations. However, the update operations above may entangle considers the information changes over spatial-temporal couthem at the element level again. Therefore, we propose the sec- pled traffic data. Specifically, different layers and topology
ond representational disentanglement, which aims to highlight structures over traffic networks and the traffic feature interacthe attack-specific features in node representations in the follow- tions at different times will influence the node representations
ing end-to-end manner. It also ensures that the element-wised dynamically:
representations are close to orthogonal.
 sij = f (li ||lj ||φ(t − tij )), (14)
 1
 2
 
  
 LDis = X(t)X(t− ) − I . (11) f (x) = W(2) · ReLU W(1) x , (15)
 2 F
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10535

where || is a concatenate operator, φ(·) is a generic time en- where δ, and ζ are trade-off parameters.
coder [82] to generate temporal representations, W(1) and W(2)
are the parameters of the first and second layer MLP. E. Multi-Scale Few-Shot Learning
 Now we formally propose the multi-layer graph diffusion
 So far we have proposed DIDS for supervised intrusion demodule. We first define a differential operator on the multi-layer
 tection. Furthermore, we propose the following MFL to detect
graph, aiming to transfer the above continuous PM diffusion
 few-shot threats accurately, e.g., 5 samples of each attack type.
in (13) to multi-layer graphs. As known from previous liter-
 We first denote the learned representations Xt+Δt in (17) as
ature [83], the gradient operator corresponds to the instance
 Z ∈ RL∗N , where L is the length of representations, and N is the
matrix M, while the divergence operator corresponds to the
 few-shot sample number. The few-shot learner aims to generate a
matrix M , and we can compute the matrix M by the equation
 coefficient matrix S as a learned similarity matrix between each
MT M = D − A, where D is the diagonal matrix. Then our
 sample pair, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot traffic
novel multi-layer diffusion can be expressed as:
   threats.
 ∂Xt = −M σ(MXK )S MXK K, (16) Specifically, we propose a Multi-scale Few-shot learning
 (MFL) module. MFL first focuses on the original representations
where K is a transformation matrix, S is the structure-temporal Z to generate a coefficient matrix as:
influence coefficients calculated in (14) and σ(·) represents the
function exp(−| · |). The solution to (16) can be expressed as: min = Z − ZH 2F + λ1 H 2F , s.t. diag(H) = 0, (21)
 H
  t+Δt
 Xt+Δt = Xt + ∂t Xt dτ, (17) where | · |2F is the Frobenius matrix norm (F-norm) and diag(H)
 t denotes the diagonal entries of H. H can be directly derived
where t is the last edge occurrence time and Δt is the edge by solving (21). Specifically, we directly employ (21) as a loss
duration and we use the Runge-Kutta method to solve this function and utilize backpropagation and optimizer, e.g., Adam,
equation. to solve it.
 The above optimization term in MFL only preserves the
D. Classifier and Loss Function original-scale information of Z. The multi-scale information
 of Z can also provide necessary information to make few-shot
 For DIDS, we make the two-step predictions for intrusion
 traffic samples distinguishable. To this end, we proposed a
detection. We utilize the first MLP to classify whether the
 transform-based algorithm to generate coefficient matrix Q by
traffic is benign or anomalous and utilize the second MLP to
 using Z’s multi-scale information. This process can be considdetect the specific type of attack. When an unknown attack
 ered as an ‘augmentation’ of the original representations Z in
invades, the direct multi-classifications will be easy to fail to
 the latent space, aiming to capture the invariant attack-specific
assign the anomalous label thus leading to poor performance. In
 features across different scales. Finally, we fuse the obtained
contrast, through the first-step binary classification, DIDS will
 coefficient matrices H and Q. Equipped with the fusion of
focus more on inconsistencies with normal behavior to improve
 generated matrices, MFL can effectively utilize few-shot repthe performance of detecting unknown attacks. The following
 resentations across different scales, i.e., under the original and
second multi-classification will further alert the administrators
 transformed scale, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot
that what kind of attack it is more similar to so that similar
 traffic threats. We have the following principles to achieve MFL
mitigation measures can be taken. Specifically, the intrusion loss
 and clarify the motivations behind these designs:
can be expressed as: r 1. MFL should encourage the representations under differ-
 ⎛ ⎞
 m K ent scales to be close in latent space, thus capturing the
LInt = − ⎝log(1 − pnor,i ) + log(patt,i ) + ⎠
 yi,k log(pi,k ) attack-specific features and benefiting the distinction of
 i=1 j=1 traffic samples in different types, which is motivated by
 (18) the empirical studies in Fig. 4(a) and (b).
 r 2. MFL should ensure the disentanglement among the
where m is the batch size, K is the number of attack classes, pnor,i elements of the learned representation, thus highlighting
is the probability of normal, patt,i is the probability of attack. the attack-specific information, which is motivated by the
Additionally, the adjacent time intervals may cause adjacent empirical studies in Fig. 4(c) and (d).
times embedding to be farther apart in embedded space, due To achieve the above goals, we first propose a transformationto the learning process independency. To address this problem, based learning scheme by projecting the representations Z to
we constrained the variation between adjacent timestamps em- a latent space, aiming to discover the attack-specific invariant
bedding by minimizing the Euclidean Distance: features across different scales. Then we introduce a regulariza-
 T tion term to disentangle the few-shot representations. Finally,
 LSmooth = Xt+Δt − Xt 2 . (19) we propose an alternating optimization algorithm to derive Q in
 t=0 an end-to-end way. The implementation involves the following
Finally, the overall loss of DIDS can be expressed as follows: three steps:
 1) Generating Representation Transformation: We denote
 L = LInt + δLSmooth + ζLDis , (20) Z = Z as the original representations, and Z = G(Z) as the
 o t
10536 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

transformed representations, where G is a transformation oper- where f (P) = α2 (f1 (P) + f2 (P)), α and η are trade-off hyator. Specifically, we introduce a scaling operator S as follows: perparameters, Q̃ is a auxiliary variable, and γ is scaling rate
 ⎡ ⎤ hyperparameter.
 s1 · · · 0
 ⎢. . .. ⎥
 Since the optimization problem in (26) is not convex with
 S = diag(s1 , s2 , . . ., sL ) = ⎢
 ⎣.
 . .. ⎥
 . ⎦, (22) the unknowns {P, Q}, we solve Q by iteratively updating vari-
 0 · · · sL ables while fixing another. We propose the following alternating
 solution to derive the coefficient matrix Q.
where s1 , s2 , . . ., sD is the scale factor, and different values Alternating Solution for MFL: We solve (26) by converting
determine different scalars. Then the scaling transformation the original problem to the augmented Lagrange minimizing
can be written as Zt = G(Z) = SZ. Especially, when s1 = problem, as (26) involving a multi-objective optimization:
s2 = . . . = sL = γ, S is an equal-rate scaling operator with
 α
the rate of γ. Hence, the transformation can be rewritten as L= PZ − γPZQ 2F
 2
Zt = G(Z) = SZ = γIZ = γZ. By the equal-rate transforma-
 α  
 PZ+j − γPZ−j 2 + η Q̃ F
tion, we generate transformed representations while preserving − F
their content, e.g., scaling up an image by the rate of 2, will not 2 j
change the content we see.
 2) Generating Multi-scale Coefficient Matrix: So far, we have + < Φ1 , PZ − γPZQ+ < Φ2 , Q − Q̃ >
generated the transformations of Z. In step 2, we propose a con- μ 
 + PZ − γPZQ 2F + Q − Q̃ 2F , (27)
straint term to encourage the representation to be close between 2
the original and transformed scale. Furthermore, we introduce where Φ1 and Φ2 are the Lagrange multipliers and the penalty
a learnable projection operator P to uncover the attack-specific parameter μ > 0.
invariant information, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot The alternating solution for (27) involves four steps, and the
traffic threats. details are available in Appendix 13.
  2
 f1 (P) = PT Zo − PT Zt F , (23) So far, we have obtained coefficient matrices H and Q by
 parallel computing of (21) and (27) using the alternating solving
 The projection operator P can be considered as a metric algorithm. We can fuse two coefficient matrices by introducing
matrix across different-scale representation, also benefiting the a trade-off hyperparameter :
connectivity of same-attack traffic samples under the transformation. Then we formally propose an optimization problem as Q∗ = H + ∗ Q (28)
follows:
 where Q∗ contains fine-grained multi-scale information to help
 min f1 (P) + η Q F , few-shot traffic threats distinguishable.
 s.t. PZ = PG(Z)Q, (24) Finally, we can generate the coefficient matrix of MFL by
 S∗ = (|Q∗ | + |Q∗ |T )/2. Given the noise information and out-
The above formulation (24) corresponds to design principle 1 liers in the obtained S∗ , in practical implementations, we further
and is motivated by the empirical studies in Fig. 4(a) and (b), conduct SVD decomposition of S∗ to filter noisy information and
aiming to distinguish the attack-specific information in the latent generate a normalized matrix S. The detailed implementation
space. pseudo-code of generating S is available in the Appendix 14.
 3) Disentangling the Learned Representations: Finally, we DIDS-MFL Loss: The DIDS-MFL loss consists of two comintroduce a disentangle regularization term to highlight the ponents, a multi-scale few-shot learning term and a regularizaattack-specific information, thus mitigating the representation tion term. The former uses a cross-entropy loss, aiming to match
entangled problem in few-shot traffic samples. the prediction to the query set via the generated multi-scale
   T +j
 2
 −j 
 coefficient matrix S. In the few-shot intrusion detection task,
 f2 (P) = − P Zo − PT Zt  , (25) S is derived from the representations of support and query
 F
 j samples. The latter enforces the representations Z to be close
 to the original-scale representations in latent space. Finally, we
where Z+jo ∈R
 (L−1)×N
 repeats the j-th row of Zo and Z−j
 t ∈ introduce a trade-off hyperparameter β to control the regular-
R(L−1)×N denotes the transformation matrix by removing the
 ization intensity. The specific DIDS-MFL loss is as follows:
j-th row. The above disentanglement regularization term (25)
corresponds to design principle 2 and is motivated by the N 
  Q
empirical studies in Fig. 4(c) and (d), aiming to highlight the L= Yi,j log(Pi,j ) + β ZH − Z (29)
attack-specific information. i=1 j=1
 Combining the above key formulations (24) and (25), we can
 where N is the category number of attacks, Q is sample number
rewrite the optimization problem as:
 of query set in each category, Yi,j and Pi,j are ground-truth and
 min f (P) + η Q̃ F , prediction, respectively, Pij is query sample’s mean similarity
 score derived from the coefficient matrix S, β is a trade-off
 s.t. PZ = γPZQ, Q̃ = Q, (26) hyperparameter. In (29), the first term discovers the multi-scale
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10537

information of Z, while the second term preserves the informa- categorize the baselines into three groups, including dynamic
tion under the original scale via the coefficient matrix H. We GCNs at the top of Table I, static GCNs at the middle of the
can fine-tune β to control these two terms. table, and another three baselines at the bottom. It should be
 noted that AnomRank and DynAnom are two popular baselines
 V. EXPERIMENTS for anomaly detection. We run our experiment 5 times and report
 the mean and variance values. The comparison results in Table I
A. Experimental Settings show that our DIDS consistently performs the best among all
 Datasets: We conduct experiments on five popular datasets baselines over the five benchmarks, which shows the superiority
that involve massive network traffic over the Internet of Things of our method for intrusion detection. Specifically, compared
(IoT). We give detailed descriptions as follows: to the E-GraphSAGE, the previous state-of-art GCN-based apr CIC-ToN-IoT: This dataset is generated from the existing proach, our method achieves a 4.80% higher F1-score over the
 ToN-IoT dataset by a network traffic tool CICFlowMeter, CIC-BoT-IoT dataset. Our DIDS outperforms AnomRank, the
 where TON-IoT is a well-known database for intrusion de- previous state-of-the-art method for anomaly detection on F1,
 tection collected from Telemetry datasets of IoT services. by 15.27 points over the EdgeIIoT dataset. We attribute the
 This dataset consists of 5,351,760 flows, with 53.00% above results to the gains of our statistical disentanglement,
 attack samples and 47.00% benign samples. representational disentanglement and dynamic graph diffusion.
 r CIC-BoT-IoT: It is generated from the existing BoT- 2) Comparisons of Multi-Classification: We compare the
 IoT dataset by CICFlowMeter. This dataset consists of performance of our method to four baselines in declaring the spe-
 6,714,300 traffic flows, with 98.82% attack samples and cific attack type. These baselines include E-GraphSAGE [17],
 1.18% benign samples. TGN [89], ML [96], and AdaBoost [97], as they are represenr EdgeIIoT: It is collected from an IoT/IIoT system that tative of different types of intrusion detection models and have
 contains mobile devices and sensors. This dataset includes been widely used in previous studies. Fig. 6 demonstrates that
 1,692,555 flows, with 21.15% attack samples and 78.85% the proposed DIDS consistently performs well among all five
 benign samples. datasets, especially under some complex attacks. The classir NF-UNSW-NB15-v2: It is NetFlow-based and generated fication results in Fig. 6 correspond to the second issue we
 from the UNSW-NB15 dataset, which has been expanded claimed in Challenge 1. The existing graph-based methods,
 with additional NetFlow features and labeled with attack including E-GraphSAGE, ML, and AdaBoost, perform inconcategories. This dataset includes 2,390,275 flows, with sistently in the identification of complex attacks (e.g., MITM
 3.98% attack samples and 96.02% benign samples. and Backdoor). We also observe that some attacks that are not
 r NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2: It is a NetFlow-based dataset easily detected by the baseline approaches, can be identified
 generated from the original pcap files of CSE-CIC- by the proposed DIDS with higher F1 scores. For example,
 IDS2018 dataset. This dataset includes 18,893,708 flows, E-GraphSAGE only achieves 18.34% and 30.7% F1 scores on
 with 11.95% attack samples and 88.05% benign samples. CIC-ToN-IoT for MITM and Backdoor attacks, respectively,
 Configurations: All experiments and timings are conducted while our DIDS is able to obtain higher than 40% F1 score
on a machine with Intel Xeon Gold 6330@ 2.00 GHz, RTX3090 gains for each attack. These results further show the superiority
GPU, and 24 G memory. We use the Adam optimizer with a of the proposed DIDS. We also find that the average F1 scores
learning rate of 0.01, the learning rate scheduler reducing rate of our method on CIC-BoT-loT and NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2
as 0.9, with weight decay being 1e−5 . We train all the models are lower than those on other datasets. The underlying reason is
with 500 epochs. the unbalanced attack distributions in the training set, where the
 Baselines: To evaluate the performance of the proposed DIDS, dominant type may mislead the classifications. Such a finding
we select 10 deep learning based-models as baselines, including aligns with previous work in the field of computer vision [98].
3 sequence models (i.e., MLP [84], MStream [16], LUCID [37]), Nevertheless, the proposed DIDS is still the best under such
4 static GCN models (i.e., GAT [85] and E-GraphSAGE [86], distributions. We leave this interesting observation as our future
SSDCM [87], DMGI [88]), where SSDCM and DMGI are work.
designed for static multi-layer graphs, 4 dynamic GCN models 3) Comparisons of Unknown Attacks: To further investigate
(i.e., TGN [89], EULER [41], AnomRank [90], DynAnom [90]). the performance of detecting unknown attacks, we conduct
Additionally, we choose 3 rule-based baselines to compare with experiments on the four attack types by discarding the correthe proposed DIDS, (i.e., ML [91], AdaBoost [92], and Logistic sponding instances in the train set and detecting them in the test
Regression). set. From this perspective, the unknown attacks are the new-type
 Metrics: We follow the previous works [93] to evaluate the attacks that do not belong to the existing types of attacks in the
performances by two commonly used metrics in intrusion de- training set. The unknown attack detection results in Table III
tection including F1-score (F1) and ROC-AUC score (AUC). correspond to the first issue we claimed in Challenge 1. We run
 our experiments 5 times and report the mean and variance values
 with different random seeds. Table III reports the classification
B. Main Results results on the CIC-ToN-IOT dataset. It shows that the statistical
 1) Comparisons of Binary Classification: Under this setting, rule-based method Logistic Regression can only achieve as low
we classify a traffic flow as an attack or a benign one. We as a 1.68 F1 score for DDoS attacks, this confirms our analysis
10538 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 COMPARISONS OF BINARY CLASSIFICATION ON FIVE DATASETS

Fig. 6. Comparisons of multi-classification. Here † indicates that the results are directly copied from the previous works.

at the very beginning that rule-based methods can hardly detect attack traffic. Then we conduct a N -way-K-shot learning for the
unknown attacks. The score of graph-based E-GraphSAGE is few-shot attack traffic. Specifically, N is the category number of
much smaller than DIDS, e.g., 6.05% for MITM, indicating few-shot traffic, and K is the training number of each category,
the limitations of the static graph in detecting unknown attacks. referred to support set. In our few-shot experiments, we set K as
We also observe that TGN performs better than E-GraphSAGE, 5. We also construct a query set for our few-shot task, with 15
although both of them are graph-based methods. We attribute the sample numbers for each category. The query set can be sampled
improvement to the dynamic module for TGN. Nevertheless, our from the category samples, or augmented from the support
DIDS outperforms all these methods by a large margin, with set. We split a 5-fold cross-validation set from the training
an average score of 33.65% on the four attacks. The results set, with 20% of support and query set. Taking CIC-TON-IoT
also suggest that our method is more consistent in detecting as an example, we conduct a five-way-five-shot learning and
various unknown attacks, showing the effectiveness of the two five-classification test with 100 training samples. We repeat the
disentanglements. More details about unknown detection are above training, validate, test ten times, and report the average
available in Appendix 17.1. performance. Each time’s training and validation samples are
 4) Comparisons Under Few-Shot Settings. Task Setting: We randomly selected from our existing traffic data, thus simulating
first conduct the DIDS pretraining over the known benign and the few-shot learning setting in real-world scenarios.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10539

 TABLE II
 COMPARISONS OF FEW-SHOT LEARNING CLASSIFICATION ON FIVE DATASETS

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 UNKNOWN CLASSIFICATION ON THE CIC-TON-IOT DATASET WITH METRIC ABLATION STUDY OF DIDS
 F1-SCORE (%)

 Baselines: We select 14 few-shot learning models to incorporate into DIDS as baselines, including 3 meta-learning
based models (i.e., MBase [22], MTL [61], TEG [99]), where
 cover more comprehensive real-world traffic data, including
TEG is designed for graph-structure-based few-shot learning,
 malicious traffic data with complex patterns. It poses a critical
4 augmentation-based models (i.e., CLSA [70], ESPT [71],
 challenge to the existing baselines in detecting some complex
ICI [69], KSCL [72], where CLAS and ESPT are based on
 attacks, especially under few-shot intrusion detection settings. 2)
contrastive augmentation, ICI and KSCL are based on instance
 The existing few-shot intrusion detection approaches can hardly
augmentation), 4 metric learning-based models (i.e., BSNet
 separate the few-shot representations in the latent space and
[27], CMFSL [31], TAD [32], PCWPK [100]), 3 selective and
 highlight the few-shot attack-specific information, thus misleadstrong baselines in current few-shot intrusion detection area (i.e.,
 ing the few-shot threat detection. It manifested that the proposed
FeCoGraph [101], FC-Net [64], and BSF-NID [102].
 MFL performs well in both F1 score and NMI value, while
 Performance metrics: We follow the previous work [103]
 existing approaches, e.g., FC-Net, perform worse in NMI value,
using F1 scores and NMI [104] metrics for multi-classification
 a stricter metric to evaluate multi-classification performance.
comparison.
 We attribute the superior and impressive reproducible results
 As shown in Table II, our MFL consistently achieves the
 of MFL to our multi-scale latent information learning and disbest performances among 14 baselines under the five benchentanglement designs among traffic representation dimensions.
marks. Specifically, our MFL achieves reproducible average
 The RQ5 and RQ6 in the discussion section further verified our
results of 93.25% and 90.17% in F1 score and NMI value
 attributions.
over five public datasets. The results gain 71.91% - 125.19%
and 71.95% - 144.07% improvements in average F1-score and
 C. Ablation Study
NMI value of 14 baselines over five public datasets, respectively. Furthermore, compared to the previous state-of-the-art 1) DIDS: In this section, we conduct an ablation study on the
approaches, the proposed DIDS-MFL still achieves a 12.42%- CIC-ToN-IoT dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of each com-
51.32% and 15.16%-58.62% improvement in F1 score and NMI, ponent. We remove our statistical disentanglement and denote it
respectively. Specifically, the selective baselines in few-shot as “w/o SD”. We use “w/o RD” and “w/o MLGRAND” to refer
intrusion detection achieve better performance compared to the to the model that removes representational disentanglement and
previous approaches, such as FC-Net, achieving the second-best the multi-layer graph diffusion module, respectively. Table IV
F1 score of 78.55% in CIC-ToN-IoT, and BSF-NID, achieving reports the comparison results in binary classification. It shows
the second-best NMI value of 69.44% in CIC-BOT-IoT. How- that removing the multi-layer graph diffusion module leads to the
ever, these strong baselines are still significantly lower than the most significant performance degradation, e.g., an 18.33 points
proposed DIDS-MFL, lying in two aspects: 1) The benchmarks decrease in AUC, indicating that it is the key component for
10540 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE V
 ABLATION STUDY OF MFL

 Fig. 8. The comparison of node representation of the Injection attack after
 graph aggregation of our DIDS and E-GraphSAGE. The grey line presents
 benign data.

Fig. 7. Statistical disentanglement of traffic features.

the accuracy of the proposed DIDS. Our second disentangled
memory is also non-trivial to the overall detection accuracy, as
removing this component can decrease the performance by 12.47
points in AUC. We observe that the SD module also benefits the
model performance. The above ablation study further confirms
 Fig. 9. Spatial-temporal coupling in intrusion detection.
the effectiveness of the three key components.
 2) MFL: Furthermore, we conduct an ablation study on the
CIC-TON-IOT dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of our designed multi-scale few-shot learning (MFL) module. We denote with the original data, which demonstrates this module could
our model without multi-scale latent optimization space as “w/o decrease the mutual reference between features and enable them
LOS” and “w/o DR” as our model without the disentanglement to be distinguishable. We also observe that the distributions
regularization term. For the model without both of the above gradually shift to the right side, representing the order-preserved
components, we denote it as “SE”, which degenerated into a constraints within our disentangling method.
naive self-expressiveness model. Table V shows that removing RQ2: How does the representational disentanglement benefit
both LOS and DR leads to dramatic performance degradation, “highlighting the attack-specific features”? To answer this quesi.e., 9.92% and 9.75% drop in F1-score and NMI, respectively, tion, we track several Injection attack data in the CIC-ToN-IoT
indicating the effectiveness of our designed MFL. Furthermore, dataset and obtain the representation of these data in DIDS
we observed that each component of MFL, e,g. LOS or DR is and E-GraphSAGE. Meanwhile, we calculate the above two
necessary for performance improvement, cause removing one of methods’ average values of embeddings for the benign traffic.
them will lead to performance degradation, i.e., 22.21%-23.16% As shown in Fig. 8, the representation values of E-GraphSAGE
and 8.63%-9.24% drop in F1-score and NMI, respectively. are much closer to the normal. It illustrates that as nodes ag-
Without any one of these two components, the performance gregate, the discrepancies in features become blurred, leading
will be poorer than the base model SE. Results showcase the to inaccurate classification. While benefiting from the represencomplementary relationships of the proposed two modules. The tational disentanglement, each dimension of features in DIDS
LOS provides a latent optimization space across multi-scale can effectively preserve its own properties, deviating from the
representations, which is the foundation of the DR term. Then averages. Especially for the attack-specific features Fwd Pkt Len
the DR term generates effective disentangled representations Max and Fwd Pkt Std, etc., these attack-specific features are sigacross multiple scales based on LOS. nificantly highlighted in Fig. 1(a), thus improving the accuracy
 of detection. The result proves the effectiveness of the proposed
 DIDS in maintaining a disentangled representation during the
D. Discussion
 aggregation process, ensuring the presence of discrepancies,
 1) DIDS thus highlighting the attack-specific features and leading to more
 RQ1: How does the statistical disentanglement help the detec- accurate classification for attacks.
tion of various attacks? To answer this question, we visualize the RQ3: How does the multi-layer diffusion module perform
distributions of features before and after the statistical disentan- effectively for intrusion detection? We have illustrated the princiglement. Fig. 7 shows the visualizations of the two distributions ple of multi-layer diffusion in Section IV-C. In this part, we take
respectively. We can observe that there is less overlap between the MITM attack as an example to illustrate the effectiveness of
distributions of features after the disentanglement compared spatial-temporal in intrusion detection.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10541

 TABLE VI
 TIMESTAMP AND IP

 Fig. 10. The t-SNE visualization of representations on the CIC-TON-IoT
 Fig. 9(a) shows a deep learning-based NIDS. When a MITM dataset generated by DIDS and MFL.
attack occurs, it is difficult to detect the intrusion since the spatial
and temporal information of those packets is not considered.
There are also some methods that only consider a single aspect
of spatial and temporal information, such as E-GraphSAGE
and MStream. In this case, for example, E-GraphSAGE mainly
focuses on the spatial relationship of the set nodes and extracts features from them. However, we observe that different
streams have their own timestamps from Table VI, so the lack
of temporal information makes it impossible to analyze the
dynamic structural changes of the edge. Similarly, taking the
temporal information as the only effect factor will also get Fig. 11. The correlation map and the t-SNE visualization of representations
 generated by DIDS and DIDS-MFL with MFL.
incomplete characteristics that do not contain spatial information (IP address). Moreover, some methods that take both the TABLE VII
spatial and temporal information into account, such as Euler, THE MULTI-CLASSIFICATION F1-SCORE (%) COMPARISON BETWEEN
take the snapshot method to capture the feature of the flow DIFFERENT DATASETS ON DIDS WITH MFL MODULE
which does not achieve the synchronous update for spatial and
temporal information. As shown in Fig. 9(b), intuitively, we
can quickly detect that UE6 is an intrusion device of layer 1
when the flow changes from SW 2 − SW 3 to SW 2 − U E6 and
U E6 − SW 3 considering SW 2, SW 3 are layer 2 devices. Also,
we have noticed the changes in dynamic graph structure with a
multi-Layer graph diffusion module to realize spatio-temporal invariant features among few-shot traffic in latent space, thus
coupling and synchronous updating. Overall, DIDS performs improving the distinction of attack representations.
best among these baselines in detecting various attacks. RQ6: Can MFL disentangle the representations of few-shot
 RQ4: How does the disentanglement facilitate the explain- samples? To answer this question, we visualize the learned
ability of DIDS? For this question, we rely on Fig. 8(a) as an representations of DIDS and MFL on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset
example to recover the possible traffic features of a password via correlation heatmaps. As shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b), the
attack. Since the original features are retained after disentangle- visualization results significantly reveal that MFL can generate
ment, we can find some feature values that deviate significantly highly disentangled representations via our designed regularizafrom the normal values in node embeddings. In the password tion term. Specifically, MFL generates a block diagonal heatmap
attack, we observe that the deviated features after disentangle- with high correlations and non-diagonal areas with very low
ment are “Fwd Pkt Std” and “Fwd Pkt Len Max”. It aligns with correlations. It verifies that MFL disentangles the few-shot traffic
our common sense for the main causes of password attacks and representations and highlights the attack-specific ones, making
further benefits the explainability of DIDS. them more distinguishable.
 2) MFL RQ8: Can MFL improve the performance of DIDS? So far,
 RQ5: How does multi-scale transform-based MFL benefit we have verified the effectiveness of MFL in few-shot traffic
the distinction of few-shot traffic threats? To answer this ques- intrusion detection, including serving as a plug-and-play module
tion, we visualize the learned representations of DIDS and the for other methods. To further study the applicability of MFL in
few-shot learning module MFL on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset supervised task, we conduct DIDS training with MFL and report
via t-SNE technology. As shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), the the multi-classification results, as shown in Table VII. DIDS
MFL’s representations are highly separated and distinguishable with MFL achieves a 2.31% to 15.82% F1-score improvements
for different few-shot attacks, i.e., the red square box, compared among three datasets. The results reveal the effectiveness of
to the representation generated by DIDS, i.e., the red round box. MFL when serving as a multi-classification module for normal-
It verifies the effectiveness of our proposed multi-scale few-shot size traffic training. Our designed multi-scale transform-based
learning framework, i.e., multiple coefficient matrices fusion and framework also sheds light on the future intrusion detection
multi-scale transformation. They discover the attack-specific model design. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of the
10542 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE VIII REFERENCES
 THE F1-SCORE (%) AND TIME COST (S) COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE LLM
 AND DIDS-MFL ON 100 TRAFFIC SAMPLES FROM THE CIC-TON-IOT [1] P. G. Kelley et al., “Guess again (and again and again): Measuring
 DATASET password strength by simulating password-cracking algorithms,” in Proc.
 2012 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2012, pp. 523–537.
 [2] Z. Cekerevac, Z. Dvorak, L. Prigoda, and P. Cekerevac, “Internet of
 Things and the man-in-the-middle attacks–security and economic risks,”
 MEST J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 15–25, 2017.
 [3] K. M. Prasad, “DoS and DDoS attacks: Defense, detection and traceback
 mechanisms-a survey,” Glob. J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 14, no. E7,
 pp. 15–32, 2014.
 [4] B. Bhushan and G. Sahoo, “Recent advances in attacks, technical challenges, vulnerabilities and their countermeasures in wireless sensor netproposed MFL module under multiple baselines in few-shot works,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 98, pp. 2037–2077, 2018.
intrusion detection tasks and their visualization analyses in [5] X. Li et al., “Detection and identification of network anomalies using
Appendix 20 and 21, respectively. sketch subspaces,” in Proc. 6th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas.,
 2006, pp. 147–152.
 RQ9: Network intrusion detection and Large language [6] C. Wueest, Targeted Attacks Against the Energy Sector, Mountain View,
model (LLM): Recently, there has been a significant surge in CA, USA: Symantec Security Response, 2014, pp. 1–8.
the development and application of Large Language Models [7] S. Kumar, A. Viinikainen, and T. Hamalainen, “Machine learning classification model for network based intrusion detection sys-
(LLMs) [105] cross various domains, including Natural Lan- tem,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Internet Technol. Secur. Trans., 2016,
guage Processing (NLP) [106], Computer Vision (CV) [107], pp. 242–249.
and multimodal tasks. However, the existing LLMs, e.g. GPT- [8] H. Zhao, N. Zheng, J. Li, J. Yao, and Q. Hou, “Unknown malware
 detection based on the full virtualization and SVM,” in Proc. 2009 Int.
3.5, GPT-4 struggle to detect traffic threats accurately and effi- Conf. Manage. e-Commerce e-Government, 2009, pp. 473–476.
ciently. As shown in Table VIII, the F1-score of the existing LLM [9] P. Ioulianou, V. Vasilakis, I. Moscholios, and M. Logothetis, “A signatureis significantly lower than our SOTA method DIDS. It may lie in based intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things,” in Proc. Inf.
 Commun. Technol. Form, 2018, pp. 1–6.
the hallucinations [108] of existing neural language-based LLM, [10] F. Erlacher and F. Dressler, “FIXIDS: A high-speed signature-based flow
which struggle to comprehend the intrinsic attack features in intrusion detection system,” in Proc. NOMS 2018-2018 IEEE/IFIP Netw.
traffic data. Second, the LLM necessitates more time to process Operations Manage. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–8.
 [11] M. Masdari and H. Khezri, “A survey and taxonomy of the fuzzy
the input traffic data and may fail as the size of the input traffic in- signature-based intrusion detection systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol.
creases. It may be attributed to the numerical values of the traffic 92, 2020, Art. no. 106301.
data involved. To sum up, the future directions to empower NIDS [12] N. T. Van et al., “An anomaly-based network intrusion detection system
 using deep learning,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. Eng., 2017, pp.
via LLM can be: 1. Aligning encrypted traffic data with the input 210–214.
requirements of LLMs, thus speeding the intrusion detection via [13] S. Aljawarneh, M. Aldwairi, and M. B. Yassein, “Anomaly-based in-
LLM; 2. Determining the necessary volume of traffic data and trusion detection system through feature selection analysis and building
 hybrid efficient model,” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 25, pp. 152–160, 2018.
corresponding traffic mining technology to unlock the powerful [14] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban
inference capabilities of LLM. IDS: An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for iot
 edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897,
 Aug. 2020.
 VI. CONCLUSION [15] Z. Ahmad, A. S. Khan, C. W. Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
 “Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
 This paper quantitatively discovers the inconsistent perfor- learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
mances of existing NIDS and reveals that the underlying cause Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. e4150.
is entangled feature distributions. Furthermore, we delve into [16] S. Bhatia, A. Jain, P. Li, R. Kumar, and B. Hooi, “MStream: Fast anomaly
 detection in multi-aspect streams,” in Proc. Web Conf. 2021, Apr. 2021,
the deeper reasons for the poor few-shot intrusion detection pp. 3371–3382, doi: 10.1145%2F3442381.3450023.
performance of existing NIDS. These interesting observations [17] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “Emotivate us to propose DIDS-MFL. The former is a novel GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
 for iot,” in Proc. NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage.
method that aims to benefit known and unknown attacks with Symp., 2022, pp. 1–9.
a double disentanglement scheme and graph diffusion mecha- [18] C. Ioannou and V. Vassiliou, “Network attack classification in IoT using
nism, and the latter is a transform-based multi-scale few-shot support vector machines,” J. Sensor Actuator Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, 2021,
 Art. no. 58.
learner to highlight few-shot traffic threats. The proposed DIDS [19] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
first employs statistical disentanglement on the traffic features security systems at the edge: Network ton_iot datasets,” Sustain. Cities
to automatically differentiate tens and hundreds of complex Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art. no. 102994.
 [20] C. Qiu et al., “3D-IDS: Doubly disentangled dynamic intrusion detecfeatures and then employs representational disentanglement tion,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
on the embeddings to highlight attack-specific features. DIDS 2023, pp. 1965–1977.
also fuses the network topology via multi-layer graph diffusion [21] I. Cohen et al., “Pearson correlation coefficient,” Noise Reduction Speech
 Process., 2009, pp. 1–4.
methods for dynamic intrusion detection. Finally, the proposed [22] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, H. Xu, T. Darrell, and X. Wang, “Meta-baseline: Ex-
MFL uses an alternating optimization framework to separate and ploring simple meta-learning for few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
disentangle the few-shot traffic representations. Extensive exper- Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 9062–9071.
 [23] X. Li et al., “PromptAD: Learning prompts with only normal samples
iments on five benchmarks show the effectiveness and the prac- for few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
tical employment potential of our DIDS-MFL, including binary Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 16838–16848.
classifications, multi-classifications, unknown attack detection, [24] N. Belton, M. T. Hagos, A. Lawlor, and K. M. Curran, “FewSOME:
 One-class few shot anomaly detection with siamese networks,” in Proc.
and few-shot intrusion detection. Future work could focus on IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, Jun. 2023,
the deployment of DIDS-MFL on future wireless networks. pp. 2978–2987.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10543

 [25] J. Liao, X. Xu, M. C. Nguyen, A. Goodge, and C. S. Foo, “COFT-AD: [49] R. Suter, D. Miladinovic, B. Schölkopf, and S. Bauer, “Robustly disen-
 Contrastive fine-tuning for few-shot anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. tangled causal mechanisms: Validating deep representations for interven-
 Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2090–2103, 2024. tional robustness,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 6056–6065.
 [26] Y. Ma, Z. Wang, Y. Cao, and A. Sun, “Few-shot event detection: An [50] K. Ridgeway and M. C. Mozer, “Learning deep disentangled embeddings
 empirical study and a unified view,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meet. Assoc. with the F-statistic loss,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
 Comput. Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 2023, vol. 1, pp. 11211–11236. vol. 31, pp. 185–194.
 [27] X. Li, J. Wu, Z. Sun, Z. Ma, J. Cao, and J.-H. Xue, “BSNet: [51] F. Träuble et al., “On disentangled representations learned from correlated
 Bi-similarity network for few-shot fine-grained image classification,” data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 10401–10412.
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 1318–1331, 2021, doi: [52] S. Zhou, Z. Guo, C. Aggarwal, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Link prediction
 10.1109/TIP.2020.3043128. on heterophilic graphs via disentangled representation learning,” 2022,
 [28] G. Liu and J. Guo, “Bidirectional LSTM with attention mechanism and arXiv:2208.01820.
 convolutional layer for text classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 337, pp. [53] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks
 325–338, 2019. for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, pp.
 [29] C. Brodbeck and J. Z. Simon, “Continuous speech processing,” Curr. 5363–5370.
 Opin. Physiol., vol. 18, pp. 25–31, 2020. [54] F. Gu, H. Chang, W. Zhu, S. Sojoudi, and L. E. Ghaoui, “Implicit graph
 [30] V. Sharma and R. N. Mir, “A comprehensive and systematic look up into neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
 deep learning based object detection techniques: A review,” Comput. Sci. pp. 11984–11995.
 Rev., vol. 38, 2020, Art. no. 100301. [55] Q. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Yang, and Z. Lin, “Optimization-induced
 [31] B. Xi, J. Li, Y. Li, R. Song, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Few-shot learning graph implicit nonlinear diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 with class-covariance metric for hyperspectral image classification,” 2022, pp. 3648–3661.
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 5079–5092, 2022. [Online]. [56] B. Chamberlain, J. Rowbottom, M. I. Gorinova, M. Bronstein, S. Webb,
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID251068999 and E. Rossi, “GRAND: Graph neural diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 [32] M. Hu, H. Chang, Z. Guo, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. CHEN, “Under- Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 1407–1418.
 standing few-shot learning: Measuring task relatedness and adaptation [57] J. Li, Y. Liu, and L. Zou, “DynGCN: A dynamic graph condifficulty via attributes,” in Proc. 37 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, volutional network based on spatial-temporal modeling,” in Proc.
 pp. 19397–19409. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= Web Inf. Syst. Eng.–WISE 2020: 21st Int. Conf., Amsterdam, The
 Pvgxecj5aS Netherlands, Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 83–95, doi:
 [33] R. Samrin and D. Vasumathi, “Review on anomaly based network 10.1007/978-3-030-62005-9_7.
 intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Elect., Electron., [58] Z. Yue, H. Zhang, Q. Sun, and X.-S. Hua, “Interventional few-shot
 Commun., Comput., Optim. Techn., 2017, pp. 141–147. learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
 [34] L. Ma, Y. Chai, L. Cui, D. Ma, Y. Fu, and A. Xiao, “A deep learning- pp. 2734–2746.
 based ddos detection framework for Internet of Things,” in Proc. ICC [59] D. Wang, Y. Deng, Z. Yin, H.-Y. Shum, and B. Wang, “Progressive disen-
 2020-2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6. tangled representation learning for fine-grained controllable talking head
 [35] N. Hu, Z. Tian, H. Lu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A multiple-kernel synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 clustering based intrusion detection scheme for 5G and IoT networks,” 2023, pp. 17979–17989.
 Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 3129–3144, 2021. [60] L. Zhao et al., “T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for
 [36] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph traffic prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 9, pp.
 neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported 3848–3858, Sep. 2020.
 Cooperative Work Des., 2022, pp. 1275–1280. [61] Q. Sun, Y. Liu, T.-S. Chua, and B. Schiele, “Meta-transfer learning
 [37] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. M. Rincon, and D. for few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Siracusa, “Lucid: A practical, lightweight deep learning solution for ddos Recognit., 2019, pp. 403–412.
 attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. [62] K. Singh and D. Malhotra, “Meta-learning based efficient framework for
 876–889, Jun. 2020. diagnosing rare disorders: A comprehensive survey,” AIP Conf. Proc.,
 [38] M. Kalander, M. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Yi, and L. Pan, “Spatio-temporal vol. 3072, no. 1, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 040003, doi: 10.1063/5.0199881.
 hybrid graph convolutional network for traffic forecasting in telecommu- [63] A. Li, T. Luo, T. Xiang, W. Huang, and L. Wang, “Few-shot learning
 nication networks,” 2020, arXiv:2009.09849. with global class representations,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 [39] Y. Cong, B. Yang, J. Ma, and X. Jiang, “Dynamic graph representation Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 9714–9723.
 learning via graph transformer networks,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. [64] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 Representations, 2022, pp. 1–12. detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 [40] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal [65] Y. Ouyang, B. Li, Q. Kong, H. Song, and T. Li, “FS-IDS: A novel few-shot
 network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. learning based intrusion detection system for SCADA networks,” in Proc.
 34, pp. 914–921. ICC 2021 - IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
 [41] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “EULER: Detecting network lateral movement [66] Z. Shi, M. Xing, J. Zhang, and B. H. Wu, “Few-shot network intrusion
 via scalable temporal link prediction,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. detection based on model-agnostic meta-learning with l2f method,” in
 Symp., 2022, pp. 1–16. Proc. 2023 IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–6.
 [42] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Explaining the pre- [67] Y. Yan, Y. Yang, F. Shen, M. Gao, and Y. Gu, “Meta learning-based
 dictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. few-shot intrusion detection for 5G-enabled industrial internet,” Complex
 Conf. Knowl. Dis. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, Intell. Syst., vol. 10, 2024, Art. no. 268699862. [Online]. Available: https:
 pp. 1135–1144. //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID
 [43] M. W. Gondal et al., “On the transfer of inductive bias from simulation [68] W. Cho and E. Kim, “Improving augmentation efficiency for few-shot
 to the real world: A new disentanglement dataset,” in Proc. Adv. Neural learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 17697–17706, 2022.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, vol. 32, pp. 15661–15672. [69] Y. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Yao, and Y. Fu, “How to trust unlabeled data?
 [44] F. Locatello, B. Poole, G. Rätsch, B. Schölkopf, O. Bachem, and instance credibility inference for few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 M. Tschannen, “Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compro- Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 6240–6253, Oct. 2022.
 mises,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 6348–6359. [70] X. Wang and G.-J. Qi, “Contrastive learning with stronger augmenta-
 [45] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, tions,” Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5549–5560, May 2023.
 the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery,” Queue, vol. [71] Y. Rong, X. Lu, Z. Sun, Y. Chen, and S. Xiong, “ESPT: A self-supervised
 16, no. 3, pp. 31–57, 2018. episodic spatial pretext task for improving few-shot learning,” in Proc.
 [46] I. Higgins et al., “Beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 9596–9605.
 constrained variational framework,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repre- [72] H. Xu, H. Xiong, and G.-J. Qi, “K-shot contrastive learning of visual
 sentations, 2017, pp. 1–15. features with multiple instance augmentations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 [47] H. Kim and A. Mnih, “Disentangling by factorising,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 8694–8700, Nov. 2022.
 Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 2649–2658. [73] M. N. Rizve, S. Khan, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah, “Exploring complemen-
 [48] M. Yang, F. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Shen, J. Hao, and J. Wang, “CausalVAE: tary strengths of invariant and equivariant representations for few-shot
 Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder,” 2023, learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 arXiv:2004.08697. Jun. 2021, pp. 10836–10846.
10544 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 [74] Y. Zhou, J. Hao, S. Huo, B. Wang, L. Ge, and S.-Y. Kung, “Automatic [96] H. Wang, Z. Lei, X. Zhang, B. Zhou, and J. Peng, “Machine learning
 metric search for few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. basics,” Deep Learn., vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
 Syst., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 10098–10109, Jul. 2024. [97] R. E. Schapire, “Explaining adaboost,” in Empirical Inference: Festschrift
 [75] X. Chen, G. Zhu, and J. Wei, “MMML: Multimanifold metric learning in Honor of Vladimir N. Vapnik. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2013, pp.
 for few-shot remote-sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. 37–52.
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5618714. [98] R. S. Fisher et al., “Operational classification of seizure types by the in-
 [76] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few- ternational league against epilepsy: Position paper of the ilae commission
 shot learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., NY, for classification and terminology,” Epilepsia, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 522–530,
 USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 4080–4090. 2017.
 [77] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. S. Torr, and T. M. [99] S. Kim, J. Lee, N. Lee, W. Kim, S. Choi, and C. Park, “Task-equivariant
 Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learn- graph few-shot learning,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 ing,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1120–1131.
 2018, pp. 1199–1208. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar. [100] B. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Feng, “Prototype completion for few-shot
 org/CorpusID4412459 learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 10, pp.
 [78] O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, 12250–12268, Oct. 2023.
 “Matching networks for one shot learning,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Neural [101] Q. Mao et al., “FeCoGraph: Label-aware federated graph contrastive
 Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2016, learning for few-shot network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 pp. 3637–3645. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025.
 [79] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Understanding [102] X. Dong, Y. Lai, X. Zhang, and X. Xu, “Counteracting new attacks in cps:
 cross-domain few-shot learning based on domain similarity and few-shot A few-shot class-incremental adaptation strategy for intrusion detection
 difficulty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2473–2488,
 D. Belgrave, and K. Cho, Eds., 2022, pp. 2622–2636. [Online]. Available: Jun. 2025.
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=rH-X09cB50f [103] S. Bandyopadhyay and V. Peter, “Unsupervised constrained community
 [80] L. D. Moura and N. Bjørner, “Z3: An efficient SMT solver,” in Proc. detection via self-expressive graph neural network,” in Proc. Uncertainty
 Tools Algorithms Construction Anal. Syst.: 14th Int. Conf., TACAS 2008, Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1078–1088.
 Held Part Joint Eur. Conf. Theory Pract. Softw., 2008, pp. 337–340. [104] M. Grandini, E. Bagli, and G. Visani, “Metrics for multi-class classifica-
 [81] P. Perona and J. Malik, “Scale-space and edge detection using anisotropic tion: An overview,” 2020, arXiv:2008.05756.
 diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. [105] A. Bahrini et al., “ChatGPT: Applications, opportunities, and threats,” in
 629–639, Jul. 1990. Proc. 2023 Syst. Inf. Eng. Des. Symp., 2023, pp. 274–279.
 [82] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Inductive [106] I. Lauriola, A. Lavelli, and F. Aiolli, “An introduction to deep learning
 representation learning on temporal graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07962. in natural language processing: Models, techniques, and tools,” Neuro-
 [83] F. R. Chung, Spectral Graph Theory, vol. 92. Providence, RI, USA: computing, vol. 470, pp. 443–456, 2022.
 American Mathematical Soc., 1997. [107] F. Liu, D. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Li, and F. Xu, “Deep learning based single
 [84] M. Roopak, G. Y. Tian, and J. Chambers, “Deep learning models for cyber sample face recognition: A survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 3, pp.
 security in iot networks,” in Proc. IEEE 9th annu. Comput. Commun. 2723–2748, Aug. 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
 Workshop Conf., 2019, pp. 452–457. s10462-022-10240-2
 [85] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Ben- [108] L. Huang et al., “A survey on hallucination in large language models:
 gio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Trans. Inf.
 Syst., 2017, vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008. Syst., vol. 43, pp. 1–55, 2023.
 [86] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Representation learning on
 graphs: Methods and applications,” arXiv:1709.05584, 2017.
 [87] A. Mitra, P. Vijayan, R. Sanasam, D. Goswami, S. Parthasarathy, and B.
 Ravindran, “Semi-supervised deep learning for multiplex networks,” in
 Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. Chenyang Qiu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 1234–1244. received the BSc degree in science from Beijing
 [88] C. Park, D. Kim, J. Han, and H. Yu, “Unsupervised attributed multiplex Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is
 network embedding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, pp. currently working toward the PhD degree with the
 5371–5378. National Engineering Research Center for Mobile
 [89] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and M. Bron- Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts
 stein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs,” and Telecommunications, Beijing. He has authored
 2020, arXiv:2006.10637. or coauthored papers in top-tier conferences and
 [90] M. Yoon, B. Hooi, K. Shin, and C. Faloutsos, “Fast and accurate anomaly journals, including KDD, AAAI, IEEE Transactions
 detection in dynamic graphs with a two-pronged approach,” in Proc. on Mobile Computing, and IEEE Transactions on
 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019, Cybernetics. His research interests include wireless
 pp. 647–657. network intrusion detection, semantic communication, graph neural networks,
 [91] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow datasets and ai robustness.
 for machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” in
 Proc. Big Data Technol. Appl.: 10th EAI Int. Conf., BDTA 2020, 13th
 EAI Int. Conf. Wireless Internet, WiCON 2020, Virtual Event, 2021, pp.
 117–135.
 [92] W. Lalouani and M. Younis, “Robust distributed intrusion detection Guoshun Nan (Member, IEEE) is currently a prosystem for edge of things,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., fessor with the Beijing University of Posts and
 2021, pp. 1–6. Telecommunications. He is a member of the National
 [93] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Evaluating standard fea- Engineering Research Center for Mobile Network
 ture sets towards increased generalisability and explainability of ML- Technologies. He has authored or coauthored pabased network intrusion detection,” Big Data Res., vol. 30, 2022, pers in top-tier conferences and journals including
 Art. no. 100359. ACL, CVPR, EMNLP, SIGIR, SIGCOMM, IEEE
 [94] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE
 A self-supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph Network, Computer Networks, Journal of Network,
 neural networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, 2022, Art. no. 110030. and Computer Applications. His research interests in-
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ clude natural language processing, computer vision,
 S0950705122011236 machine learning, and wireless communications, such as information extraction,
 [95] X. Guo, B. Zhou, and S. Skiena, “Subset node anomaly tracking over large model robustness, multimodal retrieval, and next-generation wireless networks.
 dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data He was a reviewer for ACL, EMNLP, AAAI, Neurocomputing, and IEEE
 Mining, 2022, pp. 475–485, doi: 10.1145/3534678.3539389. Transactions on Image Processing.
QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION 10545

 Hongrui Xia is currently working toward the un- Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the BEng dedergraduation degree with the National Engineering gree in computer science from Shandong University,
 Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies, Jinan, China in 2009, and the PhD degree in computer
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications. science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
 He specializes in network security and intrusion in 2014. He is currently with the Beijing Institute
 detection, aiming to advance his expertise in safe- of Technology, Beijing, as a professor. His research
 guarding digital systems and detecting cyber threats. interests include privacy protection for cloud and
 Dedicated to contributing to the field through research IoT, blockchain applications, and encrypted traffic
 and innovation. classification. He was the recipient of the Best Paper
 Runner-Up Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014.

 Xiaofeng Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an
 Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1993, and the
 master’s and PhD degrees in telecommunication
 Zheng Weng is currently working toward the unengineering from the Beijing University of Posts
 dergraduation degree with the National Engineering and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
 Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies,
 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently a profes-
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
 sor with the National Engineering Research Center
 He focuses on graph neural networks and machine
 for Mobile Network Technologies, BUPT, a fellow
 learning, exploring innovative methods to enhance of the Institution of Engineering and Technology, and
 data security and network integrity through advanced
 the chair of the IEEE ComSoc Beijing Chapter. He
 computational models.
 has authored or coauthored more than 200 articles and three books in wireless
 communication areas. His research focuses on B5G/6G.

 Jun Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BEng
 degree from Central South University in 2011, the
 MSc degree from Fudan University in 2014, and the
 PhD degree from Nanyang Technological University
 Xueting Wang is currently working toward the un- in 2019. He was with the Singapore University of
 dergraduation degree with the National Engineering Technology and Design from 2019 to 2024 and Ten-
 Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies, cent from 2014 to 2015. He is currently a professor
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications. and the chair of Digital Health with the School of
 Her current research interests include artificial intelli- Computing and Communications, Lancaster Univergence security, the analysis and detection of network sity. His research interests include computer vision,
 traffic attacks, and the use of AI automation to detect machine learning, and digital health. He is in the list
 and analyze viruses such as Trojans. of Stanford/Elsevier’s Global Top 2% Scientists. He was the recipient of the
 Best Thesis Award from EEE at NTU and Best Paper Award, from PREMIA.
 He was the area chair of CVPR, ECCV, ICML, NeurIPS, ICLR and MM.