IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 13085

 DRCAD: Dual-View Experts Routing and
 Counterfactual Generation for Explainable
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Dawei Zhao , Member, IEEE, Haoran Li , Lijuan Xu , Zhen Wang , Fellow, IEEE, and Haipeng Peng

 Abstract—Time series anomaly detection is critical in domains quently outputting anomaly scores. These anomaly scores guide
such as cybersecurity monitoring, network operations, and indus- the generation of counterfactual samples, integrating feature
trial control systems. Lately, unsupervised anomaly detection change tendencies with normalized feature impacts to derive
methods that utilize contrastive learning have shown promise. a feature importance ranking as the explanation. We evaluate
However, existing approaches often struggle to model high- DRCAD on six widely used datasets, observe state-of-the-art
dimensional temporal dependencies efficiently and rely on rigid (SOTA) performance. Moreover, in the explainability evaluation
feature-fusion schemes that can inadvertently amplify noise. on SWaT dataset, DRCAD achieves superior realism and sparsity
These factors increase computational overhead and sensitivity in counterfactual generation compared to existing methods, with
to irrelevant signals, hindering the capture of salient patterns. top-ranked features closely matching officially documented attack
Additionally, the explainability of anomalies detected by these characteristics.
mechanisms is often limited, restricting their application in
traceable detection processes and an explicit decision-making Index Terms—Time series, contrastive learning, anomaly detecbasis. In this paper, we propose dual-view experts routing and tion, explainable, XAI, counterfactual explanation.
counterfactual generation for explainable time series anomaly
detection (DRCAD), a novel framework that detects anomalies I. I NTRODUCTION
within time series data while providing intuitive and actionable explanations for model predictions. DRCAD uses in-patch
and patch-wise perspectives as input views for the contrastive
learning model, employing a flattened attention mechanism
 A NOMALY detection is a critical task in many highsecurity domains. For example, in industrial control
 systems, experts aim to identify which sensor is malwith lightweight spatial projections and a Patch Mixture of functioning or which device is under attack [1], [2]. In
Experts (MoE) layer for adaptive routing and information fusion.
It identifies anomalies by expanding the discrepancy between network security, anomaly detection is essential for idennormal and anomalous points in the representation space, subse- tifying and mitigating threats such as intrusions, insider
 attacks, and performance issues [3], [4]. Insufficient detec-
 Received 15 August 2024; revised 22 March 2025 and 24 September 2025; tion of anomalous data can lead to severe consequences
accepted 28 November 2025. Date of publication 3 December 2025; date [5].
of current version 16 December 2025. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant Detecting anomalies in real-world scenarios is challeng-
2023YFB3107300, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of ing. In practice, anomalies constitute only a small fraction
China under Grant 62172244, in part by Taishan Scholars Program under of the data and are generally weakly correlated with one
Grant tsqn202211210, in part by the “20 New Universities” Project of Jinan
City under Grant 202333023 and Grant 202333045, in part by the Key another [6]. Current anomaly detection techniques primarily
Research and Development Program of Shandong under Grant 2025CXPT082, use statistical methods, traditional machine learning, and deep
in part by Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant learning, with deep learning achieving significant success
ZR2024MF250, and in part by the Pairing Plan Project of the School
of Computer Science and Technology of Qilu University of Technology [7], [8]. Deep learning based anomaly detection methods
(Shandong Academy of Sciences) under Grant 2024JDJH12. The associate are typically divided into prediction-based and reconstructioneditor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication based approaches [9]. In recent years, reconstruction-based
was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding authors: Dawei Zhao; Lijuan Xu.)
 Dawei Zhao, Haoran Li, and Lijuan Xu are with the Key Labora- methods have gained significant notice. These methods operate
tory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of on the idea that a model, when trained exclusively on normal
Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer data patterns, will fail to accurately reconstruct anomalous
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), Jinan 250316, China, and also with Shandong Provincial Key data, thus identifying anomalies through reconstruction errors.
Laboratory of Industrial Network and Information System Security, Shandong However, these methods often face challenges such as large
Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan 250014, China (e- reconstruction errors, which can adversely affect model trainmail: zhaodw@sdas.org; haoranli0605@163.com; xulj@sdas.org).
 Zhen Wang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and ing and lead to false positives. To overcome these limitations,
Electronics (iOPEN), and the School of Mechanical Engineering, North- contrastive learning-based anomaly detection methods have
western Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710072, China (e-mail: emerged, offering a compelling alternative approach [6], [10],
zhenwang0@gmail.com).
 Haipeng Peng is with the Information Security Center, State Key Laboratory [11], [12], [13]. Contrastive learning focuses on learning
of Networking and Switching Technology, and the National Engineering representations by contrasting different views. Nevertheless,
Laboratory for Disaster Backup and Recovery, Beijing University of Posts designing stable architectures for contrastive learning on time
and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: penghaipeng@
bupt.edu.cn). series is still challenging, and the effectiveness of such repre-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3639899 sentations for anomaly detection warrants further investigation.
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
13086 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 In addition, the opacity of internal representations in deep perspectives, and a Patch Mixture of Experts (MoE)
learning models is an urgent issue. For example, if a banking mechanism dynamically adjusts feature importance based
system labels someone as a defaulter, the individual may on input data. The model detects anomalies by increasing
demand the basis for this judgment. Legal systems may only the distance between normal and anomalous points in the
trust the model if it aligns with objective facts. Unfortunately, representation space.
most time series anomaly detection models lack explainability, • We use anomaly scores to constrain the generation of
leaving users unaware of how decisions are made. counterfactual samples and combine counterfactual dis-
 Several methods have been proposed to address the explain- crepancies with prediction-based contributions to derive
ability problem. Feature importance techniques, such as SHAP feature importance scores, thereby explaining anomalies.
[14] and LIME [15], provide insights into which features are • We evaluate our detection approach with the state-ofmost influential in a model’s decision. However, these methods the-art anomaly detection algorithms on six real-world
often fail to offer a clear understanding of how changes in datasets, demonstrating better anomaly detection perthe input would affect the output. In contrast, counterfactual formance. On the SWaT dataset, we compare four
explanations [16], [17], [18] seek the closest but different representative explanation methods and obtain comparadata point in a non-real space that would yield a different ble results. Additionally, we generate importance scores
prediction under the model. These methods are commonly for each feature and provide visual results, showing a
used in computer vision [19], where counterfactual images high correlation between the most important features
are generated and compared with the original images for and the attack characteristics described in official docuexplanation. However, applying counterfactual explanations to ments, additional feature-weight experiments corroborate
time series anomaly detection is challenging due to the unique the fidelity of our explanations.
temporal dependencies and intrinsic coupling of features in
time series data, as well as the mixture of normal and II. R ELATED W ORK
anomalous samples, making it difficult for experts to discern
the properties of generated samples [20], [21]. To handle the A. Explainability in Deep Learning
challenges above, after the model makes a prediction, we use In recent years, the explainability of deep learning networks
an anomaly score-guided conditional variational autoencoder has garnered significant attention. Traditional machine learning
(CVAE) [22] to generate counterfactual samples. Unlike tradi- explanation methods, such as decision trees and naive Bayes,
tional VAEs, conditioning on the anomaly score mitigates the have been applied to deep learning models to enhance their
challenge of distinguishing normal from anomalous samples explainability. Notable methods like LIME [15], which designs
by guiding the CVAE to generate counterfactuals that are a local surrogate model to fit the model’s prediction results,
coherent and plausible within the learned distribution, thereby and SHAP [14], which uses Shapley values to calculate each
indicating which current conditions should change to yield the feature’s contribution to the model’s prediction, are prominent
opposite prediction. For instance, if a counterfactual sample examples. However, these methods face challenges in explainin an anomaly detection model shows significant changes in ing time series data due to the unique operational patterns
debt, the user can repay the debt to alter the model’s decision. that only emerge over observed periods and long-term trends,
We adopt variational autoencoder driven by its ability to learn coupled with the higher information content compared to other
complex data distributions and generate realistic samples by data types.
mapping data to a latent space and then reconstructing it. Several methods have been specifically developed to explain
This characteristic is particularly beneficial for time series time series predictions. TimeX [23] designs a time prediction
data, where maintaining temporal dependencies and feature surrogate model that approximates the original model’s output
relationships is crucial. by minimizing the embedding distance in the latent space
 To simultaneously address the tasks of anomaly detec- between the original and surrogate models. FIT [24] estimates
tion and anomaly explanation, we propose Dual-view experts feature importance by fixing certain variables and altering
Routing and Counterfactual generation for explainable time others to observe changes in the predicted distribution over
series Anomaly Detection (DRCAD), an innovative anomaly time. WinIT [25] extends FIT by using a retrospective window
detection framework with counterfactual explanations. It lever- to explain changes in the predicted distribution, illustrating
ages dual-perspective learning of data representations and the temporal dependencies between different observations of
identifies anomalies by comparing the discrepancy between the the same feature for more persistent explanation patterns.
two representations and a set threshold, effectively avoiding Other post-hoc explanation methods generate explanations for
potential biases from relying on reconstruction errors. DRCAD model predictions. For instance, counterfactual explanations
can (1) detect anomalies in input time series data and (2) [16], [17] focus on identifying how features need to change
generate counterfactual samples and assign importance scores to produce an opposite prediction with minimal perturbation.
to each feature to explain anomalies. The contributions of this CounTS [26] designs a self-interpretable time series prediction
paper are summarized as follows: model that uses causal inference to identify causal relation-
 • We propose DRCAD, a contrastive learning framework ships between inputs and the predictions, providing feasible
 where in-patch and patch-wise relationships serve as dual counterfactual explanations for time series prediction models.
 input perspectives for the model. A Flattened Atten- The aforementioned methods are all aimed at explaining the
 tion mechanism encodes the original data and dual results of time series prediction models. However, merely
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13087

Fig. 1. Overview of DRCAD. E performs basic embedding of the multivariate time series. The detector D x encodes the in-patch view and the patch-wise view
with Flattened Attention and fuses them using a Patch Mixture of Experts, producing two representations whose discrepancy defines the anomaly score S .
The detection decision is obtained by comparing S with a threshold δ. The generator Gc f is a score-conditioned CVAE that uses the input and S to generate
counterfactual sequences and to compute feature importance for explanation. The workflow is: the embedded series is first partitioned into patches of length p.
Next, The detector processes the two views and outputs the score S , which is compared with δ for detection. For explanations, the raw series is concatenated
with S to train the score-conditioned CVAE, which then generates counterfactual series under the condition. Feature importance is finally obtained by T-test
between the original and the counterfactual series.

providing explanations for the results of time series prediction and support vector machines (SVM) for anomaly detection.
models is often not directly applicable to time series anomaly These methods identify anomalies by learning the similarities
detection. This is because the task of anomaly detection and differences between data points.
requires the ability to accurately identify and interpret anoma- Deep learning techniques have further expanded the capalous samples, rather than just explaining the overall prediction bilities of anomaly detection due to their powerful feature
results. extraction and high-dimensional data processing abilities [7].
 Currently, only a few works focus on explaining time series Time series anomaly detection algorithms in deep learnanomalies. InterFusion [27] explains anomalies in multivariate ing mainly include prediction-based and reconstruction-based
time series by using the original reconstruction probabil- methods. In detail, prediction-based algorithms construct a
ity of each detected entity anomaly and applying Markov prediction model to estimate future normal data points based
Chain Monte Carlo imputation to obtain more plausible latent on historical data. When a specific data point is observed,
embeddings and reconstructions.However, due to the potential the method compares it with the model’s predicted value. If
deviation of the reconstruction from the original input data, there is a significant difference between the observed data
this may result in explanations that are unrelated to the input point and the predicted value, the point may be considered
data, thereby affecting the accuracy of the interpretation. Some anomalous. Reconstruction-based algorithms are more widely
works use attention matrices to explain anomalies. VTT [28] used in anomaly detection. These methods rely on building
explains anomalies through a comparative analysis of attention a model to encode the normal behavior of a given time
patterns derived from the original anomaly-containing data series into a low-dimensional latent space and then attempt
and those obtained from reconstructed data. By analyzing to reconstruct the original sequence. Since the model is
attention maps, key variables and changes in correlations trained only on normal data, it will not effectively reconstruct
can be identified. However, it lacks fine-grained explanations anomalous subsequences. However, labeling anomalous points
and fails to provide more specific reasons for anomalies and in real life is challenging, making it difficult to ensure that the
detailed relationships between variables. Most methods either training data is free from anomalies [32]. For prediction-based
analyze feature impacts solely based on prediction results or methods, if the training data contains anomalous samples,
are only suitable for specific models. the model may incorrectly interpret these anomalous data
 points as part of normal fluctuations, reducing future prediction
B. Time Series Anomaly Detection accuracy. Reconstruction-based methods typically work by
 Time series anomaly detection aims to identify points or training models to recognize only normal data patterns. If
segments in sequence data that deviate from expected pat- the training set contains anomalous data, the model may
terns. In the statistical domain, techniques include but are learn to reconstruct these anomalous patterns, failing to
not limited to moving averages, exponential smoothing, and distinguish between normal and anomalous data. Lately, selfautoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models supervised methods like contrastive learning have achieved
[29]. These traditional methods detect potential anomalies by significant success [33], [34], [35], [36]. Contrastive learning
analyzing historical patterns and trend changes in the data. In assumes that normal data should exhibit certain similarities,
the machine learning domain, researchers have explored using while anomalous data will significantly deviate from the
clustering algorithms like k-means [30], density-based meth- normal data distribution, thereby isolating anomalous samples
ods, and classification algorithms such as decision trees [31] [6], [10], [13].
13088 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I To better understand our proposed time series anomaly
 N OTATION detection method, we compare it with six popular methods.
 Figure 2 shows the architecture comparison of six approaches.
 Rather than relying on conventional multi-head attention and
 frequency domain analysis mechanisms, DRCAD (Figure 2(f))
 uses MLP to“Flatten Attention” in order to enhance feature space resolution and reduce computational complexity.
 Additionally, during information integration, we introduce a
 elaborately designed Patch Mixture of Experts (MoE) layer
 to selectively filter and merge information from the two
 perspectives.
 Here, we introduce the overall structure of the anomaly
 detection module, including the implementation of the flattened attention mechanism and Patch MoE, and explain how
 representation differences are used for anomaly detection.
 1) Anomaly Detection Model Structure: In the Embedding processing stage, we apply instance normalization and
 channel independence [39] to standardize the multivariate time series input and reduce the model’s parameter
 count.
 Patch was first popularized as a fixed-size, typically nonoverlapping image block that is linearly projected into a token
 [40]. In sequence modeling (NLP), related segmentation ideas
 III. M ETHOD appear as chunking units used as tokenization granularity. For
A. Overview time series, a patch is defined as a contiguous, non-overlapping
 segment along the time axis. It has been shown effective for
 As illustrated in Figure 1, our goal for multivariate time
 time series representation learning [39]. To this end, after the
series is to design a framework that can simultaneously handle
 embedding operation, the input multivariate time series X ∈
anomaly detection and provide explanations for the anomalies.
 RT ×D is partitioned into Tp non-overlapping patch blocks, an
In Table I, we list the notations used in this paper. Overall, we
 operation we denote as Patching(·). Consequently, the original
develop an anomaly detection classifier based on contrastive
 data is transformed from dimensions T × D to Tp × p × D:
learning, which avoids the issue of large reconstruction losses
affecting training, a common problem in reconstruction-based  
 T
 ×p×D
anomaly detection methods. After the model completes its X = Patching(E(X)) ∈ R p , (1)
predictions, output the importance of each feature to determine
which features are more likely to cause anomalies when where E(·) refers to the embedding process. Our approach
altered, we achieve this by calculating an anomaly score utilizes a feature projection mechanisms, represented as FP(·),
for each time window, which serves as a conditional input to extract and transform features from two complementary
for the counterfactual generator. This guides the generation views within our framework. The projection function is realof counterfactual samples and adjusts the randomness of ized through a distinct linear transformation:
counterfactual generation by incorporating the normalized T
 Xin−patch = FP(X) ∈ Rd× p , (2)
contribution of each feature to the prediction. Sections B and C
detail the implementation methods for the anomaly detection X patch−wise = FP(X) ∈ R d×p
 . (3)
model and counterfactual explanations, respectively.
 These two views are then used as inputs for the subsequent module, flattened attention, to obtain their respective
B. Time Series Anomaly Detection representations.
 We propose a novel contrastive learning method for time The flattened attention module is crucial in our architectural
series anomaly detection, leveraging improved representation design. This pivotal component facilitates the learning of
network techniques without the need for negative examples. multi-view representations from input data, enabling a com-
The input multivariate time series is defined as X ∈ RT ×D , prehensive analysis of latent patterns. Normal data points tend
with each sample containing time steps T and a number to exhibit consistent underlying patterns across these varied
of sensors D. The task of the anomaly detector D x is to views. In contrast, anomalies, being rare and lacking definitive
output detection results yipred ∈ RT . We divide the time series patterns, struggle to align with the latent structures of normal
into several patches, splitting the original data into in-patch data or even with other anomalies. This results in weak correand patch-wise perspectives. These perspectives model the lations between anomalous points and the rest. Consequently,
representations within and between patches, respectively. We the representational disparities for standard data points across
use these two perspectives as positive samples for contrastive different views remain minimal, whereas anomalies display
learning. significant variations. By leveraging crafted criteria to assess
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13089

Fig. 2. The distinctions between DRCAD and the other five methods. Anomaly Transformer [6] (a) employs Gaussian kernels to learn prior differences and
amplifies these correlation differences using a minimax strategy to quantify each time point. DCdetector [10] (b) employs a“Dual attention” mechanism to
differentiate anomalous patterns from regular data points within time series. ModernTCN [37] (c) employs enhanced TCN blocks optimized for time series
modeling. TFMAE [13] (d) employs dual Transformer-based autoencoders with temporal and frequency masking strategies to learn unbiased patterns and
anomalies. CATCH [38] (e) proposes frequency patchification and a Channel Fusion Module for optimized signal analysis and channel correlation. DRCAD
(f) employs a novel approach, utilizing MLP and a specially designed MoE layer to obtain representations of two input views, in contrast to the conventional
multi-head attention mechanism.

Fig. 3. Structure of the anomaly detector D x . The detector consists of an Embedding module, a Flattened Attention module, a Patch Mixture of Experts
(MoE) module, and an Upsampling operation. The detailed structures of the flattened attention module and the patch MoE module are provided, as they
contribute the most to anomaly detection. The structures used for the in-patch and patch-wise views are identical.

these representational differences, we can effectively differ- threshold for identifying anomalies. Figure 3 shows the speentiate between normal and anomalous data points.Finally, cific structure of detector, with the main components being
we derive anomaly scores by assessing the discrepancies embedding module, flattened attention module, patch MoE
between the two representations and employ a predetermined module, and the anomaly detection module. Furthermore, the
13090 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

detailed structures of the flattened attention module and the the input data. Specifically, we generate importance weights
Patch MoE module are also provided in Figure 3, as they related to the input data using the flattened attention module to
contribute the most to anomaly detection. control the weighted results in the self-attention mechanism,
 2) Flattened Attention and Patch MoE Structure: The atten- which are defined as follows:
tion mechanism is effective in capturing patterns in time series
data, but its high complexity limits the training efficiency FlatAttenS = (1 − (σ(MLP(VS )))) · AS
of the model.Unlike previous works that solely rely on the + σ(MLP(VS )) · FlattenedS , (12)
traditional attention mechanism for sequence modeling [6], FlatAttenN = (1 − (σ(MLP(VN )))) · AN
[10], we employ a MLP to flatten the attention mechanism.
 + σ(MLP(VN )) · FlattenedN , (13)
Specifically, we replace the traditional dot-product attention
with linear layers and non-linear activation functions. Instead where V represents the value and A retains the original
of forming all pairwise query-key scores, we flatten tokens attention score obtained by multiplying Q and K. This yields
and use MLP to compute mixing weights for interactions. This the final representation results for the two inputs.
avoids constructing O(L2 ) attention maps, reduces memory and Since the patch-wise view ignores the correlation between
compute, and is less sensitive to noisy or irrelevant channels. points within a patch, and the in-patch view ignores the corre-
Together with the Patch Mixture of Experts that adaptively lation between different patches, upsampling is required when
fuses the in-patch and patch-wise views per window, it comparing the results of the two representation networks.
strengthens the cross-view discrepancy used for scoring and For the patch branch, the upsampling operation is performed
improves both the accuracy and latency trade-off.Specifically, within the patch (i.e., from patch to point), ultimately obtaining
we first initialize and merge the query Q and key K from the the patch representation. For the in-patch branch, the upsamtwo perspectives: pling operation extends from one patch to the full number
 of patches, ultimately obtaining the in-patch representation,
 QS , KS = WQ Xin−patch , WK Xin−patch , (4)
 which is:
 QN , KN = WQ X patch−wise , WK X patch−wise ,
 CS = Concat(QS , KS ), C N = Concat(QN , KN ), (5) N = Upsampling(FlatAttenN ),
 T
 S = Upsampling(FlatAttenS ). (14)
where QS , KS ∈ R p ×h×dmodel , QN , KN ∈ R p×h×dmodel , and h refer
to dnmodel
 head
 . 3) Contrastive Difference and Anomaly Detection: Consid-
 Next, the concatenated tensor is flattened into two dimen- ering the rarity of anomalies and the common latent patterns
sions and passed to a predefined MLP to compute the attention shared by normal points, the representations of the same input
weights. We define the flattening operation C f lat as follows, should be similar. For normal samples, the representations
including in-patch view flatten C f latS and patch-wise view learned from two different perspectives should be highly
C f latN : consistent, but the representations of anomalous samples are
   difficult to learn, resulting in significant differences in the
 T
 ×h×(2×dmodel )
 C f latS = reshape(CS ) ∈ R p , representations learned from different perspectives. Therefore,
 C f latN = reshape(C N ) ∈ R
 (p)×h×(2×dmodel )
 , (6) in the representation discretization module, we utilize the
 KL divergence to measure the dissimilarity among the two
where h represent the head number. Our designed MLP branches. The loss functions for the two branches are symbolconsists of two linear layers and a ReLU activation layer. The ized as follows:
computation process of the MLP is as follows: X
 LS = KL(S k S topgrad(N)) + KL(S topgrad(N) k S ),
 M1 = ReLU(C f lat W1 + b1 ), (7) (15)
 M2 = M1 W2 + b2 . (8) LN =
 X
 KL(N k S topgrad(S )) + KL(S topgrad(S ) k N),
The two-dimensional tensor is then restored to a four- (16)
dimensional tensor and transposed, which is:
 where S topgrad(·) represents the stop-gradient operation, S
 O = (reshape(M2 ))T . (9) and N represent the embedding results within and between
 patches, respectively. The final loss function is:
 Finally, we obtain the preliminary representation results for
the two dimensions, in-patch and patch-wise: LN − LS
 L= . (17)
 len(N)
 FlattenedS = S o f tmax(MLP(C f latS (CS ))), (10)
 Similar to most anomaly detection methods, we determine
 FlattenedN = S o f tmax(MLP(C f latN (C N ))). (11) whether a point is an anomaly by comparing the anomaly
 Mixture of Experts (MoE) is usually employed in the score with a threshold. The anomaly score is the degree of
domain of large language models to enhance the accuracy difference between the two perspectives:
and capabilities of artificial intelligence systems. We design X
 Score(Xi ) = KL(S k S topgrad(N))
a Patch MoE layer here to adjust the self-attention weighted
results based on the importance of different features in + KL(N k S topgrad(S )), (18)
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13091

 time series, the trained anomaly detection model scores the
 sample points as S core ∈ RT ×D , and outputs the detection
 results yipred ∈ RT . The objective is to generate a set of samples
 xic f ∈ RD×T that make minimal changes to the features but
 can flip the model’s prediction results, for example, changing
 yipred = 0 to yci f = 1.
 Unlike previous methods for generating counterfactual samples, we use the anomaly score S as a condition to supervise
Fig. 4. Visualization results of different detection model on 105 window size. the learning process of the autoencoder. We first embed the
(a) Higher attention weights are assigned to temporally proximate time series input score, encoding it as S core0 ∈ RT ×2 . In the encoder part,
data points, while correlations between features further apart in the sequence we input S core0 as a conditional parameter along with the time
are disregarded. (b) The attention weights are overly smoothed, resulting in
the neglect of crucial areas within the time series. Consequently, neither yields series sample to obtain the mean µ and variance σ. Similarly,
the desired level of explanatory granularity. in the decoder part, the condition is also input along with µ
 and σ to generate the counterfactual sample. During training,
 the CVAE attempts to generate samples from the latent space
where KL(· k ·) is the KL divergence. The anomaly score is distribution that satisfy the conditional constraints. To meet the
compared with a prior threshold δ, and points exceeding the proximity requirement, we add an L1 norm as a regularization
threshold are considered anomalies. That is: constraint. Therefore, the final loss L is:
 (
 1: anomaly S core(Xi ) ≥ δ
 Eqφ (z | xi ,Score0 ) − log pθ xi | z, Score0 + λ1 kX c f − Xk1
  
 yi = (19)
 0: normal S core(Xi ) < δ.
 + KL qφ (z | xi , Score0 ) p(z | Score0 ) ,
 
 (20)

C. Counterfactual Feature Importance Explanation where S core0 is the conditional input to the variational autoencoder, and X c f is the generated counterfactual sample. After
 In this section, we introduce the method for explaining
 training the model, we can generate counterfactual samples
anomalies by comparing the differences between counterneeded for the desired prediction of anomalies by elevating
factual and original samples to obtain feature importance
 the given condition, that is:
scores. A higher score indicates a greater contribution of that
feature to the occurrence of the anomaly.Notably, although our S core0 = δ + η, (21)
anomaly detection model incorporates an attention mechanism,
we chose not to use the attention matrix for explanations. where δ is prior threshold and η is the bias of elevating.
We observe that, under a sliding-window setting, the attention 2) Feature Discrepancy: After obtaining the counterfactual
weights mainly concentrate on outputs from the adjacent samples, we can compare the data changes between the origwindow, yielding only local explanatory effects, as Figure 4 inal data and the generated counterfactual samples to obtain
shows. In contrast, counterfactual explanations aim to provide the feature discrepancies. To ensure the entire process is interinsights into what changes to the input might lead to a pretable, we use an independent sample T-test to compare each
desired prediction. Such altered inputs shift the prediction to feature of the original and generated samples, calculating their
a specific target, for example, from normal (prediction value significant differences. The T-test is a statistical method used
0) to anomalous (prediction value 1), thus offering actionable to compare whether the means of two independent samples
explanations for the anomaly. are significantly different. By calculating the T-statistic and
 Considering that existing counterfactual generators mostly the corresponding P-value, the statistical relevance of feature
satisfy the requirement of proximity without providing discrepancies between the paired samples can be ascertained.
answers on which features to change, we acknowledge that For the independent sample T-test, we establish two comconstraining features is challenging. In the real world, it is peting hypotheses: Null hypothesis (H0): Both sample groups
challenging to pre-determine the importance and range of share identical mean values; Alternative hypothesis (H1):
feature changes. This makes generating feature importance The mean values of the two samples differ. The decision to
scores by simply comparing the differences between generated accept or reject H0 hinges on the calculated T-statistic and its
samples and original samples more random. Therefore, we corresponding P-value. When the P-value falls below the preenhance the model by predicting feature importance, making determined significance threshold (typically 0.05), we dismiss
the explanation results more meaningful by overlaying the H0, suggesting a noteworthy distinction between the sample
normalized feature mask on the prediction results. means. The magnitude of this difference is inversely related to
 We introduce the process of generating counterfactual sam- the P-value, smaller P-values indicate more pronounced feature
ples in paragraph a). In paragraph b), we describe the process disparities.
of calculating feature importance after obtaining the generated Our goal is to obtain the importance score for each feasamples. In paragraph c), we present the final method used to ture based on the discrepancy between the two samples.
explain anomalies. Specifically, for each feature, we extract the values of that
 1) Generating Counterfactual Samples: We use a Con- feature from the original and generated samples, forming two
ditional Variational Autoencoder (Conditional VAE) [41] to independent samples with a sample size of nT . First, we
generate counterfactual samples. For input multidimensional calculate the pooled standard deviation, then compute the
13092 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 Explaining DRCAD’s Detection Result where I represents the collection of all feature sequences.
Input: Multivariate time series X ∈ RT ×D , detection results Finally, we perform a weighted summation to determine the
S core, the CVAE model, elevating bias η. final feature importance value:
Output: Feature importance values valc f ∈ R1×D , the
 val(i) = val pre (i) − λ2 · valc f (i), (25)
well-trained CVAE, encoding network parameters θ, decoding
network parameters φ, counterfactual examples X c f ∈ RT ×D . where λ2 aligns the numerical values. Feature importance
 1: # Incorporate anomaly S core condition into the model. highlights the suspicious features causing anomalies and pro-
 2: S core0 ← ReLU(Linear(S core)). vides feasible actions on how altering features could lead to
 3: Concate X with S core0 in Encoder. anomalies.
 4: Concate z with S core0 in Decoder.
 5: # Initialization parameters. IV. E XPERIMENTS
 6: CVAE, θ, φ ← Randomly initialize the parameters. A. Datasets
 7: # Training Process of CVAE. We adopt six widely used datasets to evaluate the anomaly
 8: for i = 1,2,...,e p do detection model and provide explanation results on the SWaT
 9: z ← S ample(µ, logσ). dataset. Details of datasets used are summarized in TABLE II,
10: Calculate L via Eq.(20). including:
11: CVAE, θ, φ ← Update parameters using Adam. • PSM [42]: This dataset is collected internally from mul-
12: end for
 tiple application server nodes at eBay and contains 25
13: Generating X c f by elevating S core0 to δ + η.
 dimensions.
14: # Calculate the feature importance.
 • MSL [43]: NASA’s collection encompasses data on the
15: for i = 1,2,...,D do
 Mars rover’s sensor health and actuator operations, offer-
16: Calculate the feature discrepancy by Eq.(23). ing valuable insights into the vehicle’s performance.
17: Calculate the contribution of each feature by Eq.(24). • SMAP [43]: This dataset, also gathered by NASA,
18: Output i-th feature importance by Eq.(25). includes soil samples and telemetry data utilized by the
19: end for
 Mars rover.
 • SWaT [44]: This dataset is obtained from 51 sensors
T-statistic for the two samples. The formula for calculating of the critical infrastructure system under continuous
the T-statistic is: operations.
 r • SMD [45]: This dataset is a five-week-long collected
 nT E(X1 ) − E(X2 )
 T (X1 , X2 ) = , (22) from an internet company compute cluster, which stacks
 2 S accessed traces of resource utilization of 28 machines.
and we define the counterfactual discrepancy for each feature • GECCO [46]: This dataset focuses on drinking water
as: quality in the context of the Internet of Things.
 valc f (i) = T (xi , xic f ). (23)
Using the T-statistic distribution table, we can find the B. Baselines
corresponding P-value. The smaller the P-value, the more We compare our model with seventeen compelling anomaly
significant the discrepancy in that feature between the gen- detection models, including:
erated datasets and the origin. This allows us to evaluate • Reconstruction-based models: LSTM-VAE [47],
the importance of each feature by comparing the differences OmniAnomaly [45], BeatGAN [48], InterFusion [27],
between the original and generated samples. CATCH [38].
 3) Explanation by Feature Importance: Algorithm 1 illus- • Autoregression-based models: VAR [49], LSTM [43],
trates the computational process of feature importance. The CL-MPPCA [50],GPT4TS [51], ModernTCN [37].
counterfactual generator captures the relationships between • Density-estimation models: LOF [52], MPPCACD [53],
time series features, but it does not impose constraints when DAGMM [54].
changing feature values. This can lead to an excessive num- • Clustering-based methods: DeepSVDD [55], THOC
ber of undesirable explanations (e.g., the model may prefer [56], ITAD [57].
to change only a few features, or some features may lose • Classic methods: OCSVM [50], IForest [58].
discreteness during the change process). Our solution is to • Change point detection and time series segmentation
add an additional feature importance prediction. We calculate methods: BOCPD [59], U-Time [60], TS-CP2 [61].
the impact of each feature on the prediction result. Specifi- • Contrastive learning based methods: Anomaly Transcally, after the model training is completed, we sequentially former [6], DCdetector [10], TFMAE [13].
transform each feature into random noise, erasing its effect We compare our approach with four prevalent counterfactual
on the prediction. After obtaining the true prediction value generation methods on SWaT dataset, that is:
and the actual prediction value, we normalize the impact of
 • Regularized Gradient Descent (RGD): [17] A approach
each feature on the prediction. The formula about feature
 that minimize the sum of squared differences between
contribution is defined as follows:
 expected outcomes and counterfactuals, employing graval pre (i) = Norm(D(XI/{i} )), (24) dient descent for counterfactual search.
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13093

 TABLE II
 S PECIFIC I NFORMATION A BOUT THE DATASETS . AR (A NOMALY R ATIO ) I S THE P ROPORTION OF A NOMALIES . T HE F IRST
 F OUR DATASETS H AVE R ELATIVELY H IGHER AR, W HEREAS SMD AND GECCO H AVE L OWER AR

 • Generative Adversarial Network (GAN): [62] This rate is set to 1e-4. The CVAE model training data is stored as
 approach integrates the standard GAN with a target time series sampled from anomalous samples according to the
 classifier. time window, with duplicates present. We set epoch = 5, the
 • Counterfactual Search Guided by Prototypes (CSGP): training-to-validation ratio to 8:2, λ1 = 0.1, λ2 = 1e-3, learning
 [63] This method extends RGD by pushing counterfactu- rate to 1e-4, η is set to 5e-4 and batch size is set to 128.
 als towards more realistic data points of the desired class The encoder and decoder each have 3 layers. During testing,
 using class prototypes. we use normal samples. Both the anomaly detection module
 • Generating Counterfactuals using Residual GANs and the CVAE module are implemented in PyTorch [64] and
 (CounteRGAN): [16] The CounteRGAN method lever- optimized using the Adam [65] optimizer. The hardware used
 ages a residual generative adversarial network to generate is an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 24G.
 counterfactuals for a target classifier.
 E. Main Results
C. Evaluation Metrics 1) Anomaly Detection Results: We compare our model
 1) Metrics on Time Series Anomaly Detection: We employ with 17 representative methods on four higher anomaly ratio
accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score which are the most com- (AR) datasets using precision (P), recall (R), and F1-score
monly used evaluation metrics for anomaly detection tasks. (F1) as the evaluation metrics. Table III reports the results.
 2) Metrics on Counterfactual Examples Generation: We The evaluation results of CATCH on the SMAP dataset are
utilize four widely adopted metrics from related work to omitted from this study due to the lack of preprocessed
evaluate the relative performance of our method for generating data and a standardized data processing methodology. The
counterfactual time series samples. These metrics include comparison shows that our detector achieves state-of-the-art
realism, sparsity, prediction gain (pred-gain), and latency. (SOTA) performance on multiple benchmarks. In addition, on
 Realism reflects the extent to which the content or results the two lower AR datasets GECCO and SMD, our method
generated by counterfactuals are consistent or believable. We maintains high precision and competitive F1, as shown in
employ the L2 norm to calculate reconstruction error as a Table IV.
measure of realism. A lower value indicates higher realism of Although the DRCAD model performs exceptionally across
the method. multiple evaluation metrics, its recall rate is slightly lower
 Sparsity refers to the degree of difference between counter- than other methods. One possible explanation is that the
factuals and the actual observed data. Lower sparsity implies designed Patch MoE is overly stringent, causing some borderthat counterfactuals are closer to actual data points. We use line anomalous data to be filtered out and thus not recognized
the L1 norm to quantify this difference. as anomalies by the model. While this stringent filtering
 Prediction gain shows the contrast between the classifier’s standard enhances the overall reliability of the model, it may
predictions on the counterfactual examples and the original also impact the recall rate to some extent.
input data point. A higher value indicates a higher proportion 2) Counterfactual Generation: In this subsection, we evalof normal samples successfully reversed into anomalies. uate the generation capability of the CVAE and the quality
 Latency represents the computational cost of generating of counterfactual samples on the SWaT dataset. The CVAE
counterfactual samples. In many scenarios of time series is trained using anomalous data to avoid the absence of highanomaly detection, generating explanatory samples is required scoring anomalies during training, allowing the model to learn
to be as real-time as possible. the input condition score.
 We compare our interpretation method with four popular
 methods in terms of proximity, sparsity [66], prediction gain,
D. Implementation Details and time efficiency. TABLE V shows our comparison results
 We document the hyperparameters used, as well as the run- on SWaT dataset. DRCAD’s prediction gain is slightly lower
time environment and hardware configuration. In the anomaly than RGD because the VAE model has higher randomness
detection module, the default epoch is set to 1, and the learning when generating counterfactual samples.
13094 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE III
C OMPREHENSIVE D ETECTION O UTCOMES ON F OUR R EAL -W ORLD T IME S ERIES DATASETS W HICH H AVE R ELATIVELY H IGHER AR, R ANKED IN
 A SCENDING O RDER OF P ERFORMANCE . T HE M ETRICS P, R, AND F1 D ENOTE P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE , R ESPECTIVELY. A LL VALUES
 A RE P RESENTED AS P ERCENTAGES , W ITH THE T OP R ESULTS IN B OLD AND THE S ECOND -B EST U NDERLINED

 TABLE IV TABLE V
D ETECTION R ESULTS ON GECCO AND SMD DATASETS . T HESE T WO C OUNTERFACTUAL T IME S ERIES E VALUATION R ESULTS ON THE SWAT
 DATASETS H AVE A L OWER AR T HAN THE OTHER F OUR DATASETS DATASET. T HE A RROWS D ENOTE W HETHER L ARGER ↑ OR
 L OWER ↓ VALUES A RE B ETTER

 chose to provide explanations on the SWaT dataset because it
 has more authoritative official documentation.
 We select the top four features with the highest scores
 from the obtained feature importance results to illustrate
 3) Feature Importance and Explanation: We aim to explain the rationality of the explanation: P302, MV303, DPIT301,
which features are more likely to cause decision reversals and AIT504. Higher feature importance scores indicate that
by outputting feature importance. Therefore, we use T-test to modifying these features are more likely to cause anomalous
measure importance, as Figure 5 shows. The lower the p-value, events. The feature with the highest importance score is P302,
the more important the feature. Then obtain the normalized indicating that if we modify the value of P302 beyond a certain
results of each feature’s impact on the final prediction on the range, the model is highly likely to predict the time series
SWaT dataset. According to the formula 25, we calculate the result as anomalous. According to the description provided
final feature importance values, as shown in Figure 6. Note that by the SWaT dataset [44], P302 was deliberately closed from
the proposed method is model-agnostic and data-agnostic. We 31/12/2015 01:45:19 to 11:15:27. This actuator pumps water
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13095

 Fig. 7. Recall comparison under different anomaly ratios. (a) AR × 0.5:
 anomaly prevalence reduced to 50% of the original; (b) AR × 0.1: reduced
 to 10%. Results for 5 datasets comparing DCdetector and DRCAD. As AR
 decreases, recall drops for both methods, with a clearer advantage for DRCAD
 at AR × 0.1.

 F. Model Analysis
 1) Anomaly Ratio Sensitivity: Anomaly ratio (AR) is con-
Fig. 5. Feature p-values ranking. A lower p-value indicates that the feature sidered a key factor that controls how hard detection becomes.
undergoes larger changes when generating counterfactuals.
 When anomalies are fewer, recall usually drops and it is
 harder to balance recall and precision. To study this effect,
 we create two test settings named AR × 0.5 and AR × 0.1
 while keeping the raw signals unchanged. For each setting we
 choose the decision threshold on a validation set using the
 precision recall curve so that the operating point is fair for
 every method. We evaluate on MSL, SMAP, SWaT, PSM, and
 SMD and report per dataset results with recall trends shown
 in Figure 7.
 The results show a clear two step drop as the anomaly
 ratio goes from the original level to AR × 0.5 and then to
 AR × 0.1. Both DCdetector and DRCAD lose recall, yet
 DRCAD stays higher on all datasets and the gap is larger at
 AR × 0.1. The advantage is strongest on harder datasets such
 as SMD where rare events are easy to miss. This result may
 be due to the design of DRCAD, where flattened token mixing
 reduces sensitivity to channel noise and the Patch MoE adaptively fuses in-patch and patch-wise views to retain weak but
 Fig. 6. Feature importance ranking on the SWaT dataset. useful cues.
 2) Ablation Studies on Detector Structure: Table VI shows
 the ablation studies on the Flattened Attention and Patch MoE
from the UF feed tank to the RO feed tank through UF modules. “No Flatten” indicates that the representations of
filtration. The negative impact of attacking actuator P302 the two views are obtained through the traditional multi-head
on the water flow of the RO unit is that tank T401 stops attention mechanism, while “No MoE” means replacing with
inflowing, affecting the feature values after P4, as shown in multi-scale patch sizes, specifically patch size is set to 3 and
Figure 9. From 29/12/2015 14:38:12 to 14:50:08, MV303 is 5. Experimental results indicate that both designed modules
prevented from opening, causing changes in the backwash can enhance performance. Patch MoE is more prominent
process and leading to the cessation of stage 3, resulting in because it integrates useful information during representation
anomalies. extraction.
 By attributing features to decisions, we effectively avoid 3) Ablation Studies on Dual-View Structure Design:
the randomness in the counterfactual generation process. Rela- We conduct an investigation into the rationality of homotively, MV303 have a high proportion in the normalized feature geneous branch structures, as shown in Table VII, while
impact on prediction results, which is one of the key reasons “Original” refers to no modification; “Freeze” denotes fixwe can identify it as a cause of anomalies. Similarly, DPIT301 ing the parameters of the branch; “Random init” represents
causes the water level of T401 to drop and the water level random initialization of the branch; “Switch” indicates interof T301 to rise by setting the value > 40kpa. AIT504 is changing inputs between two branches. To facilitate a more
modified twice within twelve minutes, causing water to not comprehensive analysis of feature disparities across varyenter the drainage pipe, which fully aligns with the attack ing viewpoints between the dual branches, we introduced
methods described in the documentation. This indicates that C-S and R-A-R metrics [67], where C-S stands for Cosine
our results are highly credible. Similarity, while R-A-R represents Range-AUC-ROC based
13096 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 8. Comparative results of employing four attention mechanisms in the detector across four datasets, respectively.

 Fig. 9. Visualization results of latent distribution under distinct feature weights by T-SNE.

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON F LATTENED ATTENTION AND PATCH M O E M ODULE

on label transformation under ROC curve. It can be seen model’s enhanced focus on optimizing the unfrozen branch
that freezing either the in-patch or patch-wise branch leads when one branch remains static. Similarly, the R-A-R metric
to a slight decrease in model performance and similar- potentially benefits from this stability, as it considers perity metrics, with values approaching those observed in the formance across various thresholds, resulting in a marginal
unfrozen state. This phenomenon can demonstrate that both performance improvement. When initialization operations are
branches capture equally important yet distinct features. The performed, a significant decrease in metrics is observed.
observed increase in the R-A-R metric may be due to the This substantial reduction can be explained by the disruption
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13097

 TABLE VII
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON H OMOGENEOUS B RANCH S TRUCTURES

 Fig. 10. Visualization results of the different window size comparison.

of pre-trained weights and the consequent amplification of
disparities between the two branches. Specifically, there are
no notable changes when switching the inputs from the two
views, confirming that identical branch structures are capable of capturing features from different views, as disscussed
above.
 4) Ablation Studies on Attention Mechanism: Moreover, we
perform ablation studies on Attention Mechanism to evaluate the efficiency and necessity of our proposed design as
the Flattened Attention is developed to optimize parameter
efficiency while retaining the capability to extract temporal patterns from sequential data. Figure 8 illustrates the Fig. 11. Visualization results of different elevating bias η for counterfactual
 generation.
results of modeling time series using three different attention mechanisms in the detector: Multi-head Attention [68],
Flash Attention [69], and Sparse Attention [70]. It can be normal and anomalous points under baseline conditions, where
seen that Flattened Attention exhibits superior performance red points denotes anomalous and blue represents normal
enhancement, more efficient runtime, and smaller memory instances. Figure 8(b) demonstrates the result after artificially
consumption. Flash Attention and Sparse Attention have reducing the weights of the top five features ranked by
the same level of complexity; however, Sparse Attention importance, revealing that anomalous points become signifdemonstrates superior stability. Furthermore, it is noteworthy icantly less distinguishable. Figure 8(c) shows the outcome
that the multi-head attention mechanism did not demonstrate of randomly downweighting five features across all dimensuperior performance in comparative analyses. This under- sions, where the distribution overlap between normal and
performance may be attributed to overfitting, as the datasets anomalous points in the low-dimensional embedding space
like SMAP and PSM provided relatively limited training data. exhibits minimal variation. This comparative analysis validates
This phenomenon underscores the critical balance between the effectiveness of feature importance ranking methodologies
model complexity and data availability required for optimal in maintaining class separability for time series anomaly
performance. detection tasks.
 5) Feature Importance Analysis: We validate the efficacy 6) Parameter Selection: We investigate the parameter senof the feature importance output. Figure 9 illustrates the sitivity of the DRCAD model. Figure 10 demonstrates detect
visualization of feature distributions in the SWaT dataset under performance across different window sizes, indicating robust
three conditions. Figure 8(a) visualizes the distribution of stability of our model across four datasets. Within the window
13098 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 R EFERENCES
 [1] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
 “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, Sep. 2022.
 [2] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
 time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
 pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
 [3] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
 robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
 heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
 [4] P.-F. Marteau, “Random partitioning forest for point-wise and collective
 anomaly detection—Application to network intrusion detection,” IEEE
Fig. 12. (a) Time cost comparison on different datasets. (b) Accuracy Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2157–2172, 2021.
performance on different datasets. [5] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
 survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
 [6] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
size range [60,105], fluctuations in DRCAD performance Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–20.
do not exceed 8.03%. Figure 11 illustrates the performance [7] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
of counterfactual generation under varying elevating bias η series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
 no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, May 2022.
values. Lower Realism and Pred-gain metrics indicate reduced [8] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
perturbation in the generated counterfactual samples. Note that survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
excessively high bias values may compromise the integrity of [9] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and
 M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,”
the counterfactual generation rules. 2022, arXiv:2211.05244.
 7) Time Cost and Accuracy (ACC) Comparison: In [10] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
Figure 12 we compare the Time efficiency and Accuracy detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
(ACC) of our method with two highly correlated methods, Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
Anomaly Transformer and DCdetector. Across four datasets, [11] A. Liu et al., “Contrastive context-aware learning for 3D high-fidelity
our method yield the lowest average time overhead, and ACC mask face presentation attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Security, vol. 17, pp. 2497–2507, 2022.
results close to DCdetector, higher with Anomaly Transformer. [12] X. Luo, X. Han, W. Zuo, X. Wu, and W. Liu, “MLaD2 : A semi-
This can be attributed to our designed flattened attention mech- supervised money laundering detection framework based on decoupling
anism, which successfully ties the algorithm’s complexity to training,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4518–4533,
 2024.
the hidden layer dimensions of the MLP, thereby avoiding [13] Y. Fang, J. Xie, Y. Zhao, L. Chen, Y. Gao, and K. Zheng, “Temporalexcessive computations. frequency masked autoencoders for time series anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), May 2024,
 pp. 1228–1241.
 [14] S. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK model predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 pp. 4765–4774.
 [15] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust
 In this paper, we propose DRCAD, a novel approach that you?’ Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd
addresses both the challenges of multivariate time series ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016,
anomaly detection with the need for result interpretation. pp. 1135–1144.
 [16] D. Nemirovsky, N. Thiebaut, Y. Xu, and A. Gupta, “Countergan: Gen-
We present an innovative high-confidence explanation tech- erating counterfactuals for real-time recourse and interpretability using
nique applicable to time series anomaly detection model. residual gans,” in Proc. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 1488–1497.
Specifically, our method employs a contrastive representation [17] S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Counterfactual explanations
 without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr,”
learning framework to capture time series dependencies and Harv. JL Tech., vol. 31, p. 841, Apr. 2018.
identify anomalies by analyzing representational discrepancies [18] S. Nagesh, N. Mishra, Y. Naamad, J. M. Rehg, M. Shah, and
from multiple angles. Furthermore, we develop counterfac- A. Wagner, “Explaining a machine learning decision to physicians via
 counterfactuals,” in Proc. Conf. Health, 2023, pp. 556–577.
tual instances based on detected anomalies and quantify [19] Y. Goyal, Z. Wu, J. Ernst, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee,
feature importance through the extent of feature alterations. “Counterfactual visual explanations,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach.
Experimental evaluations demonstrate that DRCAD achieves Learn., 2019, pp. 2376–2384.
 [20] E. Ates, B. Aksar, V. J. Leung, and A. K. Coskun, “Counterfactual
state-of-the-art outcomes across various metrics in anomaly explanations for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Artif.
detection tasks and superior realism and sparsity in counterfac- Intell. (ICAPAI), May 2021, pp. 1–8.
tual generation compared to existing methods, as validated on [21] E. Delaney, D. Greene, and M. T. Keane, “Instance-based counterfactual
 explanations for time series classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Casefour real-world datasets, the explanations on the SWaT dataset Based Reasoning, 2021, pp. 32–47.
align closely with the official documentation. [22] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
 However, there are still many aspects in our work that arXiv:1312.6114.
 [23] O. Queen, T. Hartvigsen, T. Koker, H. He, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitrequire improvement. One observed limitation is that our nik, “Encoding time-series explanations through self-supervised model
explanation process does not account for the differences behavior consistency,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36,
between different types of features. In practice, as seen 2024, pp. 1–31.
 [24] S. Tonekaboni, S. Joshi, K. R. Campbell, D. Duvenaud, and A. Goldwith the SWaT dataset, discrete features should be given enberg, “What went wrong and when? instance-wise feature importance
greater weight because they influence the data of subsequent for time-series black-box models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
features. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 799–809.
ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION 13099

[25] K. K. Leung, C. Rooke, J. Smith, S. Zuberi, and M. Volkovs, “Temporal [49] O. D. Anderson, Time-Series, 2nd ed. London, U.K.: Charles Griffin,
 dependencies in feature importance for time series prediction,” in Proc. 1976.
 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–18. [50] S. Tariq et al., “Detecting anomalies in space using multivariate convo-
[26] J. Yan and H. Wang, “Self-interpretable time series prediction with lutional LSTM with mixtures of probabilistic PCA,” in Proc. 25th ACM
 counterfactual explanations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2019, pp. 2123–2133.
 pp. 39110–39125. [51] T. Zhou et al., “One fits all: Power general time series analysis by
[27] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpreta- pretrained lm,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023,
 tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. pp. 43322–43355.
 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, [52] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 pp. 3220–3230. density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
[28] H. Kang and P. Kang, “Transformer-based multivariate time series Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 anomaly detection using inter-variable attention mechanism,” Knowl.- [53] T. Yairi, N. Takeishi, T. Oda, Y. Nakajima, N. Nishimura, and N. Takata,
 Based Syst., vol. 290, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 111507. “A data-driven health monitoring method for satellite housekeeping data
[29] G. E. P. Box and D. A. Pierce, “Distribution of residual autocorrela- based on probabilistic clustering and dimensionality reduction,” IEEE
 tions in autoregressive-integrated moving average time series models,” Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1384–1401, Jun. 2017.
 J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 65, no. 332, pp. 1509–1526, Dec. 1970. [54] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
[30] N. Kant and M. Mahajan, “Time-series outlier detection using enhanced pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 k-means in combination with PSO algorithm,” in Engineering Vibration, pp. 1–19.
 Communication and Information Processing: ICoEVCI 2018, India. [55] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 363–373. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[31] P. Karczmarek, A. Kiersztyn, W. Pedrycz, and E. Al, “K-means-based [56] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using
 isolation forest,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 195, May 2020, Art. no. temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf.
 105659. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[32] Y. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Long-distance pipeline safety early [57] Y. Shin et al., “ITAD: Integrative tensor-based anomaly detection system
 warning: A distributed optical fiber sensing semi-supervised learning for reducing false positives of satellite systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int.
 method,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 17, pp. 19453–19461, Sep. 2021. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 2733–2740.
[33] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework [58] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [59] R. Prescott Adams and D. J. C. MacKay, “Bayesian online changepoint
[34] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” detection,” 2007, arXiv:0710.3742.
 in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit., [60] M. Perslev, M. H. Jensen, S. Darkner, P. Jennum, and C. Igel, “U-time:
 Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758. A fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied to
[35] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self- sleep staging,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
 supervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., pp. 4415–4426.
 2020, pp. 21271–21284. [61] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
[36] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738. [62] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[37] D. Luo and X. Wang, “Moderntcn: A modern pure convolution structure Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
 for general time series analysis,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. [63] A. V. Looveren and J. Klaise, “Interpretable counterfactual explanations
 Represent., 2024, pp. 1–43. guided by prototypes,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
[38] X. Wu et al., “CATCH: Channel-aware multivariate time series anomaly Discovery Databases, 2021, pp. 650–665.
 detection via frequency patching,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. [64] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
 Represent., 2025, pp. 1–15. learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
[39] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series pp. 8026–8037.
 is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. [65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–24. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[40] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers [66] R. K. Mothilal, A. Sharma, and C. Tan, “Explaining machine learning
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., classifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations,” in Proc. Conf.
 2020, pp. 1–21. Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, Jan. 2020, pp. 607–617.
[41] K. Sohn, X. Yan, and H. Lee, “Learning structured output representation [67] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and
 using deep conditional generative models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. M. J. Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evaluation
 Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 3483–3491. measure for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
[42] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn- vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, Jul. 2022.
 chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” [68] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008.
 Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494. [69] T. Dao, D. Y. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Ré, “FlashAttention: Fast
[43] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness,” in Proc. Adv.
 strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 16344–16359.
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. [70] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Generating long
 Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395. sequences with sparse transformers,” 2019, arXiv:1904.10509.
[44] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-
 Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36.
[45] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837. Dawei Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[46] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time degree in cryptology from Beijing University of
 series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. 35th Conf. Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2021, pp. 1–13. 2014. He is currently a Professor with Shandong
[47] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” Center in Jinan), China. His main research interests
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. include network security, complex networks, and
[48] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous epidemic spreading dynamics.
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc.
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
13100 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Haoran Li is currently pursuing the master’s degree Zhen Wang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 in computer science and technology with Shandong degree from Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong
 Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Kong, in 2014. He is a Distinguished Professor and
 Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology the Dean of the School of Cybersecurity, North-
 (Shandong Academy of Sciences), China. His cur- western Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China. He
 rent research interests include anomaly detection and has published more than 100 articles in PNAS, Sciinterpretable machine learning. ence Advances, Nature Communications, Physical
 Review Letters, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PAT-
 TERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE ,
 IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F OREN -
 SICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND
 L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING, NeurIPS,
 ICLR, ICML, WWW, IJCAI, and AAAI with more than 30 000 citations.
 His research focuses on artificial intelligence, networks, multiagent systems,
 and games. He is an Elected Member of Academia Europaea/the Academy
 of Europe, European Academy of Sciences and Arts, and a fellow of AAIA
 and IOP.

 Haipeng Peng received the M.S. degree in system
 Lijuan Xu received the master’s degree in computer engineering from Shenyang University of Technolscience and technology from Shandong University, ogy, Shenyang, China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree
 Jinan, China, in 2007. She is currently an Associate in signal and information processing from Beijing
 Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center University of Posts and Telecommunications, Bei-
 (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), China. jing, China, in 2010. He is currently a Professor
 Her main research interests include network security,
 with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing
 industrial internet security, and computer forensics. University of Posts and Telecommunications. He
 has co-authored 200 scientific articles. His research
 interests include information security, network security, and complex networks.