IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3548914

 Dual Spatio-Temporal Contrastive Learning
 Network With Adaptive Threshold Generation for
 Anomaly Detection of Electric Submersible Pump
 Kang Li , Member, IEEE, Shuang Li , Qiang Li , Zhikuan Jiao , Jun Fu , Xiaoyong Gao ,
 and Laibin Zhang

 Abstract—To improve the electric submersible pump (ESP) [1]. As an important artificial lifting equipment, the electric
system’s anomaly monitoring performance, this article proposes submersible pump (ESP) is extensively employed in various
a novel approach known as the dual spatio-temporal contrastive well types, including deep wells, directional wells, and those
learning network with adaptive threshold generation (DSTCL-
ATG). Unlike previous ESP process modeling methods, this containing water, due to its strong lifting capacity, large
study comprehensively considers the spatio-temporal coupling displacement, and high lift [2]. However, ensuring the safe
characteristics of ESP data and incorporates Crossformer into and reliable operation of ESPs poses significant challenges.
the dual-path contrastive learning (DCL) architecture to provide These challenges stem from their intricate design, complex
superior normal ESP process modeling. Furthermore, we design coupling mechanisms, and continuous operation in harsh oil
an ATG approach based on a random forest regressor that is
aimed at successfully mitigating frequent false alarms resulting well environments characterized by high temperatures, presfrom fluctuations in ESP status. The algorithm is evaluated sures, impurities, and corrosion. Like most industrial systems
using data from four faulty wells in real oilfield scenarios, [3], [4], the failure of an ESP could trigger a cascade of
demonstrating its effectiveness and superiority through extensive events leading to prolonged shutdowns, resulting in substantial
comparative experiments against state-of-the-art methodologies. economic losses and potentially catastrophic outcomes [5].
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, contrastive learning, electric Therefore, it is essential to swiftly detect any irregularities
submersible pump (ESP), process modeling, spatio-temporal in ESP operation to maintain the safety and reliability of the
feature extraction. oil recovery process. This necessitates the implementation of
 effective monitoring strategies to mitigate risks and ensure the
 I. I NTRODUCTION uninterrupted operation of ESPs in oil production [6].
 The initial focus of many studies has been on two key
I N RECENT years, there has been a notable shift toward
 artificial lifting as the primary method for oil production.
This transition is attributed to the depletion of easily accesareas: current card detection [7], [8] and wellhead pressureholding diagnosis [9], [10]. The current card detection method
sible reservoirs and the deterioration of oil well conditions involves assessing the fluctuation trend of the ESP’s current, typically relying on the subjective judgment of field
 Received 12 April 2025; revised 12 June 2025; accepted 30 June 2025. engineers. While this method is straightforward and user-
Date of publication 10 July 2025; date of current version 18 July 2025.
This work was supported in part by the State Key Program of National friendly, achieving accurate detection is often challenging due
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52234007; in part by to its subjective assessment criteria [11]. On the other hand,
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant GZB20230861; in part the wellhead pressure-holding diagnosis approach involves
by the Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum, Beijing,
under Grant 2462023YJRC036 and Grant 2462020BJRC004; in part by the increasing pipeline pressure by closing the production valve
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 22178383 and and then observing pressure changes to identify faults. How-
Grant 21706282; and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under ever, this method is associated with prolonged downtime
Grant 2232021. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was
Dr. Marco Pau. (Corresponding author: Kang Li.) between stopping and resuming the pump, significantly dis-
 Kang Li is with the Department of Automation, China University of rupting regular production operations [12]. Both methods
Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of suffer from limitations, as they rely solely on a single variable
Oil and Gas Safety and Emergency Technology, Ministry of Emergency
Management, Beijing 102249, China (e-mail: likangone@gmail.com). (such as current or pressure) for ESP abnormality detec-
 Shuang Li, Qiang Li, Zhikuan Jiao, and Xiaoyong Gao are with tion. This reliance may lead to low diagnostic accuracy and
the Department of Automation, China University of Petroleum, Beijing efficiency, hampering the effectiveness of anomaly detection
102249, China (e-mail: lishuang000215@163.com; liqiang.cup@gmail.com;
cupb.jiaozhikuan@gmail.com; x.gao@cup.edu.cn). efforts [13].
 Jun Fu is with the Engineering Technology Branch, CNOOC With the rapid development of sensing technologies and
Energy Development Company Ltd., Tianjin 300452, China (e-mail: the vast accumulation of big data, modern approaches such
fujun8@cnooc.com.cn).
 Laibin Zhang is with the College of Safety and Ocean Engineering, as multivariate statistical analysis and machine learning have
China University of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China, and also with emerged as powerful tools for ESP abnormality detection [6],
the Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Safety and Emergency Technol- [14], [15]. For instance, classic machine learning algorithms,
ogy, Ministry of Emergency Management, Beijing 102249, China (e-mail:
zhanglb@cup.edu.cn). such as support vector machine (SVM), K-nearest neighbor
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3587359 (KNN), neural networks (NNs), and classification and regres-
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

sion trees (CART), have been utilized to detect ESP anomalies. mentioned cutting-edge techniques to enhance ESP anomaly
Despite their encouraging outcomes, these methods primarily monitoring performance is a highly significant attempt and
concentrate on capturing the multivariate and nonlinear aspects investigation.
of ESP data, ignoring its dynamics. Besides, they often require Furthermore, fixed thresholds (FT) are frequently used in
pre-labeling of the data, which may limit their applicability in traditional methods to identify anomalies. However, the FT
real-world scenarios. is not appropriate for ESP abnormal detection tasks since
 In practice, a significant portion of the recorded ESP data ESP has been operating in complex well conditions for a
lacks labels, which has led to growing interest in unsupervised considerable amount of time, and the data is severely condetection methods [16], [17], [18], [19]. In [16], principal taminated by erratic disturbance, which would result in a lot
component analysis (PCA) is utilized to identify anomalies of false alarms and significantly impede the production schedrelated to ESP broken shafts. In [17], a method combining ule. Recent research has presented several adaptive threshold
PCA with individual X and moving range (XmR) is developed generation (ATG) approaches to address this problem [23],
for ESP anomaly detection. In [18], an autoencoder (AE) is [30], [31]. In [30], adaptive thresholds are constructed by
employed to detect ESP anomalies. Despite the success of combining an empirical constant with support vector regresthese methods, they tend to overlook the temporal dependen- sion (SVR). The empirical constant and kernel function
cies among monitoring variables. Recently, a novel approach employed in SVR, however, have a significant impact on its
known as dynamic kernel PCA with local preservation pro- efficiency. In [31], the optimal relevance vector machine’s
jection (LDKPCA) has been introduced for the detection of (RVM) probabilistic output is used to construct adaptive
shaft breakage [19]. This method integrates dynamic analysis thresholds, which enable the wind turbine pitch system’s
to effectively capture temporal correlations among variables. status monitoring to function well. Due to the probabilistic
Nevertheless, LDKPCA does not serve as an enhancement to output’s reliance on the normal distribution assumption, which
NNs and is unable to leverage the powerful feature extraction ESP might not meet, the application of this method for ESP
capabilities inherent in NNs. anomaly identification is regrettably restricted. More recently,
 Although a lot of research has been done on NN-based an XGBoost-regressor-based adaptive threshold adjustment
dynamic modeling, such as recurrent NNs (RNNs) [20], (ATA) mechanism has been developed for ESP anomaly detecgated recurrent unit (GRU) networks [21], long short-term tion [23]. However, it is important to note that the XGBoost
memory (LSTM) networks [22], these methods still struggle regressor is fundamentally a boosting algorithm, which tends
to learn long-term dependency among variables. Notably, to be more sensitive to noise and prone to overfitting. Addiour team developed a temporal attention network (TAN) tionally, it encompasses a complex hyperparameter system
based on an LSTM-AE architecture, which has demonstrated that necessitates meticulous tuning to achieve optimal perforthat NN-based dynamic modeling can be effectively applied mance. Thus, how to design an ATG method that minimizes
to ESP anomaly detection [23]. Nevertheless, the funda- sensitivity to noise while facilitating easier hyperparameter
mental limitation in capturing complex long-term variable adjustments becomes a key challenge for ESP abnormality
correlations persists across these methodologies. Fortunately, detection.
Transformer introduces a multihead attention and residual In this article, we present a novel approach for ESP anomaly
learning mechanism to improve the long-term dependency detection, called dual spatio-temporal contrastive learning netmodeling performance [24]. However, Transformer and most work with ATG (DSTCL-ATG), to address the aforementioned
of its variants focus more on relationship learning in the issues. The main contributions of this article are summarized
temporal dimensions while ignoring explicit correlation mod- below.
eling in the spatial (variable) dimensions [25]. In fact,
along with the correlation between variables that share the 1) An integrated algorithm named DSTCL network is
same physical characteristics, the ESP system also finds a developed, which can effectively accomplish ESP norlink between neighboring variables with different properties mal process modeling with an excellent performance
in space. More recently, Crossformer [26] has been pro- by introducing Crossformer’s encoder-based spatioposed and demonstrated to be capable of explicitly modeling temporal feature extraction into dual-path contrastive
spatio-temporal dependency; however, it adopts the classical learning (DCL) architecture.
supervised learning paradigm, which is difficult to be directly 2) A new random-forest-regressor-based ATG method is
used in the unsupervised normal process modeling of ESP investigated and used to improve frequent false alarms
anomaly detection task. In the past few years, contrastive caused by erratic disturbance in the ESP system.
learning [27] has achieved sufficient performance in dealing 3) Practical data collected from four different ESP wells in
with unsupervised problems due to its outstanding contrastive a real oilfield site is used to evaluate the effectiveness
optimization strategy, which has also been successfully applied and superiority of the proposed method. The experiin anomaly detection [28], [29]. Nevertheless, these generic mental results demonstrate that the proposed method
techniques fail to account for the spatio-temporal interac- outperforms other state-of-the-art methodologies.
tion of ESP variables. To our knowledge, there are rarely
published reports of unsupervised modeling of ESP systems The rest of this article is structured as follows. The ESP
with spatio-temporal interaction of variables using contrastive system is briefly introduced in Section II. Section III elaborates
learning. Therefore, conducting a fusion study of the afore- on the proposed method. In Section IV, the effectiveness of
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 A. Overview of the Proposed Method
 To improve ESP anomaly detection performance, it is
 necessary to consider the characteristics of multiple variables,
 nonlinearity, long-term dynamics, and uncertain disturbances
 of the ESP system. In this section, we develop a contrastive
 learning-based technique for ESP anomaly detection. The
 proposed DSTCL-ATG approach consists of two modules:
 DSTCL and ATG, as illustrated in Fig. 2. To fully account
 for the multivariate, nonlinear, and long-term dependency
 characteristics of ESP data and achieve efficient unsupervised
 modeling of ESP normal operating conditions, the DSTCL
 module builds on a dual-branch contrastive learning architecture and introduces an encoder network of Crossformer to
 extract ESP data’s spatio-temporal coupling features. Furthermore, instead of the more usual FT, the ATG module generates
 adaptive thresholds using a random forest regressor to detect
 whether ESP operating conditions are abnormal. This might
 reduce frequent false alarms caused by uncertain disturbances.
 The joint use of two modules is intended to enhance ESP
 anomaly detection capability.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of an ESP system [2].
 B. Dual Spatio-Temporal Contrastive Learning
the proposed method is validated. Finally, the conclusion is Most contrastive learning methods concentrate on acquirgiven in Section V. ing feature representations by distinguishing between pairs
 of samples [34]. This characteristic renders them particularly well-suited for downstream tasks such as time-series
 II. B RIEF I NTRODUCTION OF ESP S YSTEM classification [35]. However, the normal process modeling
 The ESP system is made up of two sections, the surface for ESP anomaly detection is fundamentally characterized
zone and the downhole zone, as seen in Fig. 1 [2]. Electric as time-series forecasting. The primary objective here is to
drives and pump control components, such as the power predict future operating conditions based on historical time
supply, control circuit, and pump discharge valve, are the windows rather than merely differentiating between instances.
primary components of the ESP system’s surface zone. These Therefore, the features learned through instance discriminacomponents sense variations in flow, frequency, current, and tion may be inadequate for achieving accurate forecasting.
voltage. The production monitoring device, motor, oil and gas Recently, SimTS, a simple representation learning framework
separator, pump, and motor protector are all part of the ESP for time-series forecasting, has been proposed [36]. This
system’s downhole zone. The motor is the central component framework employs a convolutional encoder-based DCL archiof the system, serving as its power source. The motor protector tecture to learn representations and performs exceptionally
keeps the motor separate from the fluid in the well. Crude oil well in time-series prediction. However, beyond temporal
enters the oil and gas separator through the pump input during correlations, variables with the same physical characteristics
the oil production process to accomplish gas-liquid separation. and spatially adjacent variables with distinct characteristics
The separated gas enters the annulus when the oil is pumped are also associated. This indicates that ESP data exhibits a
to the surface zone. complex spatio-temporal coupling. When applying the SimTS
 ESP system operational status can be monitored with the approach to describe ESP normal processes, the ESP data’s
help of the downhole production monitoring system, which peculiarities are not adequately considered. Fortunately, Crosscurrently has the ability to gather real-time process data, former utilizes a dual-layer attention mechanism to effectively
such as pressure, temperature, vibration, pump inlet, and capture spatio-temporal coupling within time-series data [26].
outlet pressure differential. However, nonlinear responses in Consequently, we create a DSTCL module that incorporates
pump performance may result from changes in fluid viscosity, the Crossformer encoder network into the DCL architecture to
density, and gas-to-liquid ratio [32]. Additionally, long-term better capture spatio-temporal correlations in ESP data.
dynamic behavior is observed as the system responds to The developed DSTCL module comprises two branches:
changes in fluid composition, reservoir pressure, temperature, one dedicated to future forecasting and the other focused
operating conditions, and external factors [33]. Uncertain on future encoding. The future forecasting branch aims to
disturbances can also cause non-stationary fluctuations in map historical ESP time-series segments into predicted future
normal operating conditions. The multivariate monitoring data representations, whereas the future encoding branch serves to
naturally exhibits these complex features, which make ESP encode forthcoming time-series segments to retrieve the actual
anomaly detection extremely difficult. future representation. Unsupervised ESP process modeling can
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Framework of the proposed DSTCL-ATG method.

be accomplished well by minimizing the residuals between c. Each variable will be fed into the multihead self-attention
two distinct future representations. This lays the groundwork (MSA) [24] layer with Hd heads in the cross-time stage
for identifying ESP anomalies based on residual-adaptive h,time
 Ẑ:,c = LN Zh:,c + MSAtime Zh:,c , Zh:,c , Zh:,c
 ˚ 
threshold disparities. (4)
 To be more specific, given a raw ESP time-series data x =
 n h,time  h,time o
 Z h,time
 = LN Ẑ + MLP Ẑ (5)
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xT ] ∈ RC×T , where C represents the number of
variables and T denotes the length of the time series. The where 1 ≤ c ≤ C and LN indicate layer normalization [37].
ESP data x can be partitioned into two components: historical The MSA layer is denoted by MSA(Q, K, V), where Q, K,
segments xh = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x M ] ∈ RC×M and future segments and V represent queries, keys, and values. Every variable has a
x f = [x M+1 , x M+2 , . . . , xT ] ∈ RC×(T −M) , with 0 < M < T . In single MSA layer. Both the MSA and MLP outputs are shown
 h,time
the future forecasting branch, the historical segment xh will be by Ẑ and Zh,time .
fed into an encoder network Gφ to learn the historical latent Following this step, Zh,time records the dependencies
spatio-temporal feature representations Zh,st ∈ RC×M between time-series segments in the same variable. The
 cross-variable stage then uses Zh,time as its input to cap-
 Zh,st = Gφ xh
 
 (1)
 ture cross-variable dependency. In particular, several learnable
where φ are the learnable parameters of the encoder network routers initially aggregate messages from all variables utilizing
Gφ . routers as queries in MSA and all-variable vectors as keys
 In practice, the core architecture of Crossformer is employed and values. After that, the received messages are distributed
here as the encoder network Gφ . The operation details are among variables by routers using variable vectors as queries
presented as follows. xh is first divided into L subsequences, and aggregated messages as keys and values. By doing so, the
represented as xh ∈ RC×L×(M/L) . Then, a multilayer perceptron all-to-all interactions among C variables are built
(MLP) network is used to map them into the embedding  
sequences Xh ∈ RC×L×T d Bhl,: = MSAvar
 1 R h
 l,: , Zh,time
 l,: , Z h,time
 l,: , 1 ≤ l ≤ L (6)
 h,var
  
 Xh = MLP xh Zl,: = MSAvar Zh,time , Bhl,: , Bhl,: , 1 ≤ l ≤ L
 
 (2) 2 l,: (7)
 h,st
  h,var
 
where Td represents the dimension of the embedded sequences Ẑ = LN Zh,time + Z (8)
along the timeline. However, the above embedding sequences  h,st  h,st 
do not mark the sequential order relation of the subsequences; Zh,st = LN Ẑ + MLP Ẑ (9)
therefore, positional embedding Eh ∈ RC×L×T d is added to X h
to generate the tokenized embedding sequences Zh ∈ RC×L×T d where Rh ∈ RL×cons×T d (cons  C is a small constant) is the
 trainable router matrix that dynamically learns to aggregate
 Zh = Xh + Eh . (3) cross-variable information. During the cross-variable atten-
 To facilitate subsequent operations, the first two dimensions tion stage, this matrix first collects global features from all
of Zh are swapped. Zh will be rewritten as Zh ∈ RL×C×T d , variables, as shown in (6), then redistributes them through
which will serve as the input of cross-time and cross-variable attention weights, as shown in (7). Bh ∈ RL×cons×T d represents
 h,var
attention layers in the encoder network of Crossformer. More the aggregated messages from all variables. Z represents
 h,st
detailed, we define Zhl,: as the vectors of all variables at the lth the router’s output. Ẑ and Zh,st signify the output of residual
subsequence, and Zh:,c for those of all subsequences in variable connection and MLP, respectively.
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

 By repeating the above cross-time and cross-variable stages When the model parameters have been learned, the predictor
α times, executing necessary dimension swapping, and rea- output x̂m w.r.t. m ∈ {M + 1, M + 2, . . . , T } can be estimated
sonably selecting MLP parameters, the spatio-temporal feature based on the past M observational data.
representation of the historical segments Zh,st ∈ RC×M can be Remark 1: Notably, the primary contribution of DSTCL lies
obtained. After that, a predicted MLP network Fθ is applied in the integration of the encoder network from Crossformer
 f
to Zh,st to predict the future representation Ẑ ∈ RC×(T −M) into a DCL architecture. This approach facilitates the capture
 f of spatio-temporal dependencies inherent in ESP data and
 Ẑ = Fθ Zh,st
 
 (10) allows for the modeling of normal ESP processes within
where θ denotes the learnable parameters of the MLP network an unsupervised contrastive learning paradigm, which might
Fθ . be conducive to ESP anomaly detection. In addition, two
 Similarly, in the future encoding branch, the future segments key distinctions exist between DSTCL and the previously
x f are directly encoded by the encoder network of Crossformer developed TAN framework [23]. First, while TAN solely
Gφ to generate the actual future representation Z f ∈ RC×(T −M) employs the attention mechanism along the temporal dimension, DSTCL utilizes Crossformer to implement dual attention
 Z f = Gφ x f .
 
 (11)
 mechanisms across both temporal and variable dimensions.
Note that to guarantee that the dimension is appropriate, M is Second, whereas TAN adopts an AE reconstruction architecset to 1/2T in our setup. ture, DSTCL combines unsupervised contrastive learning with
 f
 After obtaining the predicted future representation Ẑ and a single-point prediction architecture. This integrated approach
 f enables more effective acquisition of invariant features in
the actual future representation Z , cosine distance dcos is
employed to evaluate the similarity between these two rep- ESP processes, thereby achieving superior process modeling
resentations. Based on this metric, a loss function L is performance.
formulated to facilitate the ESP spatio-temporal feature representation learning
  f 
 L (φ, θ) = −dcos Ẑ , Z f C. Adaptive Threshold Generation

 T f f The proposed DSTCL module can be used to model the
 1 X Ẑc,m · Zc,m
 =− f
 (12) complex ESP process, but it inevitably learns some uncertain
 T−M Ẑc,m f
 Zc,m disturbances in the modeling process, which will affect the
 m=M+1
 model’s output. In this case, using residuals exceeding the
 f f
where Ẑc,m and Zc,m denote the predicted future representation predetermined threshold for alarms will result in many false
and the actual future representation of the mth time instant in alarms, as the threshold cannot adaptively change in the case
the c spatial dimension, respectively. The notation k·k signifies of uncertain interference, causing significant fluctuations in the
the L2 norm. state of the ESP. In addition, setting the threshold too high can
 Considering that the same encoder network is employed easily miss anomalies, which is very dangerous. Therefore, it
in the real optimization process, model optimization may is crucial to create an ATG method to counteract the negative
inadvertently steer the actual future representation Z f toward effects of interference and improve the ESP anomaly detection
 f
the predicted future representation Ẑ , which is undesirable. performance.
To mitigate this issue, a stop-gradient approach [38] is imple- In general, the threshold is determined by taking the
mented in the future encoding branch. This strategy ensures maximum residual value from the validation set as a fixed
that the encoder network does not receive updates from the reference point. During the testing phase with sample inputs,
actual future representation but only anticipates features based it is anticipated that the model will be capable of distinon historical data. guishing anomalies by employing varying thresholds tailored
 After training the DSTCL module, the historical latent to different inputs. This necessitates that the model generate
spatio-temporal feature representations of ESP Zh,st will be distinct residuals based on these diverse inputs in real time. An
obtained. An MLP network-based single-point predictor Fγ intuitive approach to achieving this goal involves establishing a
will be designed, where the feature representation following regressor mapping between the inputs and their corresponding
the encoded history segment Zh,st is utilized to predict the residuals. In our ATG module, we utilize a random forest
ESP’s single-point operational state after this history segment regressor to build this relationship and train the residual
x̂ M+1 : generator using data from the validation set.
 x̂ M+1 = Fγ Zh,st Specifically, the residual rcval between the predicted state for
 
 (13)
 val
 each spatial feature dimension within the validation set x̂c,m
where γ denotes the learnable parameters of the predictor Fγ . val
 and its corresponding ground truth xc,m is first calculated by
 Finally, the mean square error (mse) between the predicted
single-point operating state x̂m and its actual operating state
 rcval = ˇ x̂c,m
 ˇ val ˇ
 val ˇ
xm serves as the loss function for optimizing the single-point − xc,m (15)
predictor
 val val
 T where x̂c,m , xc,m , and rcval have been appended with the “val”
 1 X
 superscripts to clarify that the computations are derived from
 L (γ) = − k x̂m − xm k22 . (14)
 T−M the validation set. To address the scale discrepancies of
 m=M+1
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

residuals across various spatial features, a robust normalization
technique [39] is employed
 rcval − pval
 r̃cval = c
 (16)
 qval
 c

where pval val
 c and qc are the median and inter-quartile range of
 val
rc , respectively.
 Then, the maximum value of r̃cval across all spatial feature
dimensions is computed
 rval = max r̃cval . (17)
 c

To enhance the robustness of the normalized residual against
disturbances under normal conditions, a simple moving aver- Fig. 3. Flowchart of DSTCL-ATG-based ESP anomaly detection.
age (SMA) approach [40] is used to generate the smoothed
residual rval
 s
 In the offline training phase, the training data xtrain is initially
 s = SMA r
 rval .
 val
 
 (18)
 input into the designed DSTCL module to learn the optimal
Ultimately, the random forest regressor Fψ is trained to create model parameters θ∗ , φ∗ and γ∗ . Subsequently, historical
mappings from xh,val to rval
 s segments of validation data xh,val are processed through the
 well-trained DSTCL module to obtain the predicted states x̂val .
 s = Fψ x
 rval h,val
 
 (19)
 Following this, the smoothed residuals rval s will be computed
where xh,val = [x1val , x2val , . . . , xval
 M] ∈ R
 C×M
 represents the using (15)–(18). Finally, sample pairs constructed from xh,val
historical segments in the validation set that serve as input and rval
 s will be utilized to train the random forest regressorto Fψ , rval
 s denotes the smoothed residual in the validation based ATG module until the optimal parameters ψ∗ are
set that serves as output to Fψ , and ψ refers to the model achieved.
parameters. The number of decision trees in random forest nt In the online detection stage, historical segments of test
and the depth of the decision tree dt are selected according to data xh,test are first fed into the trained DSTCL module to
the performance of anomaly detection. The optimally trained obtain the predicted state x̂test . Then, the smoothed residual
random forest regressor Fψ∗ will be derived by minimizing the rtest is computed using (15)–(18) in the test set. Afterward,
 s
mse between the predicted outputs and the ground truth, which the adaptive threshold Jth is generated according to (19), and
will subsequently be employed to generate adaptive thresholds the empirical statistical principle that nearly 99.73% of data in
during the online detection phase. a Gaussian distribution lies within the µ±3σ range. Motivated
 Remark 2: It should be noted that, in contrast to by this, we incorporate a 3σval margin to enhance disturbance
the XGBoost regressor-based ATA mechanism [23], which mitigation capability
sequentially builds learners with increasing focus on previ-
 Jth = Fψ∗ xh,test + 3σval
 
ously misclassified (potentially noisy) samples, the proposed (20)
random forest regressor-based ATG module employs a bagging where σval represents the standard deviation of the residual of
strategy that trains multiple decision trees independently on the validation set.
bootstrap samples. This ensemble approach inherently reduces Finally, we will assess whether the ESP process exhibits
variance by averaging predictions across diverse learners, any abnormalities in accordance with the following criteria:
thereby mitigating the influence of outliers and noisy data. (
Furthermore, the feature randomness introduced at each split s > Jth
 rtest =⇒ abnormality
 (21)
decorrelates the trees, enhancing the model’s robustness to rtest
 s ≤ Jth =⇒ normality.
noise. These theoretical characteristics collectively make random forest a more noise-tolerant choice for adaptive threshold When an abnormal ESP operating condition is effectively
estimation in ESP anomaly detection. In addition, it requires monitored, the operator can implement appropriate measures
adjustment of only a few key parameters (e.g., number of deci- to avoid potential losses. Detailed processes are summarized
sion trees and maximum depth), while demonstrating smoother in Algorithms 1 and 2.
performance variation across hyperparameter configurations.
This characteristic may significantly enhance ESP’s anomaly IV. E XPERIMENTS
detection capabilities. A. Data Description
 To assess the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
D. DSTCL-ATG-Based ESP Anomaly Detection collect ESP operational data from four distinct anomalous
 The flowchart for ESP anomaly detection, based on the wells belonging to a real production company. These wells are
DSTCL-ATG methodology, is presented in Fig. 3. As indicated designated as #B20H3, #B09ST1, #B18ST1, and #A03ST3,
by the red and blue dotted boxes, the proposed monitoring which correspond to specific faults: emulsification, electrical
framework is organized into two distinct phases: offline train- failure, plugging, and shaft breakage, respectively. Table I
ing and online detection. summarizes the specific time when the exception occurred,
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

 TABLE I
 E XPERIMENTAL DATA D ESCRIPTION

Algorithm 1 Learning Algorithm of DSTCL-ATG TABLE II
Input: M ONITORING VARIABLE D ESCRIPTION
 A mini-batch Dtrain = {xtrain i }i∈[1:N] with N time-series
 samples;
 Initial model parameters φ, θ, γ, and ψ
Output: φ∗ , θ∗ , γ∗ , and ψ∗
 # DSTCL model training
 1: for number of training iterations do
 2: for number of batch sizes do
 3: for xtrain in Dtrain do
 4: xh ,x f = xtrain [:, : M, :],xtrain [:, M + 1 :, :]
 5: Calculate Zh,st and Z f by (1) and (11)
 f
 6: Obtain Ẑ by (10) and stop gradient
 7: Compute L(φ, θ) by (12)
 8: end for
 9: end for
10: Update parameters φ and θ
11: end for
12: Obtain the trained parameters φ∗ and θ∗ B. Experimental Setup
13: Train single-point predictor F γ by (13)–(14) and obtain 1) Baseline Methods: In our experiments, we compare
 the trained parameters γ∗ the proposed method with several state-of-the-art abnormality
 # ATG model training detection techniques, including PCA [16], DEEP-IFOREST
14: Calculate validation set’s residual rval s by (15)–(18) [41], MEMTO [42], NPSR [43], TAN-ATA [23], and STEN
15: Learn the random forest regressor F ψ by (19) [44]. More details of comparative methods are presented
16: Obtain the trained parameters ψ∗ below.
17: return φ∗ , θ∗ , γ∗ , and ψ∗
 1) PCA [16]: PCA facilitates the projection of
 high-dimensional ESP monitoring data into a low-
Algorithm 2 Anomaly Detection Based on DSTCL-ATG dimensional subspace by maximizing the variance of
Input: the predictive dimensions. Ultimately, anomalies are
 Testing data xh,test detected by assessing whether the statistical properties
 Trained parameters φ∗ , θ∗ , γ∗ , and ψ∗ of features in this low-dimensional space exceed
Output: Detection results predefined limits.
 1: Calculate test set’s residual rtest
 s by (15)–(18) 2) Deep isolation forest (DEEP-IFOREST) [41]: To accom-
 2: Generate adaptive threshold Jth by (20) plish anomaly isolation, DEEP-IFOREST employs ran-
 3: Obtain detection results by (21); dom axis-parallel cutting after mapping the original data
 4: return detection results into a random representation set using NNs and utilizes deviation-enhanced anomaly scoring to recognize
 anomalies.
the data sampling time, the monitoring number of variables 3) Memory-guided transformer (MEMTO) [42]: MEMTO
contained in each piece of data, etc. More details of the moni- is a reconstruction-based approach, which incorporates
toring variables are illustrated in Table II, where variables 1-7 a gated memory module, a two-stage training paradigm,
correspond to the production attributes of the oil well, whereas and a bi-dimensional deviation-based detection criterion
variables 8-15 pertain to the operational characteristics of the to achieve time-series anomaly detection.
equipment. It is noteworthy that in all datasets used in our 4) TAN-ATA [23]: TAN with ATA integrates a temporalresearch, there is no overlap between the training and test attention network built upon an LSTM-AE architecture
sets. To enhance the model’s detection effectiveness and data with an XGBoost-regressor-based ATA mechanism,
quality, raw data is scaled using the standard normalization delivering enhanced ESP anomaly detection through this
criterion. hybrid strategy.
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F OUR ESP W ELL DATASETS

 5) NPSR [43]: Nominality score conditioned time-series the timeline Td and the number of Crossformer encoder blocks
 anomaly detection by point/sequential reconstruction α are set to 64 and 1, respectively. In the Crossformer encoder
 (NPSR) is an unsupervised approach that utilizes point- block, L, Hd, and cons are set to 5, 4, and 10, respectively.
 based and sequence-based reconstruction models, which The model is trained via a stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
 outperforms most representative baselines for time- optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-3 and a weight decay of
 series anomaly detection. 1e-4. All experiments are conducted throughout 100 epochs.
 6) Spatial-temporal normality learning (STEN) [44]: STEN In the ATG module, the number of decision trees nt and the
 comprises two distinct modules designed to capture depth of the decision tree dt are set to 100 and 10, respectively.
 the inherent temporal and spatial correlations present All experiments in this work are implemented based on Python
 within sequences. By integrating these two modules, 3.7 with PyTorch 1.8 and performed on Windows 11 with an
 STEN facilitates effective modeling of normal processes, Intel 1 Core 2 GeForce RTX3060 CPU at 2.30 GHz with 16
 thereby enhancing the performance of anomaly detec- GB of RAM.
 tion.
To be more specific, hyperparameters of the baseline meth- C. Comparative Analysis
ods are configured as follows. PCA uses three principal
components. DEEP-IFOREST sets the expected proportion The comparative experimental results of various methods
of anomalies to 0.01. MEMTO employs 32 memory items applied to data from four different wells are summarized in
with an embedding dimension of 64 and initializes without Table III. Generally, a smaller FAR is associated with a larger
memory item embedding. TAN-ATA implements 15 LSTM FDR, and a higher gmean indicates better anomaly detection
units in the output layer, a hidden layer dimension of 64 performance. From the table, it is evident that the Deep
500 trees in XGBoost, and a maximum tree depth of 10. IFOREST, a machine learning-based method, outperforms
NPSR uses a hidden dimension of 64 with one encoder layer. the PCA-based multivariate statistical analysis method in
STEN adopts a temporal hidden dimension of 64, a Trans- ESP anomaly detection. Additionally, the NN-based MEMTO,
former spatial encoder, a mask ratio of 0.1, and one temporal NPSR, and TAN-ATA methods surpass both PCA and Deep
layer. IForest in ESP anomaly monitoring performance, demonstrat-
 2) Evaluation Indicator: In our experiments, the perfor- ing that incorporating the dynamic characteristics of ESPs
mance of anomaly detection is comprehensively assessed using enhances detection performance. TAN-ATA, unlike MEMTO
three metrics: false alarm rate (FAR), fault detection rate and NPSR, employs an adaptive threshold adjustment based
(FDR), and their geometric mean (gmean ), as advocated by on an XGBoost regressor to improve detection performance.
[45]. The formulations for these three indicators are presented This illustrates that the adaptive threshold method is quite
below successful. The STEN method, which takes into account both
 the spatial and temporal characteristics of the data, yields even
 FAR = Nnf /Nn (22) better results. Notably, the proposed DSTCL-ATG method
 FDR = N df N f delivers superior performance compared to other advanced
 ı
 (23)
 p methods, confirming the effectiveness and advantages of
 gmean = FDR × (1 − FAR) (24) the designed DSTCL and random-forest-regressor-based ATG
where N df denotes the number of detected abnormal samples, techniques.
while Nnf indicates the number of normal samples identified
through false alarms. Additionally, N f and Nn represent the D. Effects of the DSTCL
total counts of abnormal and normal samples, respectively.
 Table IV presents the comparative results of the average
 3) Implementation Details: In our studies, we employ the
 residuals between the DSTCL model and the DCL model
sliding window approach to acquire ESP time-series segments,
 on the datasets from four ESP wells. As shown in the table,
with the window size T set to 300 and the M set to 150. In the
DSTCL module, based on the findings from multiple experi- 1 Registered trademark.

ments, the dimensions of the embedded sequences throughout 2 Trademarked.
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF AVERAGE R ESIDUALS W ITH AND W ITHOUT THE C ROSSFORMER IN DSTCL ON F OUR ESP W ELL DATASETS

Fig. 4. Anomaly detection performance of the proposed DSTCL-ATG method on the test set of four different datasets. (a) B20H3, (b) B09ST1, (c) B18ST1,
and (d) A03ST3.

while the average residuals of a few variables are marginally E. Effects of the ATG
higher for certain wells, the residuals produced by the DSTCL
model, enhanced by integrating the Crossformer architecture The anomaly detection performance of the proposed
into the DCL framework, are consistently smaller than those DSTCL-ATG method is intuitively illustrated in Fig. 4. As
of the DCL model. These results indicate that the proposed depicted in Fig. 4, when the ESP experiences an anomaly, the
DSTCL model demonstrates superior accuracy in modeling residuals exceed the adaptive threshold, triggering an alarm.
the normal operational processes of ESP systems. This com- The adaptive threshold is highly effective in mitigating false
parison effectively highlights the enhanced performance and alarms caused by uncertain disturbances during the normal
robustness of the DSTCL model, underscoring its effectiveness operation of the ESP. For instance, in the case of well #B20H3,
and superiority. the DSTCL-ATG method detected an anomaly at 1:23 AM on
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE V
 A BNORMALITY D ETECTION R ESULTS U NDER D IFFERENT T HRESHOLD S ETTINGS

September 13, 2022, approximately 3 h prior to the recorded TABLE VI
anomaly detection time in the field log at 4:20 AM on the same A BLATION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF DSTCL-ATG
day. Similarly, for wells #B09ST1, #B18ST1, and #A03ST1,
the anomaly warning times provided by the DSTCL-ATG
method were approximately 3, 2, and 2.5 h earlier than those
logged manually, respectively. These findings demonstrate the
ability of the proposed method to issue anomaly warnings
significantly earlier, enhancing operational safety and response
efficiency.
 Moreover, we conduct comparative studies on different
threshold-setting strategies, as shown in Table V. Although
methods such as FT, SVR, and RVM achieve relatively high exclusively implements the well-designed DSTCL module
FDR, they result in significantly higher FAR, indicating a while omitting the ATG technique. Method 4 employs TAN as
tendency to raise more false alarms under fluctuating ESP the backbone network to substitute the DSTCL module while
conditions. In addition to these traditional approaches, more integrating the random-forest-regressor-based ATG mechaadvanced uncertainty-based methods like deep Gaussian pro- nism. Method 5 replaces the random forest regressor with
cess (DGP) [46] and Bayesian random forest (BRF) [47] also the XGBoost regressor based on the proposed DSTCL-ATG.
reach high FDR, but their FAR remain elevated. This may be In contrast, the proposed DSTCL-ATG approach integrates
attributed to two key factors: the increased model complexity DSTCL and random-forest-regressor-based ATG effectively.
introduced by the hierarchical structure of DGP and the infer- The ablation experimental method was implemented on
ence variance introduced by the posterior sampling mechanism well #B20H3, and the results for the FAR, FDR, and gmeans
in BRF. Both factors may increase sensitivity to input noise indicators are presented in Table VI. From the results, we can
and elevate the risk of overfitting, consequently impacting draw the following observations.
the stability of predictions during practical deployment. In 1) The performance of Method 3 surpasses that of Method
contrast, the proposed lightweight random-forest-regressor- 2, indicating that the Crossformer encoder is superior
based ATG module achieves consistently high FDR while to the multiscale CNN network in capturing spatiomaintaining the lowest FAR and the highest gmean across all temporal correlations from ESP data.
four ESP well datasets. It provides a better balance between 2) The superiority of Method 3 over Method 2 highlights
detection performance and model simplicity. The use of a the advantages of the DCL architecture.
bagging-based ensemble and a relatively shallow structure 3) The proposed DSTCL-ATG demonstrates better perforcontributes to more stable value estimation and reduced vari- mance than Method 3, revealing the effectiveness of the
ance in threshold prediction, making ATG more suitable for ATG strategy.
deployment in complex ESP operational environments. 4) DSTCL-ATG is superior to Method 4, which confirms
 that the proposed DSTCL module has greater ESP
F. Ablation Study process modeling capability than TAN.
 The proposed DSTCL-ATG technique consists primarily 5) The failure of Method 5 to DSTCL-ATG implies that
of the DCL architecture, Crossformer encoder, and random- the random-forest-regressor-based ATG performs better
forest-regressor-based ATG strategy. The following ablation in ESP anomaly detection than the XGBoost-regressorexperiments were carried out to ensure that each component based ATA in TAN-ATA.
of DSTCL-ATG was effective. Here, Method 1 substitutes the These findings suggest that all designed modules are effec-
Crossformer encoder with a multiscale CNN as the encoder tive in enhancing ESP anomaly detection performance.
network Gφ , without employing the ATG method. Method Furthermore, we conduct an evaluation of the performance
2 utilizes only the Crossformer NN as the ESP feature of ESP anomaly detection under various prediction (including
extractor and does not incorporate either the dual-branch five-step and ten-step forecasting) and reconstruction (includcontrastive learning architecture or the ATG strategy. Method 3 ing full-window reconstruction) strategies employed in the
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF DSTCL-ATG U SING D IFFERENT P REDICTION OR R ECONSTRUCTION S TRATEGIES ON F OUR ESP W ELL DATASETS

 TABLE VIII
 T IME C ONSUMPTION OF DSTCL-ATG U SING D IFFERENT P REDICTION OR R ECONSTRUCTION S TRATEGIES ON F OUR ESP W ELL DATASETS

 TABLE IX
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE OF DSTCL-ATG U NDER D IFFER -
 ENT N UMBERS OF C ROSSFORMER E NCODER B LOCKS

DSTCL module and statistical analysis of time consumption, whose results are presented in Tables VII and VIII,
respectively. It can be seen that the detection performance
and time consumption of all methods are similar, and the
differences are almost negligible. This indicates that ESP Fig. 5. Anomaly detection performance of DSTCL-ATG under different
 dimensions of embedded sequences over time.
anomaly detection is insensitive to different prediction or
reconstruction strategies. Notably, single-point prediction is
inherently simpler; unlike multistep prediction, it does not
require consideration of step selection, and when compared to Table IX. It is evident that a single Crossformer encoder block
full-window reconstruction, it demonstrates superior overall can achieve optimal performance; however, as the number of
performance. Therefore, our framework adopts single-point blocks increases, performance tends to decline. This indicates
prediction as it strikes an optimal balance between model that the overall performance of the model can be improved
simplicity and detection performance. by judiciously selecting the number of Crossformer encoder
 blocks
 2) Effects of the Dimension of Embedded Sequences Over
G. Hyperparameter Selection Time: The impact of the embedded sequence dimension over
 Model performance can be influenced by adjustments to time Td is explored, with results depicted in Fig. 5. It can be
the model’s hyperparameters. In this part, we examine the observed that the model achieves optimal performance when
the following effects: 1) the number of Crossformer encoder Td is set to 64. Furthermore, variations in detection outcomes
blocks α; 2) the dimension of embedded sequences over time are minimal when altering Td, indicating that the proposed
Td; 3) the number of decision trees nt; and 4) the depth of method exhibits a robust insensitivity to the selection of Td.
each decision tree dt. 3) Effects of the Number of Decision Trees: The impact
 1) Effects of the Number of Crossformer Encoder Blocks: of the number of decision trees nt in the random forest
Given the significance of ESP spatiotemporal feature extrac- regressor on detection performance is examined. The corretion, it is essential to investigate how the number of sponding detection results for varying numbers of decision
Crossformer encoder blocks α affects detection outcomes. trees are presented in Fig. 6. Notably, the model utilizing
The influence of different block numbers on the detection 100 decision trees achieves the highest gmean . Conversely,
performance is investigated, and the results are shown in when nt is set either too low or excessively high, a marked
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 real-world data from four distinct ESP failure wells, demonstrating its effectiveness and superiority. Looking ahead, future
 research will focus on advancing ESP anomaly detection
 methods that are driven by both data and domain knowledge.
 For instance, domain knowledge is incorporated into the
 optimization function of the contrastive learning framework
 via a regularization mechanism. This integration facilitates the
 influence of mechanistic knowledge on the learning process
 of the data-driven model. The robustness and generalization
 performance of the model can be assessed through experiments
 conducted in electric pump wells across various oil fields.

Fig. 6. Anomaly detection performance of DSTCL-ATG under different
 R EFERENCES
numbers of decision trees.
 [1] K. E. Brown, “Overview of artificial lift systems,” J. Petroleum Technol.,
 vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 2384–2396, Oct. 1982.
 [2] X. Liang, J. He, and L. Du, “Electrical submersible pump system
 grounding: Current practice and future trend,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl.,
 vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 5030–5037, Nov. 2015.
 [3] X. Yuan et al., “Variable correlation analysis-based convolutional neural
 network for far topological feature extraction and industrial predictive
 modeling,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
 [4] K. Peng, J. Wang, H. Yang, and X. Qin, “A semi-supervised quality
 soft sensing method under multiple operating conditions for complex
 product manufacturing processes,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
 pp. 1–14, 2024.
 [5] F. M. Varejão, L. H. Sousa Mello, M. Pellegrini Ribeiro, T. Oliveira-
 Santos, and A. Loureiros Rodrigues, “An open source experimental
 framework and public dataset for vibration-based fault diagnosis of
 electrical submersible pumps used on offshore oil exploration,” Knowl.-
 Based Syst., vol. 288, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 111452.
 [6] R. Abdalla, H. Samara, N. Perozo, C. P. Carvajal, and P. Jaeger,
 “Machine learning approach for predictive maintenance of the elec-
Fig. 7. Anomaly detection performance of DSTCL-ATG at different depths trical submersible pumps (ESPs),” ACS Omega, vol. 7, no. 21,
of decision tree. pp. 17641–17651, May 2022.
 [7] RP 11S, Recommended Practice for the Operation, Maintenance and
 Troubleshooting of Electric Submersible Pump Installations. 1st ed.,
 American Petroleum Institute, Dallas, TX, USA, May 1986.
decline in performance occurs. This observation underscores [8] M. O. Durham and J. F. Lea, “Survey of electrical submersible systems
that optimizing the number of decision trees nt can enhance design, application, and testing,” SPE Prod. Facilities, vol. 11, no. 2,
model performance. pp. 102–107, May 1996.
 [9] Q. Li, “The method of determining string leakage in electric pump well
 4) Effects of the Depth of Decision Tree: The impact of the by holding pressure curve,” Petroleum Geol. Develop. Daqing, vol. 8,
depth dt of each decision tree in the random forest regressor no. 2, pp. 57–59, 1989.
on the detection performance is studied. Fig. 7 displays the [10] G. Han, M. Chen, H. Zhang, and K. Ling, “Real-time monitoring and
 diagnosis of electrical submersible pump,” in Proc. SPE Annu. Tech.
detection results with different depths of decision trees. It Conf. Exhib., Sep. 2015, pp. 1–21.
is noteworthy that the model achieved the best detection [11] B. Wang, G. Han, X. Lu, and S. Tan, “Rapid pattern recognition
performance when the depth of each decision tree is set to 10. of electric submersible pump ammeter card based on artificial neural
 network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Exp. Eng. Sci., Aug. 2022,
On the other hand, the performance shows varying degrees of pp. 39–55.
degradation when the dt is set too low or too high, indicating [12] H. Guoqing and Z. Biao, “Working condition diagnosis of esp well based
that choosing the appropriate dt can improve the detection on wellhead pressure-out analysis,” Oil Drilling Prod. Technol., vol. 38,
 no. 4, pp. 514–518, 2016.
performance.
 [13] J. Yang et al., “Fault diagnosis method and application of ESP well
 based on SPC rules and real-time data fusion,” Math. Problems Eng.,
 vol. 2022, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 8497299.
 V. C ONCLUSION [14] J. Chen, W. Li, P. Yang, B. Chen, and S. Li, “Prediction and classification
 This article proposes a novel DSTCL-ATG method for of faults in electric submersible pumps,” AIP Adv., vol. 12, no. 4,
 pp. 1–24, Apr. 2022.
ESP anomaly detection. To effectively model the complex [15] M. B. Castellanos, A. L. Serpa, J. L. Biazussi, W. Monte Verde, and
dynamic behaviors of ESP during normal operation, the DCL N. do Socorro Dias Arrifano Sassim, “Fault identification using a chain
architecture is employed, and the Crossformer encoder is of decision trees in an electrical submersible pump operating in a liquidgas flow,” J. Petroleum Sci. Eng., vol. 184, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 106490.
integrated to capture the spatio-temporal coupling charac- [16] L. Peng, G. Han, A. Landjobo Pagou, and J. Shu, “Electric submersible
teristics of ESP data, enhancing the modeling performance. pump broken shaft fault diagnosis based on principal component
Furthermore, a random-forest-regressor-based ATG strategy is analysis,” J. Petroleum Sci. Eng., vol. 191, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 107154.
 [17] Q. Li, J. Fu, R. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Li, and X. Gao, “Electric submersible
developed, enabling real-time generation of adaptive thresh- pump anomaly monitoring based on unsupervised multivariate streaming
olds to mitigate false alarms caused by fluctuations in ESP data analysis,” in Proc. CAA Symp. Fault Detection, Supervision Saf.
states. The proposed method is rigorously validated using Tech. Processes (SAFEPROCESS), Sep. 2023, pp. 1–6.
LI et al.: DSTCL NETWORK WITH ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD GENERATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION OF ESP 3548914

[18] O. A. Alamu, D. A. Pandya, O. Warner, and I. Debacker, “ESP data [41] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for
 analytics: Use of deep autoencoders for intelligent surveillance of anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 electric submersible pumps,” in Proc. Offshore Technol. Conf., May pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023.
 2020, pp. 1–24. [42] J. Song, K. Kim, J. Oh, and S. Cho, “MEMTO: Memory-guided
[19] X. Gao, Y. Zhang, and J. Zhou, “Improved dynamic kernel PCA transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 based on local preserving projections and its application for electric Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023, pp. 57947–57963.
 submersible pump fault diagnosis,” Can. J. Chem. Eng., vol. 101, no. 8, [43] C.-Y. A. Lai, F.-K. Sun, Z. Gao, J. H. Lang, and D. Boning, “Nominality
 pp. 4539–4554, 2023. score conditioned time series anomaly detection by point/sequential
[20] L. R. Medsker and L. Jain, “Recurrent neural networks,” Des. Appl., reconstruction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2024,
 vol. 5, nos. 64–67, p. 2, 2001. pp. 1–19.
[21] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation [44] Y. Chen, H. Xu, G. Pang, H. Qiao, Y. Zhou, and M. Shang, “Selfof gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014, supervised spatial–temporal normality learning for time series anomaly
 arXiv:1412.3555. detection,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery
[22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Databases. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 145–162.
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. [45] K. Li, T. Zhang, W. Dong, and H. Ye, “Abnormality detection of blast
[23] Q. Li, K. Li, X. Gao, J. Fu, and L. Zhang, “Anomaly detection based furnace ironmaking process based on an improved diffusion convoon temporal attention network with adaptive threshold adjustment for lutional gated recurrent unit network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 electrical submersible pump,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
 pp. 1–14, 2024. [46] A. Damianou and N. D. Lawrence, “Deep Gaussian processes,” in Proc.
 Artif. Intell. Statist., 2013, pp. 207–215.
[24] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 [47] J. Guo, X. Zan, L. Wang, L. Lei, C. Ou, and S. Bai, “A random forest
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
 regression with Bayesian optimization-based method for fatigue strength
[25] M. Xu et al., “Spatial–temporal transformer networks for traffic flow prediction of ferrous alloys,” Eng. Fract. Mech., vol. 293, Dec. 2023,
 forecasting,” 2020, arXiv:2001.02908. Art. no. 109714.
[26] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “Crossformer: Transformer utilizing crossdimension dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc.
 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
[27] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[28] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual Kang Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly in automation from Central South University, Changdetection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery sha, Hunan, China, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree
 Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045. in control theory and control engineering from the
 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sci-
[29] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
 ences (IACAS), Beijing, China, in 2019.
 “CARLA: Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for time
 He has been a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with
 series anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 157, Jan. 2025, Art.
 the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
 no. 110874.
 Beijing, since 2021. He is currently an Assistant
[30] H. Chen, H. Liu, X. Chu, Q. Liu, and D. Xue, “Anomaly detection
 Professor with the Department of Automation, China
 and critical SCADA parameters identification for wind turbines based
 University of Petroleum, Beijing. His research interon LSTM-AE neural network,” Renew. Energy, vol. 172, pp. 829–840,
 ests include artificial intelligence and deep learning and their applications to
 Jul. 2021.
 data-driven fault diagnosis, human–robot interaction, and robotic vision.
[31] L. Wei, Z. Qian, and H. Zareipour, “Wind turbine pitch system condition monitoring and fault detection based on optimized relevance
 vector machine regression,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 11, no. 4,
 pp. 2326–2336, Oct. 2020.
[32] D. M. M. Ricardo, G. E. C. Jiménez, J. V. Ferreira, and P. S. Meirelles,
 “Multiphase gas-flow model of an electrical submersible pump,” Oil
 Gas Sci. Technol.–Revue d’IFP Energies Nouvelles, vol. 73, p. 29, May
 2018. Shuang Li received the B.E. degree in automation
 from the School of Electrical and Information Engi-
[33] J. P. Jordanou, I. Osnes, S. B. Hernes, E. Camponogara, E. A. Antonelo,
 neering, Hunan University of Technology, Zhuzhou,
 and L. Imsland, “Nonlinear model predictive control of electrical sub-
 China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the master’s
 mersible pumps based on echo state networks,” Adv. Eng. Informat.,
 degree in control science and engineering with China
 vol. 52, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 101553.
 University of Petroleum, Beijing, China.
[34] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning His current research interests include deep learnvia non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. ing and artificial intelligence and their applications
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742. in data-driven and industrial fault diagnosis.
[35] S. Hao, Z. Wang, A. D. Alexander, J. Yuan, and W. Zhang, “MICOS:
 Mixed supervised contrastive learning for multivariate time series
 classification,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 260, Jan. 2023, Art. no.
 110158.
[36] X. Zheng, X. Chen, M. Schürch, A. Mollaysa, A. Allam, and
 M. Krauthammer, “Simple contrastive representation learning for time
 series forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2303.18205.
[37] J. Lei Ba, J. Ryan Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016, Qiang Li received the B.E. degree in automation
 arXiv:1607.06450. and the M.S. degree in control engineering from the
[38] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” College of Automation and Information Engineerin Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit., Jun. ing, Sichuan University of Science and Engineering,
 2021, pp. 15750–15758. Zigong, China, in 2019 and 2022, respectively. He
[39] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, science and engineering with China University of
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035. Petroleum, Beijing, China.
[40] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and His current research interests include deep learn-
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and ing and artificial intelligence and their applications
 nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. in equipment safety maintenance and system health
 Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395. assessment.
3548914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Zhikuan Jiao received the B.E. degree in automa- Xiaoyong Gao received the B.E. degree in automation from the College of Information Science and tion from China University of Petroleum (East
 Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Bei- China), Dongying, China, in 2007, and the M.S. and
 jing, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degrees in control science and engineering
 M.S. degree in control theory and control engineer- from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2010
 ing with China University of Petroleum. and 2014, respectively.
 His current research interests include deep learn- He was an Exchange Visitor at the University of
 ing and artificial intelligence and their applications Surrey, Guildford, U.K., in 2013, and was a Postin industrial fault diagnosis. Doctoral Fellow at the Department of Automation,
 Tsinghua University, from 2014 to 2016. From 2020
 to 2024, he was an Associate Professor at the College of Information Science and Engineering/College of Artificial Intelligence,
 China University of Petroleum, Beijing. Since 2024, he has been a Professor
 with the College of Artificial Intelligence, China University of Petroleum.
 His research interests include fault prognosis, modeling of complex industrial
 processes, and scheduling optimization.

 Laibin Zhang received the B.E. and M.S. degrees
 in petroleum mechanical engineering and the Ph.D.
 degree in mechanical engineering from China University of Petroleum, Beijing, China, in 1982, 1985,
 Jun Fu received the B.E. degree in automation and and 1991, respectively.
 the M.S. degree in oil and gas field development He is currently associated with the College of
 from China University of Petroleum (East China), Safety and Ocean Engineering, China University of
 Dongying, China, in 2007 and 2012, respectively. Petroleum. He is an Academician at the Chinese
 Since 2012, he has been working at the Engineer- Academy of Engineering, Beijing, and the Direcing Technology Branch, CNOOC Energy Developtor of the Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Safety
 ment Company Ltd., Tianjin, China, where he was and Emergency Technology, Ministry of Emergency
 first engaged in the design of mechanical produc- Management. His research interests include fault diagnosis and safety engition processes and the research and development of neering.
 artificial lifting products. Since 2019, he has been Dr. Zhang was the Vice Chairman of the China Association for Public
 a Senior Engineer in oil recovery engineering. In Safety. He was a recipient of the Distinguished Member of the International
2021, he was in charge at the Design and Development Department, focusing Society of Petroleum Engineers and the Sun Yueqi Energy Science and
on carrying out special technical improvements to extend the life of electric Technology Award.
submersible pumps.