IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025 317

Dual Temporal Masked Modeling for KPI Anomaly
 Detection via Similarity Aggregation
 Ting Yu , Zijian Gao , Kele Xu , Xu Wang , Peichang Shi , Bo Ding , and Dawei Feng

 Abstract—With the expanding scale of current industries, is essential for preventing potential risks, mitigating economic
monitoring systems centered around Key Performance Indicators losses, and maintaining overall safety [8]. Common monitoring
(KPIs) play an increasingly crucial role. KPI anomaly detection techniques encompass the utilization of KPIs and the analysis
can monitor the potential risks according to KPI data and has
garnered widespread attention due to its rapid responsiveness of logs and trace data. Considering the dynamic nature and
and adaptability to dynamic changes. Considering the absence time sensitivity of these systems, many opt for monitoring
of labels and the high cost of manual annotation of KPI strategies centered around KPIs.
data, the self-supervised approaches are proposed. Among them, KPIs, often time series data, face anomaly detection chalmask modeling methods draw great attention and can learn lenges due to scarce labeled data and high labeling costs
the intrinsic distribution of data without relying on prior
assumptions. However, conventional mask modeling often over- in large-scale systems [9]. Consequently, many KPI anomaly
looks the examination of relationships between unsynchronized detection algorithms resort to unsupervised methods, assuming
variables, treating them with equal importance, and inducing anomalies are hard to reconstruct or predict such as [10]
inaccurate detection results. To address this, this paper proposes and [11]. The disparity between the reconstructed or predicted
a Dual Masked modeling Approach combined with Similarity data and the original data is utilized as the anomaly score
Aggregation, named DMASA. Starting from a self-supervised
approach based on mask modeling, DMASA incorporates spec- and performs well under the assumption of Gaussian noise.
tral residual techniques to explore inter-variable dependencies Performance can falter with complex, non-Gaussian noise [12],
and aggregates information from similar data to eliminate especially in fluctuating time series data where differentiinterference from irrelevant variables in anomaly detection. ating anomalies is tough. Hence, some methods attempt to
Extensive experiments on eight datasets and state-of-the-art incorporate certain supervised information, as demonstrated
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Our code
is available at https://github.com/colaudiolab/GT-DMASA. by Huang et al. [13], who combine active learning and
 variational autoencoders to boost accuracy. However, these
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, key performance indicators, approaches necessitate a prior hypothesis of the data. A
self-supervised learning, monitoring.
 more universal and convenient choice would be a method
 capable of autonomously extracting features from the data
 itself.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Defining anomalies is intricate, often involving outliers
 N CONTEMPORARY industrial landscape, the continu- with unusual data patterns [14] that necessitate contextual
I ous expansion of infrastructure, and the proliferation of
sensors underscore the significance of monitoring systems.
 consideration [15]. For example, seasonal variations in power
 system operations can affect anomaly assessment. A com-
Employing monitoring systems is crucial for ensuring the prehensive evaluation, including frequency domain insights,
continuous and reliable operation of diverse systems, includ- is crucial. Microsoft [4] employs spectral residual for proing financial systems [1], [2], Internet-based online service cessing one-dimensional KPIs, introducing frequency domain
systems [3], [4], and critical infrastructures such as network information to aid in anomaly identification. Park et al. [16]
systems [5], [6] and water treatment facilities [7]. For exam- refine the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) by computing only
ple, Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), in the context of a subset of Fourier coefficients to expedite computation. The
network security, encompass a wide array of data points, such incorporation of frequency domain information contributes to
as login failures, unusual data transfers, and unauthorized enhancing detection effectiveness.
access attempts, which are vital for detecting anomalies that Additionally, monitoring data’s multidimensionality introcould signify security breaches or system irregularities. This duces complex interdependencies among time and indicator
 dimensions [17]. Taking the IT operations domain as an
 Received 27 January 2024; revised 30 July 2024 and 19 October 2024; example, as depicted in Figure 1, similar indicator types like
accepted 19 October 2024. Date of publication 24 October 2024; date of
current version 14 March 2025. This paper is Supported by the National Key CPU usage and load show related patterns, yet many methods
Research and Development Program of China (No. 2021ZD0112904). The incorrectly equate their correlation with dissimilar indicators
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for such as disk and database metrics. Especially in anomaly
publication was Y. Diao. (Ting Yu and Zijian Gao contributed equally to this
work.) (Corresponding author: Kele Xu.) detection, not all indicators exhibit anomalies simultaneously.
 The authors are with the College of Computer, National University of Given the multitude of metrics in monitoring systems, treating
Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China, and also with the State Key various indicators equally may result in the features of indi-
Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University,
Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: xukelele@163.com). cators undergoing significant changes being submerged within
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3486167 numerous data points where no substantial changes have
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 across variables. Our main contributions can be distilled to the
 following points:
 1. We introduce a novel anomaly detection approach that
 integrates mask modeling to adaptly capture the inherent structure of KPI data through self-supervised learning, overcoming
 the challenge of sparse labeling.
 2. By utilizing spectral residual in conjunction with
 frequency-domain insights, our method bolsters the identification of anomalies, allowing for prompt detection and precise
 delineation of anomalous patterns.
 3. Our model incorporates similarity aggregation to segregate irrelevant variables, ensuring that only closely related
 variables contribute to the reconstruction process. This refines
 the detection of anomalies without being obscured by unrelated data.
 4. The vast majority of state-of-the-art experimental results
 obtained on eight datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and
 competitiveness of our proposed method.
 The remaining sections of this paper are organized as fol-
Fig. 1. Partial indicators obtained from an entity within the Internet lows. Section II provides a concise overview of KPI anomaly
monitoring system. The segments highlighted in red denote anomalies. Not
all metrics are in an anomalous state when anomalies occur. The variables
 detection, the utilization of self-supervised methods in time
indicated by red arrows have experienced anomalies, while those indicated series anomaly detection, and the application of Transformers
by green arrows have not exhibited significant changes. In particular, the in time series analysis. In Section III, we provide a detailed
Transformer structure facilitates extensive information exchange among different variables. Treating all variables equally may result in the changes occurring
 introduction to our DMASA method. Section IV comprehenin anomalous indicators being averaged, potentially making it challenging to sively outlines the experimental details and analyzes the results
identify anomalous states comprehensively. of our approach. The article culminates with a conclusion that
 encapsulates our findings, contributions, and future works.

occurred, hindering timely anomaly capture. Exploring the II. R ELATED W ORK
correlations between variables and mitigating the interference Operation and maintenance monitoring system analysis data
of irrelevant variables on those experiencing anomalies can comprise KPI data, logs, traces, and other relevant information,
contribute to enhancing detection accuracy. and KPI data draws widespread attention due to its capacity to
 To address the challenges mentioned earlier, we propose the effectively address dynamic changes in complex systems and
KPI anomaly detection method DMASA. First, the method facilitate prompt responses. First, we review self-supervised
tackles the issue of limited labels in KPI data by using self- methods for unlabeled KPI data. Furthermore, recognizing the
supervised mask modeling. In contrast to contrastive learning, predominance of masking and predictive techniques within the
relying on prior assumptions and may introduce inductive Transformer framework in current self-supervised methods, we
bias, mask modeling excavates information from the data to offer a comprehensive review of their application to time series
learn richer representations with better generality. Secondly, it data. Subsequently, we delve into the specifics of KPI anomaly
introduces frequency-domain information to identify anoma- detection, self-supervised methods for time series anomaly
lies from multiple perspectives based on spectral residual, detection, and the utilization of Transformer-based strategies
which highlights anomalies by accentuating deviations from in time series analysis.
the frequency domain mean and enhances detection accuracy KPI Anomaly Detection: KPI data fundamentally is continand timeliness. This helps the model in rapidly identifying uous time series data. Consequently, we will review methods
the starting point of anomalies and capturing them earlier. designed for anomaly detection in time series data. They can
Additionally, the distinct boundaries facilitate the observation be broadly categorized into statistical approaches, classical
of whether anomalies occur simultaneously across different machine learning algorithms, and deep learning methods.
variables. Statistical methods, including mean-based approaches, feature
 Furthermore, treating all variables as equivalent may result prominently in this domain, with classic methods such as
in interference of irrelevant variables. Especially for models moving average [19] and Autoregression [20], autoregresemploying the Transformer method, akin to the “over- sive integrated moving average, and exponentially weighted
smoothing” issue [18], with the stacking of Transformer layers, moving average [21] being extensively explored. Classical
variables tend to become increasingly similar, implying that machine learning algorithms, such as K-means [22], support
local anomalous trends are flattened. Thus, DMASA intro- vector machines [23], GBRT [24], and Gaussian Mixture
duces similarity aggregation to segregate irrelevant variables, Models [25], have also found applications. Deep learning
preventing the dilution of anomaly signals and ensuring that methods encompass various network structures, including
only related variables influence the detection process. This autoencoders [26], variational autoencoders (VAE) [27],
targeted approach helps maintain the clarity of anomaly trends temporal convolutional networks [28], recurrent neural
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 319

Fig. 2. DMASA network structure. Transformer Structure Combining Similarity Aggregation (Left): Following spectral residual processing, the unmasked
sequence learns similarity relationships and embeddings. The masked sequence segment acquires hidden layer data through one-dimensional convolution.
Both components are then integrated and fed into the Transformer block, where the attention mechanism incorporates the learned similarity relationships for
information fusion. The sequence is ultimately reconstructed after this process.

networks (RNN) [29], [30], long short-term memory networks in handling sequential data, including text and audio.
(LSTM) [31], graph neural networks [7], and Transformers. Consequently, they have attracted considerable attention
These methods operate under both supervised and unsu- from researchers in the time series domain. Approaches like
pervised training paradigms. Supervised methods include FEDformer [40] and PatchTST [41] have shown progress in
EGADS [32] and Opprentice [33], while prevalent unsu- time series prediction. In the realm of time series anomaly
pervised methods include OmniAnomaly [29], GDN [7], detection, Anomaly Transformer [35], AnomalyBERT [36],
TranAD [34], and Anomaly Transformer [35]. DCdetector [42], and others have achieved notable results.
 Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods for Time The application of Transformers in both prediction and
Series: KPIs are predominantly characterized by unlabeled anomaly detection signifies their versatility and effectiveness
time series data. Self-supervised methods excel at distilling in handling diverse time series tasks.
meaningful information from extensive data, thereby providing
a robust representation for further analytical tasks. In the III. A PPROACH
context of time series anomaly detection, self-supervised tech- A. Notation
niques predominantly harness contrastive learning strategies.
 KPI anomaly detection involves collecting metrics from
For example, AnomalyBERT [36] defines and employs four
 monitored systems, with the aim of analyzing whether the
types of methods to synthesize anomalous values, distinguishsystem is in an abnormal state. Let d represent the numing positive and negative samples by replacing certain data
 ber of variables and T1 denote the length of the training
with anomalous data. TimeAutoAd [37] uses three different
 data. We train on the given unlabeled KPI data X  train =
strategies to augment training data for generating pseudo-
 (x1 , x2 , . . . , xi , . . . , xT1 ). For evaluation, we use the test set
negative time series and utilizes self-supervised contrastive
 Xtest for unsupervised assessment. We assess the model’s
loss to differentiate between original and generated time
 performance by comparing its predictions with the test labels
series. CSL [38] utilizes a shapelet-based encoder, incorpo-
 Ytest = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yi , . . . , yT2 ), where yi ∈ {0, 1}. Here, 0
rating multi-grained contrasting, multi-scale alignment, and a
 indicates a normal state and 1 indicates an abnormal state.
data augmentation library to learn time series features in a
comprehensive manner. CTAD [39] incorporates seven types
of general time-series data augmentation methods from the B. Overall Framework
perspectives of variables and points, integrating a one-class Our approach employs a self-supervised approach grounded
learning approach into the contrastive learning loss. Despite in masked modeling to distill essential features from KPI data.
the promising results of contrastive learning methods, they Recognizing that KPI changes may not be synchronous across
are not without limitations. The introduction of inductive variables, our framework is designed to capture the interbias based on researchers’ prior assumptions can lead to variable relationships, which is crucial for reducing the impact
performance inconsistencies when applied to time series data of irrelevant variables on the anomaly detection process. To
with different characteristics, as seen in the augmentation achieve this, we integrate the learning of similarity relations
strategies employed by AnomalyBERT and TimeAutoAd. and apply spectral residual methods to enhance the under-
However, when transferred to time series problems in other standing of inter-variable dynamics and emphasize temporal
domains with inconsistent data characteristics and prior changes.
assumptions, model performance can significantly decline. As depicted in Figure 2, our model initiates with the spectral
 Transformer Architecture for Time Series Analysis: residual enhancement of the data, which is then merged with
Transformers have demonstrated remarkable success the original sequence. This processed data is directed into
320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

two parallel components: Similarity Relation Learning and
Random Masking. The Similarity Relation Learning module
is tasked with identifying the relationships between variables,
while the Random Masking module, following the application
of random masks, is directed into a one-dimensional convolutional network to project the input data effectively. The outputs
of these components are then consolidated and channeled
into the Transformer module, where the similarity relation
insights are deployed to modulate self-attention mechanisms.
This strategic integration ensures that the model focuses on
relevant connections between variables. This process is the
reconstruction of the sequence, which is refined through minimizing reconstruction error, thereby optimizing the network’s
performance. Fig. 3. Example of spectral residual results. The red points indicate
 In the subsequent sections, we will delve deeper into the anomalous data points. Following the application of spectral residual, the
intricacies of each component and elucidate their synergistic anomalous points are magnified.
contribution to the anomaly detection framework.
 A(f ) = Amplitude(F(x)), (2)
C. Enhancing Data With Spectral Residual P (f ) = Phase(F(x)), (3)
 Anomalies, by nature, present a complex challenge to define R(f ) = log(A(f )) − Ip (f ) · log(A(f )), (4)
  
and detect within data sets. In the context of KPI anomaly  
detection, while a certain degree of detection latency (the S (x) = F−1 (exp(R(f ) + iP (f ))), (5)
time lag between the anomaly’s actual occurrence and its
 where F and F−1 denote Fourier Transform and Inverse
identification) might be tolerated, our goal is to minimize this
 Fourier Transform respectively. x is the input sequence of
delay to ensure the timeliness of monitoring systems. To boost
 shape n × 1. A(f ) is the amplitude spectrum of sequence
the detection capabilities, we introduce the spectral residual
 x. P(f ) represents the corresponding phase spectrum of the
method, which combines spectral information to amplify
 sequence. Ip (f ) is a local average filter of a p × p matrix,
the deviation between each data point and the frequencyin which each element is p12 , to convolute the input sequence
domain mean of its preceding data within a window. It is
well-established that the frequency attributes of normal data log(A(f )).
differ markedly from those of anomalous data. When an Following spectral residual operations, the data exhibits
anomaly emerges, the spectral residual method accentuates the the characteristics illustrated in the accompanying Figure 3.
divergence of the affected segment from the normal segment As observed, spectral residual amplifies the deviation of
that precedes it, in terms of the frequency-domain mean. data from the frequency domain baseline. If a point is an
This amplification allows our network to more accurately anomaly, it will exhibit more pronounced behavior along the
and swiftly detect the onset of an anomaly, thereby reducing temporal dimension. Additionally, if multiple variables change
detection latency. simultaneously at a certain moment, it indicates a potentially
 In multivariate scenarios, the spectral residual method closer relationship among them. The spectral residual method
further aids in identifying anomalies by accentuating their fluc- amplifies such changes, thereby distinguishing them from
tuations, which in turn promotes the clustering of these points. other variables that do not change synchronously, aiding in
This clustering facilitates the recognition of analogous patterns capturing the connections between variables.
across variable fluctuations. Synchronous anomalies across
variables suggest a heightened correlation between them, D. Partitioning Variables Through Similarity Relationships
which is beneficial for our subsequent similarity aggregation For KPI data, each dimension encapsulates a distinct metric
processes. Our approach considers each of the d dimensions or sensor, with each KPI exhibiting its own unique traits. The
in the multivariate data as an independent univariate dataset, interplay among various features is often intricate. Consider a
applying spectral residual operations to each one individually. software operation system, where CPU-related metrics might
By adding the spectral residual to the original data, we fluctuate independently of database metrics. Similarly, in a
effectively increase the deviation of each data point, enhancing water treatment system, the levels indicated by water level
the model’s sensitivity to anomalies. This methodical enhance- sensors may not consistently align with those of temperature
ment of the data not only refines the detection process but sensors. In the realm of anomaly detection, it’s crucial to
also enriches the model’s ability to discern meaningful patterns recognize that anomalies across different variables are not
within the data. The process is shown in Equation (1): uniformly synchronized. Applying a one-size-fits-all approach
   to variable analysis could potentially obscure the distinctive
 Xtrain = X  train + SR X  train , (1) features of variables that exhibit anomalies, especially when
 other variables show no signs of anomalies. To counteract
where the process of SR is described by Equations (2)-(5): this, it’s imperative to understand and leverage the underlying
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 321

dependencies between variables. This understanding allows in the temporal dimension. Random masking involves indepenfor the aggregation of similar metrics, thereby minimizing the dently selecting data in the time dimension with a proportion
interference from irrelevant variables. r for masking across different variable dimensions. That is,
 To achieve this, our methodology employs a learning a proportion r of the data is masked in the time dimension,
process that discerns and respects the complex relationships and variables at the same time may not necessarily be
between variables. By doing so, it ensures that the anomaly simultaneously masked across different variable dimensions.
detection process is both sensitive and specific, acknowledging We take the window data X = [xt , xt+1 , . . . , xt+w −1 ] as
the unique characteristics of each KPI while identifying the input. Let the mask matrix be denoted as M, which is a binary
subtleties of anomalies within their respective contexts. This matrix with elements 0 and 1. The proportion of 0s in each
approach is essential for developing a nuanced and effective row is r, and it is of the same dimension as X. After applying
anomaly detection system that can accurately interpret and the mask, the updated representation X is as shown in the
respond to the multifaceted nature of KPI data. Equation (9):
 Inspired by the graph neural network approach GDN [7],
we employ a graph adjacency matrix to describe variable rela- X := M  X , (9)
tionships. First, if we have prior knowledge about relationships
between different metrics, we can incorporate this knowledge
 where  represents element-wise multiplication. The
into the graph structure. Let Aij represent the adjacency matrix
 one-dimensional convolution in the temporal dimension
indicating relationships between different variables, where
 captures dependencies in the time series while also serving as
Aij = 1 indicates an edge from variable i to j, signifying an
 a method for input projection. It is important to note that we
influence from variable i to j. However, in many cases, we
 process each variable separately, and the 1D-CNN is solely
may not have prior knowledge about the relationships between
 used to capture dependencies in a single dimension, as shown
variables. We need to learn the proximity information from the
 in the Equation (10),
data. Initially, we utilize Embedding(·) network to characterize
each dimension of the variable x and get the embedding ei ,
 X  = 1D − Conv (X ). (10)
 dmodel
 ei ∈ R , for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , d }. (6)

 Then, assess the proximity between variables by measuring F. Isolating Irrelevant Variables Through Similarity
cosine similarity, Aggregation
 Transformer-based models excel in sequence tasks and
 ei ej
 vji =   , for j = i . (7) are prevalent in sequence modeling. Yet, a common chal-
 ||ei || · ej  lenge arises with deep Transformers: as layers accumulate,
 Aji = 1, j ∈ Top − k ({vki : k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , d }\{i }}). (8) information fusion can homogenize variables, obscuring
 anomalous trends. In cases where only a subset of system
 We calculate the cosine similarity between embeddings for components malfunction, while others remain normal, the
each pair of variables, and for each variable, we select the extensive interaction can mask the anomalies, leading to a false
k variables corresponding to the embeddings with the highest sense of normalcy and potential false negatives in monitoring.
similarity as neighbors. This indicates that these k neighbors To address this, we refine the Transformer architecture
are the variables most likely to influence it. The learning of by limiting information fusion to closely related variables,
embeddings ei and the adjacency matrix Aij will be utilized thereby preserving the distinctiveness of anomalies. We intein subsequent information fusion using Transformer. grate the Transformer with learned similarity relations to
 selectively fuse information, enhancing the model’s ability to
E. Self-Supervised Learning via Mask Modeling detect anomalies without being confounded by normal data
 KPI data, as a kind of time series data, exhibits temporal variability. This nuanced approach ensures that only pertinent
redundancy. As we claimed, some reconstruction methods variables influence the anomaly detection process, improving
assume that anomalies are challenging to identify based on the model’s accuracy and reliability.
reconstruction errors. However, the potent fitting capability of In comparison to a standard Transformer, our enhancements
neural networks and the temporal redundancy in time series are primarily focused on the self-attention mechanism. Here,
data make the reconstruction of anomalies less challenging. ed ], we use a linear
 assuming E = [e1 , e2 , . . . , ei , . . . ,  trans-
Conventional contrastive learning methods construct positive formation W3 X  for value V, E W1 X  and E W2 X
and negative samples and introduce inductive bias, limiting its as query Q and key K for self-attention calculation. Note that
universality and performance in various scenarios, as well as the components at corresponding positions of E and W1 X 
its transferability and generalization capabilities. To deal with represent the same variables. Moreover, attention needs to
it, we introduce mask modeling, starting from the distribution incorporate the adjacency matrix A, with the attention matrix
of the data itself, which achieves excellent results without result being valid only when Aij = 1. As shown in the
additional assumptions about the data. following Equation (11),
 In this process, the primary steps of the model involve
random masking and one-dimensional convolution processing Z = softmax (AQK T )V . (11)
322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 1 The Training Phase of DMASA Algorithm 2 The Testing Phase of DMASA
Input: X  train ∈ Rd×T1 , window size w of X  train ; Input: Xtest ∈ Rd×T2 , Embedding(·), A, 1D − Conv (·),
Output: Network that maps to the embedding Embedding(·), ModifiedTransformer (·), fθ , w;
 Adjacency matrix A, 1D − Conv (·), Fully connected Output: AnomalyScore
 network fθ , Our Transformer network incorporating the Ntest ← Tw2 ;
 masking mechanism ModifiedTransformer (·); for ntest ← 1 to Ntest do
 X  train ← X  train + SR(X  train ); X ← Xtest [ntest · w :(ntest + 1) · w ];
 Ntrain ← Tw1 ; for i ← 1 to d do
 for ntrain ← 1 to Ntrain do ei ← Embedding(Xi∗ );
 X ← Xtrain [ntrain · w :(ntrain + 1) · w ]; end for
 for i ← 1 to d do X  = 1D-Conv(X );
 ei ← Embedding(Xi∗ ); E = [e1 , e2 , . . . , ei , . . . , ed ];
 end for Zhidden = Modified Transformer(E , X  , A);
 for i ← 1 to d do Z  = fθ (Zhidden );
 AnomalyScore = m 1 ||Z  − X || + SR( 1 ||Z  − X ||)
 for j ← 1 to d do m
 ei ej end for
 vji = ||e ||·||e , j = i ;
 i j ||
 end for
 Aji ← 1 if j in Top-k(vki , k = i );
 end for assess whether the current time point is in an anomalous state
 M ∈ RD×w , with Mij ∈ {0, 1}; based on the level of deviation:
 X  = 1D-Conv(M  X ); 1 1
 AnomalyScore = ||Z  − X || + SR( ||Z  − X ||) (15)
 E = [e1 , e2 , . . . , ei , . . . , ed ]; m m
 Zhidden = Modified Transformer(E , X  , A); The comprehensive algorithm for the testing phase is illus-
 LossMAE = m 1 ||f (Z
 θ hidden ) − X ||; trated in Algorithm 2. In line with standard procedures in
 end for current self-supervised studies, our testing phase begins with
 utilize LossMAE to improve the entire network; scoring each test sample, followed by threshold adjustment
 to align with the benchmark’s anomaly likelihood. Anomalies
 are flagged when their scores exceed this threshold. This
 Additionally, before entering the feedforward network, we process mirrors the operations within real-world systems. A
perform a dot product between embeddings E and Z, as shown better detection model can offer clearer statistical distinctions
in the following Equation (12), between normal data points and anomalies, facilitating the
 determination of an appropriate threshold to perform this task
 Z := EZ . (12) more effectively.

 After several Transformer layers, we utilize a simple fully H. Computational Complexity
connected network to aggregate data from different dimen-
 Our proposed method incurs two additional computational
sions. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) reconstruction error
 costs compared to conventional Transformer approaches.
is employed as the optimization objective, aiming to minimize
 Firstly, we employ spectral residuals to augment the data,
the overall objective function. As shown in the following
 which involves the use of FFT with a time complexity of
Equation (13), (14),
 O(d · T1 log T1 ). Secondly, the method includes learning
 Z  = fθ (Zhidden ), (13) similarity relationships, which entails calculating pairwise
 1 neighbor relationships between embeddings of dimension
 LossMAE = ||Z  − X ||, (14) dmodel across d variable dimensions, resulting in a comm
 plexity of O(d · dmodel 2 ). As a comparison, the Anomaly
where fθ is a fully connected network, and m is the number of Transformer requires additional Gaussian kernel overhead,
matrix elements. Zhidden represents the output data obtained while the DCdetector applies self-attention both within and
after the input data has undergone the modified Transformer between patches to facilitate contrastive learning. In comparcomponent. The comprehensive algorithm for the training ison, our method does not result in a significant increase in
phase is illustrated in Algorithm 1. overhead. With the GPU acceleration, the additional computational overhead introduced by our method is acceptable.
G. Anomaly Detection Scoring
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 Finally, in the process of assigning anomaly scores, we
enhance the evaluation using spectral residual. Spectral resid- A. Benchmark Dataset
ual amplifies the deviation of values from a frequency domain We employ five of the most classic and widely comperspective. By leveraging the disparity between the data pared datasets, including PSM (Pooled Server Metrics), MSL
processed through spectral residual and the original data, we (Mars Science Laboratory rover), SMAP (Soil Moisture
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 323

Active Passive satellite), SWaT (Secure Water Treatment), sequences. InterFusion employs a hierarchical VAE to learn
and SMD (Server Machine Dataset). Additionally, to visually low-dimensional inter-metric and temporal embeddings.
demonstrate the model’s detection capabilities across various Anomaly Transformer detects anomalies by leveraging
anomaly types, we utilize NeurIPS-TS. Furthermore, we add differences between local and global correlations in normal
two real-world multidimensional time series datasets from and anomalous data. DCdetector combines contrastive learning
different domains: NIPS-TS-SWAN and NIPS-TS-GECCO. to learn permutation invariant representations from a multi-
Here is a brief overview of the datasets, as shown in Table II: scale perspective.
 1) PSM: The PSM dataset, featuring 25 dimensions, is Common evaluation metrics, including accuracy, precision,
collected from multiple application server nodes at eBay. It recall, and F1-score, are utilized. In alignment with [11], [29],
includes 13 weeks of training data and 8 weeks of testing data, [35], [42], [52], we adopt common adjustment strategies for a
and is characterized by a relatively high anomaly ratio. fair evaluation. Additionally, we have supplemented recently
 2) MSL & SMAP: The MSL dataset contains sensor data proposed metrics such as affiliation precision/recall [57],
from NASA’s Mars Curiosity Rover, while the SMAP dataset, Range-AUC-ROC, Range-AUC-PR, V_ROC, and V_PR [58].
comprising 25 dimensions, includes soil samples and telemetry Affiliation precision and recall [57] are determined by meafrom the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite. suring the distance between true labels and predicted labels.
The data represents real spacecraft telemetry and anoma- Range AUC-ROC and Range AUC-PR add a buffer transition
lies from both missions, fully anonymized with respect to area at anomaly boundaries, mapping discrete data to a
channel IDs. continuous region and calculating the area under the ROC and
 3) SWaT: The dataset, consisting of 51 dimensions, is PR curves for different thresholds. The VUS metric represents
collected from a continuously operating water treatment infras- the volume corresponding to Range AUC-ROC and Range
tructure. It spans 11 days of network traffic and sensor data, AUC-PR for various buffer sizes [58].
with 7 days of normal operation and 4 days of attack scenarios
involving 41 documented attacks, all labeled as either normal
or abnormal behavior. C. Implementation Details
 4) SMD: A five-week dataset gathered from an Internet We summarize the default hyper-parameters as follows. Our
company’s cluster. As per the instructions provided by the data model has a default of 3 layers for the Transformer. Except for
provider, the detection process is required to be carried out on the SMAP dataset, where the hidden layer dimension is set to
individual entities separately. Thus, we chose the first entity 64, the default dimension for hidden layers in other datasets
from the first cluster. is 256. The default stride for one-dimensional convolution is
 5) NeurIPS-TS: A synthetic dataset provided by [45] for set to 32. For convenience in masking, the number of heads in
detecting various anomaly types. attention is set to 1 by default. The default masking rate for
 6) NIPS-TS-SWAN: The NIPS-TS-SWAN dataset, focused the mask part is 0.3, the number of nearby variables (Top-k) is
on drinking water quality in the “Internet of Things” context, set to 3, the window size is 128, and the default definition for
featuring a relatively high anomaly rate and posing challenge the anomaly threshold is 1. We utilize the Adam optimizer to
for anomaly detection. optimize network parameters, setting the initial learning rate
 7) NIPS-TS-GECCO: The NIPS-TS-GECCO dataset is to 10−3 . The default batch size for both training and testing is
derived from vector magnetograms of the solar photosphere 128. All experiments are conducted using the PyTorch 1.7.1
in Spaceweet HMI active regions,and presents a very low library on a computer equipped with a GeForce RTX 3060
anomaly rate, making it another difficult anomaly detection GPU supporting NVIDIA CUDA.
dataset.

B. Baselines D. Research Question
 We compared our model with 16 different approaches In the following experiments, we endeavored to answer
for a comprehensive evaluation. DAGMM [25], LOF [48], these questions.
MPPCACD [49] utilize density estimation models; •RQ1: Faced with the challenge of unlabeled KPI data,
OC-SVM [23], iForest [50] employ classical machine learning has the overall design of the DMASA framework resulted in
algorithms. Deep SVDD [51], THOC [52], ITAD [53] use effective anomaly detection?
clustering methods, VAR [54], LSTM [31] are autoregres- •RQ2: Do the various components of DMASA collaborate
sive models, and LSTM-VAE [26], OmniAnomaly [29], effectively to identify different types of anomalies, including
BeatGAN [55], InterFusion [56], Anomaly Transformer [35], point anomalies and pattern anomalies?
DCdetector [42] are reconstruction-based models. Among •RQ3: Has the use of similarity aggregation to isolate
reconstruction-based methods, LSTM-VAE employs LSTM irrelevant variables and the application of spectral residual to
to extract temporal features and reconstruct the expected strengthen anomaly boundaries yielded positive results?
distribution of the data by progress-based varying prior. •RQ4: Is similarity aggregation meaningful? Do features
OmniAnomaly employs stochastic variable connection and of different variables exhibit meaningful correlations, either
planar normalizing flow to acquire robust representations of proximity or divergence?
time series data. BeatGAN utilizes an adversarial generative •RQ5: How does the model’s performance vary under
approach coupled with time series warping for reconstructing different parameters? Is it robust?
324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 R ESULTS ON F IVE W IDELY U SED R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS FOR P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON . P ERFORMANCE IS R ANKED IN A SCENDING O RDER
 BASED ON F1 S CORE . P, R, AND F1 R EPRESENT P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1 S CORE , R ESPECTIVELY. A LL R ESULTS ARE P RESENTED IN
 P ERCENTAGES (%), W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS H IGHLIGHTED IN R ED AND THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS I NDICATED BY A
 B LUE U NDERSCORE . T HE R ESULTS OF OTHER M ETHODS ARE S OURCED F ROM DC DETECTOR [42]

 TABLE II
 B ENCHMARK DATASET D ETAILS , W HERE D IM R EPRESENTS detection in practice. Therefore, we adhere to the evalua-
 D IMENSIONS , AND AR R EPRESENTS A NOMALY R ATIO tion methods consistent with the Anomaly Transformer and
 DCdetector. Of course, for a more comprehensive assessment
 of the performance of various methods, we complement the
 additional evaluation with recently proposed metrics such
 as affiliation precision/recall [57], Range-AUC-ROC, Range-
 AUC-PR, V_ROC, and V_PR [58]. Table I illustrates that the
 best results are concentrated among Anomaly Transformer,
 DCdetector, and our method. Therefore, we provide a broader
 comparison of these three methods in Table III. The table
 demonstrates that our method excels on most metrics and
 datasets. The choice of anomaly threshold also affects the
 corresponding evaluation metrics. If the goal is accurate
 anomaly detection, aligning with our method involves select-
E. Main Results ing a smaller anomaly rate to raise the anomaly threshold.
 RQ1: We initially evaluate our model on five widely-used Conversely, if the focus in anomaly detection is on the distance
and well-assessed real-world scenario datasets, comparing it between real situations and predicted events, selecting a larger
against 16 various baseline models as presented in Table I. Our anomaly rate to relax the threshold produces better results.
model continues to exhibit superiority compared to advanced Furthermore, considering the already high evaluation results
models like Anomaly Transformer [35] and DCdetector [42]. on several commonly used datasets, we increased the diffi-
Notably, using the same evaluation metrics as the Anomaly culty of anomaly detection by employing more challenging
Transformer and DCdetector, our method achieves state-of- datasets for comparison among various anomaly detecthe-art performance on most datasets. Despite the impressive tion methods. We supplemented experimental data for the
performance of current methods–DCdetector, for instance, has NIPS-TS-SWAN and NIPS-TS-GECCO datasets in Table VI.
garnered F1 scores of 96.33% on SWaT and 97.94% on PSM These datasets present challenging detection scenarios with
benchmarks–our approach has managed to outperform them, anomaly rates of 32.6% and 1.1%, respectively. We compared
achieving F1 scores of 97.53% on SWaT and 98.17% on PSM. our model with several representative methods that have
We eschew the use of contrastive learning strategies for sample demonstrated good performance, including Matrix Profile,
augmentation, which, while beneficial for some methods like GBRT, LSTM-RNN, Autoregression, OCSVM, AutoEncoder,
DCdetector in enhancing performance on the MSL benchmark, Anomaly Transformer, iForest, and DCdetector. Remarkably,
incurs higher training costs and can compromise generalization our model still achieved the best overall performance,
across other benchmarks, as evidenced by the 87.18% F1 score underscoring the competitiveness of our approach. Similarly,
on the SMD benchmark. In comparison, our method not only considering that outstanding deep learning methods are still
demonstrates superior performance across all benchmarks but Anomaly Transformer and DCdetector, we further compared
also significantly elevates the overall detection capabilities. our model with these two methods. The results across different
 Despite ongoing controversies in evaluating anomaly detec- metrics for the three models are presented in Table IV,
tion algorithms, we argue that timely alerts and interventions comprehensively showcasing the performance of our model. In
during anomalies align with the ultimate goal of anomaly terms of both detection accuracy and the rapidity of response,
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 325

 TABLE III
 A DDITIONAL E VALUATION M ETRICS ON THE 5 DATASETS . A FF -P R EPRESENTS A FFILIATION P RECISION , A FF -R S TANDS FOR A FFILIATION
 R ECALL [57], R_A_R, AND R_A_P [58] ARE R ANGE -AUC-ROC AND R ANGE -AUC-PR, R ESPECTIVELY, R EPRESENTING T WO S CORES BASED ON
L ABEL T RANSFORMATION U NDER ROC AND PR C URVES . V_ROC AND V_PR [58] R EPRESENT VOLUMES U NDER THE S URFACE C REATED BY ROC
 AND PR C URVES , R ESPECTIVELY. A LL R ESULTS ARE P RESENTED IN P ERCENTAGES (%), W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS H IGHLIGHTED IN R ED AND THE
S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS I NDICATED BY A B LUE U NDERSCORE . T HE T WO VALUES OF AR R EPRESENT THE E VALUATION R ESULTS OF O UR M ODEL AT
 D IFFERENT T HRESHOLDS

 TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF A DDITIONAL M ETRICS FOR THE NIPS-TS DATASET. A LL R ESULTS ARE P RESENTED IN P ERCENTAGES (%), W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS
 H IGHLIGHTED IN R ED . T HE R ESULTS OF OTHER M ETHODS ARE S OURCED F ROM DC DETECTOR [42]

indicating the distance between real situations and predicted our model efficiently recognizes the onset points where patevents, our method consistently maintains a leading position. terns undergo abrupt changes, rapidly localizing the start
 and end points of anomalous segments. Clearly, our model
 proves capable of effectively addressing different types of
F. Visualization of Anomaly Score anomalies.
 RQ2: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our model
in handling various types of anomalies, we adhere to the
benchmark conventions outlined in NeurIPS-TS and visually G. Ablation Studies
present anomaly scores as shown in Figure 4. The NeurIPS-TS RQ3: Table V presents the ablation study of the two
benchmark is a meticulously designed artificially synthesized main modules under consistent parameters. The attention mask
anomaly detection benchmark that encompasses point anoma- designates a module designed to discern similarity relations
lies, including global point anomalies and contextual point and impose similarity adjacency structure onto the attention
anomalies, as well as pattern anomalies such as shapelet module of the Transformer. This module restricts the fusion of
anomalies, seasonal anomalies, and trend anomalies. In par- information across distinct variable dimensions, as elaborated
ticular, from the experimental results, it can be observed upon in Section III-D and Section III-F concerning the topic
that our model is capable of promptly identifying and pin- of similarity aggregation. Spectral residual, on the other hand,
pointing point anomalies. Moreover, for pattern anomalies, is the part of Section III-C and III-G that utilizes spectral
326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 4. Visualization of the detection of different types of anomalies by our model. It can be observed that for point anomalies, DMASA yields significantly
higher anomaly scores, allowing for the easy identification of anomalous points. For pattern anomalies, DMASA demonstrates the ability to locate such
anomalies by exhibiting notably elevated anomaly scores at the starting and ending points of the anomalous segment.

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE M ODEL , W HERE ATTENTION M ASK R EPRESENTS THE PART R ELATED TO S IMILARITY AGGREGATION , AND S PECTRAL
 R ESIDUAL R EPRESENTS THE PART R ELATED TO S PECTRAL R ESIDUAL . A LL R ESULTS ARE P RESENTED IN P ERCENTAGE (%),
 W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS H IGHLIGHTED IN R ED

 TABLE VI
R ESULTS FOR THE NIPS-TS DATASET. P ERFORMANCE IS R ANKED F ROM from a frequency domain perspective, leading to substantial
 L OW TO H IGH . A LL R ESULTS ARE P RESENTED IN P ERCENTAGES (%), performance improvement on the SMAP dataset.
W ITH THE B EST R ESULTS H IGHLIGHTED IN R ED AND THE S ECOND -B EST
R ESULTS I NDICATED BY A B LUE U NDERSCORE . T HE R ESULTS OF OTHER
 M ETHOD S OURCED F ROM DC DETECTOR [42] H. Visualization of Variable Relationships
 RQ4: In order to provide a more comprehensive and visually intuitive depiction of the relationships between variables,
 we computed similarity using the ei embeddings learned from
 the PSM dataset and represented them through a heatmap,
 as illustrated in Figure 6. The color intensity in the heatmap
 corresponds to the strength of the correlation between variables, with darker colors indicating stronger correlations.
 Evidently, for each variable, only a limited set of other variables exhibit high correlation. This observation suggests that
 when employing attention mechanisms for information fusion
 among variables, focusing on these highly correlated variables
 is sufficient. This focused attention facilitates the effective
 transmission of relevant information, reducing the impact of
 irrelevant variables on anomaly detection. Simultaneously, this
 strategy contributes to a reduction in computational complexity
residuals to enhance the data, combining frequency domain
 during self-attention computations.
data to aid in learning similarity relations and reinforcing
the scoring mechanism. It can be observed that, although
the performance improvement seems not very significant on I. Parameter Sensitivity
some datasets such as MSL and PSM, there is a substantial RQ5: Simultaneously, we investigated the sensitivity of our
enhancement, particularly with the spectral residual method model to different parameters, as illustrated in the Figure 5.
on the SMAP dataset. The reason for this could be the high The mask_ratio represents the difficulty of reconstructing data
anomaly rate in the SMAP dataset, along with a much larger for the model. It is noteworthy that even with a high masksize of the test set compared to the training set, resulting ing rate, our model maintains robust detection performance.
in overall large-scale and challenging detection scenarios. This robustness may be attributed, on one hand, to the
The spectral residual method provides significant enhancement residual connection structure of the Transformer, allowing
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 327

Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis of key parameters. mask_ratio denotes the proportion of masked data during self-supervised learning. Top-k represents the number
of other variables involved in information fusion for each variable. dmodel signifies the dimensionality of the hidden layer variables. step denotes the stride
in one-dimensional convolution. layers indicate the number of layers in the stacked Transformer.

 few most relevant variables for information fusion is sufficient.
 In the case of the MSL benchmark, the lack of a contrastive
 strategy to enrich the data, along with a smaller training dataset
 relative to the test dataset, leads to a slightly lower robustness.
 However, the overall resilience of our method is confirmed
 by its performance on other benchmarks. Balancing training
 expenses with the performance trends shown in Figure 5 (b),
 we recommend setting the parameter k optimally between 5
 and 6.

 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 KPI anomaly detection plays a crucial role in maintaining
 the overall reliability of operational systems. However, due
Fig. 6. Visualization of pairwise similarity among different variables. The to the lack of labels in KPI data, self-supervised approaches
darker the color, the greater the degree of correlation between the two are proposed to learn data features for anomaly detection. In
variables. this work, we introduce a pioneering self-supervised model,
 DMASA, which stands out with its dual-masked approach couinformation to be effectively transmitted. On the other hand, pled with similarity aggregation for KPI anomaly detection.
it could be because the learned embeddings ei carry essen- A key innovation is the integration of spectral residual methtial information that remains unaffected by masking. The ods to detect anomalies through frequency-domain analysis,
parameter dmodel corresponds to the dimensionality of the enhancing the identification of their onset points. Furthermore,
intermediate variable, and layers denotes the number of layers DMASA refines Transformer architecture to better assimilate
in the Transformer, both of which can influence computational the complexities of multivariate time series, while a similarity
efficiency. Increasing dmodel and layers sometimes leads aggregation technique minimizes interference from irrelevant
to improved detection efficiency. However, considering the variables to extract meaningful features from KPIs. The model
associated performance overhead, we opt for a trade-off. The has proven to be superior and effective across various datasets
parameter step represents the stride during one-dimensional and can be used in various scenarios.
convolution, indicating the aggregation of several time points. Our approach is well-suited for detecting anomalies in
Top-k determines the number of most relevant variables multivariate KPIs, such as CPU utilization and socket status,
selected, influencing the number of related variables each in dynamic environments like networks and servers, where
variable can “see”. It is observed that allowing each variable to conditions are continuously evolving. Traditional methods
interact with all variables may introduce interference, leading relying on contrastive learning might struggle with the varying
to a decrease in detection efficiency. Therefore, selecting a features of data over time. In contrast, our solution, grounded
328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

in mask modeling, is designed to adapt to the data’s intrinsic [8] Y. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Pipeline safety early warning by
distribution, offering greater flexibility. A key implementation multifeature-fusion CNN and LightGBM analysis of signals from
 distributed optical fiber sensors,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70,
challenge in these contexts is calibrating the anomaly score pp. 1–13, Sep. 2021.
threshold to ensure timely alerts in response to the evolving [9] Y. Yang, Y. Li, and H. Zhang, “Long-distance pipeline safety early
landscape. While setting a generalized threshold in advance is warning: A distributed optical fiber sensing semi-supervised learning
 method,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 17, pp. 19453–19461, Sep. 2021.
difficult due to the varying nature of real-world systems, we [10] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with LSTM
believe that dynamically adjusting the threshold based on the neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 8,
statistical distribution of normal data points versus anomalies pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020.
 [11] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autocould significantly improve the model’s practicality. Therefore, encoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
in future work, we plan to explore how to implement a self- Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
adaptive mechanism for adjusting the threshold at test time. [12] H. Zhu, S. Rho, S. Liu, and F. Jiang, “Learning spatial graph structure
 for multivariate KPI anomaly detection in large-scale cyber-physical
 Additionally, while our current approach effectively iden- systems,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–16, Jun. 2023.
tifies when anomalies occur, determining which specific [13] T. Huang, P. Chen, and R. Li, “A semi-supervised VAE based active
variables contribute to an overall anomaly remains a challenge anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series for online
 systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1797–1806.
due to the complex relationships between variables. This topic [14] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
has not been thoroughly addressed in the field, and existing on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
datasets often lack labels indicating which individual variables vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
 [15] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly
are abnormal. In future work, we aim to investigate how the detection,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
interactions between variables affect anomalies and whether it [16] Y.-c. Park, J.-G. Jang, and U. Kang, “Fast and accurate partial Fourier
is possible to attribute an anomaly to specific variables. This transform for time series data,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
 Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2021, pp. 1309–1318.
will form a key part of our continued research. Meanwhile, [17] Y. Yang, Y. Li, and H. Zhang, “Pipeline safety early warning method for
we are committed to collecting and incorporating more real- distributed signal using bilinear CNN and LightGBM,” in Proc. IEEE
world data to further validate the applicability and robustness Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 4110–4114.
 [18] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers
of our approach, thereby reinforcing the practical relevance for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
and continuous improvement of our research. 2021, pp. 1–22.
 [19] D. R. Choffnes, F. E. Bustamante, and Z. Ge, “Crowdsourcing servicelevel network event monitoring,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2010,
 ACRONYMS pp. 387–398.
 [20] P. J. Rousseeuw and A. M. Leroy, Robust Regression and Outlier
 FFT Fast Fourier Transform Detection. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2005.
 KPI Key Performance Indicator [21] S. W. Roberts, “Control chart tests based on geometric moving averages,” Technometrics, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 239–250, 1959.
 LSTM Long Short-term Memory [22] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
 MAE Mean Absolute Error detection in multivariate time series data,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100,
 MSL Mars Science Laboratory rover dataset Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106919.
 [23] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
 PSM Pooled Server Metrics dataset Learn., vol. 54, pp. 45–66, Jan. 2004.
 RNN Recurrent Neural Network [24] S. Elsayed, D. Thyssens, A. Rashed, H. S. Jomaa, and L. Schmidt-
 SMAP Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite dataset Thieme, “Do we really need deep learning models for time series
 forecasting?” 2021, arXiv:2101.02118.
 SMD Server Machine Dataset. [25] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for
 SR Spectral Residual unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 SWaT Secure Water Treatment dataset 2018, pp. 1–19.
 [26] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
 VAE Variational Autoencoder for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551,
 Jul. 2018.
 R EFERENCES [27] M. Sakurada and T. Yairi, “Anomaly detection using autoencoders
 with nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. 2nd Workshop Mach.
 [1] A. Anandakrishnan, S. Kumar, A. Statnikov, T. Faruquie, and D. Xu, Learn. Sens. Data Anal., 2014, pp. 4–11.
 “Anomaly detection in finance: Editors’ introduction,” in Proc. KDD [28] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Yang, Z. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Unsupervised
 Workshop Anom. Detect. Financ., 2018, pp. 1–7. machine anomaly detection using autoencoder and temporal convo-
 [2] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate lutional network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13,
 time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion, Oct. 2022.
 vol. 91, pp. 93–102, Mar. 2023. [29] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 [3] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020. Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [4] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at [30] L. Bontemps, V. L. Cao, J. McDermott, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Collective
 Microsoft,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. anomaly detection based on long short-term memory recurrent neu-
 Data Min., 2019, pp. 3009–3017. ral networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Future Data Secur. Eng., 2016,
 [5] D. P. Kumar, T. Amgoth, and C. S. R. Annavarapu, “Machine learning pp. 141–152.
 algorithms for wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 49, [31] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 pp. 1–25, Sep. 2019. T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMS and
 [6] Y. Li et al., “Federated domain generalization: A survey,” 2024, nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 arXiv:2306.01334. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2018, pp. 387–395.
 [7] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection [32] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and I. Flint, “Generic and scalable framework
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, for automated time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 21th ACM
 pp. 4027–4035. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2015, pp. 1939–1947.
YU et al.: DUAL TEMPORAL MASKED MODELING FOR KPI ANOMALY DETECTION VIA SIMILARITY AGGREGATION 329

[33] D. Liu et al., “Opprentice: Towards practical and automatic anomaly [57] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time series
 detection through machine learning,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
 2015, pp. 211–224. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 635–645.
[34] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [58] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. M. J. Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evalua-
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022. tion measure for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endow.,
[35] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, 2022.
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–20.
[36] Y. Jeong, E. Yang, J. H. Ryu, I. Park, and M. Kang, “AnomalyBERT:
 Self-supervised transformer for time series anomaly detection using data
 degradation scheme,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. Workshop Ting Yu received the bachelor’s degree in computer
 Mach. Learn. IoT, Datasets, Percept., Underst., 2023, pp. 1–11. science from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
[37] Y. Jiao, K. Yang, D. Song, and D. Tao, “TimeAutoAD: Autonomous China, in 2020 and the master’s degree from
 anomaly detection with self-supervised contrastive loss for multivariate the College of Computer, National University of
 time series,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1604–1619, Defense Technology, China. Her research focuses on
 May/Jun. 2022. time series analysis and artificial intelligence for IT
[38] Z. Liang, J. Zhang, C. Liang, H. Wang, Z. Liang, and L. Pan, “A operations.
 shapelet-based framework for unsupervised multivariate time series representation learning,” Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 386–399,
 2024.
[39] H. Kim, S. Kim, S. Min, and B. Lee, “Contrastive time-series
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 10,
 pp. 5053–5065, Oct. 2024.
[40] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “Fedformer:
 Zijian Gao received the B.E. degree from Sichuan
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series fore-
 University, Chengdu, China, in 2019 and the
 casting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
 master’s degree in software engineering from
[41] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series the National University of Defense Technology,
 is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. Changsha, China, in 2022, where he is currently pur-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–24. suing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer.
[42] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual His research interests include continual learning and
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly reinforcement learning.
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Min., 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[43] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to
 asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min.,
 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
[44] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed Kele Xu received the Ph.D. degree from the
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber- University of Paris VI, France, in 2017. He is an
 Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36. Associate Professor with the School of Computer,
[45] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time National University of Defense Technology. His priseries outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. 35th Conf. mary research interests in acoustic signal processing,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2021, pp. 1–13. machine learning, and intelligent software systems.
[46] R. Angryk et al., 2020, “SWAN-SF,” Dataset. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/EBCFKM
[47] F. Rehbach, S. Moritz, S. Chandrasekaran, M. Rebolledo, M. Friese,
 and T. Bartz-Beielstein, “GECCO 2018 industrial challenge: Monitoring
 of drinking-water quality,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf., 2018,
 p. 2019.
[48] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 density-based local outliers,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 93–104,
 2000. Xu Wang received the B.E. degree from the
[49] T. Yairi, N. Takeishi, T. Oda, Y. Nakajima, N. Nishimura, and N. Takata, Southwest University of Finance and Economics,
 “A data-driven health monitoring method for satellite housekeeping data Chengdu, China, in 2021 and the master’s degree
 based on probabilistic clustering and dimensionality reduction,” IEEE in electronic and information engineering from
 Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1384–1401, Jun. 2017. the National University of Defense Technology,
[50] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th Changsha, China, in 2024.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., 2008, pp. 413–422.
[51] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[52] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using
 temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[53] Y. Shin et al., “ITAD: Integrative tensor-based anomaly detection system
 for reducing false positives of satellite systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int.
 Peichang Shi received the Ph.D. degree from
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., 2020, pp. 2733–2740.
 the National University of Defense Technology,
[54] O. D. Anderson and M. Kendall, “Time-series. 2nd edn,” J. Roy. Stat.
 Changsha, China, in 2012, where he is an Associate
 Soc. Ser. D Stat., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 308–310, 1976.
 Professor. His current research interests include
[55] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous cloud computing, blockchain, AI, software engineer,
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. and distributed computing technology.
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
[56] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and
 interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min.,
 2021, pp. 3220–3230.
330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 Bo Ding received the Ph.D. degree in computer Dawei Feng received the Ph.D. degree from the
 science from the National University of Defense University of Paris XI, France, in 2014. He is an
 Technology, Changsha, in 2010, where he is cur- Associate Professor with the School of Computer,
 rently a Professor. His research interests include National University of Defense Technology. His
 distributed computing and systems. main research interests are distributed computing
 and intelligent software systems. He has presided
 over several national scientific research projects.