IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025 3565

 Efficient Intrusion Detection in AMI Systems Based
 on Federated Semi-Supervised Learning
 Zhuoqun Xia , Haidong Tang , Zhenzhen Hu , Member, IEEE, and Hongmei Zhou, Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) net- technology in the AMI network is an efficient solution [3]. Smart
work is the most critical part of a smart grid, and it faces serious grids (SGs) and wireless technology enable AMI to integrate
security challenges from network attacks. Federated learning (FL) more flexibly with smart meters and more services/applications.
is a common method for addressing network security problems;
however, it has several shortcomings, such as difficulty in obtaining However, AMI systems are widely distributed and vulnerable to
labeled data and high communication costs. Therefore, in this various security attacks, such as denial of service (DoS), false
paper, an efficient intrusion detection method based on federated data injection (FDI), and user-to-root (U2R) attacks [4]. In 2015,
semi-supervised learning is proposed to improve the efficiency a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack on Ukrainian AMI
of AMI network intrusion detection and reduce communication systems affected 225000 consumers [5]. In 2020, the Energias
overhead. First, an intrusion detection framework based on federated distillation (FD) is established to address intense assumption de Portugal (EDP) electricity company suffered from Ragnar
dependency problems and reduce communication overhead. Then, Locker Ransomware attacks, which resulted in economic losses
an efficient intrusion detection algorithm is used to improve the of $10.9 million [6]. Therefore, network security attacks have
classification performance. Finally, the designed deep convolutional a history of leading to severe financial losses and hindering
generative adversarial network (DCGAN) model is used to obtain people’s daily lives.
high-quality sample data. The experimental results show that the
scheme achieves an accuracy of 99.58%, a communication over- Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can intercept network
head of 75 MB, and a reduction in the false-positive rate of 6%. traffic and trigger real-time alerts to improve the performance
 of AMI networks in monitoring and detecting failures. Recent
 Index Terms—Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI),
intrusion detection, federated distillation (FD), semi-supervised
 studies have focused on deep learning (DL)-based intrusion
learning, deep convolutional generative adversarial network detection systems to improve the accuracy of AMI intrusion
(DCGAN). detection. Some authors have proposed AMI network intrusion detection schemes that combine feature downscaling and
 I. INTRODUCTION modified long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to increase
 classification accuracy. However, this approach has flaws, such
 N RECENT years, the vigorous evolution of smart grids
I (SGs) has yielded numerous application services, such as demand response (DR), advanced metering infrastructure (AMI),
 as low data privacy, low efficiency, and high latency [7], [8], due
 to the possibility of exploiting privacy-sensitive network traffic
 data. To improve communication security, several authors have
and real-time price (RTP), which has been very beneficial investigated federated learning (FL)-based intrusion detection
for customers and grid companies [1]. An AMI is a typi- methods for AMI networks [9], [10], [14]. However, these methcal application service for smart grids. The AMI consists of ods have two drawbacks. First, large numbers of AMI devices
group smart meters, concentrators, and data centers. In addi- upload model parameters to cloud servers, resulting in heavy
tion, AMI enables bidirectional communication between cus- communication burdens. Second, existing FL-based intrusion
tomers and utilities [2]. However, massive data transmission detection methods rely on strong assumptions (adequate availimposes a considerable burden on the communication of AMI able traffic samples, labeled samples, and having all samples
networks. Fortunately, fifth-generation (5G) communication available for model training). In these methods, the client uptechnology can meet wide coverage, large connectivity, and loads the overall model to the cloud server rather than using
low latency requirements. Therefore, using 5G communication the Federated Distillation (FD) model parameters. Therefore,
 the FDs are widely used to reduce communication costs [11],
 Received 15 February 2024; revised 9 April 2025; accepted 14 April 2025. [12], [13]. In the real world, these unlabeled data are rarely used
Date of publication 21 April 2025; date of current version 25 August 2025. in supervised learning procedures due to the high cost of data
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 52177067 and Grant 62402209 and in part by the labeling, lack of most of the data being labeled, limited stored
Hunan Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2023JJ30052. Recommended data, missing and unbalanced data, etc. [15]. Semi-supervised
for acceptance by Prof. Xiaowen Chu. (Corresponding author: Zhenzhen Hu.) learning has gained widespread attention in recent years because
 Zhuoqun Xia, Haidong Tang, and Hongmei Zhou are with the College
of Computer, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha it can efficiently address insufficiently labeled data.
410114, China (e-mail: xiazhuoqun@csust.edu.cn; 1031564607@qq.com; Although the above literature has addressed the relevant issues
zhouhongmei@stu.csust.edu.cn). to some extent, there are still two significant shortcomings:
 Zhenzhen Hu is with the College of Computer Science, University of South
China, Hengyang 421001, China (e-mail: hzz88@hnu.edu.cn). (1) Several studies have been performed on intrusion detec-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3562751 tion FL-based methods in AMI networks, however, not many

 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3566 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

of the studies have considered the attack detection accuracies multiple calssification and regression tree (CART) decision tree
and communication overheads, which significantly reduces the classifiers. Vijayanand et al. [19] used a multilayer deep learning
practical application potential of the proposed model. (2) Several algorithm to analyze smart meter traffic for accurate attack
existing works on intrusion detection modeling have focused on detection. He et al. [20] proposed an AMI network intrusion
using or modifying the structure of a neural network to achieve detection method using the conditional deep belief network
a high detection rate but have ignored the complexities of data (CDBN), which can identify a false data injection via several
collection and use. However, the processing of datasets may external conditions. Xiao et al. [21] combined self-encoders with
sometimes be more time-consuming than the study of detection convolutional neural networks and reduced the dimensionality
models. Therefore, datasets must be automatically processed for of the data to reduce redundant feature interference. Xu et al.
AMI-IDS research. [22] analyzed abnormal data in AMI networks via a bidirec-
 This paper proposes an effective intrusion detection method tional gated recurrent unit (BiGRU). Compared with LSTM, the
for AMI networks based on federated semi-supervised learning, BiGRU is more effective and accurate and has a lower false
known as FSSL-IDS, to address these challenges. The main alarm rate. Alshede et al. [36] proposed an integrated voting
research contributions of this paper are as follows: algorithm based on random forest and convolutional neural
 r We propose a distributed intrusion detection framework networks to classify multiclass attack categories. Alsirhani et al.
 based on FD to provide efficient communication methods [37] proposed a smart grid intrusion detection strategy that
 for AMI networks. The framework allows AMI devices to combines deep learning and signature techniques. After the
 participate in creating global detection models by exchang- dataset is preprocessed, the feature values are extracted, and
 ing model outputs. The switched model output reduces the the African culture optimization algorithm is used to organize
 communication overhead for intrusion detection in AMI the feature selection. Then, deep belief network (DBN)-LSTM
 networks and enables high detection performance. is used to identify attacks. Alabassi et al. [38] proposed a deep
 r We create an intrusion detection model based on the DC- learning-based system for critical infrastructure cyber-attack
 GAN. The limited labeled data from the cloud server can detection and location recognition by building new represenbe supplemented by the synthetic data produced by the tations and modeling the system’s behavior via multiple layers
 DCGAN, which has the advantages of efficient feature of autoencoders.
 extraction capabilities, fast training speeds, and high detec- In AMI intrusion detection, deep learning improves accuracy
 tion accuracies in implementing intrusion detection in the and multiclassification while reducing overfitting. However,
 AMI network. Moreover, the DCGAN addresses the issues there is a reliance on centralized data, which poses privacy issues
 of missing categories, imbalances, and limited labeled data and network strain.
 on the cloud server side.
 r The PyTorch framework is used to conduct simulation
 experiments on the proposed model. These experiments B. FL-Based IDS for AMI Networks
 verify that our proposed FSSL-IDS model not only has high Federated learning is a distributed learning system in which
 accuracy but also reduces the FL communication overhead. clients work together to train models under the supervision of a
 The introduction of the DCGAN model fully utilizes the cloud server. Training data can be stored locally on the client,
 AMI dataset, which endows the model with high practical and the cloud server must be informed only of local distributed
 value. model training parameters [23], [24]. This method lowers the
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In costs and privacy hazards associated with centralized ML meth-
Section II, related work is discussed. In Section III, the prepara- ods. Federated learning is a viable method for detecting AMI
tory knowledge is presented. In Section IV, the FSSL-IDS intrusions because it can help address data privacy concerns.
detection framework, the DCGAN intrusion detection model, Recently, Sun et al. [8] suggested an intrusion detection
and the federated semi-supervised learning intrusion detection solution for AMI networks that employs Transformer modtechnique are introduced. In Section V, the performance of the els for hierarchical federated learning training. The system
FSSL-IDS is experimentally evaluated. The conclusions of this achieves collaborative training of shared intrusion detection
paper are presented in Section VI. models for smart meters while protecting privacy and reducing communication costs. In addition, Mirzaee et al. [9] pre-
 II. RELATED WORK sented a federated intrusion detection solution for AMI networks based on deep neural networks (DNNs), which achieves
A. DL-Based IDSs for AMI Networks
 secure and private AMI systems by monitoring AMI network
 In response to insufficient machine learning (ML), some traffic with federated deep neural network detection techniques
researchers have investigated deep learning-based intrusion de- and constructing a distributed IDS architecture. Xia et al. [10]
tection for AMI networks. Several works have demonstrated suggested a client-based paradigm for effective AMI network
that DL outperforms ML in terms of AMI network intrusion intrusion detection. The framework comprehensively considdetection. For example, Zheng et al. [17] proposed a depth-and- ers the client’s security performance and computing power to
breadth convolutional neural network (CNN) model to identify achieve efficient intrusion detection. It uses a DBN based on
power theft in a smart grid. To detect intrusions into smart an attention mechanism, thereby reducing the communication
grids, Taghavinejad et al. [18] proposed a hybrid deep neural overhead. Liang et al. [25] proposed a federated learning apnetwork to improve detection performance by incorporating proach for AMI intrusion detection, with local DNN model
XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3567

 TABLE I overhead of the entire training process [27], [28]. Suppose that
 NOMENCLATURE
 the local dataset of client k is Dk = (xki , yik )|i = 1, 2, . . ., n,
 where n denotes the number of samples in dataset Dk . Then,
 Dk can be divided into l subsets according to the labels, that is,
 Dk (Dk = Dk,0 ∪ Dk,l ∪ . . . ∪ Dk,L−1 ). For any subset Dk,l ,
 Dk,l = {(xk,l k,l
 i , yi ), i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n}. The label of each sample is a one-hot vector; for example, the one-hot vector of label
 k,l k,l k,l
 L can be expressed as y ik , l = {yi,0 , yi,1 , . . . , y i , lk , l, yi,L−1 },
 k,l
 where yi,l = 1 and the other values are equal to 0. The FD
 algorithm consists of the following six main steps [11], [12],
 [13]:
 1) Training phase: The client k performs the same procedures as in federated learning local training to train its
 local model ω k with the dataset Dk .
 2) Prediction Phase: The local average logit vector, which is
 calculated for client k and displayed below, represents the
 average value of each label:
  
 ŷik,l = F xk,l i |ω
 k
 (1)

 N
 1  k,l
 k,l
training on concentrators and a data center aggregating and
 k,l
distributing a global model. Wen et al. [26] developed a federated ȳ = k,l ŷi (2)
 N i=1
learning framework for collaborative privacy-preserving power
theft detection in smart grids by employing a secure commu- If client k has no samples with label l, namely, Dk,l = ∅,
nication protocol and temporal convolutional network (TCN) then the label l’s local average logit vector is 0, that is,
model. Wang et al. [39] proposed an intrusion detection method ȳ k,l = 0.
based on an AMI network federated learning client security. In 3) Upload phase: Each client uploads {ȳ k,0 , ȳ k,l , . . . ,
addition, adaptive weights have been used to resist poisoning ȳ k,L−1 } to the cloud server.
attacks. Naeem et al. [40] proposed a novel FL-empowered 4) Aggregation phase: The client receives the global average
semi-supervised active learning (FL-SSAL) security orches- logit vector via broadcast from the cloud server after
tration framework for a label-at-client scenario that used la- performing global aggregation.
beled and unlabeled samples to detect attacks in the network
 K
infrastructure. 1  k,l
 ȳ s,l = ȳ (3)
 However, supervised approaches in AMI intrusion detection K
 k=1
cannot utilize large amounts of unlabeled data. This paper proposes a method using a DCGAN within FL to improve detection 5) Update Phase: Each client calculates a new local average
performance by leveraging both labeled and unlabeled data, and logit vector based on the global average logit as follows:
achieves high-precision classification. Additionally, federated 1  l 
distillation is employed to optimize the communication over- ȳ k,l = l N × ȳ s,l − ȳ k,l (4)
 N −1
head, resulting in a highly accurate and efficient model. where each sample xi with true label l has a local average
 logit vector ȳik,l equal to ȳ k,l .
 III. PRELIMINARY KNOWLEDGE 6) Iteration phase: Client k trains its model using the true
A. Federated Distillation labels and the new local average logit vector.

 The parameters andexplanations used in this paper are as B. Generating an Adversarial Network
shown in Table I. Federated learning was proposed by Google in
2016 [7], and its emergence addressed the capability of attackers The deep learning network called the generative adversarial
to steal or tamper with raw data during the upload process. network (GAN) uses an inverse model [29]. Fig. 1 depicts
The mainstream federated averaging (FedAVG) algorithm en- the network structure. Generators train themselves to generate
sures that the client shares only the model parameters but not artificial data, whereas discriminators are trained to distinguish
the local raw data, thus ensuring the privacy of the client’s between raw and generated data. The performances of the two
local data. Moreover, FD can shrink the model. The client networks can be incrementally improved as they operate in
participating in FD does not need to upload model parameters; parallel. After n iterations, the discriminator learns to identify
only the average predicted values of the labels, namely, the the data source, whereas the generator learns to produce data
local model output (local logits), need to be uploaded. After similar to the original data. The GAN function is as follows:
the Softmax function operation, the local model output is a minG maxD = Ex Pdata (logDi (x))
normalized vector value, which is much smaller than the size of
the local model parameters, largely reducing the communication + Ez Pz (log (1 − Di (Gi (z)))) (5)
3568 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 1. Generating an adversarial network.

 Fig. 2. FSSL-IDS detection framework.
where Gi (z) represents the synthetic data generated by the
generator, and the discriminator output is Di [0, 1], which expresses the likelihood that the data are authentic or a copy. The the minority, the generator using the DCGAN model generates
generator aims to reduce the possibility that the discriminator synthetic data based on the original labeled data, feeds it to the
classifies the data source as 1 − Di (Gi (z)). The discriminator’s discriminator for supervised learning along with the original
goal is to maximize the probability of data source recognition, labeled data, and finally broadcasts the initialized DCGAN
that is, 1 − Di (Gi (z)) and Di (x). The generator’s input is the model to the centralizer. In addition, after each round of comnoise signal, which is a random vector of size k that follows munication, the DCGAN supervised model is adjusted using the
the normal distribution and provides data that are similar to global model output, which is created by incorporating the local
the training data. The generator and the training samples serve model output from the cloud server. Finally, the cloud server
as the discriminator’s input so that the discriminator can distin- broadcasts the global model output and the DCGAN supervisory
guish between them. model back to the concentrator.
 2) Concentrator: The concentrator is the local client for FL
 training. This device collects smart meter power data from
 IV. THE PROPOSED FSSL-IDS SCHEME residential customers and requires privacy and security protec-
 Joint training by exchanging equipment local FL model pa- tion. Smart meters communicate with home appliances through
rameters is a common practice in the AMI intrusion detection the home LAN to collect data. The power data are regularly
field and provides benefits for data privacy protection [29], delivered to a nearby concentrator for storage and co-training.
[30], [31], [32], [33]. However, in traditional FL-based intrusion In each round of training, the concentrator uses local unlabeled
detection methods for AMI networks, AMI devices require data for local updates, obtains local model outputs, and performs
communication overhead proportional to the model size when category prediction on the unlabeled data. The output of the local
training is performed. In addition, in actual AMI networks, the model is then transferred to the cloud server.
data obtained from the AMI device are usually partially labeled 3) 5G Base Stations: 5G base stations are deployed near
or may be completely unlabeled. To address the problems men- the concentrator to improve the spectral efficiency of comtioned above, we propose a method based on the federal AMI munication between the concentrator and the cloud server via
network intrusion detection method. 5G network slicing technology and to provide low-latency
 end–to-end connectivity. The concentrator generates the local
A. FSSL-IDS Detection Framework model output through federated distillation learning and transmits it to the cloud server for aggregation over the 5G core
 In this section, our detection framework and main ideas are network.
described, as shown in Fig. 2. The AMI detection framework
proposed in this paper consists mainly of a data center (i.e.,
cloud server), a concentrator, and a 5G base station, which are B. Federated Semi-Supervised Intrusion Detection Algorithm
described in detail below. In this section, we detail the design of the federated semi-
 1) Data Center: The data center is a cloud server deployed supervised learning algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically,
by an electric utility that is in charge of gathering, analyzing, and a small publicly available labeled dataset is first introduced, and
processing the data, serving as the federated learning counterpart the cloud server uses this labeled dataset for initial training.
of the central server. Before training begins, considering that the Before training, a generator network using the DCGAN model
standard samples are the majority, and that attack samples are generates synthetic data based on the original labeled data; it
XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3569

 Algorithm 1: FSSL-IDS Algorithm.

 Fig. 3. Communication process for federated semi-supervised learning.

 This model is trained on a small publicly available labeled
 dataset. The proposed algorithm is described in detail below.
 1) Supervised Training and Label Balancing Phase: First,
 the cloud server trains the supervised classification model θ0
 with a small number of publicly available labeled datasets.
 Considering a class imbalance problem in labeled datasets,
 synthetic data are produced from the original labeled data before
 training via the generator network of the DCGAN model. The
 discriminator for supervised learning is then given both synthetic
 data and original labeled data. The detailed formula is as follows:

 Zi = GaussianN oise(b) (6)
 XG = G (ω, z) |zZi (7)
  p
 D = XG + D (8)
  m
 
 1 
 θ0 = Adam θ (−D (Gθ (z)) , θ, α) (9)
 m i=1
then feeds these synthetic data together with the original labeled
data into the discriminator for supervised learning. The local where b denotes a random number, where Adam denotes the
concentrator is trained locally via a large amount of unlabeled optimization function, where D denotes the discriminator, and
data via the FD algorithm after receiving the supervised model where G denotes the generator.
from the cloud server to determine the class to which each sample 2) Distribute Model Parameter Phase: The cloud server disin the unlabeled data belongs, thereby assisting the cloud server tributes the supervised classification model θ0 to the local conin performing iterative training for supervised learning. centrator through the 5G core network.
 We assume that there are M concentrators, and that each 3) Local Update Phase: Based on the stochastic gradient
concentrator m{1, 2, 3, . . . , M } has a local unlabeled dataset descent algorithm, each concentrator is trained unsupervised
Dm,c = {xm,c i |i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n}. The cloud server has a with a substantial amount of local unlabeled data, and the local
small number of publicly available labeled datasets Dp = update model θt is calculated as shown below:
{(xpj , yjp )|j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N p }. Intrusion detection is similar to
a classification task. In this section, there are assumed to be L θt = θ0 − η∇ψ (Dm,c |θ0 ) (10)
categories, and yjp is assumed to be a one-hot vector. In addition,
each concentrator receives a supervised classification model θ0 In the intrusion detection problem, the cross-entropy loss funcbroadcast by the cloud server before local unsupervised training. tion is generally used, and ψ(Dm,c |θ0 ) is calculated as follows:
3570 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 n
 
 ψ (D m,c
 |θ0 ) = − logF (xm,c
 i |θ0 ) (11)
 i=1

 4) Prediction Phase: Concentrator m uses federal distillation to calculate the local model output (local logits), which
represents the inferred probability of each data sample being
classified into each category. To achieve category prediction of
unlabeled data, a local unsupervised model based on what was
learned in the previous stage must be used. The local logits values predicted by each concentrator m are calculated as follows:

 p̂i,m = F (xm,c
 i |θt ) (12)

where the matrix P̂m is used to denote the set p̂i,m |i =
1, 2, 3, . . . , n.
 5) Uploading Phase: The concentrator uploads the local
 Fig. 4. Deep convolutional generative adversarial network.
model output P̂m to the cloud server, unlike in traditional FL,
which uploads the model parameters θt .
 6) Aggregation Phase: The cloud server performs entropy
reduction, which primarily accelerates and stabilizes the FD Algorithm 2: DCGAN Algorithm.
process, to combine the uploaded local model output with the
global model output p̂i,s , which is calculated as follows:
 M
 1 
 p̂i,s = p̂i,m (13)
 M m=1

 p̂i,s = S (p̂i,s |T ) (14)
where S is the Softmax function at temperature T .
 7) Supervised Learning Phase: The cloud server takes the
global model output p̂i,s as the input of the DCGAN model and
helps the DCGAN model be supervised and trained again.
 θt+1 = θt+1 − η∇ψ (Dp , p̂i,s |θt+1 ) (15)
 8) Broadcast Global Model Output Phase: Over the 5G core
network, the cloud server broadcasts the global model output p̂i,s
to every concentrator client.
 9) FD Phase: The concentrator updates the local model
based on the broadcasted global model output p̂i,s and the local
unlabeled data Dm,c . Specifically, the local model parameters
are calculated as follows:
 θt = θt − η∇ψ (Dm,c , p̂i,s |θt ) (16)
The above communication process is iterated several times until
the model converges, and the detailed process is shown in
Algorithm 1.

C. DCGAN Intrusion Detection Model
 Often, the data are unlabeled or unbalanced, and it is not
practical to directly use the data in the model to make judgments.
We use the DCGAN to construct intrusion detection models;
this approach can solve the problem of data labeling, and can
better extract dataset characteristics. The DCGAN is used for
supervised learning in cloud servers and for local training, and
updates the concentrators and cloud server concentrators. FD
trains the DCGAN intrusion detection model collaboratively
XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3571

over a 5G core network. A CNN discriminator and a CNN function, and is defined as follows:
generator compose the DCGAN optimization model, which is
gamed to produce the best outcomes. The goal of the discrim- φ (QL , QL )
inator is to identify anomalous data, whereas the generator’s e
 1
goal is to generate additional data to improve the classification. = − [QLl log (QLl ) + (1 − QLl ) log (1 − QLl )] (21)
The DCGAN may also extract deep features from AMI network e
 l
traffic via CNNs to increase the model’s stability and training
duration. The architecture of the DCGAN is shown in Fig. 4. where the lth actual value in a batch of input data is indicated by
The DCGAN is represented as follows: the symbol QLl ; in a batch of input data, e represents the number
 of samples, and QLl represents the lth neural network predictor.
 min max VGAN (G, D) The cross-entropy loss function can be used to improve the CNN
 G D
 performance effectively.
 = Ex∈X [Log (D(x))] + Ez∈Xz [Log (1−D (G(x)))] (17) Additionally, the loss function of the model can be improved
 via the adaptive moment estimation (ADAM) optimization func-
 In the suggested intrusion detection model based on the DCtion with the following formula:
GAN, data z are selected from the dataset Xz with random noise
as the input to the DCGAN generator. xz and z are matrices of  e
 1
sizes jm × km and jm × km 
 , respectively, where km and km 
 gt = ∇θ φ (QL , QL ) (22)
 e
are the sample sizes of Xz and z, respectively, and where jm k=1
is the feature size of the noisy data. The random noisy data mt = ρ1mt−1 +(1−ρ1 )gt (23)
are subsequently converted into fake data Xz = G(Xz ) by the
generator G, where Xz is a matrix of size km C × C. This nt = ρ2nt−1 +(1−ρ2 )gt2 (24)
process of generating false data from random, noisy data can mt
be expressed as follows: m̂t = (25)
 1 − ρt1
  l C nt
 vXzl = g l ωG × Xzl−1 + blG , l = 1, 2, 3, . . . , nm (18) n̂t = (26)
 1 − ρt2
 n
where Xz0 denotes the input data z, Xz m denotes the output m̂t
Xz of the generator G, Xzl denotes the output of the lth layer, Δθ = −η √ (27)
 l l
 n̂t + ε
and θG = (ωG , blG ) denotes the parameters of the lth transposed
convolutional layer. In addition, g l is the activation function, where φ denotes the loss function of the CNN, and where ∇θ
which is typically set as the hyperbolic tangent function. The denotes the gradient of the parameter θ. gt denotes the gradient
suggested strategy optimizes generator G via the mean square of the tth time step, and t denotes the number of optimization
error (MSE) function to obtain the best result for the generator time steps. ρ1 and ρ2 denote the exponential decay rates of
network. The MSE loss function can be expressed as follows: the moment estimate, and the values of ρ1 and ρ2 lie between
 e  2 [0, 1], respectively, indicating the decay degree of the moment
 l=1 (QLl − QLl )
 ξM SE (QL , QL ) = (19) estimate. In addition, mt and nt denote the biased first-order
 e moment estimates and second-order moment estimates, respec-
 To train the discriminator network, the generator-generated tively. Correspondingly, m̂t and n̂t denote the bias-corrected
dataset Xz is combined with the input dataset XR = first-order moments and bias-corrected second-order moments,
(X1 , X2 , . . . , Xmx ) to generate the combined data Xc . where respectively. ε denotes the constant used for numerical stabimx is the number of samples of genuine data, Xi (i = lization. Δθ denotes the magnitude of the updated parameter θ.
1, 2, 3, . . . , mx ) is the data matrix, and Xc is a matrix of size
km + mx . The discriminator network is trained using the com- y1ι=0 ,y2ι=1 if y1ι <y2ι
bined data Xc . Discriminator D is a CNN network used to Y (Yc ) = y1ι=1 ,y2ι=0 if y1ι ≥y2ι , [4pt]ι = 1, . . ., km + mχ
generate discriminative data Yc = D(Xc ), and Yc is a matrix (28)
of size 2 × (km + mx ). The training process of discriminator D
is shown in Formula (22). where y1l and y2l denote the discriminant results of the lth data
   point of the discriminator. Yz and YR compose the discrimina-
 ψ∗l kcnn l
 ∗ X (l−1) + blcnn = X l , l = 1, 2, . . . , nC (20) tor’s output data Yc . The discriminant result of the produced data
 Xz is Yz , and the discriminant result of the original data XR is
where X 0 denotes the input data X, X nC denotes the output YR . The function ϕ is subsequently used to determine Yz and
data Y , and where X l denotes the output of the lth layer. The YR . The function ϕ can be used to determine the discriminative
maximum pooling operation is used by all pooling levels. Ad- ability of the original data and the created data, and the following
 l l
ditionally, θcnn = (kcnn , blcnn ) is used to denote the parameters technique is used to implement the function ϕ:
of the lth convolutional layer. The activation function ψ∗l can be
a hyperbolic tangent function, a ReLU function, or a Softmax TP + TN
 ϕ= (29)
function. The cross-entropy loss function φ is used as the loss TP + TN + FP + FN
3572 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

where the letters TP, FP, FN, and TN represent true-positive, TABLE II
 NUMERICAL PROCESSING OF LABEL DATA
false-positive, false-negative, and true-positive samples, respectively. The matrices corr(A, B) and their similarity are defined
as follows:
corr(A, B)
  
 ms ns (ams ,ns−ā ) bms ,ns−b̄
 =  
 2  2 
 ms ns (ams ,ns −ā) ms ns bms ,ns − b̄
 experiments for accurate comparisons. For each global round,
 (30)
 the local model output of the concentrator is transmitted to
where ā and b̄ represent the average values of A and B, re- the cloud server via the 5G core network for aggregation and
spectively, and both matrices A and B are of size ms × ns . updating. We perform different parameter selection and training
Consequently, the following formula can be used to determine steps, thus presetting the learning rate, batch size, and local
how similar Xz and XXz are on average: training epochs for each communication round to 0.0001, 50,
   and 10, respectively.
 kc 
    l corr Xzl , XXzl
  2) NSL-KDD Dataset: This dataset has been widely used
 Cr Xz , XXz = (31) in AMI intrusion detection [8], [9], [10]. It contains all types
 kc
 of attacks that AMI networks can be subjected to, including
where the generated data Xz are the generated data, and where the 4 attack categories DoS, Probe, U2R, and R2L, and the 39
XXz is the comparison data. The model is updated by deter- attack subcategories, making it an ideal dataset for evaluating
mining the sizes of ϕ(Y (Yz ), YYz ) and ϕ(Y (YR ), YYR ) and the performance of IDS models.
determining whether the The Cr(Xz , XXz ) value reaches the The data distribution of the NSL-KDD dataset has a periodic
threshold υ. The labels for the produced data Xz and the original character, which is critical for detecting and defending against
data XR are YYz and YYR , respectively. If ϕ(Y (Yz ), YYz ) is cyberattacks. Each piece of data contains 42 features, of which
smaller than ϕ(Y (YR ), YYR ) and Cr(Xz , XXz ) ≤ ν, then the 38 are numeric, 3 are symbolic, and 1 is a label [27]. The training
generator is updated; otherwise, the discriminator is updated. and testing intrusion detection models can use these features
Implementing the Nash equilibrium yields the ideal discrimina- to help detect and respond to various cyberattacks promptly.
tor. The precise method is expressed as follows: Table II details the 4 attack categories.
 max DEX∈XR [log (ϕ (D(X)))] + Ez∈Xz 3) Data Preprocessing: The NSL-KDD dataset includes
 samples of multiple data types, including symbolic data, and
 [log (1 − ϕ (D (G(z))))] (32) neural networks cannot directly process such samples. Therefore, to better train the model, preprocessing operations such
Finding the best discriminator is the objective function. The
 as numerical processing, one-hot coding, normalization, and
value function is therefore expressed as follows:
 balancing sample categories must first be performed on the data
 VGAN (G, D) = EX∈XR [log (ϕ (D(X)))] to improve the accuracy.
 (1) Numerical Processing and One-Hot Coding: The goal
 + Ez∈Xz [log (1 − ϕ (D (G(z))))] (33)
 is to convert symbolic features to numerical features for nu-
 ∗
If G is constant, then DG = arg max DVGAN (G, D) can be merical processing and institute one-hot encoding during data
considered the best discriminator. Accordingly, if D is a con- preprocessing. The main features that need to be processed by
stant, the optimal generator G∗G = arg min GVGAN (G, DG ∗
 ) numerical and one-hot encoding are protocol_type, service, and
can be obtained. After a series of training steps, the opti- flag. The protocol type consists of three attributes, namely, TCP,
 ∗
mal discriminator DG = arg max DVGAN (G∗G , D) can be ob- UDP, and ICMP, which are represented by 1x3-dimensional
tained. The details of the DCGAN algorithm are shown in vectors (0,0,1), (0,1,0), and (1,0,0), respectively, after numerical
Algorithm 2. encoding and one-hot encoding. The service and sign features
 contain 70 and 11 attributes, respectively, and can be represented
 V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS by 1x70 and 1x11 dimensional vectors, respectively. After numerical and one-hot encoding of these three symbolic features,
A. Experimental Setup
 we obtain a 1x84-dimensional numerical feature vector. This
 1) Environment Setting: We formulate the federated semi- vector is combined with the original 1x38-dimensional numersupervised learning intrusion detection model via the PyTorch ical feature vector to obtain a 1x122-dimensional numerical
framework in Python 3.8 version 1.9.0. The experiments were feature vector. In addition, the symbolic label data must be
executed on a Linux operating system with an Intel Core i5- numerically processed. This dataset has five label types, namely,
6200U CPU and an AMD Radeon (TM) R5 M430 GPU. In the labels representing normal behavior (Normal) and attack behavexperiments, 100 concentrator clients are considered, and the ior (U2R, R2L, Probe, DoS). Table IV presents the numerical
training set is divided equally and randomly into 100 copies, processing results of the labels.
with one copy assigned to each client. The rounds are set as (2) Normalization Processing: After the numerical processing
the number of test rounds and kept constant for each set of and one-hot coding process, certain numerical features may
XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3573

 TABLE III the final data sample exhibits a balanced state. The sample size
 COMPARISON OF THE DETECTION PERFORMANCE WITH THE CENTRALIZED
 METHODS
 of the normal attack type is the greatest, and that of the R2L
 attack type is the lowest.
 4) Evaluation Metrics: In this work, the accuracy, precision, recall, F1, false-positive rate (FPR), and loss were used
 as evaluation metrics. These metrics are calculated from the
 true positive (TP), false-negative (FN), false-positive (FP), and
 true negative (TN) values, where TP denotes the number of
 TABLE IV positive class samples correctly predicted as positive, FN de-
 ACCURACY, FPR, AND PRIVACY PROTECTION COMPARED TO THE EXISTING notes the number of positive class samples incorrectly predicted
 METHODS
 as attack samples, FP denotes the number of attack samples
 incorrectly predicted as positive, and TN denotes the number of
 attack samples correctly predicted as attack samples.

 B. Performance Comparison with the Centralized Detection
 Scheme
 We compare the effectiveness of the proposed FSSL-IDS
 approach with that of the centralized intrusion detection strategy.
 In this set of experiments, 100 concentrator clients are assumed
 to be distributed in the AMI system, and each concentrator
 represents an IDS that monitors the network traffic of the AMI
 network. According to the experimental results in Fig. 6(a), the
 loss of the FSSL-IDS approach is 0.06 under 100 communication
 rounds, which is significantly lower than that of the centralized
 scheme, with a loss value reduction of approximately 50%. In
 addition, according to the experimental results in Fig. 6(b), the
 FSSL-IDS method achieves a 99.58% detection accuracy over
 100 communication rounds, which is an improvement of approximately 2% over that of the traditional centralized method;
 this is because our method uses a DCGAN model, which makes
 it easier for neural networks to converge during training by
 processing datasets with complete and balanced dataset labels.
 Specifically, the FSSL-IDS method achieves a better performance in monitoring AMI network traffic. With distributed monitoring, each concentrator client can effectively detect intrusions,
 thus reducing the risk of system attacks. The significant loss
 reduction in the FSSL-IDS method indicates that the method can
Fig. 5. Balancing treatment of small-sample attack classes in the NSL-KDD better control the complexity of the model without sacrificing
training set. detection accuracy. Additionally, the detection accuracy of the
 FSSL-IDS method is 2% greater than that of the traditional
mislead the learning model if used directly due to their large centralized method, which indicates that the method can detect
values. The purpose of normalization is to improve the learn- intrusions more accurately, and thus, better secure the AMI
ing models’ performance. Normalization refers to mapping the systems.
datasets’ numerical features into a uniform interval [0,1] range. Table III compares the precision, recall, and F1 score of
The specific normalization formula is as follows: the FSSL-IDS method with those of the centralized method.
 Table III shows that the proposed FSSL-IDS outperforms the
 xi − xmin
 x= (34) centralized method on all three evaluation metrics. Specifically,
 xmax − xmin the FSSL-IDS method achieves 99.54%, 99.50%, and 99.52%
where xi denotes the feature’s starting value; xmax and xmin values under the precision, recall, and F1 metrics, respectively,
denote the feature’s highest and lowest values, respectively; and which represents improvements of 0.49%-6.32% in precision,
x denotes the normalization outcome. 1.83%-8.71% in recall, and 2.01%-5.54% in F1 over the cen-
 (3) Sparse Class Balancing: Fig. 5 shows the sample sizes for tralized method. This indicates that the FSSL-IDS approach
different attack types. Owing to the uneven distribution of attack performs better at distinguishing natural traffic from attack
categories and unbalanced labels in the NSL-KDD dataset, it traffic, thus achieving more accurate detection of intrusions and
is necessary to balance the data. Through preprocessing, the protecting the AMI systems. In addition, the superiority of the
sample data generated are the same as the original sample, and FSSL-IDS method is shown in Fig. 7. The figure shows that the
3574 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 6. Comparison with centralized detection methods (a) loss (b) accuracy.

 DoS, and probe attacks, and higher detection accuracies for R2L
 and U2R attacks; this is because the proposed FSSL-IDS model
 uses an innovative method of data feature extraction. Excellent
 dataset preprocessing and multilayer convolution make the extracted features more representative and more convenient for
 neural network fitting. Therefore, we can draw two conclusions:
 (1) the FSSL-IDS approach has been studied and is verified
 to achieve better detection performance and privacy protection
 than the centralized approach, and (2) we can achieve multicategory detection performance, which meets the high detection
 performance requirements for the AMI networks.

 C. Performance Comparison With Existing Detection Schemes
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method’s de-
Fig. 7. Precision, recall, and F1 comparisons with centralized detection meth- tection, we compared the proposed method’s performance with
ods.
 that of the existing detection methods, namely, the NBTree
 [32], DBN-ELM [33], A-DQN [34], 5-layer AE-based [35],
 AE-CNN-based [17], HFL-Transformer [8], FLDNN [9], and
 Fed_ADBN [10] methods, via the same evaluation metrics.
 According to the comparison results in Table IV, the proposed
 FSSL-IDS method yields better accuracy and a lower false alarm
 rate than the other methods. The accuracy of the FSSL-IDS
 method is 99.58%, which is 0.1%-9% better than that of the
 existing methods. The false alarm rate of the FSSL-IDS method
 is 1.02, which is 0.07%-6% lower than that of the existing
 methods. The lower the FPR is, the better the classification
 performance. In addition, the FSSL-IDS method has a significant
 of privacy protection advantage over the existing centralized
 intrusion detection methods; this is because only our method
 is trained using unlabeled data, and a comprehensive dataset is
Fig. 8. Multiclassification results of the FSSL-IDS method. more likely to reveal the most realistic AMI attack patterns. In
 the table, “–” indicates that no results are available.
FSSL-IDS approach can better distinguish between normal and
attack traffic conditions, resulting in higher detection accuracy D. Performance Comparison With AMI Federated Detection
and a lower false-positive rate. Methods
 In addition, we analyze the detection performance of the pro- In addition to the above experiments, we perform a compreposed method for each attack category. As shown in Fig. 8, the hensive comparison using different evaluation metrics. Table V
FSSL-IDS approach achieves better performances for normal, shows the performance comparison of the proposed FSSL-IDS
XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3575

 TABLE V TABLE VIII
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI NETWORK FEDERATED COMPARISON OF COMMUNICATION OVERHEAD PER ROUND FOR DIFFERENT
 DETECTION METHODS MODEL SIZES OF FEDERATED LEARNING METHODS

 TABLE VI
 MULTI-CLASSIFICATION PRECISION COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI
 NETWORK FEDERATED DETECTION METHODS of model size. As the model size increases, the FL overhead
 increases due to the need to upload model parameters, and
 the parameters are proportional to the model size. In contrast,
 the FSSL-IDS uploads model outputs that do not depend on
 the model size, thereby reducing communication overhead and
 enhancing data security. This method avoids potential leakage
 TABLE VII
 of sensitive information by not requiring uploading local model
 MULTI-CLASSIFICATION RECALL COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI parameters, ensuring efficient distributed learning with strong
 NETWORK FEDERATED DETECTION METHODS privacy protections.

 VI. CONCLUSION
 This paper investigates efficient intrusion detection based on
 federated semi-supervised learning in AMI systems. First, we
 design an FD-based intrusion detection framework to reduce
 the communication overhead. Next, we use an effective intrusion
method with other methods in terms of precision, recall, and F1 detection algorithm to improve the classification performance.
score. According to the data in Table V, the proposed FSSL-IDS Finally, we design a DCGAN model to improve the sample data
method performs well on all the evaluation metrics, with a quality. The use of a federated semi-supervised algorithm allows
detection precision of 99.5%, a recall rate of 99.50%, and an for improvements of more than 99.58% and 6% in accuracy and
F1 score of 99.52%. These data indicate that the proposed the false-positive rate, respectively.
method outperforms the existing AMI network-federated detection methods in terms of detection performance. REFERENCES
 Additionally, Tables VI and VII present the classification [1] E. Natalizio, H. Ishii, R. Lu, and S. Pack, “Introduction to the special
performances of the proposed FSSL-IDS approach and current section on security and privacy of smart network systems,” IEEE Trans.
AMI network federated detection methods on several threat Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1975–1977, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
 [2] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter
categories. These data further show that the classification per- data analytics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE Trans.
formance of the proposed method is significantly better than that Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3125–3148, May 2019.
of the existing AMI network federated detection methods. [3] B. Goswami, R. Jurdak, and G. Nourbakhsh, “Node allocation strategy
 for low latency neighborhood area networks in smart grid,” IEEE Trans.
 According to the experimental results in Tables VI and VII, the Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 5087–5098, Sep./Oct. 2024.
proposed FSSL-IDS method has almost the same accuracy and [4] J. Bi, F. Luo, G. Liang, X. Yang, S. He, and Z. Y. Dong, “Impact assessment
recall rate as other models in the face of DoS attacks and probe and defense for smart grids with FDIA against AMI,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 578–591, Mar./Apr. 2023.
attacks. It significantly improves the detection performance of [5] D. E. Whitehead, K. Owens, D. Gammel, and J. Smith, “Ukraine cyber-
R2L attacks and U2R attacks. induced power outage: Analysis and practical mitigation strategies,” in
 The proposed method exhibits excellent performance in iden- Proc. 70th Annu. Conf. Protective Relay Engineers, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–8.
 [6] V. Kayalvizhy and A. Banumathi, “A survey on cyber security attacks and
tifying various network attacks, particularly R2L and U2R at- countermeasures in smart grid metering network,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
tacks, by fully leveraging unlabeled data from the local con- Comput. Methodol. Commun., Apr. 2021, pp. 160–165.
centrator. This significantly enhances the precision of detecting [7] G. Lu and X. Tian, “An efficient communication intrusion detection
 scheme in AMI combining feature dimensionality reduction and improved
small-sample attacks; this is because, compared with other LSTM,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 6631075.
models, our model processes the dataset in a way that makes [8] X. Sun et al., “A hierarchical federated learning-based intrusion detection
it difficult for noise to affect the detected data. system for 5G smart grids,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 16, 2022, Art. no. 2627.
 [9] P. H. Mirzaee, M. Shojafar, Z. Pooranian, P. Asefy, H. Cruickshank,
 and R. Tafazolli, “Fids: A federated intrusion detection system for 5G
E. Communications Overhead Evaluation smart metering network,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Mobility, Sens. Netw.,
 Dec. 2021, pp. 215–222.
 In this section, we compare the performance of the federal [10] Z. Xia et al., “Fed_ADBN: An efficient intrusion detection framework
learning approach and the proposed approach for different model based on client selection in AMI network,” Expert Syst., vol. 40, no. 4,
 2023, Art. no. e12983.
sizes in respect to the communication overhead per round. [11] F. Sattler, A. Marban, R. Rischke, and W. Samek, “CFD: Communication-
Table VIII shows that the proposed FSSL-IDS approach out- efficient federated distillation via soft-label quantization and delta coding,”
performs FL in terms of communication overhead, regardless IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2025–2038, Jul./Aug. 2022.
3576 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

[12] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto, [34] Z. Liu, L. Hou, K. Zheng, Q. Zhou, and S. Mao, “A DQN-based consensus
 “Distillation-based semi-supervised federated learning for communi- mechanism for blockchain in IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 cation-efficient collaborative training with non-IID private data,” IEEE vol. 9, no. 14, pp. 11962–11973, Jul. 2022.
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 191–205, Jan. 2023. [35] R. Yao, N. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Chen, D. Ma, and X. Sheng, “Intrusion
[13] D. Sui, Y. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Jia, Y. Xie, and W. Sun, “Feded: Feder- detection system in the smart distribution network: A feature engineering
 ated learning via ensemble distillation for medical relation extraction,” based AE-LightGBM approach,” Energy Reports, vol. 7, pp. 353–361,
 in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., Nov. 2020, 2021.
 pp. 2118–2128. [36] H. Alshede, L. Nassef, N. Alowidi, and E. Fadel, “Ensemble voting-based
[14] S. Bhattacharjee, A. Thakur, and S. K. Das, “Towards fast and semi- anomaly detection for a smart grid communication infrastructure,” Intell.
 supervised identification of smart meters launching data falsification Automat. Soft Comput., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 3257–3278, 2023.
 attacks,” in Proc. Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., May 2018, [37] A. Amjad, M. A. Mohammed, M. H. Ahmed, I. T. Ahmed, M. A. E.
 pp. 173–185. Rasha, and H. S. Ahmed, “Implementation of african vulture optimization
[15] R. Sharma, A. M. Joshi, C. Sahu, G. Sharma, K. T. Akindeji, and algorithm based on deep learning for cybersecurity intrusion detection,”
 S. Sharma, “Semi supervised cyber attack detection system for smart grid,” Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 79, no. 105–115, pp. 1110–0168, 2023.
 in Proc. 30th Southern Afr. Universities Power Eng. Conf., Jan. 2022, [38] A. Al-Abassi, A. N. Jahromi, H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, P. Siano,
 pp. 1–5. and H. Leung, “A self-tuning cyber-attacks’ location identification ap-
[16] K. Zhang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhan, X. Wang, and K. Guo, “A smart grid AMI proach for critical infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
 intrusion detection strategy based on extreme learning machine,” Energies, no. 7, pp. 5018–5027, Jul. 2022.
 vol. 13, no. 18, 2020, Art. no. 4907. [39] J. Wang, Z. Q. Xia, Y. L. Chen, C. Hu, and F. Yu, “Intrusion detection
[17] Z. Zheng, Y. Yang, X. Niu, H. -N. Dai, and Y. Zhou, “Wide and deep framework based on homomorphic encryption in AMI network,” Front.
 convolutional neural networks for electricity-theft detection to secure Phys., vol. 10, 2022, Art. no. 1102892.
 smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1606–1615, [40] F. Naeem, M. Ali, and G. Kaddoum, “Federated-learning-empowered
 Apr. 2018. semi-supervised active learning framework for intrusion detection in
[18] S. M. Taghavinejad, M. Taghavinejad, L. Shahmiri, M. Zavvar, and ZSM,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 88–94, Feb. 2023.
 M. H. Zavvar, “Intrusion detection in IoT-based smart grid using hybrid
 decision tree,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Web Res., Apr. 2020, pp. 152–156.
[19] R. Vijayanand, D. Devaraj, and B. Kannapiran, “A novel deep learning Zhuoqun Xia received the Ph.D. degree from the
 based intrusion detection system for smart meter communication network,” School of Information Science and Engineering, Cenin Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Techn. Control, Optim. Signal Process., tral South University, Changsha, China, in 2012. In
 Apr. 2019, pp. 1–3. 2000, he joined the School of Computer and Commu-
[20] Y. He, G. J. Mendis, and J. Wei, “Real-time detection of false data injection nication Engineering, Changsha University of Sciattacks in smart grid: A deep learning-based intelligent mechanism,” IEEE ence and Technology, Changsha, where he is cur-
 Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2505–2516, Sep. 2017. rently a Full Professor. He has authored or coauthored
[21] Y. Xiao, C. Xing, T. Zhang, and Z. Zhao, “An intrusion detection model more than 50 research papers in journals or conferbased on feature reduction and convolutional neural networks,” IEEE ences. His research interests include cryptography,
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 42210–42219, 2019. network and information security.
[22] C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Du, and F. Zhang, “An intrusion detection system using
 a deep neural network with gated recurrent units,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 pp. 48697–48707, 2018.
[23] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, Haidong Tang received the B.Sc. degree in network
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized engineering from Dalian Minzu University, Dalian,
 data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., Apr. 2017, pp. 1273–1282. China, in 2022. He is currently working toward the
[24] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of things master’s degree in computer science from the Changintrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?,” IEEE sha University of Science and Technology, Changsha,
 Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020. China. His research interests include cryptography,
[25] H. Liang, D. Liu, X. Zeng, and C. Ye, “An intrusion detection method for network and information security, especially the seadvanced metering infrastructure based on federated learning,” J. Modern curity of the smart grid.
 Power Syst. Clean Energy, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 927–937, May 2023.
[26] M. Wen, R. Xie, K. Lu, L. Wang, and K. Zhang, “FedDetect: A novel
 privacy-preserving federated learning framework for energy theft detection
 in smart grid,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 6069–6080,
 Apr. 2022.
[27] S. Revathi and A. Malathi, “A detailed analysis on NSL-KDD dataset Zhenzhen Hu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 using various machine learning techniques for intrusion detection,” Int. J. degree in computer science from Hunan University,
 Eng. Res. Technol., vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 1848–1853, 2013. Changsha, China, in 2022. She is currently a Teacher
[28] R. Vinayakumar, K. P. Soman, and P. Poornachandran, “Applying con- of computer science with the University of South
 volutional neural network for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. China, Hengyang, China. Her research interests in-
 Conf. Adv. Comput., Commun. Inform., Sep. 2017, pp. 1222–1228. clude mobile and wireless networks, especially UAV
[29] N. Gao, L. Gao, Q. Gao, and H. Wang, “An intrusion detection model wireless communication in wireless network.
 based on deep belief networks,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big
 Data, Nov. 2014, pp. 247–252.
[30] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat analysis
 for automotive CAN networks: A GAN model-based intrusion detection
 technique,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4467–4477,
 Jul. 2021. Hongmei Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the
[31] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for master’s degree in computer science from the Changnetwork intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern sha University of Science and Technology, Chang-
 Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231. sha, China, in 2023. Her research interests include
[32] D. H. Deshmukh, T. Ghorpade, and P. Padiya, “Improving classification us- cryptography, network and information security, esing preprocessing and machine learning algorithms on NSL-KDD dataset,” pecially the security of the AMI system.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Inf., Comput. Technol., Jan. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[33] D. Liang and P. Pan, “Research on intrusion detection based on improved
 DBN-ELM,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Inf. Syst., Comput. Eng.,
 Jul. 2019, pp. 495–499.