5564 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Empirical Study of Hierarchical Intrusion Detection
 Systems for Unknown Attacks
 Menaka Pushpa Arthur, Ganesan Ramachandran, Keshav Sood , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Pavan Kaarthik, Srivarshinee Sridhar, and Morshed Chowdhury

 Abstract—The attack detection models of the traditional 5G is very high due to their diversified connected devices, vast
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) are trained on closed-set coverage, large network scalability, and restricted computation
problems which reduces the classifiers’ performance on detecting resources in the connected devices. Due to advanced intelligent
unknown attacks in the open-set problem space. Mostly adapted,
one-short learning in the classifier does not allow the traditional technology [1], openly accessible high-end resources, and the
IDS to be an open-set recognizer. The alternate continuous motivations from terrorists, attackers trigger more attacking
learning-based IDS in unknown attack detection claims ongoing strategies than before. The zero-day attacks can be predicted
suggestions from experts to retrain the model with newly only after a while from the attack initiation to create an explicit
identified samples. Hence, using the multi-layer hierarchical IDS impact on the network performances. Meanwhile, its impact
(HIDS) with optimized classifier models, the unknown attacks
can be classified by comparing their patterns with benign and on the network is substantial. In this situation, the convenknown attacks. However, we have identified many challenges in tional signature-based IDSs make them unable to protect the
the existing HIDS system on various datasets though it provides networks from unknown attacks with zero knowledge about
a solid foundation in this design category for unknown attack the new coming attacking strategy. The traditional IDSs have
identification. As a result, in this paper, we designed an enhanced been built by learning the patterns of benign and known attack
multi-tier IDS for zero-day attack detection with optimized
heterogeneous classifiers in its major two phases like basic instances. With limited data sets, fewer minority samples
framework demands. We have examined the enhanced proposed and traffic do not contain modern networks’ footprints, the
hierarchical IDS on various benchmark Intrusion Detection conventional IDSs struggle to identify new attacks and new
Systems datasets such as WUSTL, CIC_IDS_2017, 5G and benign traffic [2]. Also, the unknown attack classification gets
UNR to analyze the efficiency in unknown attacks classification. complicated and produces high false positive rates in such
When compare to existing multi-tier IDS, the proposed IDS
achieved highest detection 96.2%, 87%, 96.8% and 100% in IDSs because of real-world open-set problems [3].
5G, WUSTL, UNR and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets for unknown Traditional Artificial Intelligence-enabled IDSs are mostly
attacks. The optimized model in the proposed IDS reduces the designed as a closed-set recognition approach where all class
time complexity into 50% than the existing. Implementation samples are used in the training phase and those class labels
results show the proposed enhanced IDS performs better than alone are expected to occur during testing for prediction [3],
the existing hierarchical IDS with a high true positive rate for
benign, known and unknown attack labels on various datasets. [4], [5]. The Open Set Recognition (OSR) approach facilitates
 the classifier to detect zero-day attack instances in an adaptive
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection system, zero-day attack, and proactive manner [3]. To address the open-set problem,
open set problems, machine learning.
 IDS should be designed to classify the newly arrived class test
 samples that are not seen or used to train the classification
 I. I NTRODUCTION model [4]. Further, one-shot training is not sufficient for
 an intrusion detection model to learn the pattern of the
 HE SCOPE of zero-day attacks in the latest networks
T such as Internet of Things (IoT), Industrial-IoT (IIoT) and
 zero-day attacks. The IDS framework with OSR [6], [7]
 continuously evolves the learning even after training to detect
 Received 6 June 2025; accepted 7 August 2025. Date of publication
 unknown attacks. Unsupervised machine learning algorithms
19 August 2025; date of current version 5 December 2025. This research is such as clustering and outlier analysis can identify the samples
supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, under that are deviated from benign patterns. This methodology
the Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure in Universities and Higher
Educational Institutions (FIST) Program [Grant No. SR/FST/ET-I/2022/1079], in the existing works [8], [9] can solve the zero-day attack
and a matching grant from VIT University, Chennai. The associate editor identification at a baseline level.
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was To further validate our observations, in this paper, we
D. G. Berbecaru. (Corresponding author: Menaka Pushpa Arthur.)
 Menaka Pushpa Arthur, Ganesan Ramachandran, Pavan Kaarthik, and systematically evaluated the performance of multistage, hier-
Srivarshinee Sridhar are with the School of Computer Science and archical IDS which is proposed by Verkerken et al. [10]
Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai 600127, India (e-mail: against unknown attacks. In their work, the IDS has given
menakapushpa.a@vit.ac.in).
 Keshav Sood is with the School of Information Technology, Deakin 96% balanced accuracy in the overall classification and 87%
University, Geelong, VIC 3220, Australia. zero-day attack classification for CIC_IDS_2017 dataset. This
 Morshed Chowdhury is with the School of Engineering and Information multi-tier hierarchical IDS has been designed with super-
Technology, Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3000,
Australia. vised and semi-supervised algorithms in two tiers and the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3600378 results are well-tuned with the set of calculated thresholds
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5565

and hyper-parameter optimization algorithm, i.e., TPE (Tree- classification model and b) the way to use the appropristructured Parzen Estimator) in the classification model. We ate machine learning, deep learning, deep reinforcement
have analyzed the general solution capacity of this IDS over learning, and federated learning algorithms for the
unknown attacks on other IDS datasets such as UNR [11], design of OCR IDS for a zero-day attack detection.
5G_IDD [12], and WUSTL [13]. Interestingly, this system The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In the
does not produce impressive results in other datasets. In small next section, existing works in the intrusion detection system
datasets like UNR and 5G, the classification accuracy for designed for unknown or zero-day attacks are discussed.
unknown attacks is notable, yet the misclassification rate for Section III describes the benchmark network intrusion datasets
known attacks is still quite high. Known attacks are mis- used in this empirical study. Section IV presents various methclassified as unknown attacks. Whereas this system achieves ods and algorithms adapted in the design of an unknown attack
nearly 80% classification accuracy for unknown attacks in detection system. The experimental results and comparison of
large datasets like CIC_IDS_2017 and WUSTL. the performance of various techniques in the hierarchical IDS
 Motivated from this, we extended the framework of [10] are presented in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the
with various alternative supervised, unsupervised and semi- paper.
supervised machine learning and deep learning algorithms
in its two stages and evaluated the outcome under permutation and combination of such algorithms. The proposed II. R ELATED W ORK
OSR classifier is also optimized by Gaussian Process-based The misclassification rate of unknown attacks in con-
Bayesian optimisation (BOGP) technique. The implementation ventional single-layer intrusion detection systems is in the
results are extensively analyzed to find the best algorithms unavoidable range that leads to severe data breaches and
for anomaly detection (stage1), multi-class known attack network instability. In recent years, many initiatives have
detection, and unknown attack (combined stage) detection been taken against unknown or zero-day attacks to design
in the multitier IDS architecture. Our work observed that adaptive intrusion detection systems that automatically tune
the optimization algorithm BOGP performs better than TPE when faced with new patterns in network traffic [8], [9]. Based
and produces very similar high classification accuracy for on this requirement, existing work designed the hierarchical
benign samples like in state-of-the-art [10]. The known attacks IDS to classify unknown attacks from known attacks and
are classified by the proposed enhanced OCR IDS with benign traffic. The multilevel, hybrid IDS has been designed
the highest accuracy than in existing IDS. Interestingly this with anomaly and signature-based techniques to separate
enhanced multi-tier IDS can classify unknown attacks better the learning process as benign and adversarial traffic. In
for CIC_IDS_2017 and UNR datasets. By considering the the state-of-the-art work [4], [8], [10], [14], [15], benign
overall classification accuracy including all labels; benign, network activities are learned well by the semi-supervised or
known, and unknown attacks, the proposed enhanced multi- unsupervised algorithms, whereas known attacks are learned
tier IDS gives similar or better values in four datasets. by the supervised learners. The taxonomy of the existing IDSs
 Our contributions are as follows: for unknown attacks is given in Fig. 1 and summary of such
 1) In our empirical study, we have reproduced the work works is presented in Table I.
 done by Verkerken et al. [10] in which the authors have Zero-day attacks in the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) caused
 proposed a multi-stage IDS against unknown attacks. by vehicles and external networks connected to vehicles have
 After our rigorous evaluation of their work, we have been detected by Yang et al. [14] multilevel hybrid (MTH)
 investigated that the performance of the model is limited intrusion detection system. The normal and known traffic
 to certain data types and overall, not effective to detect patterns are learned by the signature-based IDS. The unknown
 unknown attacks. attack traffic samples are grouped using anomaly-based IDS.
 2) To bridge this identified gap, we have proposed a They evaluated the efficiency of the designed MTH using the
 multitier hierarchical IDS framework with various alter- CAN and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets. The limitation of this work
 native supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised is the less F1 score, i.e., 0.8 obtained for the CIC_IDS_2017
 machine learning and deep learning algorithms, in its data set. A set of appropriate preprocessing steps has been
 two stages. We have also used BOGP technique to identified to improve the quality of the data set before training.
 optimize the classification model. These enhancements k-means clustering for data sampling, SMOTE-based balanced
 produce impressive results in the classification rate dataset, label encoding, and z-score normalization algorithm
 of unknown, known, and benign attacks. This is a are in the first phase of the MTH-IDS for preprocessing.
 significant contribution in the design of the proposed For training, only optimal features are selected using IG
 hierarchical and hybrid intrusion detection system for (Information Gain), FCBF (Fast Correlation Based Feature
 open set problem that consists of unknown or zero-day Selection), and KPCA (Kernel Principal Component Analysis)
 attacks. techniques. Signature-based IDS is implemented by supervised
 3) Finally, we have further evaluated and compared the algorithms such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
 performance of the existing and proposed enhanced Tree, and XGBoost for known attacks detection. CL-k mean
 multi-tier hierarchical IDS on different network datasets. classifier used to implement anomaly-based IDS to label zero-
 This gives us insights about a) the important role day attacks. Bayesian Optimization-Tree of Parzen Estimator
 of hyper-parameter optimization algorithm in the (BO-TPE) [16], [17], [18] and Bayesian optimization based
5566 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of Zero-Day Attack IDS.

on Gaussian processes used to optimize the supervised and into a new benign, unknown attack, temporary anomaly and
unsupervised learning algorithms in this MTH. (iv) retrain the model with newly labeled samples to classify
 The model retraining phase is enhanced with Proportional zero-day attacks. Another work in this category, proposed by
Progressive Pseudo-Labeling (PPPL) technique [19] by Wu et al. [9] explored deep Q-network (DQN) to design an
excluding uncertain samples in the beginning stages of the IDS under active against unknown attacks in the network.
training loops. Using the reinforcement learning method [20], Active DQN consists of three phases; (i) NIDS classifier
[21] or experts labeling, the new class labels are named to generate belief vector for benign and malicious samples,
for the unknown samples and models will be retrained by (ii) sample selection phase selects valuable samples based on
including those new samples in the original dataset. The the belief vector and confidence score and (iii) annotator labels
performance of IDS on zero-day attacks also improved by the new group samples and added in the existing dataset to
the model’s hyper-parameters optimization techniques like retrain the model. With the help of deep learning techniques
Bayesian Optimization and Tree-structured Parzen estima- such as Evaluation Net and Target Net, the deep-Q network
tor [16]. Also, the zero-day attack signature extraction is very reinforcement learning process is enhanced.
difficult if it overlaps the known attacks or normal traffic Nguyen and Le [15] designed a reliable unknown
samples [22]. DoS/DDoS attack detection system for IoT networks using the
 In the state-of-the-art work, very limited papers have been combination of supervised and unsupervised hybrid IDS. The
published on adaptive IDS to detect zero-day attacks in soft-ordering CNN model is trained by the benign network
the open set problem space. The clustering-based open-set traffic patterns. The unsupervised algorithms Local Outlier
recognition models such as DOC (Deep Open Classification), Factor (LOF) and isolated-based Nearest Neighbor Ensemble
OpenMax, and AutoSVM are initially introduced for zero- (iNNE) identified the abnormal traffic patterns in the IoT
day attack detection in the IDS by Soltani et al. [8]. In network. The sequentially deployed SOCNN (Soft Ordering
two ways, the open-set IDS have been designed in state- CNN), LOF, and iNNE models detect the test samples as
of-the-work; (i) setting appropriate threshold in the baseline normal or abnormal and forward the abnormal samples to the
models [10], [23] and (ii) Unsupervised or semi-supervised admin to handle the unknown attacks.
anomaly detection in the multi-tier IDS framework to filter Recently, Fog and Edge Computing Architecture in the IoT
unknown attacks prior to supervised classification model for network requires edge-device-oriented federated learning to
known attacks [3], [8], [10]. detect zero-day botnet attacks [24]. Further, Popoola et al. [25]
 Soltani et al. [8] designed an adaptable deep learning-based applied a Deep Neural Network to create the local and global
IDS in this category with four phases; (i) Open set recognition classification model in different places of the network. The
used AutoSVM to classify known and unknown attack samples, federated learning algorithm aggregates local model updates,
(ii) unknown attack samples are grouped using a clustering and via polling the global model is updated to learn the new
algorithm with deep model in its last layer, (iii) supervised samples in the network. Verma et al. [3] designed a zerolabeling used experts to label clusters of the unknown samples day guardian against IIoT in the 5G network using federated
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5567

 TABLE I
 D ISCUSSION OF E XISTING IDS FOR U NKNOWN ATTACKS

learning IDS. Dual synchronized Autoencoders have been attack detection system for smart homes. The Variational
used to train the normal and attack samples in this FL- Autoencoder and Hidden Markov Model are used to learn the
based IDS. Kim et al. [26] used an autoencoder to implement known and unknown attack samples. The latent space is very
the reliable profiling-based approach to automatically detect close to the normal Gaussian distribution for known attacks
zero-day malware. In the training phases, the autoencoder rather than unknown attacks.
generates the latent representation Z for the training samples, Interestingly, Mbona and Eloff [28] and Zoppi et al. [29]
and then Z is passed as an input for the one-class classifier used only the semi-supervised machine learning algorithms
to learn the benign software and malware. One-class learner for zero-day attack detection in the IoT network. Gaussian
reads latent representations of the training samples rather than Mixture Model and the One-Class SVM semi-supervised
the actual training dataset. The same technique was adopted algorithms have been adapted to design the IDS. In addition to
by Li et al. [27] to design the MS-ZeroWall, a multistep the primary target of detecting zero-day attacks, the IDS is also
5568 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

designed to optimize its performance in detection accuracy. A. Unsupervised Machine Learning
High-biased and low-variance issues in the prediction of 1) AutoEncoder: The zero-day attack detection system in
unknown attacks in the model have been reduced by [4] the state-of-the-art utilized Autoencoder as an unsupervised
concatenating the results of auto-encoder, CNN, and LSTM in machine learning algorithm to learn the patterns in normal
the ensemble Intrusion Detection Systems for IoT and wired network traffic to classify them from abnormal traffic. As
networks. The overfitting problem in the training process of mentioned in [10], [32], for known samples, the latent domain
unknown attacks IDS was solved by Hairab et al. [30] using in the autoencoder is closer to the normal Gaussian distribution
CNN along with regularization techniques L1 and L2. N(0,1) than in the unknown samples. The design of a Zero-
 Remarks: The existing works in the open-set IDS design for day attack Intrusion Detection System used Autoencoder in
the unknown or zero-day attack detection are very limited [3], the following ways;
[4], [5], [8], [10]. Also, the IDSs in the state-of-the-art 1) Single Autoencoder to classify the normal data using a
have been designed for a particular network like 5G, IIoT, One-Class classifier [26]
and IoT. The datasets used in such works are related to 2) A Single Autoencoder for benign data and its encoder
specific networks. There is no such general Open-Set IDS for hidden layers are built by CNN [27]
unknown attack classification for different types of networks. 3) Dual synchronized Autoencoder for normal and attack
In our work, we analyze the performance of out-performed data [3]
multi-tier hierarchical IDS on unknown attacks that registered The encoder of the AE is connected with the classifier
on CIC_IDS_2017 dataset against various IDS datasets of using the latent representation zi of the input data xi using an
different networks. The poor results obtained in our empirical activation function Ae of the encoder
study drive us to enhance the existing hierarchical IDS for    
zero-day attack classification. Qp x i = Ae Wx i + b (1)
 with W and b represent the weight and bias values. The encode
 III. DATASETS D ESCRIPTION Ae maps x i into a latent representation or bottleneck z i .
 2) iForest [33]: iForest uses a partition-based anomaly
 We have used 4 datasets in our comparative study. The
 isolation method other than other methods such as densitydescription of the data sets are given below.
 based and distance-based to build the model for normal or
 CIC_IDS_2017: This dataset is generated by the Canadian
 anomaly samples. The tree is constructed with two child nodes,
Institute of Cybersecurity (CIC) in 2017 [31]. This data
 i.e., binary tree to profiling the normal instances, the deviation
set is intended to evaluate the performance of IDS and
 is identified as an anomaly. The analytical model of the iForest
IPS. This dataset consists of 53,92,441 samples including
 uses the height of the isolation tree h(x) for the instance x to
benign and various attacks such as DDoS, Port Scan, Brute
 isolate the anomaly instances from the normal. If the path of
Force, Web-Attack, Botnet, Infiltration, and Heartbleed. For
 the leaf node x from the root is more, then it is classified as
the implementation of the purpose of the empirical study, infilnormal otherwise anomaly.
tration and heartbleed samples have been considered unknown
attacks due to the smaller number of samples in the entire 
 x

dataset. Edge = 0; h(x ) = Edge + + (2)
 UNR-IDD: University of Nevada - Reno Intrusion i=root
Detection Dataset (UNR-IDD) [11] is an NIDS dataset with c(n) = 2H (n − 1) − (2(n − 1)/n) (3)
 E (h(x )
additional special feature network port statistics collected from − c(n)
 s(x , n) = 2 (4)
switch or route. ⎧
 ⎨ Anomaly; if s(x , n) > 0.8
 5G-NIDD: This Network Intrusion Detection dataset is
 A(x , n) = Normal ; if s(x , n) < 0.5 (5)
generated over 5G wireless networks testbed by the University ⎩
 NoAbnormality; if s(x , n) ≈ 0.5
of Oulu, Finland [12]. The data is collected from the base
station that is connected with normal and attacker user nodes. 3) iNNE [34], [35]: The unknown DoS/DDoS attacks were
This dataset consists of DoS and port scan attack samples. detected using isolation using the nearest neighbor ensemble
 WUSTL-IIoT 2021: The cybersecurity attacks in Industrial model, [15]. iNNE is a distance-based method to build
IoT have been collected emulated and collected from the the ensemble model for anomaly isolation. The axis-parallel
testbed. This dataset [13] consists of nearly 93% samples from clustering in iForest induces an anomaly masking problem
normal traffic in the total dataset whereas the remaining 7% that reduces the anomaly detection accuracy. This problem
is occupied by Reconnaissance, command injection, DoS, and is resolved in iNNE by forming hyperspheres for selected
backdoor attacks. Using Argus tool, the best 41 network flow- subsamples with size ψ. Each instance x in the subsample
related features are identified. S is covered by hypersphere H(x) centered with x and
 calculated radius r(x). The instance x with long radius H(x)
 is more isolated from its neighbors. If H(x) intersects other
 IV. P RELIMINARIES hyperspheres, then x is very close to neighborhoods. The dense
 In this section, we discussed the methodologies used in hypersphere contains normal instances whereas there is more
the state-of-the-art of multi-tier IDS against unknown attacks chance for the sparse hypersphere formed by anomalies. In
detection. this way, the isolation score is calculated between 0 and 1 for
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5569

the x t h instance in S. For the subsample S with n number algorithms. The multi-tired IDS [14] has been designed to
of instances, the anomaly score A for the training dataset is detect unknown cyberattacks on the Internet of Vehicles.
calculated by the average of isolation score I of each instance; In the Four-tired IDS, the first and second layers were
 
 n implemented using multiclass supervised learning algorithms
 Ii
 A= (6) with hyper-parameters optimization to detect known attacks.
 n Four tree-based learners with Tree Parzen Estimator Bayesian
 i=1
The test sample t is classified as anomaly or normal by optimization algorithm have been stacked in the first two
calculating the average isolation score of t sample from n layers of the IDS. The Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
number of hyperspheres H(x) generated for x instances in the Tree, and Extreme Gradient Boosting are the base learners in
subsample with ψ size; the ensemble model whereas high accuracy learner from this
 n set is used as the meta classifier. The base models RF, ET
 I (t, H (xi )) and XGBoost are ensemble models of multiple decision trees.
 A(t) = i=1 (7)
 n The Random Forest Supervised machine learning algorithms
 An anomaly score A(t) of test sample t is more than the such as AdaBoost, Logistic Regression and Naive Bayes are
threshold value then it’s classified as an anomaly; adopted for the zero-day attack detection IDS for the IoT
 Anomaly, if A(t) > threshold networks [30].
 t= (8) 2) Deep Learning: Deep Learning model framework has
 Normal , otherwise
 been designed [8] with the help of DOC and OpenMax to
 4) LOF [36]: This mechanism learns outlier patterns rather classify known and unknown samples in the repeated training
than normal patterns in the input samples. The parameter along with labeling via clustering technique.
Local Outlier Factor gives the degree of isolation for the Deep Open Classification [37]: Instead of, training the
outlier objects. This outlier factor depends on the outlier- model in the closed environment, the learning process is
ness of the object against its k-neighborhood. The LOF of done in a dynamic and open environment in the DOC, an
an object is calculated via the sequence of calculations such extension of Open-class SVM. DOC should identify the new
as k-distance of an object (k-dis), reachability distance of class samples that are not used in the model learning phase is
an object (r_dis), reachability density (r_den) and outlier called an open classification problem. DOC generates M(i+1)
factor (f). The LOF is calculated by the following combined one-vs-rest models for i number of seen class labels li in the
formula; training dataset D and additional label for rejection class that
 
  Reach _Dist(p,o) represents unseen samples.
  o∈NM inPts(p)
 o∈NM inPts(p) 
 o  ∈NM inPts(o) Reach _Dist(o ,o) 
 LOF (p) = Reject, if Sigmoid(di ) < ti , ∀i ∈ li
 |NM inPts(p)| ŷ = (12)
 (9) max (Sigmoid(di )), ∀i ∈ li otherwise

Reach _Dist(p, o) = max (kd ist(o), d(p, o)).p, o ∈ D (10) The Open Space risk of Sigmoid function is reduced by
 adjusting the threshold value ti equivalent to 0.5.
 LOF finds outliers using local analysis rather than global
 OpenMax [5], [23]: The penultimate layer of the Softmax
analysis from k-nearest neighbors of an object. MinPts reprelayer gives the score for an input that is not specific to any
sents the nearest neighbors of an object.
 known classes. This score is called the activation vector, which
 is considered as the main information for OpenMax. Using the
B. Semi-Supervised Machine Learning
 Meta-Recognition technique, OpenMax finds the distance of
 1) One-Class Learner(OC-SVM): In the hierarchy intru- input from known classes. If the input is far away from known
sion detection system for an unknown attack [10], [28], the data, then it is classified as unseen sample. The Softmax layer
anomaly samples are classified from benign traffic in the first computes the probability of detection under class label j for
phase. The labeled benign samples train the model to learn an input x;
the one-class pattern in the dataset. Gaussian kernel form
the hypersphere around similar samples in the feature space e vj (x )
 P (y = j |x ) = N (13)
instead of forming hyperplanes in default SVM. The complex, vi (x )
 i=1 e
non-linear boundary builds for hyper_sphere in the OCSVM. y ∗ = argmaxj P (y = j |x ) (14)
In these works, the hyperparameters of OCSVM are optimized ∗ ∗
 Reject, if y == 0(or)P (y = y |x )<
to induce the best AOC for anomaly detection. The one-class ŷ = (15)
 y ∗, otherwise
RBF of OCSVM is given as follows:
 2 2 CNN: The Convolutional Neural Networks [3], [25] and
 K xi , xj = exp−||Xi −Xj || /2σ (11) LSTM are ensembled with Auto Encoder to detect unknown,
 known and benign classes, [4]. The ensemble model consid-
C. Supervised Learning Algorithm ered threshold-based design to deal the open-set problems.
 1) Machine Learning Algorithm: One of the layers in The CNN architecture with L1 and L2 regularizations is used
the hybrid Intrusion Detection System included [10], [14], in the IDS [30]. By reducing the over-fitting problem, the
[30] to detect known attacks in networks that classify detection of a zero-day attack has been improvised by L1
unknown attacks from them using the multiclass classifier and L2 regularization techniques. L2 performs better when
5570 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

compared to L1 since L2 uses the square value of magnitude where, Rcorrect = +1, Rwrong = −1 and Rmodify = 0 reprerather than absolute value in L1. The regularizers integrate the sent the action for correct, wrong classification and expert’s
additional term, that is, penalty, with the cost function of CNN request for class labeling for an input sample x. yˆx and
model; yx means the predicted and actual class value. The LSTMbased Evaluation and Target Net models of this framework are
 λ 
 m
 L1 = Loss(ŷ, y) + ||wi || (16) used to calculate the Q value using Q(current_state,a), ∀a ∈
 2m actions pace and updated Q value after the reward has been
 i=1
 calculated.
 λ 
 m
 L2 = Loss(ŷ, y) + ||wi ||2 (17)
 2m
 i=1 E. Hyper-Parameter Optimization [39] (HPO)
 The L2 considers all features to tune the parameters by The hyperparameters of the model are improved by two
calculating the square of magnitude that makes the less different variations of Bayesian Optimization algorithms; Treecoefficient features nearer to 0 rather than 0. At the same time, structured Parzen Estimator [16] and Gaussian process [40]. In
the L1 method directly removes the less important features that the [10] research work, TPE is used as a sampling algorithm.
have 0 value from the model construction process. Hence, L1 The k-value in the k-means unsupervised clustering algorithm
fits for outlier analysis, whereas L2 fits for complex network is tuned using the GP-BO method in the work [14]. The
traffic with uncertain features to design an IDS against zero- Gaussian distribution in GP-BO method predicts the class label
day attacks. y for an input x in the hyper-parameter space D with mean μ
 Soft Ordering CNN: The traditional CNN architecture is and covariance σ.
  
modified in SOCNN by including the feature expansion p(y|x , D = N y|μ̂, σ̂ 2 (20)
layer before to feature extraction and classification layer to
classify unknown DoS/DDoS attack detection system for IoT The prediction of next hyper-parameter value in TPE is
networks [15]. The fully connected layer is added first in the calculated using two density functions l(x) and g(x) with the
SOCNN architecture to extend the input vector x into an output predefined threshold y*. These two functions are defined for
matrix in nxm size where n is the existing features and m good region and poor region which is adjusted by l(x)/g(x) to
is the soft ordering feature set. The intention of SOCNN is obtain optimal values for hyper-parameters.
re-ordering the features to find an optimal order with high l (x ), if y < y∗
detection rate of unknown attacks. p(x |y, D) = (21)
 g(x ), if y > y∗
 FCout = g(Wx + B ) (18)
 V. I MPLEMENTATION M ECHANISM
where, FCout is the output matrix of fully connected layer In this section, we discuss the proposed enhanced IDS
with nxm size. g() is the activation function and B is the bias to detect unknown attacks and compare it with the existvalue. W is the m matrix in nxn size. ing multi-tier hierarchical IDS [10]. We have considered
 LSTM [4] and BiLSTM [9]: The LSTM-based Evaluation Verkerken et al. [10] IDS for an empirical study over different
and Target Net models of the ADQN NIDS [9] framework are networks based IDS datasets. This IDS is a three-tier, multiused to calculate the Q value using Q(current_state,a), ∀a ∈ stage framework to detect benign, known, and unknown attack
actions pace and updated Q value after the reward has been samples using anomaly-based and signature-based approaches.
calculated. ADQN NIDS is designed to learn spatial, temporal Totally three stages namely anomaly detection, known attack
and spatio-temporal features in the input samples by inte- detection and unknown attack detection are used to build this
grating BiLSTM, CNN and fusion of these two architectures hierarchical IDS. To improve the unknown attacks classificaconnected via fully connected layer. tion accuracy, anomaly scores generated in stage1 and stage2
 for the test samples are compared with the corresponding
D. Reinforcement Learning phase revised thresholds τB , τM and τV of the unsupervised and supervised classification algorithms rather than
 Deep Q Network combined with BiLSTM [9] selects the
 their default threshold values. The anomaly detector model’s
zero-day attack samples for annotation along with the probthreshold τB is calculated from the maximum f-score in the
ability distribution before classifying them using the ADQN
 F1 to F9 scores of the classification algorithm. In the second
algorithm. Using DQN [38], the dynamic active learning
 stage, F1 score of the multi-class classification algorithm is
process is featured in IDS to retrain the model with newly
 set as threshold τM . This work compared and identified One
annotated unknown attack samples that will improve the
 Class Support Vector System algorithm performs better than
overall performance of the detection. The reward function
 Auto Encoder for an unsupervised algorithm to classify benign
of ADQN is defined as follows with two different action
 samples in the anomaly detection stage. Whereas, Random
spaces Ak , ∀k - class labels in the dataset and AE - expert’s
 Forest performs better than Neural Networks for a supervised
requisition for label annotation for unknown sample;
 ⎧ algorithm to classify the known attacks in the multiclass
 / AE and yˆx ≡ yx
 ⎨ Rcorrect , if ax ∈ classification stage. The performance of the stage1 and stage2
 rx = Rwrong , if ax ∈ / AE and yˆx = yx (19) classification models is improved by the optimization of the
 ⎩
 Rmodify , if ax ∈ AE hyper-parameters using the TPE method. The CIC_IDS_2017
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5571

Fig. 2. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier Hierarchical IDS Architecture with various Implementation Techniques.

dataset has been considered to evaluate the IDS performance. models. The anomaly detector model is trained using the
The major drawbacks we have identified in the existing alternative methods LOF, iNNE, iForest, k-means clustering,
work are (i) the efficiency of this system has not compared PAE, and CNN with AE to classify the samples as benign
with other multi-tier zero-day attack detection systems. This or not. In stage2, the multi-class classification model is build
system is compared only with simple open-set IDS which using various algorithms and ensemble techniques to classify
tunned the RF baseline threshold (ii) other intrusion detection known attacks. The sample which is with less anomaly score
benchmark datasets have not been considered to analyze the scored in stage2 than the stage2 threshold value τM then
IDS performance under different characteristics of various it forwards to stage3 otherwise this is classified as known
networks and (iii) it can’t achieve the high classification attack by the stage2. In the final stage, the anomaly score
accuracy for zero-day attacks. of unclassified samples is compared with stage1 and stage3
 We initiated our work by considering this setback in threshold values. If the anomaly score generated in stage2 for
Verkerken et al. [10] work and the notable technologies in unclassified samples is less than stage3 threshold τV then it
other zero-day attack detection systems which are discussed is classified as an unknown attack. The BOGP is applied to
in Sections II and III. In our work, we adapted the basic tune the hyper-parameters of the models in both stages.
structure of Verkerken et al. [10] IDS with an adjustable The existing and enhanced IDS (represented as “Alternative”
threshold since the framework with clustering and classi- in Fig. 2) performance is analyzed using various intrusion
fication is the best one for unknown attack detection in detection benchmark datasets such as CIC_IDS_2017, 5G,
open-set problems. The novelty in our work is the multi-stage UNR and WUSTL. To introduce an unknown attack in the
hierarchical IDS is designed against zero-day attacks with dataset for implementation, a known attack class with less
different algorithms mentioned in the state-of-the-work. The occurrence is considered for that purpose which is mentioned
proposed framework shown in Fig. 2 is designed with three in Table II.
stages such as anomaly detection, known attack detection,
and unknown attack confirmation which is similar to existing
 VI. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
hierarchical IDS. The enhancement is introduced via two
ways; (i) find the best combination from the permutation of A. Implementation Environment and Performance Metrics
clustering and classification algorithms to design the open-set We used high end GPU platform, NVIDIA H100 80GB
IDS to provide a general solution and (ii) BOGP optimized PCIe 5.0 x 16 for the implementation of hybrid, multi-tier
5572 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE II
 D ETAILS OF U NKNOWN ATTACK S AMPLES IN THE I MPLEMENTATION OF THE P ROPOSED E NHANCED M ULTI -T IER IDS

 TABLE III
IDS with optimized parameters. It is the most powerful GPU G ENERATED T HRESHOLDS BY THE E XISTING IDS [10]
chip on the market and is designed specifically for artificial
intelligence (AI) applications. The configuration details of
H100 is with the processors in 2 x 24-core (48 cores), memory
in 1TB, OS storage in 1 x 1.9TB NVMe PCIe, file storage in
3 x 14TB SATA 6Gb/s 7.2K and NVIDIA NVLink Bridge.
The four datasets CIC_IDS_2017, WUSTL, 5G and UNR IDD
intrusion detection benchmark datasets of different networks
are stored in the server and executed using the python code IDS to detect unknown attacks along with benign and known
with appropriate packages such as PyTorch and TensorFlow attacks.
etc. The metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, balanced The implementation in our work has been carried out for
accuracy, and F-score have been measured to analayze the three major observations:
performances of the hierarchical intrusion detection system. 1) Existing multi-tier IDS vs other networking benchmark
Out of that, the formula for balanced accuracy and F-score are IDS datasets: These results evaluate the efficiency of the
given below: existing multi-tier IDS using different IDS datasets
 Balanced accuracy: This is one of the vital metrics for 2) The Proposed Enhanced multi-tier IDS: The techniques
highly imbalanced datasets by considering the accuracy of used in the state-of-the-art of zero-day attack detection
both positive and negative cases. The datasets used in our system are applied in anomaly detection and multi-class
experiments are highly imbalanced. We have not adapted any attack detection stages in the Existing multi-tier IDS
techniques to balance the actual dataset since they reduce the 3) BOGP vs TPE Optimization techniques: The Proposed
quality of the dataset. Hence, balanced accuracy is the perfect Enhanced multi-tier IDS is evaluated with a different
measure to analyze the system under this case. optimization technique BOGP than the proposed one
 TPE to tune the hyper-parameters of the anomaly detec-
 Sensitivity + Specificity
 Balanced Accuracy = (22) tion and classification models
 2 We present the implementation results in the following
 F score: It combines Precision and Recall to analyze the sections to discuss the efficiency of the proposed enhanced
performance of the algorithm. IDS along with TPE and BOGP optimization techniques and
   Precision . Recall the limitations of the existing work on various datasets.
 Fβ = 1 + β 2 2
 (23)
 (β . Precision) + Recall
 C. Existing Multi-Tier IDS vs Various Benchmark IDS
where, β various from 1 to 9 for calculating F1 score to Datasets
F9 score.
 In this section, the limitations of the existing multi-tier
 IDS [10] are discussed in stage-wise detail with the help of
B. Performance Evaluation and Results Analysis various IDS datasets. The limitations outlined here emphasize
 The existing multi-tier hierarchical IDS [10] is implemented the significance of the general open-set approach-based IDS
and evaluated its’ performance using various benchmark intru- framework against unknown attacks regardless of the features
sion datasets such as UNR, 5G and WUSTL. In three stages of specific to the datasets. Primarily, we focused on the exethe IDS architecture, the performance of the machine learning cution time and classification performances to analyze the
algorithm is observed for an evaluation of binary and multi- performance of the IDS on various datasets and presented
classification models to detect normal, known and unknown these results in Table III to Table V, and Fig. 3–Fig. 6.
attacks. Using various benchmark datasets, the pros and cons 1) Execution Time of the IDS: The training time of stage1
of the existing hybrid IDS design are well analyzed. The and stage2 and the testing time of all three stages of the
metrics such as training time, test time, accuracy, balanced existing system are shown in Table V. The stage1 training
accuracy, precision, recall and F scores are identified as time of WUSTL is recorded as high, i.e., 1min 39s ± 924 ms
appropriate to evaluate the performance of the design of an and CIC_IDS_2017 is observed as low 0.771 s ± 21 ms
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5573

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF E XISTING M ULTI -T IER H IERARCHICAL IDS

Fig. 3. Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for 5G Dataset.

 TABLE V
 T IME C OMPLEXITY OF P ROPOSED IDS VS E XISTING IDS [10] datasets such as 5.65 s ± 43.49 ms and 8.043 s ± 65 ms
 respectively. It shows how complex these two datasets are to
 derive the unknown attacks.
 2) Anomaly Detection Phase: The unsupervised and
 semisupervised algorithms correspondingly AE and OCSVM
 are used in the anomaly detection model of the existing system
 and identified OCSVM outperforms AE. The classification
 model is optimized by TPE technique. Hence, we implemented
 the first stage of the existing system using OCSVM and AE
 and then observed the high value generated by these two
 methods. The confusion matrix generated in stage1 for the
 datasets 5G, WUSTL and UNR are presented in Fig. 3, Fig. 4
 and Fig. 5 correspondingly. From Fig. 3, the accuracy of
 anomaly detection in stage1 for the 5G dataset is observed
 very less, i.e., 75% than for other two datasets WUSTL and
 UNR which are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. For that two
 datasets, anomaly labels are classified with more than 92%.
out of 4 considered datasets. The WUSTL dataset contains Table VI shows the other performance metrics such as
11,07,448 benign samples to train the OC_SVM model which recall, precision and F1-score in stage1 for all four datasets.
is higher than UNR and 5G datasets that induce the high Correspondingly, the Recall value of the attack class shown
training time for WUSTL. Interestingly, the test time is high in Table VI reached 79% for the 5G dataset which is lower
for CIC_IDS_2017 with 8.117 s ± 277 ms and UNR secures than in other datasets whereas the precision is comparalow with 122.6 ms ± 20.75 ms due to how complex the tively lesser than others. The anomaly samples are wrongly
model converges to find the solution. The known attacks classified as benign which reduces the recall of attack
detected in 1.813 s ± 8.387 ms for 5G dataset that is the and precision of benign samples for UNR and WUSTL.
high value observed in the 4 datasets. Similarly, the unknown Another interesting observation noticed in the stage1 results
classification takes more time in 5G and CIC_IDS_2017 is the dataset CIC_IDS_2017 secured less accuracy 68.7%
5574 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 4. Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for WUSTL Dataset.

Fig. 5. Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for UNR Dataset.

for benign sample prediction. Correspondingly, the recall of known attacks since more known attack samples are wrongly
benign samples and precision of attack samples are observed classified into other classes like benign. More negative cases
as less than the other datasets. The reason behind this is more are wrongly classified as known attacks in 5G dataset which
number of benign samples in the CIC_IDS_2017 dataset are causes low precision 0.55 for this dataset.
wrongly classified as attacks. That reduces the recall of benign 4) Unknown Attack Detection Phase/Extension Stage: This
and the precision of attack classes. In general, OCSVM in stage finalizes the unknown attacks. The known attack is
stage1 performs better for UNR and WUSTL datasets than classified from benign by stage1 and then stage2 confirms it.
5G and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets for attack and benign sample Table VI shows the overall performance of the existing multidetection. tier IDS. The classification accuracy for unknown attacks
 3) Multiclass Known Attack Detection Phase: The major for CIC_IDS_2017 and WUSTL datasets are registered less
design intention of stage2 is to classify known attacks with values 87% and 83%. More benign and known attack samples
high accuracy. The multiclassification algorithm, Random are wrongly classified as unknown attacks in CIC_IDS_2017,
Forest used to train the Stage2 classifier. The threshold tau_m UNR and WUSTL datasets which reduces the precision to
in this stage is calculated from the high score registered in less than 0.5. At the same time, more unknown attack samples
the range F1 to F9 scores. Refer Table III for the threshold are wrongly classified which reduces the recall value near
obtained in stage2 for different datasets. The confusion matrix to 0.8. Fig. 6 shows the confusion matrix of the complete
of 5G, WUSTL and UNR are shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 system of UNR, WUSTL and 5G datasets. Table III shows the
respectively. The low accuracy 80.93% registered for known threshold values of each stage. The threshold value tau_b is
attacks in UNR dataset due to its small size dataset than other calculated from F-scores obtained from stage1 prediction algodatasets. Simultaneously, UNR registered less recall 81% for rithm. Tau_b is observed as low 0.00047 in CIC_IDS_2017
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5575

Fig. 6. Confusion Matrix of the Complete System in the Existing IDS for(a) UNR (b) WUSTL and (c) 5G.

Fig. 7. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for 5G with TPE.

and high 0.2068 in 5G dataset to classify the attacks from algorithms from machine learning. The ensemble machine
benign. learning models like AdaBoost, XGBoost etc and customized
 ensemble model from deep learning and machine learning
 under bagging are also used to implement the stage2 of multi-
D. Performance Analysis of the Proposed Enhanced stage IDS. The results of complete IDS for 5G, UNR, WUSTL
Multi-Tier Hierarchical IDS and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets are shown in Fig. 7 to Fig. 12
 This section applies different techniques from state-of- along with different optimization algorithms TPE and BOGP.
the-art for anomaly detection and multi-class classification For UNR dataset that shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, under
under deep learning and machine learning. For stage1 of BOGP optimization algorithm nearly 75% overall accuracy
multi-stage IDS, anomaly detection is implemented using scored by the J48G machine learning algorithm in stage2
unsupervised algorithms such as LOF, iForest, iNNE, CNN for known attacks classification and LOF_TPE as well as
with AE, k-means, one-class SVM under two different model iForest_GP algorithms in stage1 for benign samples detection.
optimization techniques TPE and BOGP. The implementation The unknown attacks are identified in 99.94% but benign
results are shown in Table VI. The top 5 algorithms are chosen and known attacks samples are classified with only 50%.
from Table VI to implement stage1 in the multi-stage IDS. For Hence, we considered the next low-level top performers GRU,
UNR and WUSTL datasets, LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, iForest_GP, MLP and XGB with LOF_TPE or LOF_GP secured 82%
and OC-SVM_GP are best algorithms for anomaly detection known and benign samples classification accuracy. In this set
to classify benign and non-benign samples. The algorithm of algorithms, XGB and MLP provides nearly 30% detection
iForest_TPE is an additional one for WUSTL dataset whereas accuracy for unknown attacks with LOF_TPE and LOF_GP
iNNE_GP is in the top list of UNR. The top 5 performers algorithms in stage1 correspondingly. For the UNR dataset
of 5G dataset are LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, CNN_GP, iNNE_GP shown in Fig. 9 with TPE model optimization algorithm, the
and OC-SVM_GP and for CIC_IDS_2017 dataset, CNN_TPE, stage2 algorithms such as MLP, CNN and XGB provide high
CNN_GP, iNNE_GP, and OC-SVM_GP. benign and known attacks accuracy in the final detection result
 In the second stage, known attacks are classified using the like 99.97% and 68% correspondingly. The algorithms such
following supervised algorithms from deep learning CNN, Soft as LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, iForest_GP are best combination in
CNN, LSTM, GRU and all types of multi-class classification stage1 along with a set of selected stage2 algorithms. Finally,
5576 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE VI
 S TAGE 1 P ERFORMANCES IN THE E XISTING IDS AND THE P ROPOSED E NHANCED IDS

the XGB and MLP are identified as a best stage2 algorithms The same kind of analysis we have applied for other
for entire IDS with iForest_GP in stage1. They secured datasets CIC_IDS_2017, 5G and WUSTL to find the best
100%:58%:38% and 100%:68%:32% for benign, known and combination of algorithms in stage1 and stage2 along with
unknown attacks in the complete multi-stage IDS. model optimization technique. For the WUSTL dataset with TPE
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5577

Fig. 8. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for 5G with BOGP.

Fig. 9. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for UNR with TPE.

Fig. 10. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for UNR with BOGP.

model optimization technique shown in Fig. 11, MLP and Extra Fig. 7 under TPE model optimization technique. For BOGP
Tree are identified as best algorithm at stage2 and iForest_GP optimization technique in the model for 5G dataset shown
in stage1. The algorithms MLP and ET secured 98%:65%:32% in Fig. 8, MLP classifier in stage2 secures high detecand 98%:58%:38% detection accuracy in the final stage of tion accuracy 97.9%:81.8%:73.5% for benign, known attacks
the multi-stage IDS for benign, known attacks and unknown and unknown attacks. The best combination algorithm in
attack samples. For BOGP model optimization algorithm for stage1 is CNN_GP for MLP (Multi Layer Perceptron) in
WUSTL dataset shown in Fig. 12, the MLP and Extra Tree stage2 to obtain this best results. For CIC_IDS_2017 dataset,
stage2 algorithms secure high detection accuracy in the final Verkerken et al. [10] system provides high accuracy than other
stage with LOF_TPE and LOF_GP algorithms in stage1. These alternative algorithms in stage1 and stage2.
algorithms provide 99.97%:68%:29% detection accuracy in the
final stage for benign, known attacks and unknown attacks.
 For 5G dataset, Extra Tree algorithm in stage2 and E. Existing Multi-Tier IDS vs the Proposed Enhanced
CNN_GP in stage1 provides best detection accuracy for Multi-Tier IDS
benign, known attacks and unknown attacks with 99.4%, The existing multi-tier hierarchical IDS proposed by
74.8% and 76.8% respectively. This result is shown in Verkerken et al. [10] performance over the various benchmark
5578 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 11. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for WUSTL with TPE.

Fig. 12. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for WUSTL with BOGP.

 better than existing IDS. However, the unknown attack samples
 classification rate is impressive in the enhanced IDS but that
 are not upto the level of existing IDS. In general, the overall
 classification rate is high in the proposed enhanced multi-tier
 IDS with less computation complexity than the existing multitier IDS.

 F. Discussions and Implications
 The following points are observed from the meticulous
Fig. 13. The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for CIC_IDS_2017 with
BOGP. analysis in the results generated from our implementation:
 1) Overall, the machine learning algorithms such as MLP,
network IDS datasets is compared with our enhanced multi-tier Extra Tree and XGB are the best performers in the
IDS and presented in Fig. 14. The best combination of stage1 stage2 of the proposed enhanced multi-tier, hierarchical
and stage2 algorithms is identified in all four datasets under IDS
TPE and BOGP optimization algorithms for this comparison. 2) For stage1, iForest_GP, LOF_GP, LOF_TPE and
For the 5G dataset, CNN with GP in stage1, Extra Tree with CNN_GP are identified as the best algorithms to achieve
BOGP in stage2 is the best combination for the proposed high results in the final stage of our enhanced multi-tier,
enhanced IDS. For the WUSTL dataset, LOF with GP in hierarchical IDS
stage1, the deep learning technique GRU with BOGP in stage2 3) BOGP model optimization technique performs well to
is the best combination for enhanced IDS. For the UNR detect benign, known attacks and unknown attacks for
dataset, LOF with GP in stage1, Extra Tree with TPE in all 4 datasets than the TPE
stage2 is the best combination for the proposed enhanced IDS. 4) From the overall observation, MLP and iForest perform
For the CIC_IDS_2017 dataset, CNN or OCSVM with GP in better in stage2 and stage1 of our enhanced multi-tier
stage1, AdaBoost with BOGP in stage2 is the best combination IDS for multi-class known attacks classification and
for enhanced IDS. The benign samples are generally well benign samples detection
classified in all the datasets by the existing and our enhanced 5) For 5G and UNR datasets, the benign, known
IDS. Known attack samples in the enhanced IDS are classified and unknown attack samples are detected in high
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5579

Fig. 14. The Proposed Enhanced Multitier IDS vs Existing Multitier IDS.

 percentage which is more than 85% than other datasets A PPENDIX
 CIC_IDS_2017, UNR and WUSTL N OMENCLATURE
 6) For stage1, the Gaussian-based optimization algorithm
 IDSs Intrusion Detection Systems
 produces better results than TPE
 HIDS Hierarchical IDS
 7) For stage1, the unsupervised and semi-supervised algo-
 IoT Internet of Things
 rithms such as LOF, OCSVM, and the deep learning
 IIoT Industrial-IoT
 technique CNN give the best results for anomaly detection
 OSR Open Set Recognition
 8) For stage2, GRU, Ada Boosta and Extra Tree per-
 TPE Tree-structured Parzen Estimator
 form better for multiclass classification in known
 BOGP Gaussian Process-based Bayesian
 attacks
 optimisation
 IoV Internet of Vehicles
 VII. C ONCLUSION MTH multilevel hybrid
 The traditional, single-level intrusion detection system does IG Information Gain
not perform well against zero-day attacks due to its closed-set FCBF Fast Correlation Based Feature Selection
recognition nature. Hence, the hierarchical, and hybrid nature KPCA Kernel Principal Component Analysis
intrusion detection systems is implemented and well-analyzed BO-TPE Bayesian Optimization-Tree of Parzen
in this empirical study with different alternative techniques Estimator
from the state-of-art works. The alternative techniques for PPPL Proportional Progressive Pseudo-Labeling
stage1’s unsupervised or semi-supervised learning and stage2’s FL Federated Learning
supervised learning are identified and observed performance AE Autoencoder
metrics of the proposed IDS. We adopted different hyper- DL Deep Learning
parameter optimization algorithms such as Tree-structured ML Machine Learning
Parzen estimator and Bayesian optimization with Gaussian FGSM fast gradient sign method
processes for model fine tunning. These techniques improve CW Carlini Wagner
the detection accuracy of unknown attacks especially along DoS/DDoS Denial of Service/ Distributed DoS
with threshold optimization at baseline classifier. In this DVAE VAE-based dual-domain defense
empirical study, the efficiency of the proposed enhanced multi- DQN deep Q-network
tier IDS is evaluated using various IDS datasets such as LOF Local Outlier Factor
CIC_IDS_2017, UNR, WUSTL and 5G. From this detailed iNNE isolated-based Nearest Neighbor Ensemble
study, we identified the best algorithms for each layer of the SOCNN Soft Ordering CNN
multi-tier IDS with suitable model optimization algorithms. CIC Canadian Institute of Cybersecurity
The advantages of our proposed work are the design of the UNR-IDD University of Nevada - Reno Intrusion
best unknown attack IDS over more datasets, better detection Detection Dataset
accuracy, and less computation complexity in training and OC-SVM One-Class Support Vector Machine
inference time. The combination of suitable hybrid algorithms HPO Hyper-parameter Optimization
at multi-levels, an adjustable threshold in the classifier, hyper- GP Gaussian Process
parameter optimized models, zero human/expert intervention, MLP Multi Layer Perceptron
one-shot learning, and the fusion of DL and ML techniques
makes the proposed IDS to perform well on unknown-attacks.
Three major drawbacks are in line for future work: (i) improve ACKNOWLEDGMENT
the overall detection accuracy better than the achieved one with This research is supported by the Department of
advanced feature learning method and (ii) confront the real- Science and Technology (DST), India, under the Fund
time traffic in open-set recognition problem with less positive for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure in Universities and
rate and inference time. Higher Educational Institutions (FIST) Program [Grant No.
5580 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

SR/FST/ET-I/2022/1079], and a matching grant from VIT [23] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in
University. The authors are grateful to DST-FIST and VIT Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2016,
 pp. 1563–1572.
management for their financial support and the resources [24] U. Zukaib, X. Cui, C. Zheng, D. Liang, and S. U. Din, “Meta-fed IDS:
provided for this work. Meta-learning and federated learning based fog-cloud approach to detect
 known and zero-day cyber attacks in IoMT networks,” J. Parallel Distrib.
 Comput., vol. 192, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 104934.
 R EFERENCES [25] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
 [1] U. Sabeel, S. S. Heydari, K. El-Khatib, and K. Elgazzar, “Unknown, O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
 atypical and polymorphic network intrusion detection: A systematic sur- detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 vey,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1190–1212, pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
 Feb. 2024. [26] C. Kim, S.-Y. Chang, J. Kim, D. Lee, and J. Kim, “Automated, reliable
 [2] O. Urečková, M. Jureček, M. Stamp, F. Di Troia, and R Lórencz, zero-day malware detection based on autoencoding architecture,” IEEE
 “Classification and online clustering of zero-day malware,” J. Comput. Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3900–3914, Sep. 2023.
 Virol. Hacking Tech., vol. 20, pp. 579–592, Feb. 2024. [27] T. Li, Z. Hong, W. Feng, L. Yu, and Z. Wen, “MS-ZeroWall: Detecting
 [3] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and zero-day multi-step attack in smart home using VAE and HMM,” IEEE
 D. Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated learning Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 13278–13291, Sep. 2024.
 framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled IIoT,” IEEE [28] I. Mbona and J. H. P. Eloff, “Detecting zero-day intrusion attacks using
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866, Feb. 2024. semi-supervised machine learning approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
 [4] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “A deep pp. 69822–69838, 2022.
 learning ensemble approach to detecting unknown network attacks,” J. [29] T. Zoppi, A. Ceccarelli, and A. Bondavalli, “Unsupervised algorithms to
 Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 67, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 103196. detect zero-day attacks: strategy and application,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 [5] R. Yoshihashi, W. Shao, R. Kawakami, S. You, M. Iida, and T. Naemura, pp. 90603–90615, 2021.
 “Classification-reconstruction learning for open-set recognition,” in [30] B. I. Hairab, M. S. Elsayed, A. D. Jurcut, and M. A. Azer, “Anomaly
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2019, detection based on CNN and Regularization techniques against zero-day
 pp. 4011–4020. attacks in IoT networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 98427–98440, 2022.
 [6] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Zero-X: A [31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 blockchain-enabled open-set federated learning framework for zero-day a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterizaattack detection in IoV,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, tion,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
 pp. 12399–12414, Sep. 2024. pp. 108–116.
 [7] C. S. Shieh, F. A. Ho, M. F. Horng, T. T. Nguyen, and P. Chakrabarti, [32] V. Böhm and U. Seljak, “Probabilistic autoencoder,” 2022,
 “Open-set recognition in unknown DDoS attacks detection with recip- arXiv:2006.05479.
 rocal points learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 56461–56476, 2024. [33] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 [8] M. Soltani, B. Ousat, M. J. Siavoshani, and A. H. Jahangir, “An IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., 2008, pp. 413–422.
 adaptable deep learning-based intrusion detection system to zero-day [34] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
 attacks,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 76, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103516. J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
 [9] Y. Wu, Y. Hu, J. Wang, M. Feng, A. Dong, and Y. Yang, “An ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, pp. 968–998, Nov. 2018.
 active learning framework using deep Q-network for zero-day attack [35] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
 detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 139, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103713. detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Disc. Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 3, 2012.
[10] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical [36] M. M. Breunig, H. P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
 pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023. pp. 93–104, 2000.
[11] T. Das, O. A. Hamdan, R. M. Shukla, S. Sengupta, and E. Arslan, “UNR- [37] L. Shu, H. Xu, and B. Liu, “DOC: Deep open classification of text
 IDD: Intrusion detection dataset using network port statistics,” in Proc. documents,” in Proc. 2017 Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process.,
 IEEE 20th Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2023, pp. 497–500. 2017, pp. 2911–2916.
[12] S. Samarakoon et al., 2022, “5G-NIDD: A comprehensive network [38] S. Shen, C. Cai, Z. Li, Y. Shen, G. Wu, and S. Yu, “Deep Q-networkintrusion detection dataset generated over 5G wireless network,” Dataset, based heuristic intrusion detection against edge-based SIoT zero-day
 IEEE Dataport. attacks,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 150, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 111080.
[13] M. Zolanvari, M. A. Teixeira, L. Gupta, K. M. Khan, and R. Jain, [39] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A next-
 (Washington Univ. St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA). WUSTL-IIOT-2021 generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proc. 25th ACM
 Dataset for IIoT Cybersecurity Research. (2021). [Online]. Available: SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2019, pp. 2623–2631.
 http://www.cse.wustl.edu/ jain/iiot2/index.html. [40] C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen, Gaussian Processes for Machine
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006.
 hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[15] X.-H. Nguyen and K.-H. Le, “Robust detection of unknown DoS/DDoS
 attacks in IoT networks using a hybrid learning model,” Internet Things,
 vol. 23, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 100851.
[16] S. Watanabe, “Tree-structured Parzen estimator: Understanding its algo- Menaka Pushpa Arthur received the Bachelor of
 rithm components and their roles for better empirical performance,” Engineering degree in computer science and engi-
 2023, arXiv:2304.11127. neering from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2002,
[17] R. Garnett, Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. the Master of Engineering degree in computer sci-
 Press, 2023. ence and engineering from Anna University in 2004,
[18] S. Theodoridis, Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization and the Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Information
 Perspective. Cambridge, MA, USA: Academic, 2015. and Communication Engineering, Anna University.
[19] M. J. Hashemi, E. Keller, and S. Tizpaz-Niari, “Detecting unseen She is an Associate Professor with the School of
 anomalies in network systems by leveraging neural networks,” IEEE Computer Science and Engineering, Vellore Institute
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2515–2528, Sep. 2023. of Technology (Chennai). She has nearly 15 years
[20] A. H. Celdrán et al., “RL and fingerprinting to select moving target of teaching and research experience. She has pubdefense mechanisms for zero-day attacks in IoT,” IEEE Trans. Inf. lished numerous research articles in international journals and prestigious
 Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5520–5529, 2024. conferences. She has also secured research funding for projects related to IoT
[21] Y. Cao, K. Liu, Y. Lin, L. Wang, and Y. Xia, “Deep-reinforcement- product development, large language models, and cyber security. Her research
 learning-based self-evolving moving target defense approach against focuses on mobile and wireless networks, multicast communication, routing
 unknown attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 20, security, intrusion detection systems, UAV networks machine learning, and
 pp. 33027–33039, Oct. 2024. deep learning. She has received two Best Paper Awards in the International
[22] A. Touré, Y. Imine, A. Semnont, T. Delot, and A. Gallais, “A framework and National level Conferences organized by MIT and Anna University. She
 for detecting zero-day exploits in network flows,” Comput. Netw., actively serves as a reviewer and an editorial board member for high-impact
 vol. 248, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 110476. journals.
ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS 5581

 Ganesan Ramachandran received the Doctor Pavan Kaarthik received the B.Tech. degree in
 of Philosophy degree in computer science from computer science and engineering from the Vellore
 Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, in 2011. Institute of Technology (Chennai). He currently
 He is a Professor and the former Dean of the works as a Software Engineer with HSBC, where
 School of Computer Science and Engineering, he enables data ETL and migration for downstream
 Vellore Institute of Technology (Chennai), where consumption and analytics. His current research
 he has been serving as the Deputy Director of the interests are in machine learning and deep learning,
 Career Development Centre since August 2025. He specifically in the field of cyber security.
 served as the Assistant Director of the Office of
 International Relations from 2018 to 2021 and the
 assistant director for outreach programs from 2018
to 2019. He was the Program Chair for B.Tech. Computer Science and
Engineering from 2013 to 2017. Earlier, he was an Associate Professor and
the Head of the Department of Computer Science Department, PSG College
of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, from 1998 to 2012. He is having more than Srivarshinee Sridhar is currently pursuing the
24 years of teaching experience. His area of research work is information B.Tech. degree in computer science with the Vellore
security and network security. Under his supervision, eight research scholars Institute of Technology (Chennai), with a passion for
have successfully completed their Ph.D. degree in computer science and pushing the boundaries of cutting-edge AI research.
one research scholar is pursuing the Ph.D. degree. He has published several Her academic and research pursuits span natural
research papers in the peer reviewed national and international level journals language processing, machine learning, mechanistic
and had delivered various guest lectures in the field of information security. interpretability, and network security with a particu-
He is a reviewer for various national and international journals. Also, he was lar emphasis on building trustworthy and transparent
a certified ISO Internal Auditor by TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt. Ltd. in 2007. machine learning systems. She is deeply motivated
 to bridge the gap between theoretical foundations
 and real-world impact, aiming to develop AI models
 that are not only powerful but also explainable, reliable, and aligned with
 human values.

 Morshed Chowdhury received the Ph.D. degree
 Keshav Sood (Senior Member, IEEE) received from Monash University, Australia, in 1999. He
 the Bachelor of Technology degree (Hons., with is currently an Academic Staff Member with the
 Distinction) in electronics and communications engi- School of Engineering and Information Technology,
 neering and the Master of Technology degree Melbourne Institute of Technology (MIT). He also
 in optical fiber engineering in 2007 and 2012, serves as the Course Coordinator of Graduate
 respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in information Diploma in Networking and the Master of
 technology (software-defined networking security) Networking. Prior to joining MIT, he has served with
 from Deakin University, Melbourne, in 2018, under the School of IT, Deakin University with various
 the supervision of Prof. S. Yu. He was a trainee academic position from 1999 to 2021. He produced
 with the Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory 23 Ph.D. as a principal/associate supervisor. Some
 (TBRL, DRDO, Ministry of Defense), Chandigarh, of his Ph.D. graduates are computing well established in various institutes
India. He was the recipient of the Professor of IT Award given by the in Australia and overseas. He was invited as a guest speaker with the
School of IT for his outstanding academic achievements during his Ph.D. Institute of Kyoto institute of Technology, Kyoto, and Kyushu University,
degree. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with The University of Newcastle, Fukuoka, Japan. He published more than 168 Journal and conference papers
New South Wales, Australia. He is currently working as a Senior Lecturer of in the reputed Journals and international conferences. He assessed more
Cyber Security with the School of IT, Deakin University. His work in cyber than 22 Ph.D. theses in Australia and India. He has been reviewing journal
security for next generation networks has been published in top-notch secu- papers of several reputed journals, such as IEEE/ACM T RANSACTION
rity and networking venues, i.e., IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION ON N ETWORKING , Computer Network (Elsevier), IEEE T RANSACTION
F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND ON I NDUSTRY A PPLICATION , Artificial Intelligence in Medicine (Elsevier),
S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, Measurement (Elsevier), Sustainable Computing (Elsevier), IEEE I NTERNET
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and OF T HINGS J OURNAL , Applied Energy (Elsevier), and International Journal
IEEE Network Magazine. of Intelligent Systems (Wiley).