IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025 331

 Encrypted Traffic Classification Through Deep
 Domain Adaptation Network With Smooth
 Characteristic Function
 Van Tong , Cuong Dao , Hai-Anh Tran , Duc Tran , Huynh Thi Thanh Binh , Thang Hoang-Nam ,
 and Truong X. Tran , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Encrypted network traffic classification has become Index Terms—Traffic classification, deep learning, deep adapa critical task with the widespread adoption of protocols such tation network, multi-kernel maximum mean discrepancy and
as HTTPS and QUIC. Deep learning-based methods have smooth characteristic function test.
proven to be effective in identifying traffic patterns, even within
encrypted data streams. However, these methods face significant
challenges when confronted with new applications that were I. I NTRODUCTION
not part of the original training set. To address this issue, ITH the proliferation of the Internet and Internet
knowledge transfer from existing models is often employed to
accommodate novel applications. As the complexity of network
traffic increases, particularly at higher protocol layers, the
 W of Things (IoT), various applications have emerged,
 including video streaming, file transfer, and chat services.
transferability of learned features diminishes due to domain Additionally, catering to user-specific requirements, such as
discrepancies. Recent studies have explored Deep Adaptation high reliability and minimal data loss, has become a critical
Networks (DAN) as a solution, which extends deep convolutional concern [1], [2]. In this landscape, traffic classification, which
neural networks to better adapt to target domains by mitigating
these discrepancies. Despite its potential, the computational
 categorizes network traffic, has assumed paramount imporcomplexity of discrepancy metrics, such as Maximum Mean tance, especially in the realm of encrypted traffic protocols
Discrepancy, limits DAN’s scalability, especially when applied like VPN, HTTPS and QUIC [3], [4]. The primary aim is
to large datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel DAN to enhance network management capabilities, encompassing
architecture that incorporates Smooth Characteristic Functions Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning, intrusion detection,
(SCFs), specifically SCF-unNorm (Unnormalized SCF) and SCFpInverse (Pseudo-inverse SCF). These functions are designed to
 application-aware mechanisms, firewalling, and more. The
enhance feature transferability in task-specific layers, effectively diagram of traffic classification is described in Figure 1.
addressing the limitations posed by domain discrepancies and In the past, many solutions have been designed to identify
computational complexity. The proposed mechanism provides a network applications [5], [6], such as port-based classificameans to efficiently handle situations with limited labeled data or tion approaches, deep packet inspection, and statistics-based
entirely unlabeled data for new applications. The aim is to limit
the target error by incorporating a domain discrepancy between
 approaches. However, these approaches suffer from several
the source and target distributions along with the source error. limitations such as dynamic port allocation, hidden signatures
Two statistics classes, SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse, are used in encrypted traffic, frequent behavior updates in tunneling
to minimize this domain discrepancy in traffic classification. The services and so on. To deal with these limitations, many studies
experimental results demonstrate that our proposed mechanism put a special focus on payload-based encrypted traffic classifioutperforms existing benchmarks in terms of accuracy, enabling
real-time traffic classification in network systems. Specifically, we
 cation using Deep Learning (DL) [7], [8], which converts the
achieve up to 99% accuracy with an execution time of only three payload of the packets to byte values and analyzes it using
milliseconds in the considered scenarios. DL to identify the applications. The payload-based approaches
 focus on ‘existing applications’, which contain labeled data in
 Received 15 November 2023; revised 1 April 2024 and 19 September
2024; accepted 24 January 2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date the training dataset. In detail, this approach collects a large
of current version 14 March 2025. This research was funded by Vingroup amount of labeled application data and trains the learning mod-
Innovation Foundation (VINIF) under project code VINIF.2022.DA00183 for els to identify these applications. However, these approaches
Huynh Thi Thanh Binh and Hai-Anh Tran. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao. encounter challenges with ‘new applications’, which are not
(Corresponding author: Hai-Anh Tran.) in the training dataset and contain unlabeled data or limited
 Van Tong, Hai-Anh Tran, Duc Tran, and Huynh Thi Thanh Binh are labeled data. Concretely, manual labelling is limited due to
with the School of Information and Communication Technology, Hanoi
University of Science and Technology, Hanoi 10000, Vietnam (e-mail: being time-consuming and costly. With the emergence of
vantv@soict.hust.edu.vn; anhth@soict.hust.edu.vn; ductq@soict.hust.edu.vn; Transfer Learning (TL), many recent studies illustrate that DL
binhht@soict.hust.edu.vn). algorithms can learn implicit features from an original domain
 Cuong Dao and Thang Hoang-Nam are with the Faculty of Information
Technology, Hanoi University of Civil Engineering, Hanoi 11600, Vietnam (e.g., existing applications, etc.) and transfer it to a new
(e-mail: cuong28264@huce.edu.vn; thanghn@huce.edu.vn). domain (e.g., new applications, etc.) in order to identify new
 Truong X. Tran is with the School of Science, Engineering and Technology, applications with limited labeled data [9]. In TL algorithms,
Penn State Harrisburg, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802 USA (e-mail: truong.tran@psu.edu). the parameters in the task-specific layers cannot be learned
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3534791 effectively due to the increase in domain discrepancy during
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 MMD and Mean Embedding (ME) for encrypted traffic
 classification. However, these approaches were hampered by
 extensive training durations. Furthermore, the experimental
 results presented in that study were incomplete, indicating
 that the proposed solution lacked efficacy. Consequently, in
 this paper, we expand upon this research by introducing a
 deep domain adaptation network incorporating novel SCFs to
 overcome these shortcomings. The contributions of the paper
 are presented as follows:
Fig. 1. The diagram of traffic classification.
 • Collection of Encrypted Traffic Dataset for Domain
 Adaptation: This work introduces DAQUIC, a dataset
the feature transferability from the original domain to the new specifically designed for domain adaptation in encrypted
domain [9], [10]. Hence, it is essential to reduce the dataset traffic classification, addressing the lack of publicly availbias and improve the feature transferability to adapt to new able datasets. The dataset is accessible on GitHub [17].
applications. • Payload-based Encrypted Traffic Classification with a
 To address the decrease in feature transferability, numer- Balance Between Accuracy and Processing Time: A
ous studies have investigated the Deep Adaptation Network Deep Learning-based encrypted traffic classification
(DAN) architecture in the context of traffic classification, mechanism is proposed, offering high accuracy while
exploring methods such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy maintaining efficient processing times.
(MMD) [11], [12], [13], semi-supervised learning [14], and • DAN-based Encrypted Traffic Classification Using Novel
others. While achieving good performance in the consid- SCFs: To reduce domain discrepancies in task-specific
ered scenarios, the usage of MMD comes with several layers, a DAN-based encrypted traffic classification
limitations [15]. Firstly, MMD employs a smooth witness method using novel Smooth Characteristic Functions
function, which proves to be less effective in high-dimensional (SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) is proposed.
spaces. Additionally, relying on the witness function does not The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
maximize test power, as it fails to provide a direct indication of introduces related work in encrypted traffic classification and
distributional features. In statistics, the power of a hypothesis existing studies using Transfer Learning. In Section III, the
test denotes the probability of correctly rejecting the null paper presents the formalization of the problem related to
hypothesis, representing the likelihood of true positive detec- traffic classification. Section IV illustrates the methodology
tion. Secondly, MMD-based approaches demand significant of the proposed payload-based encrypted traffic classification
training time when dealing with large input datasets, attributed algorithm, the proposed DAN-based solution, and the domain
to the computational complexity of calculating MMD between adaptation networks using two-sample test statistics: SCFthe source and target domains. unNorm, SCF-pInverse, and MK-MMD. Section V describes
 To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel the experimental results of the proposed mechanism for both
encrypted traffic classification mechanism to identify existing and new applications. Finally, the paper concludes
new applications using DAN architecture and novel with Section VI, which highlights our future work.
Smooth Characteristic Functions (SCFs): SCF-unNorm
(Unnormalized SCF) and SCF-pInverse (Pseudo-inverse II. R ELATED W ORK
SCF). These characteristic functions are built on the analytic
 This section presents an overview of studies on encrypted
representations of probability distributions that have greater
 traffic classification and the use of TL in this domain.
power than MMD. Moreover, the time complexity of
characteristic functions is lower than MMD. The proposed
mechanism offers opportunities to deal effectively with limited A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
labeled data or unlabeled data of new applications. Consider According to [3], [18], there are three popular encrypted
a use case where the Internet is divided into numerous traffic classification mechanisms: approaches using Transport
Autonomous Systems (ASs), each managed by an Internet Layer Security (TLS) features, statistic-based approaches, and
Service Provider (ISP). ISPs need to implement traffic payload-based approaches.
classification approaches to support network management. The TLS-based traffic classification mechanism takes into
In the case where there is a new AS with limited labeled account TLS-specific features extracted from the TLS handdata, or unlabeled data of novel applications which did not shake in the first few packets of a flow. The header of TLS
exist in other ASs, using knowledge (pre-trained models) packets contains useful information to identify the applicafrom existing ASs to identify novel applications leads to tions. Cui et al. proposed “Only Header” [19], which combines
inaccurate classification results. Therefore, the proposed a segmentation mechanism and Capsule Neural Networks to
mechanism helps to enhance the performance of encrypted classify traffic while avoiding privacy risks. Similarly, He et al.
traffic classification in the context of limited labeled data or proposed DSCU [20], a skew-based classification approach for
unlabeled data. classifying TLS applications that analyzes the window-based
 This work is an extended version of our previous paper [16]. segmentation using a one-class classifier to identify unknown
Our previous efforts concentrated on employing DAN with traffic from the known ones. However, these approaches suffer
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 333

from several limitations. “Only Header” may miss critical a large number of byte values in the input. However, the tradepayload information, which is often encrypted in TLS, leading off between performance and time processing is not considered
to potential misclassification, while DSCU falters with the thoroughly in existing studies.
variability and encryption of TLS traffic, causing difficulties While numerous payload-based approaches exist for idenin accurately classifying new traffic patterns. tifying network applications, they prove ineffective when
 The statistic-based mechanism conveys the first several encountering novel applications that have not been previously
packets or all packets of a network flow to extract flow-based trained, leading to inaccurate results. This presents significant
features (e.g., packet length, inter-arrival time, etc.) for traffic challenges for network management.
classification. Fathi-Kazerooni et al. [21] proposed a traffic
classification mechanism using the Random Forest algorithm
to identify six kinds of applications. This mechanism takes B. Traffic Classification Using Transfer Learning
into account ten flow-based features from all packets of flows According to a recent study [25], there are many solutions
and analyzes them to determine Chrome, WhatsApp, OneNote, for encrypted traffic classification, such as Federated Learning
Spotify, Google Drive, and OneDrive. However, traffic classifi- (FL), TL, and so on. FL requires labeled data from network
cation mechanisms using flow-based features from all packets applications to identify them, but it is difficult to obtain labeled
of a flow cannot early identify the network applications data of novel emerging applications. In this context, many TLbecause it is required to gather information after a flow termi- based approaches are designed to identify novel applications.
nates. Therefore, many studies focus on traffic classification Taghiyarrenani and Farsi [13] proposed a domain adapapproaches that consider flow-based features from the first tation mechanism for traffic classification, which trains a
several packets of a flow to early identify the applications. model using labeled samples from a network and adapts it
Qin et al. proposed HFC [22], a method for unsupervised to another network with only a few labeled samples using
traffic classification by exploring the flow features and link pat- MMD. Moreover, Ning et al. [14] proposed a novel traffic
terns. This method formulates the traffic identification task as a classification approach based on domain adaptation and semigraph co-clustering problem with topology and edge attributes supervised learning. This approach generates a model using
and leverages both features and linkage information to classify a semi-supervised learning algorithm from a large amount of
traffic. Moreover, Shaheem et al. presented a classification unlabeled data and a few labeled samples. Then, this approach
technique using an ensemble of deep learning architectures on adapts the pre-trained model from the source to the target
packet, payload, and inter-arrival time sequences [23]. This domain using MMD. However, using MMD to calculate the
approach analyzes the high-level features from network data domain discrepancy between the source and the target domains
using ML algorithms. Despite achieving good performance, does not maximize the test power and requires high training
these approaches require human intervention to identify pre- time.
defined flow-based features. Besides, they are ineffective when Similarly, Gu et al. [26] proposed Zen-tor, a zero-knowledge
application behaviors change with additional services (e.g., known-unknown traffic classification mechanism using GAN
Virtual Private Network, etc.). and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for home networks.
 The payload-based mechanism considers the byte value in Zen-tor considers labeled known flow samples and analyzes
the payload of a packet within a flow to identify the network them to train Flow Discriminator D and Fake Flow Generator
applications. Lotfollahi et al. [8] proposed a novel traffic G so that Zen-tor can classify the new network traffic
classification using the DL algorithm called Deep Packet. This from the existing one without any prior information about
approach takes into account 1500 bytes in the payload of a new traffic. The objective is to protect the privacy of the
packet and analyzes them to classify the network traffic into home network with only labeled existing traffic. Similarly,
different kinds of applications (e.g., email, chat, torrent, etc.) Hu et al. [18] proposed ZSL, a novel attribute-based zero-shot
in the context of VPN (Virtual Private Network) and non-VPN. learning framework for traffic classification. ZSL generates
Deep Packet uses all information in the header of a packet, a feature-attribute embedding model using both flow feaso this can lead to inaccurate classification because many tures and attributes to identify different kinds of existing
applications use the same port numbers (e.g., port 443, etc.). applications. After that, ZSL generates FAE-G, a GAN-based
Wang et al. [24] proposed an encrypted traffic classification feature generation model, to synthesize traffic samples of new
approach to identify 15 kinds of applications (e.g., Gmail, applications from the existing ones. Finally, the traffic samples
Facebook, etc.) for home networks. This mechanism considers of both existing and new applications are fed into a twothe first 1480 bytes of a packet and analyzes it using different step classification method using gradient-based rejection to
learning algorithms such as Multi-layer Perceptron, Stacked identify different kinds of applications. ZSL can achieve good
Auto-encoder, and so on. Using a large number of byte values performance for existing applications with over 95%, but it has
leads to high processing time, which is not appropriate for real- not good performance for new applications with approximately
time classification, so Wang et al. [7] proposed another traffic 21%. Besides, Nukavarapu et al. [27] proposed MirageNet,
classification approach which only uses the first 784 bytes a GAN-based synthetic network traffic generation framework
of a packet to identify six VPN and non-VPN applications. to generate synthetic models of protocols, applications, and
Although these payload-based mechanisms can achieve good devices. The GAN-based traffic classification mechanisms
performance, they require a long processing time due to using offer opportunities to classify new traffic from existing ones
334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

without any knowledge about new traffic. However, the classi- As for the new applications not in the training dataset, an
fication performance for new traffic is limited. FixMatch [28] unsupervised domain adaptation is utilized to classify them
is a semi-supervised learning that considers unlabeled data into different categories. Denote by Ds = {(xis , yis )}ni=1 s

to improve the classification. FixMatch generates pseudo- a source domain with ns labeled samples, and denote by
labels for weakly-augmented unlabeled data via a classification Dt = {(xit , yit )}ni=1
 t
 a target domain with nt samples. The
model. Then, it uses the pseudo-labels with high confidence to target domain Dt is composed of both labeled data Dl =
train the model with strongly-augmented data. Despite achiev- {(xil , yil )}ni=1
 l
 and unlabeled data Du = {(xiu )}ni=1
 u
 . A few
ing good performance in considered scenarios, FixMatch labeled samples are required for the new applications, so
suffers from limitations with the misclassification of pseudo- Dl << Du . The total dataset is all the available samples
labels. Minimum Class Confusion (MCC) [29] is a novel D = Ds ∪ Dt . The source and target domains are related but
general loss designed to adapt to various domain adaption have different distributions. The probability distribution of the
scenarios such as closed-set, partial-set domain adaptation source domain and target domain are p and q, respectively.
and so on. MCC can achieve other approaches in considered Besides, p is different from q. The goal is to learn a deep
scenarios, particularly the DomainNet dataset. However, MCC neural network y = f (x) which can learn transferable features
is ineffective with imbalanced data when the number of between different domains to reduce the discrepancy between
samples in the source domain is significantly higher than in source and target domains and minimize the target risk R(f ) =
the target domain. Pr(x ,y)∼q [f (x ) = y]. In the considered experiments, the
 Numerous existing studies incorporate TL for traffic clas- number of bytes k in the payload is set to 256 or 512 while
sification, employing methods such as MMD, GAN, etc. the number of packets in a flow m is set to 20. The number
However, these approaches encounter challenges related to of samples in the dataset is described in Table II. The details
accuracy limitations and substantial computational complex- are analyzed in the experimental results.
ity. While the MMD approach demonstrates commendable
performance under specific circumstances, it often prolongs IV. M ETHODOLOGY
training durations. Conversely, the GAN approach proves This section proposes novel two-sample test statistics (SCFinadequate for handling novel applications, resulting in inac- unNorm and SCF-pInverse) in DAN, the payload-based
curacies. Hence, the proposed DAN-based traffic classification mechanism, and the DAN-based mechanism to classify the
mechanism strives to achieve optimal performance with new encrypted traffic.
applications while maintaining reasonable training times.
 A. Novel Sample Statistic Functions and Comparative
 III. T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION P ROBLEM Benchmark
 Encrypted traffic classification identifies the network traffic The domain adaptation is limited when the target domain
generated from different applications and categorizes it into contains no prior information or limited information about new
various categories (e.g., video streaming, e-commerce, etc.). applications. According to related work [9], [30], there are
The proposed mechanism considers byte-level features from many studies aiming to bound the target error by adding a
the first few packets of a flow to classify the network traffic domain discrepancy between the source and target distribution
into different categories. The traffic classification using the p and q with the source error. The two-sample testing refers to
byte values in the payload can be effective with existing which accepts or rejects the null hypothesis p = q using two
domain data (e.g., existing applications, etc.). However, there samples generated from these distributions. In this case, three
is insufficient data to train the learning models for the new statistics classes are considered: SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse,
domains (e.g., new applications, etc.). The proposed method and MK-MMD [9], [31]. With the large input sequences of
considers both existing and new applications. traffic classification, calculating MK-MMD leads to a high
 For the existing applications that contain labeled data in the computational time, influencing the training time. Hence,
training dataset, consider set D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 of n samples, SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse are proposed to reduce the
where xi is the byte-level features of the i-th samples and yi domain discrepancy in traffic classification.
is the category of the i-th samples. Byte-level features of a 1) Novel Smooth Characteristic Functions: SCF [15] is a
sample are described in Equation (1): kind of test statistic that uses a form of Hotelling’s T-squared
 ⎛ ⎞ statistic. The detail of SCF is described in Equation (2):
 b11 b12 · · · b1k
 ⎜
 xi = ⎝ ... .. . . .. ⎟ Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz −1
 n Sn zn . (2)
 . . . ⎠ (1) v
 bm1 bm2 · · · bmk where Ds is the source domain1data, nDt is the target domain
 data, zn  n1 ni=1 zi , Sn  n−1 
 i=1 (zi − zn )(zi − zn ) ,
where k is the number of byte values used in the payload of a  
packet within a flow (≤ maximum byte of a packet), m is the zi := [f̂(φ(xi ))sin(φ(xi ) vj ) − f̂(φ(xi ))sin(φ(xi ) vj ),
 s s t t

number of consecutive packets used in a flow, bm i is the i-th f̂(φ(xis ))cos(φ(xis ) vj ) − f̂(φ(xit ))cos(φ(xit ) vj )]Jj=1 ∈
byte of the m-th packet in a flow and byte x 00 ≤ bi ≤ xﬀ . R2J , f̂ = Rd exp(−i uT x)f(u)d u denotes the Fourier trans-
The objective of traffic classification is to build a deep neural form of f (x) and f:Rd → R is an analytic translation-invariant
network y = θ (x) which can minimize the target risk (θ) = kernel. φ is a nonlinear feature mapping function of hid-
Pr[θ (x) = y]. den representations. SCF relies on J test locations V =
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 335

{vj }Jj=1 ⊂ Rd , which are in frequency domain. Let ψp (v) =
 Rd ϕp (w)l (v − w)d w be the smooth characteristic function
of p where ϕp (w) is the characteristic function of p. The SCF
is considered as a normalized distance of empirical ϕp (v) and
ϕq (v) by using Sn−1 .
 In the payload-based traffic classification mechanism, zero
padding in the input data results in a singular matrix, so it is
difficult to measure the covariance matrix. SCF is composed
of an inverse of a matrix Sn−1 described as in Equation (3):
 Sn
 Sn−1 = (3)
 detSn Fig. 2. The encrypted traffic classification architecture.

where Sn = (aij )n×n , Sn is the adjoint matrix of Sn and
detSn is the determinant of Sn . where φ is a nonlinear feature mapping of hidden representa-
 Following the Leibniz formula [32], detSn is depicted as in tions.
Equation (4): Ds and Dt are the samples from the distributions p and q.
 n The formulation of MK-MMD is converted to Equation (9):
 detSn = sgn(σ) ai,σ(i) (4) ns ns  
 1
 σ∈Sn i=1 Mk (Ds , Dt )  k xis , xjs
 ns2
 In several cases, detSn is zero, so the inverse of a matrix i=1 j =1
Sn−1 is undefined. Therefore, two customizations of SCF is 1
 nt n t  
 t t
 + k x , x
proposed to deal with the problem of the singular matrix: SCF- nt2 i=1 j =1 i j
unNorm and SCF-pInverse.
 The SCF-unNorm refers to the unnormalized SCF which 2
 ns nt  
skips Sn−1 . Besides, SCF-unNorm is demonstrated as a metric − k xis , xjt . (9)
 ns nt
 i=1 j =1
on the space of probability measures for any V and to act for
two-sample testing in a manner comparable to the normalized A noticeable feature from Equation (8) is that p=q if
SCF [33]. The SCF without using Sn−1 does not require Mk (p, q) = 0 [31]. The characteristic kernel k (xi , xj ) =
considering the covariance matrix. The detail of SCF-unNorm φ(xi ), φ(xj ) is considered as the convex combination of m
is depicted as in Equation (5): positive-definite kernels ku :
  
 Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz
 m m
 n zn . (5)
 v K k = βu ku : βu = 1, βu ≥ 0 ∀u . (10)
 SCF-pInverse considers the Moore–Penrose pseudo- u=1 u=1
inverse [34] instead of the inverse matrix Sn−1 in Equation (2). where the constraints on coefficients βu are required to ensure
The detail of SCF-pInverse is depicted as in Equation (6): that the multi-kernel k is characteristic.
 To guarantee the test power and minimal test error, the
 Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz +
 n Sn zn . (6) kernel chosen for the mean embeddings of p and q is essential.
 v
 The multi-kernel k can use various kernels to improve the
where Sn+ is the Moore–Penrose inverse of matrix Sn . The
 MK-MMD, resulting in a principled technique for the optimal
Moore–Penrose inverse of the matrix Sn is described as in
 kernel selection.
Equation (7):
  −1 
 Sn Sn S , if Sn has linearly independent columns. B. Payload-Based Encrypted Traffic Classification Approach
 Sn+ = 
  n
  −1
 (7)
 Sn Sn Sn , if Sn has linearly independent rows. The payload-based mechanism aims to analyze the network
 2) Comparative Benchmark: MMD [9], [31] is a test traffic and categorize it into different applications. This mechwhich minimizes the Type-II error and maximizes the two- anism contains two main stages: pre-processing and feature
sample test power (e.g., rejecting a false null hypothesis, etc.). extraction. As illustrated in Figure 2, in the beginning, the
Let assume that Hk is the reproduction of kernel Hilbert data traffic is processed in the pre-processing to create a
space (RKHS) possessing a distinctive kernel k. The mean matrix representing a network flow. After that, this matrix
embedding of distribution q in Hk is a distinct element μk (p) is fed into a feature extractor to classify the network traffic
where Ex ∼p f (x ) = f (x ), μk (p) Hk with all f (x ) ∈ Hk . into different categories: e-commerce, video on-demand, and
MK-MMD between probability distributions p and q is con- interactive data.
sidered as the RKHS distance between the mean embeddings In the pre-processing stage, the network traffic is processed
of p and q. The formulation of MK-MMD is described as to create uniform data for the feature extraction. This stage
Equation (8): comprises four steps: byte conversation, zero padding, normal-
  ization, and data formatting. The proposed traffic classification
 Mk (p, q)  ||Ep [φ(x s )] − Eq φ x t ||2Hk . (8) mechanism takes into account the payload of each packet in
336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. The DAN-based encrypted traffic classification mechanism using SCF.

a flow for the traffic classification, so the other information which is depicted as Equation (12):
(e.g., data-link header, Ethernet header, etc.) is skipped due c
to an unnecessity [8]. Then, the bit value in the payload (θ(xi ), yi ) = − tj logθj (xi ), (12)
is converted to byte values to reduce the input size in the j =1
byte conversation. The proposed payload-based mechanism
considers m first bytes in the payload of packets. If the number where θj (xi ) is the softmax activation function on the final
of selected bytes is m, and the payload length of a packet is fully-connected layer, which computes the probability of
less than m, the payload is padded zero values at the end to assigning point xi to class j, c is the number of classes, and
make an equal length in the normalization. To enhance the tj is a truth label taking the value of 0 or 1. If yi equals the
performance, the byte values are then normalized into a value actual label, tj is set to 1. Otherwise, tj is set to 0.
from 0 to 1 in the normalization. To represent a network flow, In domain adaptation, it is challenging to transfer knowledge
the payload of the first k consecutive packets within a flow from a source domain to a target one because the target
are grouped to create a 2-dimensional vector as in the existing domain contains no information or a few labeled data on new
study [35]. applications. Therefore, it is prone to over-fitting or difficult
 After processing the network traffic, this 2-dimensional to fine-tune the pre-trained models. It is due to the domain
vector is analyzed by a feature extractor (e.g., ResNet50, discrepancy between the source and target domains. As a
DarkNet53, etc.) to classify the network traffic into different result, this leads to a reduction of feature transferability in
types of applications (e.g., YouTube, VoIP, Chat, Amazon, task-specific layers (e.g., fully-connected layers). Therefore, in
etc.). To adapt to the traffic classification, the fully-connected this section, a DAN-based mechanism is proposed to overcome
layer of the feature extractor is replaced by two other fully- these limitations. Concretely, in the deep adaptation network,
connected layers. Then, the output from these layers is put we take into account the Smooth Characteristic Function with
into the softmax function, which normalizes the output to a two modifications in the inverse of the covariance matrix
probability distribution over predicted applications. (SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) to deal with the problem of
 the singular matrix. In the domain adaptation, the distribution
 of source and target domains are not too different. In this
C. DAN-Based Encrypted Traffic Classification Mechanism context, the proposed DAN-based solution aims to make the
 In order to enhance the performance of traffic classification, distribution of source and target domains nearly similar in the
the proposed payload-based mechanism aims to minimize the fully-connected layers. Consequently, a multi-layer penalty is
target risk which is defined in Equation (11): added to the target risk, which is described in Equation (13):
 n
 n 1
 1 min max (θ(xi ), yi ) + λ Mk (Ds , Dt ), (13)
 min (θ(xi ), yi ), (11) Θ k ∈K n
 Θ n i=1 ∈L
 i=1
 where L represents the list of hidden layers applying the
where θ(xi ) is the conditional probability that the classifier multi-layer penalty for the source and target domains, and
assign xi to all labels, and  is the cross-entropy loss function is the index of the hidden layer to which the penalty is
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 337

applied. λ is a trade-off parameter, and Mk is the SCF
between Ds and Dt . Denote Ds = {φ(xis )} and Dt =
{φ(xit )} as the -th hidden layer representations of the source
and target domains, respectively. In the proposed DAN-based
mechanism, the multi-layer penalty is applied only to the last
two fully connected layers. The detail is depicted in Figure 3.
 Fig. 4. The setup for the data collection.
 The feature extraction process generates outputs that are
fed into the first fully connected layer, known as fc1. This
stage yields the hidden representations for the first layer of
both the source and target domains, represented by φ(xis1 ) in Southeast Asia such as Shopee, Tiki, Thegioididong, eBay,
and φ(xit1 ). These representations undergo processing through Amazon, and Alibaba. Various applications, such as Chat,
either the SCF-unNorm or SCF-pInverse functions, as outlined VoIP, video streaming, and commercial websites, are considin Equations 5 and 6, which produce a metric termed the ered.
transfer loss. These applications are considered due to two reasons:
 Similarly, the second fully connected layer, fc2, receives • Dominant applications in network traffic: According
φ(xis2 ) and φ(xit2 ), which are similarly subjected to SCF- to a recent report, e-commerce, video on-demand, and
unNorm or SCF-pInverse operations akin to fc1. Within interactive data comprise over 80% of global IP traffic by
the source domain, φ(xis2 ) is passed through the softmax 2022. Those 3 applications would represent the general
function to yield the conditional probability θ(xis ), which cases of the real network traffic environment.
is subsequently put into the cross-entropy loss function, as • Domain adaptation requires a larger size of the source
specified in Equation (12). The cumulative cross-entropy loss domain compared to the target domain, hence the selecfor the samples, along with the aggregate transfer loss from tion of source and domain sets for testing is preferred
both fc1 and fc2, are computed in Equation (13), and this result to preserve this characteristic. During the periods of
is utilized for the backpropagation process. March 2018 and March 2023, we gathered a substantial
 In contrast, the target domain differs in that φ(xit2 ) dataset comprising over 200GB of network traffic. Within
solely undergoes the softmax function, which computes the this dataset, we identified approximately 20,000 flows
prediction probability for the unclassified application. across 10 different applications. The process of domain
 In Figure 3, the implicit features extracted from the input adaptation necessitates that the source domain contains a
evolve from general to specific as they progress through larger volume of data compared to the target domain. This
the network. Consequently, the features derived from the requirement stems from our methodology of pre-training
convolutional layers of the feature extractor are general, war- on the source domain and subsequently transferring
ranting their freezing. Meanwhile, the fully-connected layers the pre-trained models to classify categories within the
are customized to suit the new task, and thus, they are adapted target domain. To adhere to this principle, we divided
with SCF. This adaptation process enables the DAN-based the dataset into distinct source and target domains, as
mechanism to learn implicit features from the source domain outlined in the manuscripts. It is essential to note that
and effectively transfer them to the target domain, allowing it shuffling the applications randomly across both domains
to address new tasks. may inadvertently result in the target domain containing
 a greater volume of data than the source domain. Such
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS an imbalance can lead to inaccuracies in our findings and
 analyses. Therefore, careful consideration must be given
 This section offers a detailed overview of the traffic
 to maintaining the integrity of the source-target domain
classification dataset, covering aspects such as data characterrelationship to ensure the robustness and reliability of our
istics, collection methodology, and partitioning. Additionally,
 results.
it delineates the performance metrics and experimental config-
 Setup: To collect the data, the testbed is set as in Figure 4.
urations. The concluding segment of this section provides an
 A client and a server are dedicated to collecting the data for
extensive analysis of performance outcomes derived from three
 an application (e.g., YouTube, Facebook, etc.). In the clients,
specific experiments: the classification of existing applications,
 selenium [36] tool is used to automate the connections between
new applications, and partially known applications.
 clients and servers. Regarding YouTube and Facebook, the
 clients watch a list of videos automatically. As for the e-
A. Experimental Setups commerce applications, the clients automate access to a list of
 1) DAQUIC Dataset: To evaluate the performance of our links belonging to the e-commerce websites. For interactive
method and the benchmarks, we build a DAQUIC dataset, applications (VoIP and chat), Google Hangout is used to
which is captured at two different periods. The first part automate access and generate network traffic. To make the data
was captured during three weeks in March 2018, including similar to real scenarios, a random duration (a few minutes)
YouTube, Google Hangout Chat (Chat), and Google Hangout is set between two connections.
VoIP (VoIP). The second part was captured recently from Data Collection: To collect the data of applications,
March to April 2023, including video streaming of Facebook tshark [37] is installed in each client. During the data col-
(called Facebook or FB for short) and commercial websites lection, several noisy network flows containing only a few
338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I TABLE IV
 T HE N UMBER OF F LOWS IN THE T RAFFIC DATASET ACCURACY AND T ESTING T IME OF D IFFERENT F EATURE S ETS
 FOR T WO G ROUPS

 TABLE II prediction performance on the target domain. The data of this
 T HE DATASET D ESCRIPTION FOR S CENARIO Data Sensitivity scenario is derived from Table III.
 2) Performance Metrics: Two key metrics are chosen to
 evaluate the performance of traffic classification mechanisms:
 accuracy and the average prediction time for a flow. The
 accuracy of the model reflects how well the model can
 correctly predict the outcome. A higher accuracy indicates that
 the model learns the data better and can make more reliable
 TABLE III classifications. On the other hand, the average prediction time
T HE DATASET D ESCRIPTION FOR S CENARIO Parameter Sensitivity and for for a flow is an essential measure of the efficiency of a model.
 Partially Known Applications
 This metric provides insight into how quickly a model can
 process and predict outcomes for each data flow. A lower
 average prediction time signifies that a model is not only
 accurate but also efficient, making it highly suitable for realtime applications where speed is of the essence.
 Regarding the byte-level features of a sample, the number of
 bytes k in the payload is set to 256 or 512, while the number
 of packets in a flow m is set to 20. In the payload-based DANbased mechanisms, the fully-connected layer of the feature
 extractor is replaced by two fully-connected layers with 256
packets were filtered out to avoid their influence. Regarding and 3 nodes, respectively. The learning rate and batch size
our data collection methodology, the collection process spans are set to 0.0002 and 64, respectively. The stochastic gradient
multiple sessions throughout a two-month period. Each session descent optimizer is used in these two mechanisms. These
commences from the moment a Web browser is initiated using parameters are selected via the experiments. The implementhe Selenium tool for automated connections, continuing until tation of the proposed method and benchmarks are written
the closure of the Web browser. It is important to note that in Python using Pytorch and scikit-learn libraries. These
different encryption keys are utilized across various sessions mechanisms are implemented in a computer with Intel(R) Core
to encrypt data during transmission. As a result, the total count i5-13400F @ 4.6 Ghz, 64GB of RAM, NVIDIA GeForce RTX
of session keys is significantly larger than initially conveyed. 3080 10GB, and Ubuntu 20.04. The source code is available
Overall, the DAQUIC dataset holds substantial potential for upon request.
facilitating the generalization of the proposed approach.
 Data Splitting: The number of flows for each application is B. Performance Analysis
shown in Table I, and the applications are grouped into three 1) For Existing Applications: In this subsection, the
categories: e-commerce, video-on-demand, and interactive performance of the encrypted network traffic classification
data. A category contains the applications which have similar mechanism on the source domain is evaluated. The goal is to
data distribution. There are three scenarios in this paper. In the classify the traffic into different applications (e.g., tiki, shopee,
first scenario (data sensitivity), the data of the target domain thegioididong, etc.). The dataset is divided into training,
is divided into three smaller sets (Table II) to evaluate the validation, and test sets using a 76:4:20 ratio. The experiment
influence of data volume in the target domain on accuracy. is conducted five times, and the results are averaged to obtain
 In the second scenario (parameter sensitivity), the data is the values presented in Table IV.
separated into two small groups representing the source and Feature Extraction: Numerous feature extraction methods
target domains (Table III). exist for traffic classification, but no standard one prevails.
 In the last scenario (for partially known applications), Three backbones are considered to be suitable feature extraca small part of the data in the target domain is labeled tors: ResNet50, DarkNet53, and Mobilevitv2_50. Among
and combined with the source domain data to evaluate the these options listed in Table IV, ResNet50 demonstrates the
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 339

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 ACCURACY (%) ON D IFFERENT TARGETS W ITH 256 AND 512 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) W ITH VARYING λ VALUES
 F EATURES FOR T HREE M ECHANISMS

highest accuracy for both 256 and 512 features, achieving
89.14% accuracy with 512 features. Besides, ResNet50 also
has the lowest prediction time for all feature sizes, taking Table V shows the results for 256 features. The accuracy
only 2.26 ms with 32 features and 3.08 ms with 512 features. decreases with the original data for all mechanisms. SCF-
This indicates that ResNet50 is an appropriate solution in unNorm can achieve 66.84% accuracy for target 1, but it drops
the considered backbones. The superiority of ResNet50 in to 46.98% for target 2 and 42.75% for target 3. MK-MMD
both accuracy and prediction time can be attributed to its has the lowest accuracy for all targets, reaching only 34.35%
architectural design. ResNet50 utilises residual blocks which for target 3. The accuracy of SCF-pInverse fluctuates slightly,
help mitigate the vanishing gradient problem, allowing it decreasing from 57.48% for target 1 to 52.67% for target 3.
to learn more effectively from a large number of features. These results show that a reduction in the number of samples
This is particularly beneficial in traffic classification tasks leads to a decrease in the accuracy of traffic classification.
where subtle features can be crucial for accurate predictions. Table V also illustrates the results for 512 features. The
The prediction time is the average time required to classify accuracy is higher than that for 256 features due to the increase
a sample into one of three categories, excluding the time in the number of features, but it is still not optimal. All
for collecting the input traffic and forming the input vector. methods achieve over 60% accuracy for target 1, target 2, and
Moreover, the lower prediction times of ResNet50 suggest that target 3. Besides, SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse outperform
its layers are computationally less intensive, making it faster to MK-MMD in these targets. This indicates that an increase in
process the input data. This is a significant advantage in real- features can partially compensate for the reduced sample size,
time applications where quick decision-making is essential. though the accuracy remains less than ideal. The data patterns
 Feature Selection: The performance of the proposed mech- in the target domain are crucial for classification accuracy. A
anism and the benchmarks are evaluated with various byte small sample size (ranging from 356 to 1475 for targets 1,
values in the payload of a packet to select an appropriate one 2, and 3) fails to bridge the domain discrepancy between the
(m ∈ (32, 256, 512)). The results illustrate that increasing the source and target domains. Specifically, the source and target
number of features generally improves the accuracy of the domain features remain distinct even after applying DAN,
models but also increases the prediction time. For instance, leading to lower accuracy.
DarkNet53, with 32 features, has an accuracy of 82.96% The results, as shown in Table V, demonstrate that the data
and a prediction time of 2.55 ms, while it achieves an patterns in the target domain correlate with the accuracy of
accuracy of 88.92% and requires a prediction time of 3.47 ms traffic classification. When the number of samples is limited,
with 512 features. ResNet50 can achieve 88.24% accuracy the classification accuracy is compromised. The reason is that a
and require 2.56 ms of prediction time with 256 features. small number of samples cannot adequately bridge the domain
When the number of features increases to 512, its accuracy discrepancy. Specifically, the features of the source domain and
increases to 89.14%, and it requires 3.08 ms of prediction the target domain remain distinct even after applying DAN,
time. The Mobilevitv2_50 backbones also have similar results. leading to lower accuracy. Therefore, subsequent scenarios
Depending on the requirements of traffic classification, an will consider a larger number of samples in the target domain.
appropriate number of features should selected to balance the The number of samples is described in Table III. The target
trade-off of accuracy and prediction time. domain in Table III is composed of target 1, 2, 3 in Table II
 2) For New Applications: In this subsection, the while the source domain in the Table III and II is kept
performance of the DAN-based mechanism for new unchanged.
applications is evaluated with various two-sample test Parameter Sensitivity: Table VI aims to illustrate the accustatistics: SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse and MK-MMD. The racy of different mechanisms against various values of λ for
experimental results are averaged after five times running with two different numbers of features containing 256 and 512. The
250 epochs. λ parameter controls the trade-off between the cross-entropy
 Data sensitivity: In this scenario, we evaluate the influence and the transfer loss in the domain adaptation process. The
of the number of samples for the target domain on the accuracy goal of this scenario is to select an appropriate λ value for the
of three considered mechanisms. We use target domain data feature sets with 256 and 512 features.
from Table II and the source domain data in Table III. The We can observe that the sensitivity of the λ parameter
objective of this scenario is to show the performance of DAN varies for each mechanism and number of features. With
with varying amounts of data in the combined domain. 256 features, SCF-pInverse has an accuracy of 91.72% with
340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 Fig. 6. Training time of MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse with 256
 and 512 features.

 and SCF-pInverse. Concretely, with 256 features, MK-MMD
 requires 3.62 hours to complete 250 epochs of training,
 while SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse only require 2.61 and
Fig. 5. The performance of the DAN-based mechanisms and the solution
without DAN, which pre-trains on the source domain to obtain a pre-trained
 2.68 hours to complete their training phase. Therefore, MKmodel and then directly uses this model to classify the new applications in MMD takes one hour longer than SCF-unNorm (fastest
the target domain into one of three categories. mechanism). This difference is even more evident with 512
 features (Figure 6). MK-MMD takes more than 8 hours to
 complete its training, while SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse
λ = 0.05, but it drops to 88.54% with λ = 0.5. In contrast, require 3.51 and 3.61 hours, respectively. By increasing from
SCF-unNorm has a low accuracy of 83.37% with λ = 1 for 256 to 512 features, the difference in training time between
256 features, and then its accuracy increases to 95.56% with MMD and SCF-unNorm increases from just over 1 hour to
λ = 2. On the other hand, MK-MMD has a relatively stable 4.53 hours. In other words, SCF-unNorm can reduce 27.9% of
accuracy across different values of λ for both numbers of training time with 256 features and 55.5% of training time with
features, ranging from 83.67% to 89% for 256 features and 512 features compared to MK-MMD. The reason is that SCFfrom 88.81% to over 98% for 512 features. unNorm uses a simple linear combination of multiple kernels
 Accuracy: Figure 5 aims to show that the proposed mecha- while MK-MMD optimizes a complex objective function with
nisms (SCF-pInverse and SCF-unNorm) outperform the other multiple constraints. When the number of features increases to
mechanisms related to accuracy. In this figure, the highest more than 512 (e.g., 1024, 1400, etc.), MK-MMD will reveal
accuracy of each mechanism is selected which is described its drawbacks related to the time complexity more clearly.
in Table VI. With 256 and 512 features, the accuracy of Besides, the training of SCF-unNorm is slightly lower than
SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse are higher than the others. the figure for SCF-pInverse. The reason is that SCF-unNorm
Regarding 256 features, SCF-unNorm improves by nearly 10% does not need to calculate the matrix Sn+ as in SCF-pInverse.
compared to the solution without using DAN, respectively. As Benchmarks: The performance of the proposed mechanism
for 512 features, there is a slight difference between these is evaluated with recent studies using the payload as the
mechanisms. SCF-unNorm only improves by nearly 3% in input with λ = 1: FixMatch [28], MCC [29], Binary-Zencomparison with the solution without using DAN. Without tor and Multi-Class-Zen-tor [26] (in Table VII). The goal
using DAN, there is a large domain discrepancy between the is to show the comparison of the proposed approach and
source and the target domains, leading to inaccurate prediction. the recent studies. FixMatch generates pseudo-labels for the
In contrast, using DAN (SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse and target data using the prediction model and then trains another
MK-MMD) reduces the domain discrepancy between these model using pseudo-labels to predict on strongly-augmented
domains, enhancing the accuracy. Moreover, with 256 features, samples, while MCC is a general loss function that reduces
SCF-unNorm improves by nearly 6% compared to MK- the confusion between the correct and ambiguous classes
MMD. However, with 512 features, there is no difference for the target data. Binary-Zen-tor is a GAN-based binary
between these mechanisms. The reason is that MK-MMD uses classification approach which classifies network traffic into
the smooth witness function, which does not maximize the two classes: existing applications and new ones. Multi-Classtest power, while SCF uses the analytic representations of Zen-tor is a GAN-based multiclass classification approach
probability distributions, which can maximize the power test which not only performs binary classification like Binary-Zenbetter. Besides, using 512 features can achieve better accuracy tor but also identifies different kinds of existing applications.
than using 256 features. However, the prediction time for 512 Table VII shows the accuracy of these mechanisms. Using
features is slightly higher than the figure for 256 features. DAN with SCF function, DAN-pInverse can learn an adequate
 Training time: The training time of different mechanisms representation of the source domain and transfer it to the target
for 256 and 512 features is depicted in Figure 6. This scenario domain. Therefore, the accuracy of DAN-pInverse is better
aims to illustrate that the proposed mechanism requires less than others, achieving 90.51% accuracy. In contrast, FixMatch
training time compared to MK-MMD. Regarding the training generates the pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data, but the
time of MK-MMD, the linear formula is used to measure the data labeling is not good, influencing its performance (only
domain discrepancy in deep adaptive networks [9]. However, achieving 76.12% accuracy). MCC is a general loss function
the training time of MK-MMD is higher than SCF-unNorm that is not adapted to the traffic classification. As a result, its
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 341

Fig. 7. Accuracy of MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse methods with few labeled samples in the target domain.

Fig. 8. The accuracy against the number of epochs with 0%, 0.5%, 1% of labeled data in the target data with 256 features.

Fig. 9. The accuracy against the number of epochs with 0%, 0.5%, 1% of labeled data in the target data with 512 features.

 TABLE VII
accuracy is approximately 62%. Binary-Zen-tor achieves only ACCURACY (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ECHANISM AND B ENCHMARKS
36.94% accuracy, while Multi-Class-Zen-tor performs better
with 72.94% accuracy. The discriminator in Binary-Zen-tor
classifies traffic into two categories: existing applications or
new ones. In contrast, the discriminator in Multi-Class-Zentor performs two tasks. The first task is classifying traffic as
either from existing applications or new ones, and the second
task is further classifying existing applications into specific
categories. Multi-Class-Zen-tor incorporates additional loss
functions for the second task, which results in improved
performance.
 3) For Partially Known Applications: This subsection is the performance of the DAN-based mechanism, achieving up
dedicated to the scenario where a small fraction of the data in to over 99% accuracy. There is an upward trend in the accuracy
the target domain is labeled. The source and target domains against the number of labeled data for both 256 and 512
are depicted in Table III. The proportions of labeled data features. The reason is that a higher number of labeled data
considered are 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, and 1%. The details are described makes the training using DAN more effective. The domain
in Figure 7(a) and 7(b). This scenario aims to show that a discrepancy is reduced, and the accuracy improves better than
small amount of labeled data in the target domain can enhance without using labeled data.
342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 For 256 features [see Figure 7(a)], the accuracy of MK- shopee, etc.), but the data distribution of these applications are
MMD increases from 90.6% at 0.05% to 96.89% at 0.1% related.
of labeled data, then gradually rises to 99.09% at 1%. A Moreover, the performance metrics are produced in the
noticeable observation is that SCF-pInverse and SCF-unNorm considered scenarios along with considered parameters in
outperform MK-MMD in the considered percentage of labeled the experimental results. Besides, the proposed DAN-based
data. For 512 features [see Figure 7(b)], the accuracy of SCF- mechanisms are designed for three categories: e-commerce,
pInverse and SCF-unNorm is also higher than the figure video on-demand, interactive data. Implementing the proposed
for MK-MMD. However, there is a slight fluctuation in the mechanisms with other categories and different parameter
accuracy of MK-MMD. In addition, SCF-pInverse with 512 settings can lead to the results that are not reported in this
features exhibits slightly lower accuracy than the 256-feature research.
model. This is likely due to the increased noise introduced by
the additional labeled data, which can negatively impact the VI. C ONCLUSION
model’s performance.
 Figure 8 and 9 aim to illustrate the accuracy of three In this paper, we propose a Deep Adaptation Network
mechanisms against the number of epochs for 256 and 512 using novel Smooth Characteristic Functions (SCF-unNorm
features. The accuracy of using 1% of labeled data is higher and SCF-pInverse) to enhance the performance of encrypted
than the figure without using labeled data for both 256 and traffic classification. The experimental results show that the
512 features. In addition to higher accuracy, using a small proposed mechanism achieves up to 99% accuracy and
percentage of labeled data helps to reach high accuracy requires an appropriate processing time (only 3.08 ms) for 512
faster than unlabeled data. Regarding 256 features, all three features (512 byte values in the payload of packets). Moreover,
mechanisms can converge to optimal state within from 10 to to evaluate the performance of this work and benchmarks,
15 epochs. Without using labeled data, it is required from 20 the traffic classification dataset for domain adaptation is built
to 25 epochs. It is similar to 512 features. and provided publicly for the research communities. The
 proposed mechanism using the Deep Adaptation Network is
 dedicated to identifying new applications that are not trained
C. Discussion prior, while the proposed payload-based encrypted traffic
 Regarding the payload-based mechanisms (Table IV), the classification mechanism aims to identify existing applications
accuracy increases against the number of features. However, that are trained prior. Additionally, we plan to incorporate a
the prediction time per flow (sample) also goes up when mechanism for classifying network flows into existing or new
the number of features increases from 32 to 512. In three applications and integrate it into our framework to create a
considered backbones, ResNet50 can obtain 88.24% accuracy complete system. Furthermore, the proposed approach aims
while requiring a suitable prediction time of 2.56 ms. to classify encrypted traffic into different categories (e.g., e-
 As for the DAN-based mechanisms, the accuracy of commerce, etc.) with limited labeled data. In the future, we
MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, and SCF-pInverse are not good will enhance the proposed approach to classify traffic into
(Table V) when the number of samples in the target domain specific applications (e.g., Facebook, YouTube, etc.)
is limited, as shown in Table II. When the number of samples
in the target domain increases, as shown in Table III, the R EFERENCES
accuracy of these three functions is higher. SCF-pInverse and [1] Z. Li et al., “Problem statement and use cases of application-aware
SCF-unNorm can achieve up to 98% of accuracy with 512 networking (APN),” Internet Eng. Task Force, Internet-Draft draft-ietffeatures. When adding a few percent of labeled data to the spring-segment-routing-16, 2020.
 [2] V. Tong, S. Souihi, H. A. Tran, and A. Mellouk, “SDN-based
dataset in Table III, the performance of MK-MMD, SCF- application-aware segment routing for large-scale network,” IEEE Syst.
unNorm and SCF-pInverse are improved significantly, as in J., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 4401–4410, Sep. 2022.
Fig. 7. There is an upward trend in the accuracy of these [3] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
functions when the percentage of labeled data increases from Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
0.05 to 1 percent. The accuracy of SCF-unNorm and SCF- [4] Y. Yang et al., “A network traffic classification method based on dualpInverse can achieve up to approximately 99% for both 256 mode feature extraction and hybrid neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4073–4084, Dec. 2023.
and 512 features.
 [5] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic
 Despite obtaining good performance, the proposed DAN- classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global
based mechanisms (SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) contain Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 1–6.
several limitations. First, the influence of the transfer loss in [6] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of
 traffic classification in IoT networks: A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
the target risk relies on the λ parameter. When λ is small, vol. 154, Mar. 2020, Art. no. 102538.
the improvement of the accuracy is small. Otherwise, the [7] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
improvement of the accuracy is higher, but the deviation of the encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
accuracy between running times is large. Second, the proposed [8] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
DAN-based approaches are effective under the assumption that packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
the source domain is related to the target domain. For example, learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020.
 [9] M. Long, Y. Cao, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Transferable
the new applications in the target domain (e.g., eBay, etc.) are representation learning with deep adaptation networks,” IEEE Trans.
different from existing applications in the source domain (e.g., Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3071–3085, Dec. 2018.
TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK 343

[10] M. Long, Y. Cao, J. Wang, and M. Jordan, “Learning transferable [24] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 features with deep adaptation networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 Learn., 2015, pp. 97–105. networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI), 2017,
[11] F. Zhuang et al., “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proc. pp. 43–48.
 IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jan. 2021. [25] Y. Li et al., “Federated domain Generalization: A survey,” 2023,
[12] J. Jiang, Y. Shu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Transferability in deep learning: arXiv:2306.01334.
 A survey,” 2022, arXiv:2201.05867. [26] Y. Gu, Y. Lai, and Y. Wang, “Zen-tor: A zero knowledge known-
[13] Z. Taghiyarrenani and H. Farsi, “Domain adaptation with maximum unknown traffic classification method,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE
 margin criterion with application to network traffic classification,” in Global Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 885–890.
 Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery [27] S. K. Nukavarapu, M. Ayyat, and T. Nadeem, “MirageNet-towards a
 in Databases. Grenoble, France: Springer, 2022, pp. 159–169. GAN-based framework for synthetic network traffic generation,” in Proc.
[14] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 3089–3095.
 and ladder network for secure Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE [28] K. Sohn et al., “Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022. consistency and confidence,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
[15] W. Jitkrittum, Z. Szabó, K. P. Chwialkowski, and A. Gretton, Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 596–608.
 “Interpretable distribution features with maximum testing power,” in [29] Y. Jin, X. Wang, M. Long, and J. Wang, “Minimum class confusion
 Proc. 30th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1–9. for versatile domain adaptation,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
[16] C. Dao, V. Tong, N.-T. Hoang, H.-A. Tran, and T. X. Tran, “Enhancing (ECCV), Glasgow, U.K., 2020, pp. 464–480.
 encrypted traffic classification with deep adaptation networks,” in Proc. [30] S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and
 IEEE 48th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2023, pp. 1–4. J. W. Vaughan, “A theory of learning from different domains,” Mach.
[17] V. Tong and C. Dao. “Traffic classification dataset for deep adap- Learn., vol. 79, pp. 151–175, May 2010.
 tation network.” Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ [31] A. Gretton, K. M. Borgwardt, M. J. Rasch, B. Schölkopf, and A. Smola,
 vanvantong/Encrypted-Traffic-Classification-using-DAN “A kernel two-sample test,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 13, no. 1,
[18] Y. Hu, G. Cheng, W. Chen, and B. Jiang, “Attribute-based zero-shot pp. 723–773, 2012.
 learning for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service [32] P. Tang and A. Xu, “Generalized Leibniz functional matrices and divided
 Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4583–4599, Dec. 2022. difference form of the Lagrange–Bürmann formula,” Linear Algebra
[19] S. Cui, J. Liu, C. Dong, Z. Lu, and D. Du, “Only header: A reliable Appl., vol. 436, no. 3, pp. 618–630, 2012.
 encrypted traffic classification framework without privacy risk,” Soft [33] K. P. Chwialkowski, A. Ramdas, D. Sejdinovic, and A. Gretton,
 Comput., vol. 26, no. 24, pp. 13391–13403, 2022. “Fast two-sample testing with analytic representations of probability
[20] H. He, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, S. Le, and Z. Zhao, “A data skew-based measures,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015,
 unknown traffic classification approach for TLS applications,” Future pp. 1–9.
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023. [34] E. H. Moore, “On the reciprocal of the general algebraic matrix,” Bull.
[21] S. Fathi-Kazerooni, Y. Kaymak, and R. Rojas-Cessa, “Tracking user Am. Math. Soc., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 394–395, 1920.
 application activity by using machine learning techniques on network [35] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 traffic,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2019, “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural
 pp. 405–410. networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
[22] M. Qin, K. Lei, B. Bai, and G. Zhang, “Towards a profiling view 2017.
 for unsupervised traffic classification by exploring the statistic features [36] B. García, M. Munoz-Organero, C. Alario-Hoyos, and C. D. Kloos,
 and link patterns,” in Proc. Workshop Netw. Meets AI ML, 2019, “Automated driver management for selenium WebDriver,” Empirical
 pp. 50–56. Softw. Eng., vol. 26, pp. 1–51, Jul. 2021.
[23] M. S. Raza, K. A. Bhatti, F. M. Malik, and S. A. Sheikh, “Network [37] S. Qureshi, S. Tunio, F. Akhtar, A. Wajahat, A. Nazir, and F. Ullah,
 traffic classification using deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. “Network forensics: A comprehensive review of tools and techniques,”
 Front. Inf. Technol. (FIT), 2023, pp. 85–89. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 879–887, 2021.