18312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 End-to-End Abnormal Subgraph Detection via
 Subgraph-Level Contrastive Learning
 Zhen Peng , Yunfan Wang , Qika Lin , Member, IEEE, Bin Shi , Chen Chen ,
 Bo Dong , Member, IEEE, and Chao Shen

 Abstract—Abnormal subgraph (AS) detection plays a signifi- for subgraph anomaly detection, which is a variant of vanilla
cant role in ensuring the security of many high-impact domains. NMI and quantifies detection performance from both subgraph
Unlike node anomaly detection, identifying subgraph anomalies partition and anomaly recognition. The experimental results on
is extremely challenging due to the exponentially large subgraph synthetic and real-world datasets corroborate the superiority of
space caused by various combinations of nodes and edges. More- end-to-end unsupervised subgraph anomaly detection framework
over, in the absence of supervisory signals, how to quantify the (EndSubG) in terms of area under the curve (AUC), average
abnormality of subgraphs poses another pressing challenge. Tra- precision (AP), and AS-WNMI. We also provide an intuitive
ditional methods typically rely on handcrafted subgraph anomaly analysis of the detected subgraphs through visualization for
measures, making it hard to handle potential unknown anoma- better understanding.
lies with limited prior knowledge. Recent deep learning-based
techniques are predominantly designed to discover individual Index Terms—Anomaly-aware graph embedding, contrastive
node anomalies, which could be suboptimal for AS detection due learning, graph neural networks, subgraph anomaly detection.
to the inconsideration of collaborative behaviors between nodes I. I NTRODUCTION
in the subgraph. In fact, existing studies have put very little
effort into this task, and even dedicated performance evaluation
metrics are not yet available. To address the above challenges
 G RAPH-STRUCTURED data is ubiquitous and has
 proved to be a powerful tool to model and analyze
 various modern information networks, such as social networks,
and promote related research, in this article, we propose a
end-to-end unsupervised subgraph anomaly detection framework transaction networks, and biological networks. To prevent
(EndSubG), which jointly models subgraph partition and AS unpredictable hazards, graph anomaly detection has been
detection as a whole instead of treating them as two separate widely used to help regulators proactively uncover suspicious
stages. Specifically, E ND S UB G uncovers potential AS boundaries objects. In addition to the well-known abnormal objects that
that violate the Homophily assumption by modeling the edge exis- exist in the form of individuals, such as a rumor spreader in
tence probability, then achieves anomaly-aware graph embedding
and subgraph partition based on the refined topology. By forming social media, some anomalies may exhibit collective behavior
a coarsened subgraph network, E ND S UB G picks out subgraph in reality, such as multiple fraudsters colluding with each other
anomalies by learning the “subgraph-vicinity” matching patterns. to garner benefits [1]. These anomalies and their interactions
Additionally, we design an evaluation metric weighted normalized typically form subgraph structures. Effectively mining those
mutual information centered on AS (AS-WNMI) specifically unusual subgraphs in networks is of great significance to many
 high-impact domains [2], [3], [4]. For instance, as shown in
 Received 20 May 2024; revised 16 February 2025 and 3 May 2025; Fig. 1, locating corporate groups that issue false and fictitious
accepted 22 May 2025. Date of publication 5 June 2025; date of cur- VAT invoices will help maintain a healthy and fair business
rent version 9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant environment. In a health surveillance network, the Centers for
2021ZD0110700; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) staff have an interest
under Grant 62302380, Grant 62476215, Grant 62250009, Grant 62037001, in locating a collective of infected patients with significant
Grant U24B20185, Grant T2442014, Grant 62161160337, Grant 62132011,
and Grant U21B2018; in part by the Key Research and Development Program
 abnormal symptoms, which may reveal a potential disease
of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2022GXLH01-03, Grant 2023-ZDLGY- outbreak like COVID-19.
38, and Grant 2021ZDLGY01-02; in part by China Post-Doctoral Science The superior performance of deep neural nets, especially
Foundation under Grant 2023M742789; and in part by Shaanxi Continuing graph neural networks [5], has promoted the rapid develop-
Higher Education Teaching Reform Research Project under Grant 21XJZ014.
(Corresponding author: Bin Shi.) ment of deep graph anomaly detection. However, most existing
 Zhen Peng and Bin Shi are with the School of Computer Science and efforts [6], [7], [8] only focus on spotting individual graph
Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: zhen- anomalies, that is, single nodes or edges. In contrast, the
peng27@outlook.com; shibin@xjtu.edu.cn).
 Yunfan Wang and Chen Chen are with the Department of Computer abnormal subgraph (AS) detection task has received much
Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA (e-mail: less scrutiny despite the pressing need from real applications
abe6fq@virginia.edu; zrh6du@virginia.edu). [1]. For instance, early methods [9], [10] exploit topological
 Qika Lin is with the Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117549 (e-mail:
 signals such as L1 properties of the eigenvectors of the
linqika@nus.edu.sg). modularity matrix to reveal dense anomaly regions, yet the
 Bo Dong is with the School of Distance Education, Xi’an Jiaotong neglect of node attributes limits their identification of vari-
University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: dong.bo@xjtu.edu.cn). ous intricate anomalies. Instead, AMEN [11] considers both
 Chao Shen is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: chaoshen@xjtu.edu.cn). attribute and topological information. It spots subgraph anoma-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3573922 lies that exhibit special attribute distributions by measuring the
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18313

 the solution space exponentially large, which makes manual
 annotation almost impossible. Thus, exploring an unsupervised framework for AS detection is quite necessary. Second,
 deriving the anomaly-aware subgraph partition from both
 topological and attribute perspectives simultaneously can be a
 daunting task. Unlike independent nodes or edges, subgraphs
 composed of nodes and edges come in various sizes and
 inner structures due to their different construction forms.
 Meanwhile, the abnormality of subgraphs may be manifested
 in deviated attributes, dense topological connections, inconsistent associations between attributes and structures, and so
 forth. To reveal ASs, adaptively searching an anomaly-aware
 subgraph division through attribute and structural information
 is indispensable yet challenging, especially in unsupervised
 conditions where the potential subgraph space can be as high
 as exponential. Finally, it is challenging to design training
 objectives to effectively distinguish ASs from benign ones
 and quantify their degree of abnormality. The anomaly detection process necessitates appropriate objective functions to
 enable the detection model to capture the distinction between
 anomalies and benign counterparts. However, it is extremely
 hard to model the deviation or even quantify the arbitrary
 abnormal patterns within subgraphs when the ground-truth
Fig. 1. (a) Fraudulent companies engage in tax evasion by issuing false VAT
invoices to each other, often forming a subgraph with dense edge connections. anomaly type is unknown. Although the previous nondeep
(b) Group of patients infected with COVID-19 have unusual disease symptoms methods [16], [17] resort to handcrafted measure functions,
from healthy residents, that is, higher temperature (T), lower oxygen saturation the poor expressive power of fixed features limits their ability
(SaO2 ), and higher respiratory rate (RR).
 to generalize to unseen anomalies.
 To cope with the above challenges, we propose a endto-end unsupervised subgraph anomaly detection framework
normality of the subgraph. However, the traditional data sta- (EndSubG), which jointly models subgraph partition and AS
tistical technique used by AMEN results in low computational recognition in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, E ND S UB G
efficiency and poor scalability. Recent deep learning methods learns anomaly-aware graph embedding by explicitly capturing
DeepFD [12] and FraudNE [13] first derive node embeddings possible abnormal edges that violate the Homophily assumpthrough an autoencoder and then feed them into distribu- tion [18]. Note that nodes exhibiting unusual collaborative
tion density-based DBSCAN [14] to detect dense blocks as behaviors have similar patterns and tend to form a subgraph.
anomalies. However, this pipeline scheme is difficult to ensure A trainable clustering layer is employed to learn subgraph
that the learned representations are conducive to identify- partition according to semantic distribution while capturing
ing anomalies and can easily lead to suboptimal solutions the boundaries between anomalies and normal regions that
compared to end-to-end optimization. As a recent sophis- contribute to uncovering anomalies. The learned soft clustering
ticated end-to-end subgraph anomaly detection framework, assignment ensures the possibility of nodes belonging to
AS-GAE [4] presents a location-aware graph autoencoder and multiple subgraphs, which is more consistent with reality
a supermodular graph scoring function to uncover anomalous [19]. By coarsening the node and edge sets into subgraphs,
areas. However, its reliance on a manually set threshold is we arrive at the subgraph-level composition of the input
prone to mislocating abnormal areas, limiting its effectiveness network. Then, a contrastive learning strategy that models the
in many complicated scenarios. Additionally, existing node congruence between each subgraph and its vicinity derived
anomaly detection approaches such as ANEMONE [15] and from the coarsened subgraph network is introduced to measure
GRADATE [8] cannot be simply applied to identify subgraph- the abnormality. Through end-to-end joint optimization, E ND -
level anomalies as they lack recognition of subgraph structures S UB G implements adaptive anomaly-aware graph embedding
and consideration of collaborative behaviors between nodes and subgraph division to facilitate the identification of ASs
within the subgraph. More dedicated efforts are therefore that deviate from the majority. In contrast, the two-stage
needed to explore a promising solution for anomalous sub- pipeline method is prone to erroneously dividing the graph
graph detection, which motivates our research work. due to not directly targeting the anomaly detection task (e.g.,
 Combined with practical application scenarios, identifying the partitioning stage targets maximizing modularity [20] or
subgraph anomalies faces the following challenging issues. graph reconstruction [21]), leading to failure in subgraph
First of all, it is inaccessible to acquire sufficient and anomaly recognition. In practice, pipeline-based methods often
high-quality ground-truth anomalies to support an end-to- involve the combination of various deep or nondeep models,
end supervised learning paradigm. Due to the diversity of resulting in an explosion of parameter combination space,
anomalies, in most cases, we have little or no prior knowl- from which selecting to obtain promising performance is
edge about abnormal patterns in advance to label samples. very time-consuming. In addition, we design a new metric
Moreover, the combinatorial nature of subgraphs would make weighted normalized mutual information centered on AS (AS-
18314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

WNMI) that measures the quality of subgraph partitioning instance, Miller et al. [9] provided a statistical model to detect
while assessing the ability to identify anomalies, which fills less-correlated subgraphs through L1 properties of the graph’s
the gap in performance evaluation for the subgraph anomaly eigenvectors. SODA [16] designs a system that finds ASs
detection task. Our main contributions are summarized as given a graph and a query by indications of edge occurfollows. rence. Motivated by special attribute distributions of subgraph
 1) We examine the limitations of existing works, then intro- anomalies, gAnomaly [2], AMEN [11], and Slicendice [29]
 duce a new idea that jointly models subgraph partition model attribute distributions and measure the normality of
 and subgraph anomaly detection as a whole instead of subgraphs for detection. Nonetheless, the dependency on handtreating them as two separate steps. crafted anomaly measure functions makes it difficult for them
 2) We propose an end-to-end AS detection framework to handle unknown anomaly patterns in the absence of prior
 E ND S UB G based on anomaly-aware subgraph partition information. Moreover, these methods cannot learn high-order
 and subgraph-level contrastive learning, providing a new semantic information from structure and attribute simultanesolution for the field of deep subgraph anomaly detection ously, making them noise-sensitive and unable to generalize.
 that has received less attention. Deep subgraph anomaly detection frameworks have recently
 3) We design a new evaluation metric AS-WNMI to shown superior performance and have become a hot research
 promote research on elaborate metrics for this task. topic for future development. For instance, DeepFD [12]
 Moreover, we empirically validate the superiority of and FraudNE [13] project the user-item bipartite graph into
 E ND S UB G on both synthetic and real-world datasets, node embeddings first and then find dense blocks through
 and intuitively explain and analyze the detected sub- a density-based algorithm such as DBSCAN. However, the
 graphs through case studies. way that separates representation and anomaly detection as
 two independent steps easily leads to a suboptimal solution.
 II. R ELATED W ORKS In contrast, AS-GAE [4] develops an end-to-end detection
 framework. It employs a location-aware graph autoencoder
A. Node Anomaly Detection to uncover anomalous areas based on reconstruction and a
 Most existing efforts focus on identifying abnormal nodes supermodular graph scoring function to measure the anomaly
following the unsupervised learning paradigm. Here, we score of each subgraph. However, its reliance on a manually
briefly introduce the following three types of representative set threshold is prone to mislocating abnormal areas, and its
algorithms. Traditional shallow models such as Radar [22] and inappropriate subgraph extraction strategy further leads to poor
ANOMALOUS [23] resort to matrix factorization combined performance. To address the above limitations, we explore an
with residual analysis to spot abnormal nodes. With the end-to-end unsupervised subgraph anomaly detection method,
rapid development of graph neural networks, deep frameworks which adaptively performs anomaly-aware graph embedding
such as D OMINANT [24], SpecAE [25], and AnomalyDAE and subgraph extraction, then quantifies subgraph anomaly
[26] uncover anomalies utilizing GCN-based autoencoder with based on contrastive learning.
the capability of learning the expressive representations of
nonlinear relationships within the complex structure. Subsequently, the powerful performance of contrastive learning III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK : E ND S UB G
brought new directions to the development of graph anomaly
detection. Popular methods including CoLA [6], ANEMONE Before going further, we first give a formal definition of the
[15], and GRADATE [8] derive anomaly scores by learning studied problem. Given an attributed network G = (V, E, F)
to measure the agreement between contrastive counterparts. with |V| = n nodes and |E| = m edges, where each node vi ∈ V
Recently, promising detection techniques have continued to be is affiliated with a set of d-dimensional attributes (features)
enriched. For instance, RG-GLD [27] achieves the lightweight F = { f1 , f2 , . . . , fd }. We let the matrix X ∈ Rn×d represent node
anomaly detection for secure and efficient Internet-of-Things attributes, where xi ∈ Rd denotes the feature for node vi . The
(IoT) communications by reconstructing the directed graph adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n is used to record edge links,
formed by data communications with global-local knowl- where Ai j = 1 indicates the existence of an edge ei j = (vi , v j )
edge distillation. ARISE [28] spots topology anomalies and between nodes vi and vj ; otherwise, Ai j = 0. A subgraph of
attribute anomalies simultaneously by perceiving suspicious G is denoted as S = (VS , ES , F), where VS ⊆ V and ES ⊆
substructures through a region proposal module. However, E ∩ P(VS ). P(VS ) indicates the powerset of VS . With the above
these methods aim to identify the abnormal behavior of a notations, the goal of unsupervised AS detection aims to spot
single entity rather than analyzing the discrepancy between suspicious subgraphs S ⊆ G that significantly deviate from
node collaborative behaviors on a subgraph basis, making them the major patterns of the graph G, where the likelihood of the
unable to be directly applied in AS identification scenarios. subgraph being abnormal is quantified by a scoring function
 f (·). It should be emphasized that in this problem set, the
 candidate subgraph set S̄ = {S1 , S2 , . . . , S p } for graph G is
B. Subgraph Anomaly Detection not given in advance. Considering that the potential subgraph
 Unlike spotting node anomalies, anomaly detection on the search space is as large as exponential, our studied problem is
subgraph level has received much less attention due to the more challenging than the setting where a candidate subgraph
difficulties in subgraph pattern modeling and subgraph abnor- set is given beforehand like [3]. Next, we elaborate on the
mality quantification. One mainstream of existing works is proposed end-to-end joint modeling framework E ND S UB G, a
nondeep techniques based on traditional graph analysis. For high-level overview of which is shown in Fig. 2.
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18315

Fig. 2. High-level overview of the proposed E ND S UB G. Given an attributed graph, E ND S UB G achieves anomaly-aware graph embedding and subgraph
partition by explicitly considering potential abnormal edges and capturing the boundaries between anomalies and normal regions. After forming the coarsened
subgraph network, it spots ASs by learning the “subgraph-vicinity” matching patterns. E ND S UB G follows an idea that jointly models graph embedding,
subgraph partition, and subgraph anomaly detection.

A. Anomaly-Aware Graph Embedding and Subgraph where ri j = cos(xi , x j ) aims to calculate the existence probabil-
Partition ity of eij . Note that in practice, the standard deviation interval
 High-quality graph embedding is adept at capturing fine- can be adjusted according to the requirements of different
grained pattern distinctions among nodes, which is essential fields or tasks. To better adapt to distinct data distributions, we
for exposing unusual and problematic graph components introduce the hyperparameter λ in (1) to control the threshold
to facilitate subgraph partition. Inspired by modern self- range. The experiments on parameter analysis also demonsupervised graph representation learning [30], [31], we expect strate the effectiveness of adjusting thresholds on different
to build a graph embedding mechanism similar to GMI [32] datasets. Then, we derive adjusted graph structure A0 = A P,
that maximizes graphical mutual information between the where denotes the Hadamard product.
 0
input graph G and node embeddings H ∈ Rn×d . However, the Now, we perform anomaly-aware graph embedding by introexistence of ASs may negatively impact representation quality ducing weights A0 to adjust the calculation of the graphical
through neighborhood message propagation and mutual infor- mutual information loss (see [32] for detailed theoretical
mation operations. Specifically, we find that the boundaries analysis). We first define the computation graph of node vi
of ASs and normal regions often have illegal edge links that specifies the neighborhood around a particular node to
that violate the Homophily principle. These edges have lower perform a localized convolution as Gi , then maximize the
 0

existence probabilities predicted by attribute similarity than mutual information between hi ∈ Rd and Gi by
others, introducing heterophily into the graph. However, many X A0i j
 I(hi ; Gi ) = I(hi ; xi ) + I(hi ; x j ) + I wi j ; A0i j (2)
 
theoretical studies [33], [34], [35] have shown that conven-
 |N (i)|
tional GNN models employ homophily as a strong inductive j∈N (i)
bias, and the heterophilic edges will seriously degrade their
performance. Thus, capturing these boundaries helps GNN where wi j = σ(h>i h j ) with the sigmoid function σ. Under the
models perceive potential anomalies and focus on finely mod- guidance of weight A0i j , the representation hi will extract and
eling the similarity of homophily signals. This facilitates good preserve less information about neighboring nodes that may be
partitioning of subgraphs with similar collaborative behaviors. anomalies while weakening the topological tie with the possi-
To this end, we refine the input graph topology by reweighting bly abnormal nodes to form a boundary. As for I(hi ; x j ), we
A with potential anomaly probabilities according to the well- can employ well-known mutual information estimators such
known three-sigma rule (3σ rule) [36] in statistics. It states that as the Jensen-Shannon MI estimator (JSD) [40] to calculate
almost all (99.73%) values are within three standard deviations (see experiments for the other estimator)
of the mean, while values outside this range are most likely to
 I(hi ; x j ) = −sp −DΘ hi , x j − Evn ∼Pn sp DΘ hi , xvn
   
be anomalies, which has been widely used in various fields for
outlier detection [37], [38], [39]. Formally, for an edge eij , we (3)
estimate its anomaly probability Pi j by quantifying whether its where Pn denotes the uniform distribution on the node set
existence probability is less than the average probability of all V \ {v j }, and sp(x) = log(1 + e x ) is the soft-plus function. The
edges in G with a predefined number λ of deviation standards discriminator DΘ : d0 × d → R we applied is a simple bilinear
 (
 ri j , if ri j < MEAN rkl − λ STD rkl scoring function
 Pi j = ekl ∈E ekl ∈E (1)
 DΘ (hi , x j ) = σ h>i Θx j
 
 1, otherwise (4)
18316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

where Θ denotes a learnable parameter and the logistic sig- It should also be noted that the behavior of subgraph
moid nonlinearity σ aims to convert scores into probabilities anomaly detection heavily depends on the quality of extracted
of (hi , x j ) being a positive pair. In addition, we maximize subgraphs, especially in unsupervised scenarios. Existing
I(wi j ; A0i j ) via calculating an adjusted cross-entropy methods have paid little attention to this aspect and still
 wi j have many limitations. For instance, AMEN treats the ego-
 I wi j ; A0i j = Ai j log 0 + (1 − Ai j ) log(1 − wi j ). (5)
 
 net of each node as a subgraph to be examined. Although
 Ai j
 it reaches fine granularity, it ignores the role of attribute
Now, we arrive at the objective loss for graph embedding correlation in subgraph division. AS-GAE extracts subgraphs
 X by finding connected components in the residual network.
 Lenc = − I(hi ; Gi ). (6)
 This partitioning fails to capture the cooperativity exhibited by
 vi ∈V
 subgraph anomalies, leading to undesirable results. In contrast,
By maximizing I(hi ; Gi ) with the sum of (3) and (5) over all the learnable clustering strategy we adopt achieves adaptive
hidden vectors H, the learned representations finely preserve anomaly-aware subgraph partition, which is beneficial to the
the attribute and topological information inherent in the graph, subsequent accurate identification of subgraph anomalies.
and has good separability between benign and abnormal,
which helps in adaptive division of subgraphs. B. Subgraph-Level Contrastive Learning
 Considering that nodes exhibiting collaborative behaviors For the exported candidate subgraph set {S1 , S2 , . . . , SC },
typically have similar patterns, leading to their high proximity the key question is how to measure the abnormality of each
in the embedding space. This inspires us to utilize a differen- subgraph in an unsupervised manner to distinguish anomalies
tiable clustering layer [41] for adaptive subgraph partitioning from benign. Note that ASs often exhibit discrepancies with
based on the semantic distribution of representations. As their surrounding areas, serving as a good anomaly indicator.
the model trains, this layer continuously optimizes the soft Hence, we focus on picking out this inconsistency by learning
assignment of nodes to clusters (i.e., subgraphs), then the the “subgraph-vicinity” matching patterns. In specific, we first
above nodes will tend to be grouped into a subgraph. convert the input graph G into a subgraph-level composition
 Let µc indicate the center of cluster c ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C}. The form through the following coarsening operations:
assignment matrix to be learned is denoted as S ∈ Rn×C , where 0
Sic records the degree to which node vi is assigned to cluster XS = S> H ∈ RC×d
c. Here, we utilize a soft-min assignment to assign each node AS = S> AS ∈ RC×C (9)
vi to the cluster centers based on distance
 where XS stores hidden embeddings for each of the subgraphs,
 exp −τ khi − µc k
 
 Sic = P (7) which is derived by aggregating node embeddings according
 C exp −τ khi − µC k
 
 to the learned cluster assignments. Similarly, AS is the coarsened subgraph adjacency matrix that records the connectivity
where τ is an inverse-temperature hyperparameter, and we
 strength between each pair of subgraphs.
use norm k·k as negative cosine similarity due to its good
 To adapt to the lack of prior annotations, we create
performance. The soft assignments S are more adaptable to
 “subgraph versus vicinity” instance pairs and model their
the assumption that nodes may participate in multiple clusmatching associations in a contrastive learning manner. For
ters simultaneously. Similar to typical K-means, we optimize
 each subgraph Si , its vicinity
 P V i is defined by the fused
each cluster P by alternately updating Sic via (7) and
 center
 neighboring subgraphs V i = j∈N (i) AS i j XS j , which together
µc = i Sic hi /
 P
 i Sic . This iterative process will converge to form a positive pair. To generate negative instances, we build
a fixed point where µ remains unchanged between successive e = (e
 a corrupt graph G X, A) by adding noise sampled from a
updates [42].
 X = X + .
 uniform distribution to the given attributes, that is, e
 Intuitively, the more common subgraphs node vi and node
 After passing through the same graph encoding layer, we get
vj participate in, the more likely they are to be connected
 negative subgraph representation e XS by S> H. e The objective
by an edge. At the same time, we also need to force nodes
 function follows a standard binary cross-entropy loss to make
at the boundary to be divided into different clusters. Hence,
 the discriminator successfully differentiate between positive
we aim to apply A0i j carrying anomaly boundary information
 and negative examples:
to constrain the similarity and dissimilarity between cluster
 C
assignment vectors of different nodes 1 X
 Lcon = − XS i , V i
 log DΨ XS i , V i + log 1 − DΨ e
  
 σ Si S>j
 !
 2C
 i=1
 X
 Lpar = − − EPn log σ −Sn S>m
  
 log 0 (10)
 Ai j
 (vi ,v j )∈E
 (8) where DΨ : d0 × d0 → R is a discriminator similar to (4) with
 trainable parameters Ψ.
where Pn denotes the uniform distribution over nonedges
(vn , vm ) in G. As can be seen, the trainable clustering layer will C. Joint Optimization for Subgraph Anomaly Detection
adaptively group nodes with similar patterns that may belong
 By combining the above three objectives through tradeoff
to normal or abnormal subgraphs. Based on the subgraph
 parameters α and β, we get the complete objective function
composition of graph G, we switch the perspective from node
 for E ND S UB G
level to subgraph level to examine the abnormality of each
subgraph, which is the focus in Section III-B. L = αLenc + βLpar + Lcon . (11)
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18317

After end-to-end joint training of graph embedding, subgraph
partition, and anomaly identification, we acquire a useful classifier DΨ to discriminate the consistency between a subgraph
and its vicinity. Then, the abnormality of each subgraph ai
can be quantified by the scoring function f = 1 − DΨ (XS i , V i ),
where a ∈ RC records the anomaly scores of all subgraphs.
Multiple rounds of statistical analysis can also be used to
calculate anomaly scores [6], [15]. Due to the mismatching
with surrounding areas, an AS will be assigned a lower
probability of being positive (close to 0) by DΨ , thus having a
higher anomaly score. Interestingly, we can then evaluate the
abnormality of each node through S · a, where the anomalous
nodes will provide node-level explanations for the subgraph
anomaly. In other words, for the detected AS, we can further
figure out the abnormality of each node, which is of great
significance for subsequent analysis, management, and even
rectification of anomalies. Fig. 3. 3-D surface plot of AS-WNMI, NMI, and JS distance values under
 different simulation cases.
D. Complexity Analysis
 The graph embedding stage adopts a vanilla GCN [43] simply judging whether each subgraph Si in the given set is
encoder, which has the computational complexity of O(lndd0 + abnormal, each method utilizes different partition strategies
lmd0 ), where l denotes the number of layers. The discriminator as discussed in Section III-A to get subgraphs of various
DΘ has complexity O(ndd0 +nd), and the clustering assignment shapes and then spots anomalies accordingly. In this case,
needs O(nd0C). During the network coarsening phase, it needs metrics similar to classification accuracy cannot be used. To
O(nd0C + mC + C 2 n). The embedding of corrupt graph also meet different application needs, more dedicated research on
costs O(lndd0 + lmd0 ), and the discriminator DΨ has com- new metrics that evaluate anomaly detection quality from the
plexity O(Cd02 + Cd0 ). Note that l and C are usually much subgraph level is urgently needed [1].
smaller than n, m, d, and d0 , the overall time complexity is It can be observed that the quality of the identified ASs
num iters ∗ O(ndd0 + md0 ), which is linearly related to the depends on the correctness of the extracted subgraphs and
number of nodes and edges. abnormality measurements. Accordingly, we introduce the
 anomaly prediction difference as a weight into NMI (often
 IV. E XPERIMENTS used to measure the quality of community detection [19]) and
 In this section, we propose a new metric specifically propose an AS-WNMI as a new evaluation metric. Assume
designed to evaluate the quality of subgraph anomaly detec- that the ground-truth subgraph anomaly labels consist of the
tion, which fills the gap in performance evaluation for this task. subgraph set S̄ ∗ and node anomaly labels y∗ = [y∗1 , y∗2 , . . . , y∗n ] ∈
Then, we empirically evaluate E ND S UB G on both synthetic {0, 1}n , where all nodes belonging to ASs Si∗ are labeled with
and real-world datasets. A case study is also given to intu- 1, and others are marked as 0. Similarly, the outputs of the
itively demonstrate the quality of ASs identified by E ND S UB G detection model include the predicted subgraph set S̄ and node
and other baselines. Specifically, we mainly attempt to answer anomaly scores y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ] ∈ [0, 1]n . First, unlike the
the following four research questions. community detection task that focuses on whether each com-
 1) Q1: How to quantitatively evaluate the performance of munity (subgraph) partition is correct, our task concentrates on
 an algorithm in identifying ASs? extracting ASs rather than the division of normal regions. That
 2) Q2: How impactful is the proposed framework on syn- is, normal regions can be divided in any way that helps identify
 thetic datasets with different background graphs? ASs. Thus, we prune S̄ ∗ by merging all normal subgraphs into
 3) Q3: Does the proposed framework work well on real- one to omit concerns about the partitioning results of normal
 world datasets with different numbers of ASs? regions. And do the same for S̄. (If S̄ ∗ or S̄ only involves ASs
 4) Q4: How to understand ASs identified by the proposed without further subgraph division of normal regions, the above
 framework (visual analysis)? operation is unnecessary.) Then, the AS-WNMI (S̄ ∗ , S̄, y∗ , y)
 score is defined as
 P ∗ P   
 n n
A. New Evaluation Metric: AS-WNMI (Answer to Q1) −2 Ci=1 Cj=1 ni j log niinj j 1 − JS y∗S ∗ , yS j
 i
 Currently, there is no unified specification on how to evalu- PC ∗ ni PC nj (12)
 i=1 ni log n + j=1 n j log n
ate the performance of AS detection. Most existing works [4],
[13] still employ commonly used area under the curve (AUC) where C ∗ and C are the number of ground truth and detected
or F1 to assess detection results at the node level, which subgraphs, respectively. nij denotes the number of nodes
completely ignores the role of subgraphs. Besides, it should appearing in both the ith ground-truth subgraph Si∗ and the
be noted that in the task setting of unsupervised subgraph jth detected subgraph S j . n is the number of nodes in G. ni
anomaly detection, there is no pregiven candidate subgraph set and nj sum up the number of nodes in Si∗ and S j , respectively.
S̄ = {S1 , S2 , . . . , SC } with subgraph anomaly labels. Instead of y∗S ∗ denotes the anomaly labels of nodes belonging to Si∗ , and
 i
18318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

yS j is the predicted anomaly scores of nodes belonging to S j . 2) Dense Block Detection: Following the idea of DeepFD
JS(p, q) calculates the Jensen–Shannon distance between two [12] and FraudNE [13] that learn bipartite graph embedding
probability vectors p and q, which is the square root of the first and then uncover suspicious dense blocks with DBSCAN
Jensen–Shannon divergence and defined as [14] for fraud detection, we design a baseline consisting of
 r two phases: attributed graph representation learning and dense
 KL( p k m) + KL(q k m) block detection.
 (13)
 2 1) GAE [44] + DBSCAN: GAE generates node embeddings
where KL(·) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and by learning to reconstruct topological links, after which
m = ( p+q)/2. By measuring the anomaly prediction difference DBSCAN identifies dense regions in the vector space.
between y∗S ∗ and yS j (the smaller the difference, the value 2) DGI [30] + DBSCAN: DGI derives informative node
 i
of JS(y∗S ∗ , yS j ) approaches 0, otherwise, it approaches 1), embeddings via maximizing the mutual information
 i
(13) quantifies the anomaly recognition performance of the between patch-level and graph-level representations and
detection model on the subgraph from the node level. After then achieves dense block detection by DBSCAN.
introducing [1 − JS(y∗S ∗ , yS j )] as weight into NMI, (12) mea- 3) Subgraph Anomaly Detection (Pipeline): For an arbii
sures the quality of subgraph partitioning and simultaneously trary subgraph set, SADE [3] learns role-guided subgraph
evaluates the ability to identify anomalies in subgraphs. Here, embedding first by taking into consideration both local conneca simulation experiment is used to illustrate the superiority of tions and global roles and then employs classic unsupervised
the proposed AS-WNMI over the vanilla NMI. Let us consider outlier detection techniques such as Isolation Forest [45] or
a simple situation. There exist only two clusters, the first one LOF [46] to spot suspicious transactions in the encoded subconsisting of five nodes is labeled as normal cluster and the graph embedding space. Since there is no predefined subgraph
second one with three nodes is abnormal. We enumerate all set under our task setting, we adapt SADE to a baseline that
possible partitioning cases (28 = 256) and all possible anomaly follows a pipeline of subgraph division, subgraph embedding,
cluster prediction results (2! = 2), leading to 256 × 2 = 512 and outlier detection.
possible outcomes. We then calculate the scores for each of the 1) Louvain [47] + SADE: Louvain divides the input graph
three metrics (i.e., NMI, JS distance, and AS-WNMI) in each into multiple communities based on modularity opticase and draw them in a 3-D surface plot, as shown in Fig. 3. mization, which is fed into SADE to derive subgraph
As can be seen, the value range of AS-WNMI belongs to [0, 1] embeddings, and then LOF spots outlies in the vector
and will reach its maximum value of 1 only when NMI reaches space by measuring the local deviation of the density of
1 and JS distance reaches 0. In other words, AS-WNMI can a certain object with respect to its neighbors.
reach its highest value only when the AS is correctly divided 2) CommDGI [20] + SADE: CommDGI performs clusfrom the normal region and all nodes in each part are correctly tering assignment by learning to maximize community
judged, that is, the nodes in the AS are predicted to be mutual information and modularity from both attribute
anomalous and the nodes in the normal region are determined and topological perspectives and then identifies anomaas benign. In this sense, the evaluation perspective of the AS- lies in the subgraph embedding space with the help of
WNMI metric is more comprehensive compared with NMI SADE.
which only measures the quality of subgraph partition, and 4) Subgraph Anomaly Detection (End-to-End): We comthe traditional AUC or average precision (AP) metric which pare E ND S UB G with existing two open-source end-to-end
only considers whether abnormal nodes are identified. Thus, methods, including a traditional nondeep model and a deep
obtaining a high AS-WNMI score is somewhat challenging learning framework.
for the detection model.
 1) AMEN [11]: introduces a measure called normality to
 evaluate the abnormality of attributed neighborhoods
B. Compared Methods from both internal consistency and external separability.
 2) AS-GAE [4]: learns a residual graph by location-aware
 It needs to be emphasized again that, there are limited
 graph autoencoder, on which a trainable supermodular
existing studies on unsupervised static subgraph anomaly
 graph scoring function is applied to assign anomaly
detection, as mentioned in the related work. Thus, we select
 scores to the extracted subgraphs.
the following four categories of methods as baselines to meet
the focus of our work.
 1) Node Anomaly Detection: Two state-of-the-art methods C. Parameter Settings and Metrics
are selected to explore whether they are still effective in All experiments, except AMEN based on MATLAB, are
subgraph anomaly detection, which are both based on self- implemented in PyTorch and carried out on a single NVIDIA
supervised contrastive learning. 4090 GPU. Since SADE does not have a public source code,
 1) ANEMONE [15]: spots anomalous nodes by learning we implemented it ourselves based on its published paper.
 the patch-level (i.e., node versus node) agreement and As for other baselines, they are all implemented using the
 context-level (i.e., node versus ego-net) agreement con- released source code and undergo parameter tuning according
 currently. to the empirical strategies reported in their papers. About
 2) GRADATE [8]: presents a multiscale contrastive learn- E ND S UB G, we adopt two layers of GCN with 512 or 128
 ing framework with an augmented graph view for node neurons as the graph encoder. The number of negative samples
 anomaly detection. for the JSD estimator is set to 5. We select the number of
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18319

 TABLE I
 S TATISTICS OF S YNTHETIC AND R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS

extracted subgraphs C from {8, 10, 12, 15, 20}, and the initial TABLE II
cluster centers are chosen by the idea of K-means++, which PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR N ETWORK API S
benefits to accelerate the convergence of the model [48].
During training, we adopt the Adam [49] optimizer with
the learning rate adjusted in the range of {1e−3 , 3e−4 , 1e−4 }.
The inverse-temperature hyperparameter τ is set to 30. The
parameters α and β are selected from {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0},
and we tune the parameter λ in [1, 2] combined with the
interquartile range (IQR) rule [50].
 On the one hand, following the commonly used metrics
in the previous subgraph anomaly detection works [4], [11],
which only consider whether node anomalies are spotted, we
also calculate AUC and AP based on y∗ and y to assess the
 2) BA graph is created with the function
detection results. The AUC score (area under the receiver
 extended barabasi albert graph(n,m,p,q),
operating characteristic curve, ROC-AUC) assesses how well
 where n for the number of nodes, m for the number
the model generates relative scores to distinguish positive or
 of edges with which a new node attaches to existing
negative examples across all classification thresholds. The AP
 nodes, p for the probability value for adding an edge
score evaluates the ability of the model to identify positive
 between existing nodes, and q for the probability value
instances accurately while maintaining high precision. AP
 of rewiring of existing edges.
is more suitable for anomaly detection tasks where posi-
 3) connected watts strogatz graph(n,k,p) is for
tive (abnormal) and negative (benign) samples are extremely
 the CWS graph, where n for the number of nodes, k for
imbalanced. On the other hand, we adopt our proposed ASthe number of nearest neighbors in a ring topology, and
WNMI to comprehensively evaluate the subgraph anomaly
 p for the probability of rewiring each edge.
detection performance from both subgraph partitioning and
anomaly identification. Here, we report the average results We select four from all subgraphs and label them as
over five runs for the above metrics. anomalies by setting parameters to make them smaller in
 network size and denser in topological structure. Then, we
 connect all subgraphs together to form a connected graph by
D. Results on Synthetic Datasets (Answer to Q2) setting a probability of 0.3 of one node connecting to any
 node in the other subgraph. In addition, node feature design
 1) Data Generation: To simulate different scenarios com- follows the pattern provided by AS-GAE [4]. Node features in
prehensively, we consider the following three network models normal subgraphs and ASs are sampled from different Poisson
as background graphs: 1) Erdős-Rényi (ER) model that gener- distributions with randomly selected λ and the constraint
ates a graph where a given number of nodes are randomly (λanomaly /λnormal ) = 5. The definition of a Poisson distribution
connected with a certain probability; 2) Barabási–Albert is Pλ (x) = (λ x e−λ /x!). The data statistics are summarized in
(BA) model that creates scale-free graphs; 3) connected Table I. All parameters are randomly selected from a specific
Watts–Strogatz (CWS) model that produces connected small- distribution shown in Table II.
world property graphs. We choose one specific type above 2) Performance Evaluation: Table III reports AUC, AP, and
and utilize the following NetworkX graph generators to AS-WNMI scores of all methods, based on which we have the
generate 20 independent subgraphs with different numbers following observations.
of nodes and structural properties sampled from a given 1) Across all datasets, E ND S UB G achieves almost the
distribution range. best results concerning all metrics, except AS-WNMI
 1) ER graph is generated with the function on the BA graph (detailed explanations of this speerdos renyi graph(n,p), where n for the number cial case later). The best AUC and AP scores reflect
 of nodes and p for the probability for edge creation. the superiority of E ND S UB G in discovering anomalies
18320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON S YNTHETIC DATASETS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD . N/A M EANS N OT A PPLICABLE

 from the node granularity compared to other baselines. outputs do not form the concept of subgraph anomalies,
 Besides, the promising AS-WNMI value shows that thus inapplicable to AS-WNMI. Besides, the sparseness
 E ND S UB G works well in spotting subgraph anomalies of the BA graph makes it difficult to ensure the diversity
 from the perspective of subgraph division and anomaly of sampled contrast pairs based on random walk with
 identification in an unsupervised fashion. This advantage restart (RWR), thus impairing the correct identification
 benefits from the fact that the anomaly-aware graph of anomalies by the discriminator.
 embedding and subgraph partition explicitly capture the
 boundary between anomaly and benign, which facilitates the discovery of subgraph anomalies through E. Results on Real-World Datasets (Answer to Q3)
 subgraph-vicinity contrastive learning. Moreover, our 1) Data Description and Anomaly Injection: Note that
 E ND S UB G is relatively robust to different background there are currently almost no real-world datasets for AS
 graph types. detection publicly available in the research community. Privacy
 2) Overall, dense block detection models and pipeline- policy aside, manually spotting and annotating anomalous
 based methods exhibit undesirable performance on this subgraphs is inherently challenging. Thus, we select four real
 task, although GAE + DBSCAN and DGI + DBSCAN datasets here, then following the previous studies [4], [51]
 get good results in the BA graph. Note that the BA graph inject ASs for experimentation.
 is a scale-free network that is closer to reality and much LargeCora is an extension of the common citation network
 sparser than the other two graphs (see Table III). ASs are Cora [43], where nodes correspond to documents and edges
 obviously denser in the network and are therefore easily indicate citation relations. Each node is associated with a bagrecognized by dense block detection methods. However, of-words representation whose dimension is determined by the
 in the denser CWS graph and ER graph, it is difficult dictionary size. AmazonComputer is the “Computer” part of
 to distinguish the boundary between ASs and normal the Amazon co-purchase graph [52], where nodes represent
 regions based on density alone, so the performance is computers, edges indicate that two products are frequently
 depressing. Moreover, the high AS-WNMI score on the bought together, and node features are bag-of-words encoded
 BA graph is since the DBSCAN generates clear anomaly product reviews. Reddit [53] contains a user-subreddit graph
 and benign labels rather than anomaly scores (probabil- that captures posts shared across subreddits for a month. The
 ities), that is, the prediction y = [0, 1, . . . , 1] ∈ {0, 1}n nodes represent users, whose interactions with posts form
 instead of y ∈ [0, 1]n , which will result in a higher edges, and posts are converted into node features. Questions
 AS-WNMI value due to less error when calculating [54] is collected from the question-answering website Yandex
 JS(y∗S ∗ , yS j ). Methods that output anomaly probabilities Q, where nodes are users and edges indicate that one user
 i
 suffer slightly in this regard, but the anomaly warning answered the other user’s question during one year. Each user
 level supported by the probability is more suitable for has a description that is converted into an average of FastText
 practical application. The higher AUC and AP scores embeddings for words. Since the latter two datasets contain
 still reflect the stronger anomaly identification ability of annotated node anomalies, they need to be removed before
 E ND S UB G. Moreover, the large parameter search space injecting anomalous subgraphs.
 caused by the combination of multiple methods leads Following the method outlined in [51], we inject one or
 to a formidable defect. It should also be noted that three ASs into each dataset to simulate two detection scenarios.
 the synthetic datasets here simulate an ideal detection Taking the injection of one anomaly as an example, we
 scenario with obvious subgraph anomalies. While these first find two connected subgraphs from the graph randomly,
 methods are somewhat effective, whether they still work one of which is larger and the other is smaller. Then, we
 well in more complicated real-world situations will be select a connected subset of nodes in the larger subgraph
 explored later. that matches the size of the smaller subgraph as a candidate
 3) Although two node anomaly detection models still for subgraph anomaly. The node attributes of this subset are
 uncover a certain portion of anomalies, due to the lack replaced by those of the smaller subgraph to ensure a collecof recognition of the subgraph structure, their detection tive attribute distribution. Moreover, edge links are randomly
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18321

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS W ITH O NE AS. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS W ITH T HREE AS S . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

introduced between nodes in the subset for perturbation from riority of exploring end-to-end methods to solve the
the topological perspective. The detection model is expected to subgraph anomaly detection from a holistic perspective.
uncover these ASs by considering both attributes and structural 3) Impact of Different Mutual Information Estimators:
properties. Detailed dataset statistics are listed in Table I. We additionally explore the impact of another widely used
 2) Performance Comparison: The results with only one InfoNCE estimator on detection performance. Since we follow
AS and three ASs are summarized in Tables IV and V, the InfoMax principle [55] to directly maximize the mutual
respectively. We have the following observations. information between input node features and embeddings,
 1) E ND S UB G consistently outperforms other baselines which have different dimensions, the InfoNCE formulation in
 in real-world datasets involving different numbers of Deep InfoMax [56] is used here to calculate I(hi ; x j )
 subgraph anomalies, which strongly confirms the effec- h X i
 tiveness of our proposed joint modeling framework for I(hi ; x j ) = DΘ (hi , x j ) − Evn ∼Pn log eDΘ ( hi ,xvn ) . (14)
 anomaly-aware subgraph partition and anomaly detec- We replace only the mutual information estimator and keep
 tion. By contrast, AS-GAE relies on a manually set other experimental settings unchanged. As can be seen from
 threshold to locate unusual areas, which is difficult to the last two rows of Tables IV and V, compared with the
 adapt to the unknown data distribution and prone to erro- JSD estimator, InfoNCE achieves both gains and decreases in
 neously narrowing the scope of the abnormal regions. performance on different datasets. Overall, the performance
 Besides, it treats connected components in the network of these two mutual information estimators is quite comparaas extracted candidate subgraphs with the neglect of ble, and in practice, they can both be considered promising
 correlations between graph topology and node attributes. solutions (with a suitable number of negative samples).
 This problematic subgraph division further makes it fail
 to detect subgraph anomalies accurately (see case study).
 2) On real-world datasets with no clear subgraph bound- F. Case Studies (Answer to Q4)
 aries and more complex types of anomalies, dense block We provide intuitive visual analysis to better understand the
 detection models including GAE + DBSCAN and DGI detected ASs. Since the large number of nodes in real datasets
 + DBSCAN no longer achieve the same good results as results in poor visualization, we adopt the graph generation
 on the synthetic BA graph. From the perspective of AP strategy mentioned in Section IV-D1 to create a synthetic
 scores, their performance has declined significantly, and dataset with the BA model as background graphs. It contains
 the recognition precision of anomalies is less than 10%. 1050 nodes belonging to ten communities (subgraphs), among
 Additionally, the gap between pipeline-based methods which two ASs have denser topological links and deviated
 and our E ND S UB G once again corroborates the supe- node attributes, as shown in Fig. 4. We use different colors
18322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 4. (a) Synthetic dataset where two ASs are marked by diamond-shaped nodes. Visualization of detection results on the synthetic dataset from (b) DGI
+ DBSCAN, (c) AS-GAE, and (d) our E ND S UB G.

Fig. 5. AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI plots of E ND S UB G with respect to different λ on four real-world datasets. (a) LargeCora 3AS. (b) AmazonComputer 3AS.
(c) Reddit 3AS. (d) Questions 3AS.

to display the subgraph division results of each algorithm. 1) Extent of Anomaly Perception: We change λ from 0 to
For DGI + DBSCAN, although the discovered noisy nodes 2.5 in the step of 0.5 and keep the other parameters unchanged.
have a lot of overlap with true ASs, there are still many Fig. 5 shows the changes of E ND S UB G regarding the above
misidentified anomalies. Besides, DBSCAN only divides the three metrics on four real-world datasets with three ASs.
nodes in the input graph into two clusters and does not As can be seen, with the growth of λ, AUC, AP, and ASfurther distinguish the other eight normal subgraphs in the WNMI scores all gradually increase and then tend to decline.
ground truth, which seems very coarse-grained. As for AS- Through analysis, we attribute it to the fact that when λ = 0,
GAE, the residual graph derived by manual threshold may most edges (e.g., about 59% in LargeCora 3AS and 57%
mistakenly narrow the scope of the anomaly area, and the in AmazonComputer 3AS) are treated as potential anomalies
inappropriately connected subgraph extraction further causes and filtered out, including many normal edge structures. This
a big gap between the identified AS and the ground truth. undoubtedly loses a lot of useful information, leading to
By contrast, our E ND S UB G implements explicit anomaly- poor detection performance. As λ grows, the filtering range
aware subgraph division, a form of subgraph composition that gradually narrows to real potential abnormal edges, and the
highlights anomalies in the input graph. The shade of node performance becomes better accordingly. But when λ is set
color represents the anomaly score evaluated by E ND S UB G. too large, for example, λ = 2.5 in AmazonComputer 3AS,
The higher the score, the darker the color. It can be seen all edge links will be preserved and utilized. Then potential
from Fig. 4(d) that the division of subgraphs is similar to the anomalies will become noise and negatively impact detection
intrinsic community structure of the input graph. For two ASs, performance, which reflects the importance of anomaly-aware
E ND S UB G summarizes them into a unified AS, and almost all thinking. As for LargeCora 3AS, when λ is set to 2 and 2.5,
the nodes involved are ferreted out. For our assumed normal the model will not filter out any potential anomalies, so the
areas, the model also pre-evaluates the potential risk levels metric values are the same. In practice, we adjust λ to adapt to
in each subarea. Overall, E ND S UB G shows superior subgraph different data distributions and keep the proportion of filtered
anomaly detection quality than other baselines. edges from being too high as anomalies generally account for
 a minority. Overall, setting it to 1.5 to 2.0 is more appropriate.
 2) Granularity of Subgraph Partition: We adjust C
G. Parameter Analysis from {6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30} and keep the other parameters
 Note that the model E ND S UB G involves several hyper- unchanged. The AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI of E ND S UB G
parameters such as the predefined number λ of deviation concerning different C on four real-world datasets are illusstandards in (1), the number of extracted subgraphs C in trated in Fig. 6. It can be seen that all three metrics improve
(8), an inverse-temperature parameter τ in (7), and the trade- accordingly as C gradually increases at the beginning. With the
off parameters α and β in (11). In this part, we mainly continuous rise of C, the performance drops moderately but
explore the impact of these important parameters on detection overall maintains a good and stable trend. Too few subgraph
performance. partitions imply oversimplification, which is not conducive to
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18323

Fig. 6. AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI plots of E ND S UB G with respect to different C on four real-world datasets. (a) LargeCora 3AS. (b) AmazonComputer 3AS.
(c) Reddit 3AS. (d) Questions 3AS.

Fig. 7. AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI plots of E ND S UB G with respect to different τ on four real-world datasets. (a) LargeCora 3AS. (b) AmazonComputer 3AS.
(c) Reddit 3AS. (d) Questions 3AS.

the discriminator identifying anomalies by learning “subgraph- poor quality graph embedding and subgraph partition hinder
vicinity” matching patterns. However, if the number of the identification of anomalies. The gradual performance gains
subgraphs is too large, the subgraphs may be too granular and come from the increase of α and β, and the promising results
difficult to interpret. The overly subtle distribution differences fall within the range of α from 0.7 to 1.0 and β from 0.5 to 1.0.
between subgraphs make it difficult for the discriminator to Accordingly, we recommend setting both α and β around
delineate the boundary between anomalies and benign ones. In 0.7–1.0 to ensure a positive foundation for graph embedding
practice, we recommend employing unsupervised community and subgraph partition.
detection techniques such as B IG C LAM [57] to automatically
estimate the appropriate number of subgraphs in advance.
 3) Impact of Inverse-Temperature Parameter: We tune H. Computation Load Analysis
τ from {0.1, 1, 10, 30, 50} and keep the other parameters In addition to the theoretical complexity analysis, here, we
unchanged. Fig. 7 shows the changes of E ND S UB G regarding make an intuitive comparison between the computation loads
the AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI metrics on four real-world of different methods. Table VI lists the GPU/CPU memory and
datasets. It can be seen that the detection performance grad- running time consumed by different methods when detecting
ually improves as the τ increases. When τ reaches 50, the datasets containing three ASs. For pipeline methods, we report
metrics drop slightly. Recall that in (7), a larger inverse- the highest memory usage among the two stages, as well
temperature value will make the probability distribution as the total running time of both stages. Since Louvain +
sharper and tend to give higher membership probabilities to SADE and AMEN are traditional nondeep methods and do not
the nearest clusters, which makes the model tend to partition involve any operations on GPU, “/” means not applicable. It
clearer subgraphs. However, an excessive τ value results can be seen that our method could complete the detection in a
in overly concentrated output probabilities, weakening the relatively short time (although slightly longer on large datasets,
tolerance for overlapping clusters. On the contrary, a smaller but acceptable). Although some methods like AS-GAE and
temperature value leads to smoother probability distributions, DGI + DBSCAN are somewhat faster, their performance on
making it more difficult for the model to determine the all three metrics is significantly lower than ours. Since our
boundaries of subgraphs and uncover ASs. Overall, the value method involves many complex computational processes, it
of τ cannot be set too small in practice, and it seems more does consume a lot of GPU/CPU memory, but in exchange
appropriate to set it around 10–30. for superior subgraph anomaly detection performance. Overall,
 4) Effect of Tradeoff Parameters: We adjust α and β from our E ND S UB G could work normally on commonly used GPUs
{0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0} to explore their effects on detection such as NVIDIA RTX 4090 or A100 and derive promisperformance. The performance variance results in terms of ing subgraph anomaly detection results within an acceptable
AUC, AP, and AS-WNMI on LargeCora 3AS and Amazon- response time. Here, on large dataset Questions 3AS, we
Computer 3AS are shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that when employ the sampling strategy to avoid GPU memory overflow.
α and β are both small, all three metrics are at low levels since Optimization of the code implementation may further speed up
18324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE VI
 C OMPUTATION L OADS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS W ITH R ESPECT T O M EMORY A SSUMPTION (MB) AND RUNNING T IME ,
 W HERE MG D ENOTES M AX GPU M EMORY AND MC M EANS M AX CPU M EMORY

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE OF E ND S UB G U NDER D IFFERENT DATA M ISSING R ATIOS

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE OF E ND S UB G U NDER D IFFERENT DATA N OISE

 still works well when a small amount of data is missing
 (e.g., 10% mask), but as the degree of data incompleteness
 gradually increases, the performance shows a downward trend.
 Introducing attribute-missing graph representation learning
 techniques [58] may be a promising solution to address this
 limitation.
 2) Noisy Data Scenario: Here, we consider two types of
 noise scenarios from the aspects of attributes and topology,
 respectively. In specific, we add random variables that satisfy
 the standard normal distribution to the node attributes to
 generate noisy attributes. In addition, we randomly add 100
 edge links in the original topology to simulate structural
Fig. 8. Effects of tradeoff parameters α and β in terms of AUC, AP, and noise. Table VIII reports the results on two datasets. It can
AS-WNMI on LargeCora 3AS (left) and AmazonComputer 3AS (right).
 be found that structural noise seems to have less impact on
 the model, which could benefit from the model’s perception
the operation and reduce memory consumption, which will be and refinement of noise edges that do not conform to the
left for future research. homogeneity assumption. In contrast, the model is not robust
 enough to attribute noise. Noise-resistant robust graph learning
 and anomaly detection techniques [59], [60] may be feasible
I. Further Explorations solutions to overcome this limitation.
 Note that real-world scenarios often involve noisy or incomplete data, we further explore the performance of E ND S UB G V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
in the following two situations and illustrate its potential This work concentrates on the subgraph anomaly detection
limitations which will be left for future research. task that has currently received less scrutiny. We present
 1) Incomplete Data Scenario: Here, we simulate different an end-to-end subgraph anomaly detection framework E ND -
degrees of data missing scenarios by randomly masking 10%, S UB G, which follows the new idea of jointly modeling
30%, 50%, and 70% of node attributes. Table VII summarizes subgraph partition and anomaly detection rather than treating
the results on two datasets. As can be seen, the model them as separate steps. E ND S UB G explicitly considers the
PENG et al.: END-TO-END AS DETECTION VIA SUBGRAPH-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 18325

potential AS boundaries via anomaly-aware graph embedding [19] X. Su et al., “A comprehensive survey on community detection with
and subgraph partition, then spots subgraph anomalies by deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4,
 pp. 4682–4702, Apr. 2024.
learning the “subgraph-vicinity” matching patterns on the [20] T. Zhang, Y. Xiong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, and Y. Zhu,
coarsened subgraph network. To comprehensively evaluate the “CommDGI: Community detection oriented deep graph infomax,”
detection quality from both subgraph partition and anomaly in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., Oct. 2020,
 pp. 1843–1852.
recognition, we propose an AS-WNMI as a new evaluation [21] D. He et al., “Community-centric graph convolutional network for
metric, which fills the gap in performance evaluation for this unsupervised community detection,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
task. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets Intell., 2021, pp. 3515–3521.
validate the superiority of E ND S UB G in discovering suspi- [22] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
 detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
cious subgraphs with different numbers of subgraph anomalies 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
and diverse background graphs. Future work will concentrate [23] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS: A joint
on improving the applicability of the model to practical modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
scenarios with incomplete and noisy data or integrating tem- [24] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
poral modules to capture evolutionary information in dynamic on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
applications. pp. 594–602.
 [25] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “SpecAE: Spectral
 autoencoder for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th
 R EFERENCES ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
 [26] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for
[1] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. [27] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
[2] N. Li, H. Sun, K. Chipman, J. George, and X. Yan, “A probabilistic distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 approach to uncovering attributed graph anomalies,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
 Conf. Data Mining, Apr. 2014, pp. 82–90. [28] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE:
[3] Y. Pei, F. Lyu, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Subgraph anomaly Graph anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure
 detection in financial transaction networks,” in Proc. 1st ACM Int. Conf. awareness,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12,
 AI Finance, Oct. 2020, pp. 1–8. pp. 18172–18185, Dec. 2024.
[4] Z. Zhang and L. Zhao, “Unsupervised deep subgraph anomaly [29] H. Nilforoshan and N. Shah, “SliceNDice: Mining suspicious multidetection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022, attribute entity groups with multi-view graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 pp. 753–762. Data Sci. Adv. Analytics (DSAA), Oct. 2019, pp. 351–363.
[5] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A [30] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Rep-
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020. resent., 2019, pp. 1–17.
[6] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, [31] F.-Y. Sun, J. Hoffman, V. Verma, and J. Tang, “InfoGraph: Unsupervised
 “Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self- and semi-supervised graph-level representation learning via mutual
 supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, information maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2020,
 no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022. pp. 1–16.
[7] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed [32] Z. Peng et al., “Graph representation learning via graphical mutual
 network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. Pacific- information maximization,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 259–270.
 Asia Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jan. 2022, pp. 444–457. [33] K. Huang, Y. Guang Wang, M. Li, and P. Liò, “How universal
[8] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive polynomial bases enhance spectral graph neural networks: Heterophily,
 learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. over-smoothing, and over-squashing,” 2024, arXiv:2405.12474.
 Intell., 2023, pp. 7459–7467. [34] J. Li, R. Zheng, H. Feng, M. Li, and X. Zhuang, “Permutation equiv-
[9] B. Miller, N. Bliss, and P. Wolfe, “Subgraph detection using eigen- ariant graph framelets for heterophilous graph learning,” IEEE Trans.
 vector L1 norms,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2010, Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11634–11648, Sep. 2024.
 pp. 1633–1641. [35] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory,
[10] J. L. Sharpnack, A. Krishnamurthy, and A. Singh, “Near-optimal models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 anomaly detection in graphs using Lovasz extended scan statistic,” in Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, Apr. 2024.
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 1959–1967. [36] F. Pukelsheim, “The three sigma rule,” Amer. Statistician, vol. 48, no. 2,
[11] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed pp. 88–91, May 1994.
 neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, pp. 207–215. [37] H. Liu, S. Shah, and W. Jiang, “On-line outlier detection and data
[12] H. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Wu, W. Dang, X. Zhu, and J. Wang, “Deep cleaning,” Comput. Chem. Eng., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1635–1647, 2004.
 structure learning for fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data [38] V. Jakhetiya, K. Gu, T. Singhal, S. C. Guntuku, Z. Xia, and W. Lin, “A
 Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2018, pp. 567–576. highly efficient blind image quality assessment metric of 3-D synthesized
[13] M. Zheng, C. Zhou, J. Wu, S. Pan, J. Shi, and L. Guo, “FraudNE: A images using outlier detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15,
 joint embedding approach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. no. 7, pp. 4120–4128, Jul. 2019.
 Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–8. [39] S. Afzal, A. Afzal, M. Amin, S. Saleem, N. Ali, and M. Sajid, “A novel
[14] M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm approach for outlier detection in multivariate data,” Math. Problems
 for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. Eng., vol. 2021, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 1899225.
 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231. [40] S. Nowozin, B. Cseke, and R. Tomioka, “F-GAN: Training generative
[15] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE: neural samplers using variational divergence minimization,” in Proc.
 Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 271–279.
 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126. [41] B. Wilder, E. Ewing, B. Dilkina, and M. Tambe, “End to end learning
[16] M. Gupta, A. Mallya, S. Roy, J. H. D. Cho, and J. Han, “Local learning and optimization on graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 for mining outlier subgraphs from network datasets,” in Proc. SIAM Int. 2019, pp. 4672–4683.
 Conf. Data Mining, Apr. 2014, pp. 73–81. [42] D. J. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms.
[17] F. Chen, B. Zhou, A. Alim, and L. Zhao, “A generic framework for Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
 interesting subspace cluster detection in multi-attributed networks,” in [43] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2017, pp. 41–50. convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017,
[18] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather: pp. 1–9.
 Homophily in social networks,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 27, no. 1, [44] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” in Proc.
 pp. 415–444, Aug. 2001. NIPS Workshop Bayesian Deep Learn., 2016, pp. 1–3.
18326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

[45] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th Qika Lin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422. from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
[46] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying 2023.
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. He is currently a Research Fellow with the
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104. National University of Singapore, Singapore. He has
[47] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast published many papers in top-tier journals and conunfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mech., Theory ferences, including TKDE, ICDE, ACL, and KDD.
 Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008. His research interests include multimodal learning,
[48] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii, “k-means++: The advantages of careful logical reasoning, and LLM.
 seeding,” in Proc. 18th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, Dr. Lin has actively contributed to several jour-
 2007, pp. 1027–1035. nals/conferences as a reviewer or PC member,
[49] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” including IJCV, TKDE, NeurIPS, and ACL. He also served as a Guest Editor
 2014, arXiv:1412.6980. of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTATIONAL S OCIAL S YSTEMS (TCSS).
[50] J. Yang, S. Rahardja, and P. Fränti, “Outlier detection: How to threshold
 outlier scores?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell., Inf. Process. Cloud
 Comput., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[51] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, Bin Shi received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from
 pp. 12249–12263, Dec. 2023. the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
[52] J. McAuley, C. Targett, Q. Shi, and A. van den Hengel, “Image-based Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2013 and
 recommendations on styles and substitutes,” in Proc. 38th Int. ACM 2019, respectively.
 SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr. (SIGIR), 2015, pp. 43–52. He currently serves as an Associate Professor
[53] J. Tang, F. Hua, Z. Gao, P. Zhao, and J. Li, “GADBench: Revisiting with SPKLSTN Laboratory, School of Computer
 and benchmarking supervised graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Adv. Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 1–26. Xi’an, China. His research interests include graph
[54] O. Platonov, D. Kuznedelev, M. Diskin, A. Babenko, and data mining, large language models, and machine
 L. Prokhorenkova, “A critical look at the evaluation of GNNs learning in open-world environments [with noise,
 under heterophily: Are we really making progress?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. bias, and out-of-distribution (OOD)].
 Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–15.
[55] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, “An information-maximization approach
 to blind separation and blind deconvolution,” Neural Comput., vol. 7,
 no. 6, pp. 1129–1159, Nov. 1995. Chen Chen received the Ph.D. degree from Arizona
[56] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2019.
 estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., She is currently an Assistant Professor from the
 2019, pp. 1–24. Computer Science Department, University of Vir-
[57] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Overlapping community detection at scale: A ginia (UVA), Charlottesville, VA, USA. Before that,
 nonnegative matrix factorization approach,” in Proc. 6th ACM Int. Conf. she was a Research Assistant Professor at Biocom-
 Web Search Data Mining, Feb. 2013, pp. 587–596. plexity Institute, UVA, and a Software Engineer at
[58] X. Chen, S. Chen, J. Yao, H. Zheng, Y. Zhang, and I. W. Tsang, Google. Her research has appeared in top-tier con-
 “Learning on attribute-missing graphs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. ferences (including NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, KDD,
 Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 740–757, Feb. 2022. AAAI, IJCAI, SIGIR, WSDM, ICDM, SDM, etc.)
[59] S. Li, Y. Liu, Q. Chen, G. I. Webb, and S. Pan, “Noise-resilient and prestigious journals (including PNAS, IEEE
 unsupervised graph representation learning via multi-hop feature quality TKDE, ACM CSUR, ACM TKDD, KAIS, and SIAM SAM). Her research
 estimation,” in Proc. 33rd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. interests include the connectivity of complex networks, which have been
 2024, pp. 1255–1265. applied to address pressing challenges in various high-impact domains, includ-
[60] Z. Gong et al., “Beyond homophily: Robust graph anomaly detection ing social media, bioinformatics, recommendation, and critical infrastructure
 via neural sparsification,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., systems.
 Aug. 2023, pp. 2104–2113. Dr. Chen has received several awards, including “Bests of KDD,” “Bests
 of SDM,” and Rising Star in EECS.

 Zhen Peng received the B.Eng. degree from the
 School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong Bo Dong (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 University, Xi’an, China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. in computer science and technology from Xi’an
 degree from the School of Computer Science and Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2014.
 Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 2023. From 2014 to 2017, he did postdoctoral research
 She is currently an Assistant Professor with Xi’an in control science and engineering at Xi’an Jiao-
 Jiaotong University. Her research interests include tong University, where he is currently a Professor
 graph machine learning and its applications espe- with SPKLSTN Laboratory. His main research intercially graph anomaly detection and social network ests include large language models and machine
 analysis. learning.

 Yunfan Wang received the B.Eng. degree in computer science and technology and the B.Eco. degree Chao Shen received the B.S. degree in automation
 in economics, and the M.Eng. degree in com- and the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control
 puter science and technology from Xi’an Jiaotong engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
 University, Xi’an, China, in 2021 and 2024, respec- China, in 2007 and 2014, respectively.
 tively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in He is currently a Professor with the Faculty
 computer science with the University of Virginia, of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an
 Charlottesville, VA, USA. Jiaotong University. His current research inter-
 His research interests include machine learning ests include AI security, insider/intrusion detection,
 systems, large language models, and graph data behavioral biometrics, and measurement and expermining. imental methodology.