IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 7317

 End-to-End Attack Scene Reconstruction in a Host
 With Rules and Anomaly-Based Detection Models
 Su Wang , Hongbin Sun , Zhiliang Wang , Member, IEEE, Tao Zhou, Xia Yin, Senior Member, IEEE,
 Dongqi Han, Han Zhang , Xingang Shi , Member, IEEE, and Jiahai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Critical devices on the Internet are frequently tar- important assets [1], [2]. Intrusion campaigns of this nature
 geted by skilled and advanced network attackers. These attackers are embedded within vast amounts of host data, making
 often orchestrate complex and persistent intrusion campaigns, detection challenging. The frequent exploitation of zero-day
 which involve multiple stages of attacks. In the context of
 host-based threat detection, the reconstruction of the entire vulnerabilities adds another layer of challenge to detection
 attack scenario is crucial for tracing threats and fixing system systems.
 vulnerabilities. Prior anomaly-based studies lack the capability We study the intrusion campaigns occurring on the host.
 to interpret the attack scenario, while rule-based approaches In the realm of host-based intrusion detection, detecting
 struggle with detecting novel attack patterns. We introduce and reconstructing the complete attack scene has become
 EAG LE , an end-to-end framework that takes original host-based
 data as input and reconstructs the potential attack scenario as a research focus. To effectively detect advanced threats on
 output. It leverages an anomaly-based algorithm and a fine- the host, selecting appropriate data sources poses an initial
 grained misuse detection module to assign anomalous scores issue. An ideal data source should contain rich information
 to host data, constructs the potential attack scenario using a for intrusion analysis. The provenance graph is proposed as
 novel anomalous subtree detection algorithm, and generates the a suitable data source for host-based intrusion detection [3],
 interpretable attack scenario graph through a coarse-grained
 rule matching method. We assess the performance of EAG LE [4], [5], [6], [7]. It is a directed acyclic graph constructed
 using three attack scenarios from the DARPA TC dataset and from system audit data, where nodes represent system entithree deployment scenarios. The results demonstrate that EAG LE ties such as processes and files, and edges represent system
 can effectively uncover the hidden attack scenario within the calls between entities, indicating the flow of information.
 host data and outperforms three state-of-the-art attack scenario The provenance graph contains rich contextual information,
 reconstruction systems.
 making it potent for detecting long-term threats. Moreover, the
 Index Terms—Host-based attack scene reconstruction, graph information about causal relationships stored in the provenance
 neural network, data provenance, rule matching, anomaly-based graph facilitates causal analysis of different attack steps for the
 algorithm.
 detection system.
 Since Backtracker [8], the first work to use provenance
 I. I NTRODUCTION graphs for system intrusion investigation, was proposed in

 A DVANCED threats are frequently crafted and deployed
 by network attackers to infiltrate crucial hosts within
 companies and government departments. These sophisticated
 2003, an increasing number of studies on threat detection
 and reconstruction based on provenance graphs have been
 introduced [9]. They can generally be categorized into three
 threats tend to persist for long periods, concealing their categories: anomaly-based, rule-based, and hybrid methods.
 campaigns within systems and posing significant risks to Anomaly-based methods [3], [4], [5], [10], [11] create models
 Received 10 October 2024; revised 30 April 2025 and 2 July 2025;
 for benign activities and detect threats based on deviations
 accepted 4 July 2025. Date of publication 11 July 2025; date of current version from these models. Although these approaches have the
 18 July 2025. This work was supported by the Zhongguancun Laboratory. potential to hunt for novel threats, they often lack the abil-
 The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
 for publication was Dr. Fabio De Gaspari. (Corresponding authors: Zhiliang
 ity to provide detailed explanations for the alerts, making
 Wang; Xia Yin.) it difficult to interpret the attack scenario [4]. To interpret
 Su Wang and Hongbin Sun are with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing the attack scenarios, they need to use external interpretation
 100084, China (e-mail: wangsu@zgclab.edu.cn; sunhb@zgclab.edu.cn). tools [12], [13], [14] and thus rely on the performance of
 Zhiliang Wang, Han Zhang, Xingang Shi, and Jiahai Yang are with the
 Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, BNRist, Tsinghua Univer- these tools. Interpretability is crucial for scene reconstrucsity, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, tion algorithms because the stronger the interpretability, the
 Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: wzl@cernet.edu.cn; zhhan@tsinghua.edu.cn;
 shixg@cernet.edu.cn; yang@cernet.edu.cn).
 lower the required manual labor costs [3], [15]. Rule-based
 Tao Zhou is with Venustech Group Inc., Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: approaches [6], [7], [16] design attack patterns based on
 zhoutao@venustech.com.cn). expert knowledge and prior experience. These attack patterns,
 Xia Yin is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, often referred to as rulesets, enable the detection of threats
 BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: yxia@tsinghua.edu.cn). through pattern matching between the provenance graph and
 Dongqi Han is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Uni- the ruleset. Unfortunately, due to the limitations of predefined
 versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail:
 handongqi@bupt.edu.cn).
 rules, rule-based approaches often struggle to detect zero-day
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3588251 attacks. Both of these detection approaches possess distinctive
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 characteristics, making it worthwhile to explore how to patterns (ruleset) to address the challenge of interpreting attack
 leverage their advantages concurrently. Hybrid methods [17], steps. The granularity of the ruleset is a perennial research
 [18] combine various approaches to detect intrusion behav- challenge in the host-based threat detection community. If the
 ior in cyber space security. These methods are primarily granularity is too coarse, it generates more false positives.
 applied in network threat detection, while there is a lack Conversely, if the granularity is too fine, some attack steps
 of related research in the field of host-based threat scenario may go undetected. Based on existing research, we define
 reconstruction. two types of attack patterns: fine-grained ruleset and coarse-
 In a nutshell, anomaly-based methods detect threats by grained ruleset. We utilize the fine-grained ruleset to generate
 identifying deviations from models of benign behavior, but the anomaly score for the attack pattern matching module and
 they struggle to provide detailed interpretations for alerts. employ the coarse-grained ruleset to interpret the attack steps
 Rule-based methods utilize predefined attack patterns, which detected by the anomaly-based detection module. These two
 can limit their effectiveness against zero-day attacks. Hybrid kinds of rulesets are both generated from the TTPs [20].
 methods merge different approaches for network threat detec- Our paper makes contributions summarized as follows:
 tion, yet there is limited research on host-based scenario • General framework for host-based threats scene
 reconstruction. reconstruction. We propose a general framework that
 We introduce EAG LE, an end-to-end framework designed effectively combines both anomaly-based and rule-based
 for host-based threat scene detection and reconstruction. methods. We devise an anomaly-based algorithm, subtree
 EAG LE operates as a host-based system, aiming to harness detection algorithm, and ruleset design strategy, enabling
 the strengths of both anomaly-based and rule-based methods the accurate reconstruction of potential attack scenes
 while proposing a novel attack scene reconstruction algorithm. within a host. We evaluate the framework with various
 By taking the provenance graph as input, EAG LE employs anomaly-based detection methods to demonstrate the genboth anomaly-based detection and attack pattern matching erality.
 approaches to generate preliminary anomaly scores for entities • Better performance. We conduct an extensive evaluation
 within a host. We employ these two types of methods to detect of EAG LE’s detection capabilities using three public
 as many potentially threat-related nodes as possible, while datasets and three simulated engagements. In comparison
 leveraging the inherent interpretability of pattern matching with three state-of-the-art host-based attack scene reconto enhance the interpretability of the ultimately reconstructed struction methods, our results demonstrate that EAG LE
 attack scenario. We customize a Graph Attention Networks excels in reconstructing interpretable attack scenes and
 (GAT) model [19] for the anomaly-based detection task. The outperforms previous approaches.
 GAT model is designed to uncover hidden information within • Open-source system. We implement a prototype system
 benign nodes in a provenance graph and identify anomalous and make the code open-source.1
 nodes based on detected deviations. Additionally, a set of rules This paper is organized as follows: We introduce the backbased on Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) [20] ground and motivation of our work in §II. The threat model is
 is applied for the attack pattern matching task. To pinpoint introduced in §III. The overall design and workflow of EAG LE
 the threat scenario, we design an anomalous subtree detection are presented in §IV. The experiments are detailed in §V. We
 and pruning algorithm. Finally, a coarse-grained rule matching discuss various issues and limitations in §VI. The related work
 method is implemented to interpret the unknown steps of the is introduced in §VII, and we conclude this paper in §VIII.
 attack scene.
 EAG LE incorporates two key designs. The first design
 II. BACKGROUND & M OTIVATION
 addresses bridging the gap between anomaly-based and
 rule-based methods. By leveraging both anomaly-based and In this section, we introduce the concept of provenance
 rule-based approaches, EAG LE allows the anomaly-based graph, which is the data source of the attack reconstruction
 detection and attack pattern matching components to be framework. We introduce the motivation behind our work
 replaced by distinct methods. Consequently, an algorithm is using a toy example.
 necessary to bridge the gap between these two methods.
 We propose an anomalous subtree detection algorithm to A. Provenance Graph
 achieve this objective. The provenance graph is input into the In this paper, we utilize the provenance graph as our primary
 anomaly-based detection and attack pattern matching modules data source. The end-to-end framework of EAG LE takes the
 of EAG LE. These modules contribute to the anomaly scores for provenance graph as input and produces the reconstructed
 each node in the graph. Subsequently, the anomalous subtree attack scene. The provenance graph is proposed as a highly
 detection algorithm identifies a node as the root node of the effective data source for host-based threat detection and scene
 anomalous subtree using a novel anomaly score propagation reconstruction. This graph is constructed from system audit
 algorithm. This algorithm bridges the gap between anomaly- data using specific provenance generation tools [21], [22],
 based and rule-based modules, resulting in an anomalous [23].
 subtree for subsequent modules to analyze. The anomalous The resulting graph is a directed acyclic graph, denoted
 subtree detection algorithm is instrumental in reducing false as G. Throughout the paper, we use the same notations. V
 positives, as it locates the anomalous campaigns in a more spe-
 1 https://github.com/winsen-alpha/eaGle
 cific location. The second key design involves the use of attack

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7319

 Fig. 1. The toy example of an attack scene.

 represents the set of nodes in the graph, signifying entities Related work can be categorized into two main approaches:
 within the host. For example, a node v ∈ V could represent anomaly-based detection and rule-based matching. We evalua process entity such as “firefox.exe.” E represents the set ate a state-of-the-art anomaly-based method Kairos [10] and
 of directed edges in G. Each edge e ∈ E indicates the type a rule-based method Holmes [6] using the data in Figure 1.
 and direction of information flow between two entities in the The results show that EAG LE successfully detect all five threat
 host. For instance, an edge from a file node to a process node steps, while Holmes and Kairos identify Step O 1O 2 and O3O4 O,
 5

 P in the provenance
 might signify a “read” operation P graph G. respectively. Although interpreting the results of anomaly-
 The functions Mv : V → and Xe : E → map each
 P based host threat detection models remains an unresolved
 node and edge to their respective types from an alphabet . challenge, we conduct an in-depth analysis and attempt to
 Figure 1 provides an example of a provenance graph generated interpret Kairos’ detection results. We find that in Step O
 1 and
 within a host. O,
 2 the process, IP, and file interactions (such as connections
 and writes) show no significant difference from common
 B. Motivation Example
 benign behaviors on the host, leading Kairos to miss these
 We present the limitations of existing host-based threat steps. However, in Step O 3 and O, 4 the privilege escalation
 scenario reconstruction research and the motivation behind this operations are uncommon for the host in this example, and
 paper using the example in Figure 1, which is derived from in Step O,5 the behavior of connecting to a large number of
 the Theia scenario in the DARPA TC project [24]. The figure ports deviates substantially from normal activity. As a result,
 depicts a data provenance graph consisting of four types of Kairos successfully detects Step O,3 O 4 and O.
 5 However, such
 nodes and their connections, which can be divided into benign methods cannot explain attack steps. Meanwhile, the results
 nodes and anomalous nodes (associated with the following five of rule-based method show that it identifies Step O 1 and O.2
 attack steps): Among them, the Step O 1 is detected by the rule “Untrusted
 • O 1 Generate malicious process. The attacker exploits File Exec” in the Initial Compromise stage, and the Step
 a backdoor in Firefox 54.0.1 to plant the file O2 is detected by the rule “CnC” in the Establish Foothold
 /home/admin/profile on the victim host, which then stage. The remaining steps are not detected because the ruleset
 executes with root privileges. lacks relevant prior knowledge about them. For instance,
 • O 2 Untrusted remote connection. The process in Step O 3 and O,
 4 /var/log/mail is not included in the
 /home/admin/profile establishes a connection to the blocklist, while in Step O,5 the ruleset lacks rules pertaining
 attacker’s command-and-control (C2) server at b.b.b.b. to scanning a large number of ports. Rule-based methods
 • O 3 Generate malicious file. A malicious file named heavily rely on prior knowledge (e.g., blocklists) while in
 /var/log/mail is dropped onto the system. practice, it is challenging to maintain comprehensive prior
 • O 4 Generate malicious process. This file later executes knowledge, particularly regarding zero-day attacks. Another
 as a process /var/log/mail with root-level access. limitation for rule-based methods is that without sufficient
 • O 5 Port scan. The attacker performs a port scan against prior knowledge, the reconstructed attack scenarios contain
 the target c.c.c.c. excessive benign nodes (e.g., if a rule designed to detect
 The goal of host-based threat scenario reconstruction is to malicious processes does not specify the process name, it
 identify the complete attack scenario from the raw provenance may incorrectly flag benign processes such as Process P1 in
 graph, which should include as many anomalous nodes as Figure 1 as threats), posing significant challenges for security
 possible while minimizing benign nodes, and interpret all analysts—even though rule-based methods can explain attack
 attack steps. steps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Based on these findings, we propose a novel algorithmic • (§IV-A) Fine-grained Rules Matching: EAG LE takes
 framework that combines the strengths of both approaches: the provenance graph, generated by external tools, as
 leveraging rule-based methods for precise anomaly localiza- input and matches anomalous nodes with fine-grained
 tion and interpretability §IV-A, while using anomaly detection rules. The fine-grained rules inherently possess explanato filter out false positives and false negatives from rule tory capabilities, so the anomalous nodes they match
 matching §IV-B. contribute to both the completeness and interpretability
 As demonstrated by the APT lifecycle [6], attackers first of the ultimately reconstructed attack scenario.
 compromise a host and then establish persistence. Figure 1 • (§IV-B) Anomaly-based Detection: EAG LE employs
 confirms this pattern: the attack steps exhibit causal depen- anomaly-based detection models to identify suspicious
 dencies, ultimately tracing back to the root attack node nodes within the same provenance graph used by the
 /usr/bin/firefox, forming an attack subtree. To accurately fine-grained rules matching component. It operates indeextract this subtree from large-scale provenance graphs, we pendently of the Fine-grained Rules Matching module,
 design an anomaly score propagation-based subtree detection with both modules separately analyzing the provenance
 algorithm §IV-C. The core idea is to compute anomaly scores graph to detect anomalous nodes for subsequent processfor nodes using both rule matching and anomaly detection, ing steps. The contribution of this module lies in detecting
 then propagate these scores from leaf nodes toward the root. attack-related nodes that are not covered by the rules,
 To prevent numerical explosion (which could mistakenly select thereby enhancing the completeness of the reconstructed
 benign nodes like /usr/bin/fluxbox as the root), we intro- attack scenario.
 duce a decay mechanism during propagation. Additionally, • (§IV-C) Anomalous Subtree Detection: This comwe develop a pruning algorithm to eliminate benign nodes ponent takes the provenance graph as input and calculates
 (e.g., File F1 , . . ., File Fn ), ensuring the subtree contains the anomaly score of each node in the graph using
 minimal false positives. an iterative approach, resulting in the generation of an
 In this case, EAG LE detects Step O 1 and O 2 through its anomalous subtree.
 fine-grained rule-matching module, identifies other steps via • (§IV-D) Coarse-grained Rules Matching: In this
 its anomaly detection module, and ultimately pinpoints the component, EAG LE uses coarse-grained rules to match
 specific attack graph while generating attack descriptions for the attack types of nodes within the anomalous subtree.
 all five steps using its anomalous subtree detection algorithm • (§IV-E) Expert Interaction: For nodes that cannot be
 and coarse-grained rules matching algorithm. matched by coarse-grained rules, EAG LE seeks support
 from experts to analyze their attack types. The database
 III. T HREAT M ODEL of coarse-grained rules is updated following expert inter-
 EAG LE is a host-based threat detection and scene reconaction.
 struction system. We make the following assumptions about
 A. Fine-Grained Rules Matching
 the adversary:
 We employ the term “rules matching” to encompass the cat-
 • Targets a single host. The attacker targets a single host
 and employs a series of methods to infiltrate. These attack egory of misuse-based approaches. A rules matching method
 methods could be zero-day, meaning their attack patterns requires expert knowledge or prior experience with previous
 have never been recorded before. attacks to generate attack patterns, which are then transformed
 into human-readable texts. These texts are referred to as rules,
 • Performs Complex and structured intrusion. The
 and the collection of rules constitutes the ruleset. The rules
 attack methods employed by the attacker consist of
 utilized by EAG LE are designed based on TTPs [20], which
 multiple steps, which are interrelated and can form a
 continuous structure. is one of the most popular rulesets concerning host-based
 • Leaves traces of intrusion. The attacker’s campaigns intrusion campaigns.
 EAG LE is designed for deployment on a host. Initially,
 should, in theory, be detectable, indicating that the behav-
 EAG LE takes the provenance graph of the host as input, a
 ior of malicious entities should differ from that of benign
 process facilitated by external tools. For instance, Camflow
 entities.
 [21] constructs a unified, whole-system provenance graph
 In addition to these assumptions about the adversary, we G = (V, E, Mv , Me ) for a host, ordering events by time and
 also assume that the provenance generation system is reliable. ensuring robust security and comprehensive P information flow
 Like other provenance-based related research, EAG LE does capture. We initialize three sets: Dv : V → , Sv : V → R,
 not investigate the correctness of the provenance graph itself. Nv : V → R. Here, Dv records the attack interpretations of
 Therefore, we assume the integrity of the data used to construct each node if it is related to an attack, while Sv and Nv store
 the provenance graph, specifically that the system audit logs the Anomaly Score and Anomaly Number of each node, with
 are preserved without tampering throughout attack intervals. initial values set to {0}.
 The first component of EAG LE is Fine-grained Rules
 IV. D ESIGN Matching. In this module, EAG LE employs rules to match
 In this section, we present the overall design of EAG LE, anomalous edges within the provenance graph G. We extract
 which encompasses five main components illustrated in Fig- the fine-grained ruleset RS f based on TTPs of MITRE’s
 ure 2 and outlined as follows: ATT&CK framework [20]. In 2016, the security firm Mandiant

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7321

 Fig. 2. The overview of components in EAG LE. EAG LE uses fine-grained ruleset to match anomalous nodes in red (§IV-A) and conducts anomalybased detection to detect anomalous nodes in blue (§IV-B), finds the root node through the anomalous subtree detection algorithm (§IV-C), uses
 coarse-grained ruleset to match nodes in the subtree other than red nodes (§IV-D), and interprets the remaining unknown nodes through the analysis of
 experts.

 introduced an APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) lifecycle
 model [25] consisting of seven typical steps: Initial Compromise, Establish Foothold, Escalate Privileges, Internal Recon,
 Move Laterally, Maintain Presence, and Complete Mission.
 This APT lifecycle model serves as the basis for various
 rulesets, including the one used in this study. We provide
 examples of fine-grained rules in Table III. While there isn’t
 a strict limit to the number of rules, due to space constraints,
 we present only a subset of the complete ruleset. During the
 detection phase, the rules matching module scrutinizes each
 edge e ∈ E in the provenance graph G. For each edge e, the
 module compares it with each rule rs f ∈ RS f exhaustively. If Fig. 3. The general workflow of an anomaly-based detection model.
 e successfully matches a rule rs f , EAG LE examines the two
 endpoints of e and determines which endpoint v̂ is anomalous
 according to the rule. The anomaly score of the anomalous
 Figure 3. Typically, an anomaly-based detection approach
 node is updated as Sv (v̂) = Sv (v̂) + 1. Additionally, the attack
 involves training a model to learn the hidden distribution
 interpretation of the corresponding node is set based on the
 of benign data. Clustering methods [3] and deep learning
 matched rule.
 models [5], [26] are two commonly employed categories in
 Unlike anomaly-based detection, a rules matching approach
 these approaches. Following the training phase, a threshold
 does not require a training phase for model development.
 is determined through validation using training samples. In
 Instead, it directly takes samples as input and iteratively
 the detection phase, samples are passed to the benign model
 matches each sample with every rule. When a sample is
 learned during training. The model then generates an anomaly
 matched with a rule, it is flagged as an anomalous sample.
 score for each sample. A sample is flagged as anomalous
 As the anomalous sample is interpreted by the matched rule,
 when its anomaly score surpasses the threshold. Anomalyit has good readability, facilitating the reconstruction of the
 based detection has the potential to identify unknown attacks
 complete attack scene. However, the rules matching approach
 by detecting deviations from the benign model [27]. However,
 lacks the ability to match anomalous samples whose behavior
 it can only raise alerts and cannot specify their specific type.
 is not included in the ruleset.
 We note that the concept of anomaly-based detection [27]
 is easily confused with anomaly detection. Anomaly detection
 B. Anomaly-Based Detection encompasses various methods [28], [29], [30] for detecting
 Anomaly-based detection comprises various approaches [3], anomalies, whereas in this paper the detection methods we
 [4], [5], [26] sharing the same detection concept. The work- focus on are called anomaly-based detection which share the
 flow of an anomaly-based detection model is depicted in same detection workflow (Figure 3).

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 The anomaly-based detection component employs an [32]. Consequently, most recent studies have shifted toward
 anomaly-based model to calculate the anomaly score of each deep learning models [5], [10], [11], [31], [33] rather than
 node v ∈ V. We customize a graph neural network called relying on NLP-based node embedding techniques.
 GAT [19] to learn the hidden distribution of benign nodes
 and detect anomalous nodes in the provenance graph. As C. Anomalous Subtree Detection
 a deep learning model, GAT’s primary task is to extract Using the anomaly score Sv of each node as input, EAG LE
 features and assign labels to nodes in the graph. For nodes iteratively updates the final anomaly score and the anomaly
 in the provenance graph, their adjacent edge attributes store number Nv for nodes in the provenance graph. EAG LE selects
 substantial causal information, which is why some state-of- the most anomalous node as the root node and prunes the corthe-art host threats detection approaches [5], [31] utilize them responding subtree to generate a preliminary attack scenario.
 to initialize node features. We also adopt a similar method This process is referred to as anomalous subtree detection.
 for feature initialization. We quantify the number of different An illustrative example of the anomalous subtree detection
 types of nodes and edges as Nn and Ne , respectively. For each algorithm is provided in Figure 2. It is essential to note that
 node, its feature vector has Ne + 1 dimensions. In the first this algorithm works only when there are no cycles in the
 Ne dimensions, each dimension’s value indicates the count provenance graph.
 of a specific type of edge related to the current node. The We introduce the design rationale of the anomalous subtree
 last dimension denotes the relative time compared to the first detection algorithm here. We devise an iterative aggregation
 node in the graph. This value is calculated by subtracting the method to amalgamate the anomaly score of each node with
 timestamps of the current node and the first node. We tailor this its father node. Through this aggregation process, the anomaly
 feature extraction strategy to capture the temporal and spatial score of each node signifies the anomaly score of the entire
 characteristics of each node in the provenance graph. The GAT subtree with it as the root node. To prevent the infinite accumodel takes a Ne +1 dimensional vector as input for each node mulation of anomaly scores, we incorporate a decay procedure
 and outputs a Nn dimensional vector after undergoing a series into the algorithm. In addition to the anomaly score, we use
 of linear and nonlinear transformations. Each dimension of the variable anomaly number for each node to keep a record
 the output represents the predictive value for a specific node of how many anomalous nodes within the subtree with the
 type, with the total value summing up to 1. We use Rev (vi ) to node as the root. These two values serve as crucial metrics
 denote the abnormal degree of a node vi . Assuming the value for determining the final selection of the anomalous subtree
 in the dimension corresponding to its actual node type is Ai , from two distinct perspectives.
 Rev (vi ) is calculated as 1 − Ai . Being an anomaly-based model, Initially, we calculate the average value of the anomaly score
 we exclusively employ benign nodes to train the GAT model. Sv . The computation of the anomalous subtree commences
 The training objective is to minimize the abnormal degrees of from the leaf nodes of the graph G. We employ a set X to
 these benign nodes. During the detection phase, a node with keep track of the current leaf nodes. For every node v ∈ X, X
 a high abnormal degree is likely to be a non-benign node that computes its anomaly number Nv (v). If the anomaly score
 hasn’t appeared in the training data. Nv (v) surpasses α ∗ Avr, node v is identified as a highly
 In summary, the anomaly-based detection model takes the suspicious node, and its anomaly number Nv (v) is incremented
 provenance graph G as input and generates the detection by 1. Subsequently, the aggregation procedure begins. The
 results Rev for each node. For a node v ∈ V, Rev (v) represents anomaly score and anomaly number of node v are aggregated
 the abnormal degree of v. Consequently, EAG LE updates the with its father node v̂. Instead of directly adding the values, we
 anomaly score of each node as Sv (v) = Sv (v) + Rev (v). The introduce a decay factor θ to prevent issues related to infinite
 anomaly-based model can be replaced by other appropriate accumulation. Through this decay method, when we calculate
 models. We evaluate EAG LE with two other anomaly-based the anomaly score of a node, the contribution of its child
 detection models in §V-A to validate its generality. The nodes to its anomaly score decreases if its distance from its
 anomaly-based detection model does not consider semantic child nodes is significant long. This approach aligns with realinformation (e.g., process names) but focuses on learning world scenarios where the relationship between two entities
 causal relationships in provenance graphs. As EAG LE is in the host is heavily influenced by their distance. If several
 a general framework, the anomaly detection module can other entities are positioned between them, it suggests that
 incorporate models that leverage semantic information (e.g., they might not belong to the same campaign. After computing
 Kairos [10]). We evaluate this implementation—denoted as and aggregating every node v ∈ X, we remove these nodes
 EAG LE (Kairos)—in §V-E to assess its scenario reconstruction from V, record the new leaf nodes into X, and repeat the
 capability. Furthermore, EAG LE’s rules matching module can aforementioned process. Once all nodes in the graph G have
 utilize semantic information from host entities, complementing been processed, we select the node with the highest sum of
 the detection capacity of the anomaly detection model. In Sv and Nv to be the root node of the anomalous subtree. We
 addition to deep learning-based approaches, NLP-based node define the anomalous subtree as Ĝ = (V̂, Ê) with the root node
 embedding is another commonly used method for processing Root.
 data provenance graphs, which aims to represent network The subtree needs to be pruned because some nodes in Ĝ
 nodes as low-dimensional vectors. However, compared to deep are benign. These benign nodes should be excluded from the
 learning methods, these approaches lack adaptive learning final reconstructed scene to avoid false positives. We conduct
 capabilities and are typically limited to single-task scenarios a breadth-first search starting from the root node Root. If the

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7323

 TABLE I is substantially reduced. The coarse-grained rules are suitable
 E XAMPLES OF F INE -G RAINED RULES for providing interpretations of unknown nodes in the subtree
 because they can match nodes that fine-grained rules cannot.

 E. Expert Interaction
 The final module requires the interaction of security experts.
 We assume that in the worst case, some nodes still cannot be
 matched even with the coarse-grained rules. In such situations,
 security experts can assist by checking these nodes and providing attack interpretations for them. The interpretations of
 these nodes can be used to generate new coarse-grained or
 TABLE II
 fine-grained rules, which can then be employed in subsequent
 E XAMPLES OF C OARSE -G RAINED RULES
 detections.

 V. E VALUATION
 We evaluated EAG LE using three attack scenarios from the
 DARPA TC dataset [24]. Our evaluation primarily focused on
 the following six aspects:
 Q1. The detection and reconstruction effects of EAG LE in
 public datasets and simulated engagements (§V-A, V-C).
 Q2. The generality of EAG LE (§V-A).
 TABLE III Q3. The performance of each component (§V-C).
 OVERVIEW OF THE DARPA TC DATASET Q4. The runtime performance (§V-D).
 Q5. The influence of parameters (§V-E).
 Q6. The robustness against adaptive attacks (§V-F).

 A. Experiments With the DARPA TC Dataset
 In this subsection, we evaluate EAG LE with the DARPA TC
 dataset and compare it with three state-of-the-art threat reconanomaly number of the current node is 0, we remove this node struction detectors. We replace the anomaly-based detection
 and its descendant nodes from the anomalous subtree. The module with four different models to evaluate the generality
 rationale behind the pruning procedure is that when a node’s of EAG LE as well.
 anomaly number is 0, the subtree with it as the root node (a) Dataset: The DARPA TC dataset is generated during
 comprises nodes with low anomaly scores. The anomaly score red-team vs. blue-team engagements organized by the DARPA
 is calculated by both the anomaly-based detection and rules Transparent Computing (TC) program, which aims to develop
 matching modules. Consequently, the nodes within this subtree technologies and prototype systems for real-time detection
 are likely to be benign. In §V-C, We evaluate whether pruning of advanced threats. There are several threat scenes in the
 affects the detection of abnormal nodes in the reconstructed DARPA TC dataset, and we choose three scenes from the third
 attack scenarios on publicly datasets. engagement for evaluation. The original dataset consists of
 The parameters α and θ can be selected empirically. We system logs. We remove some redundant content and convert
 explore the impact of these parameters with varying values in the remaining part to the graph format. The provenance data
 §V-E. and ground truth are publicly available [24]. We employ the
 labeling scheme from [5] to annotate anomalous nodes based
 D. Coarse-Grained Rules Matching on the ground truth labels. The overview of the DARPA TC
 In this module, each node in the pruned subtree needs to dataset is shown in Table I.
 be checked, and interpretations need to be provided for nodes (b) Anomaly-based detection methods: We use four
 whose Dv is empty. During the fine-grained rules matching, approaches for the anomaly-based detection module to evalusome nodes have already been interpreted. For nodes with ate the generality of the proposed framework.
 an empty Dv , we employ a rules matching method with a • GAT model. This is the model we design for EAG LE.
 coarse-grained ruleset. Table II presents some examples of It utilizes the attention mechanism of the GAT model to
 coarse-grained rules. Unlike the fine-grained rules in Table III, learn the hidden distribution of different benign nodes.
 the coarse-grained rules are more likely to trigger alerts • GraphSAGE model. We adopt the GraphSAGE model
 for nodes. To minimize false positives, we do not use the from an anomalous nodes detection approach named
 coarse-grained rules as the original rules matching ruleset. threaTrace [5]. It aggregates information from neighbor
 Once an anomalous subtree is detected, the detection scope nodes to learn different characteristics of benign nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 • Kairos. Kairos [10] is a SOTA host-based attact reconstruction method. We adopt the anomaly detection module
 of Kairos, which is a graph autoencoder model.
 • node2vec. We adopt node2vec [34] to embed the features
 of each node in the provenance graph. The downstream
 approach is clustering [35]. We classify nodes into different clusters based on the features extracted by the
 node2vec approach and detect anomalous nodes using
 clustering approach.
 (c) Baselines: We categorize host-based threats reconstruction approaches into two typical categories and select three
 representative methods to establish the baselines.
 Fig. 4. The reconstructed attack graph of Theia.
 • Rule-based. The first category comprises rule-based
 threats detection and reconstruction approaches. We
 choose Holmes [6] as the representative baseline system. results with the ground truth nodes to calculate the fol-
 Holmes defines a series of rules for matching anomalous lowing evaluation metrics: True Positives, True Negatives,
 edges in a provenance graph and uses these anomalous False Positives, and False Negatives. Then, we use these
 edges to construct the attack scene based on the APT metrics to further calculate Precision, Recall, FPR, and Fkill-chain. Score. In addition, we utilize graph similarity as a metric
 • Anomaly-based. The second category consists of to assess the effectiveness of scenario reconstruction. We
 anomaly-based methods. We select two state-of-the-art employ the WL subtree graph kernel [36] to calculate
 studies, Kairos [10] and NodLink [11], as the baselines. the graph similarity. Firstly, we calculate the WL subtree
 It is important to note that the anomaly-based methods graph kernel vectors for the ground truth graph and the
 in this category are designed for attack scene reconstruc- abnormal subtree reconstructed by EAGLE. Then, we map
 tion, which distinguishes them from the attack detection the angle between these vectors to a value within the
 methods in EAG LE’s anomaly-based detection module. range of 0 to 1 to represent the graph similarity. A higher
 (d) Experimental setup: We adopt the same dataset parti- value indicates a better scenario reconstruction effect.
 tioning method as [5]. The original dataset for each scenario • Holmes. Similar to EAG LE, Holmes generates an anomacontains multiple files. We select files containing anomalous lous graph. Therefore, we apply the same strategy for
 behaviors as the test set. Some datasets are removed, including calculating metrics.
 some graphs generated during exceptional incidents such as • Kairos. The output of kairos consists of several attack
 host outages or shutdowns, while other benign graphs are summary graphs, which we compare one by one with the
 discarded because we do not need that much training data. ground truth and select the graph with the best restoration
 Among the remaining files, files without threats are used to effect as the result. Therefore, this somewhat overestrain the models, while files containing threats are reserved timates its detection capability. The subsequent metric
 for evaluation. Both nodes and edges maintain a roughly 1:1 calculation process is the same as for other baselines.
 ratio between the training and test sets. Detailed information • NodLink. The output of NodLink is a concise alert provecan be found in Table III. After training the anomaly-based nance graph. The subsequent metric calculation process
 detection model, we use the testing set to evaluate EAG LE. is the same as for other baselines.
 The parameters α and θ are set as 2 and 0.5 based on its (e) Results: Initially, we analyze the quantitative results
 performance with varying values. presented in Table IV. EAG LE exhibits promising per-
 We repeat the experiments several times and report the formance, outperforming the baselines, particularly when
 average results. The results are analyzed from two perspec- equipped with the GAT model. When compared with Holmes,
 tives: qualitative analysis and quantitative analysis. Regarding EAG LE utilizes the anomaly-based detection component to
 qualitative analysis, we present the reconstructed attack graphs identify alarms missed by rule matching, potentially leading to
 and assess their completeness and interpretability in compari- higher Recall. Furthermore, the anomalous subtree detection
 son to the ground truth. For quantitative analysis, we employ module hones in on the most likely locations of anomalies,
 Precision, Recall, F-Score, FPR (as metric in node-level), and reducing false positives and resulting in a higher Precision.
 the graph similarity [36] (as metric in graph-level), as the The impact of each component on EAG LE’s detection perevaluation metrics to compare the detection and reconstruction formance is assessed in the subsequent subsection. When
 performance with the baselines. Considering the unique char- compared with Kairos and NodLink, the fine-grained rule
 acteristics of different detectors, we define specific evaluation matching module in EAG LE plays a significant role, enabling
 metrics for each of them. it to detect more anomalous nodes, which is reflected in its
 • EAG LE. The output of EAG LE consists of an anomalous higher Recall.
 subtree. We categorize the nodes within the subtree Additionally, changing the anomaly-based detection model
 as anomalous nodes, while the remaining nodes in the from GAT to GraphSAGE and node2vec does not significantly
 testing set are considered benign. We then compare these alter the performance, demonstrating EAG LE’s generality.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7325

 TABLE IV
 T HE Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS IN THE DARPA TC DATASET

 Next, we use several case studies to analyse the qualitative results. The simplified reconstructed attack scenes
 for experiments in EAG LE and baselines are displayed in
 Figures 4, 5, and 6. For each experimental scene, EAG LE
 constructs a subtree representing the attack scene, featuring
 interpretations of nodes, edges, and each attack step.
 Figure 4 presents the reconstructed attack graphs of EAGLE
 and three baselines for the Theia scene. EAGLE reconstructs
 the complete attack graph as shown in Figure 4(a), with
 complete interpretation of all 25,363 abnormal nodes. These
 anomalous nodes are labeled based on the attack description
 files from DARPA TC [24], and the same applies to the
 subsequent Cadets and Trace scenarios. The attacker exploits
 a vulnerability in Firefox 54.0.1. They implant a malicious Fig. 5. The reconstructed attack graph of Cadets.
 file, Darkon, into the victim host. Subsequently, a malicious
 process, Shell, is generated. Shell operates as a RAT
 (remote access Trojan) and establishes a connection with the challenge to the anomaly detection model. The above qualitaattacker’s remote server, IP1. The attacker then utilizes Shell tive analysis further demonstrates that EAG LE’s combination
 to implant another malicious file, MICRO apt. Additionally, a of two types of methods enables more comprehensive scenario
 malicious process, Scan, is created to conduct a port scan on reconstruction and interpretation.
 IP2. In this scene, the anomaly-based detection component The experimental results for Cadets scenarios are presented
 triggers alerts for Shell, MICRO apt, and Scan. The fine- in Figure 5. In the Cadets scenario, EAG LE successfully
 grained rules matching component successfully matches nodes interpret 12,852 out of 12,858 anomalous nodes. The intrusion
 Darkon and IP1, generating their interpretations directly, strategy is somehow similar to the Theia scene. The attacker
 which are highlighted in blue. The interpretations for the exploits the vulnerability of Nginx with a malformed HTTP
 other three steps are generated by the coarse-grained rules request and generates a Darkon1 implant in the victim host.
 matching and are marked in red. Holmes (Figure 4(b)), Kairos The drakon implant is connected to attacker’s server IP1.
 (Figure 4(c)), and NodLink (Figure 4(d)) only partially recon- The attacker downloads the Darkon file to the victim disk
 structs the attack graph. Since the ruleset does not include prior and executes it with root privileges. A RAT Darkon2 starts
 knowledge related to Micro apt, the relevant steps do not running and it connects to IP1 again. The attacker downloads
 appear in the reconstructed scenario of Holmes. Holmes can the malicious file MICRO apt and generates the malicious
 explain the detected attack steps. Neither Kairos nor NodLink process Scan to conduct port scan in IP2. In this scene, the
 detected Darkon and IP1. Our investigation find that this is anomaly detection component raises alerts for MICRO apt, and
 because the local neighborhood behavior of these two nodes Scan. The fine-grained rules matching component successfully
 is almost indistinguishable from benign behavior, posing a matches nodes Darkon1, Darkon2 and IP1. The interpreta-

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
 OVERVIEW OF THE S IMULATED E NGAGEMENTS

 Fig. 6. The reconstructed attack graph of Trace. the intrusion concludes, these system logs are transformed
 into a provenance graph, forming the testing set. To create
 the training set, we gather training data while the victim host
 tions related to these three nodes is directly generated by the operates without intrusion campaigns. This benign training set
 fine-grained rules matching. The interpretations of the other is employed to train the anomaly-based detection module’s
 steps are generated by coarse-grained rules matching module. model. Detailed information can be found in Table V. Due
 As analyzed in the Theia scenario, Holmes (Figure 5(b)) to the limited number of hosts and the duration of attacks,
 fails to detect some nodes due to limitations in its ruleset. the simulated experiments contain fewer nodes and edges
 Kairos (Figure 5(c)) and NodLink (Figure 5(d)), on the other compared to the DARPA TC dataset.
 hand, misses detection because the behavioral characteristics We design three attack schemes, outlined as follows:
 of certain nodes’ neighborhoods are similar to those of benign
 • Scheme 1. The attacker impersonates a friend of the
 nodes.
 victim and sends a malicious compressed file, data.zip,
 The experimental results for Trace scene are presented in
 to the victim through a social software platform called
 Figure 6. In the Trace scenario, EAG LE successfully interpret
 anonym. The victim downloads and decompresses the
 68,252 out of 68,265 anomalous nodes. The attacker sends
 file, obtaining setup.exe. Upon running setup.exe, the
 a phishing e-mail to the victim. The victim uses Brower to
 victim triggers a hidden vulnerability. Subsequently, the
 open the Email process and read the Content of the phishing
 attacker conducts a port scan, identifies an exploitable
 e-mail. The attacker sets a malicious link in the e-mail. The
 port, generates a RAT named Remote, and establishes
 victim clicks the link and opens a website IP1 which has
 a connection to the attacker’s host (IP). The attacker
 a form asking for name, e-mail address, and password. The
 then utilizes Remote to download the malicious file
 victim unfortunately enters the information and the results are
 shell.exe onto the victim’s disk. Running shell.exe
 sent to another server IP2 of the attacker. In this scene, the
 results in another RAT, Shell, operating in memory. The
 anomaly detection component raises alerts for Broswer and
 attacker employs Shell to control the victim host, sendthe fine-grained rules matching component matches the node
 ing password.txt to IP. Finally, the attacker deletes the
 IP1. The interpretation “Information leakage” is generated
 password and record files.
 by coarse-grained rules matching while the interpretation
 • Scheme 2. The attacker fabricates a link and entices the
 “Phishing E-mail” is generated by expert interaction. Holmes
 victim to open it. Upon opening the link, a malicious
 (Figure 6(b)) fails to detect IP1 because it is not present in
 file, shell.exe, is automatically downloaded to the
 the prior knowledge base. Kairos (Figure 6(c)) and NodLink
 victim’s disk. Upon execution, shell.exe initiates a
 (Figure 6(d)) misses content because the local neighborhood
 RAT named Shell, which runs in memory and connects
 of this node exhibits no difference from normal nodes.
 to the attacker’s host (IP). The attacker uploads a script,
 scan.py, to the victim. The function of scan.py is to
 B. Experiments With Simulated Engagements search a file folder for a target file with the keyword
 We deploy an experimental environment in the current “password” and store the text in a file called result.txt.
 network scenario to evaluate the performance of EAG LE in The attacker then sends result.txt to IP and deletes
 a real-life setting. the scan.py and result.txt files.
 (a) Experimental setup: Similar to the experimental setup • Scheme 3. The attacker sends a phishing email to the
 in the DARPA TC dataset, we evaluate the performance of victim, containing a malicious attachment, picture. The
 EAGLE in simulated engagements. We assess the performance victim unwittingly uses the browser to read the email
 using four quantitative metrics: precision, recall, F-score, and and downloads the attachment. Upon opening picture,
 graph similarity, along with qualitative analysis. Due to time a RAT named Shell is generated, connecting to the
 and space constraints, we conduct experiments only on EAGLE attacker’s host (IP). After gaining control of the victim
 utilizing the GAT model. host, the attacker opens the file target.txt and mod-
 (b) Experimental schemes: The experimental environment ifies its content. Additionally, the attacker monitors the
 comprises two hosts, one acting as the attacker and the other victim’s keyboard input, saving the data in a file named
 as the victim. The attacker executes several intrusion steps information. Finally, the file is sent to IP.
 to accomplish specific objectives. System logs are collected (c) Results and analysis: After executing the three experiusing an internal tool and stored on the victim’s disk. Once mental schemes, we collect the system logs, convert them into

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7327

 Fig. 7. The results of ablation study.

 TABLE VI the file result.txt are identified as anomalous nodes. The
 T HE Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS W ITH S IMULATED fine-grained rules matching module determines that the file
 E NGAGEMENTS scan.py is malicious. The related edge receives the interpretation “D1: Generate malicious process”. Following the
 anomalous subtree detection module, a subtree with the node
 shell.exe as the root node is generated. Interpretations for
 the other edges are derived from coarse-grained rules matching: “D2: Generate malicious file”, “D3: Untrusted remote
 connection”, “D4: Untrusted write”, and “D5: Information
 leakage”.
 Scheme 3. As shown in Figure 10 (b), the anomalybased detection model detects anomalous nodes, including the
 processes browser, Shell, and the file information. The
 fine-grained rules matching module identifies the malicious
 attachment picture. The related edge is interpreted as “D2:
 Generate malicious process”. After the anomalous subtree
 detection module, a subtree with the node browser as the
 root node is generated. Interpretations for the other edges are
 “D1: Phishing E-mail”, “D3: Untrusted remote connection”,
 “D4: Untrusted read and write”, “D5: Untrusted write”, and
 Fig. 8. The results of runtime performance experiments.
 “D6: Information leakage” respectively.

 the format of a provenance graph, and evaluate EAG LE using
 C. Ablation Study
 them. The quantitative results are shown in Table VI.
 For qualitative analysis, EAG LE generates three recon- We examine the impact of each component of EAG LE on
 structed attack graphs. In Scheme 1, Figure 9 presents its performance. Specifically, we evaluate EAG LE using the
 snapshots after processing in each module. DARPA TC dataset under four different situations: C1 with
 Scheme 1. The anomaly-based detection module takes the all components, C2 without the rules matching and anomalous
 testing data as input and detects several anomalous nodes. As subtree detection components, C3 without the anomaly-based
 shown in Figure 9 (a), the malicious file setup.exe, malicious detection and anomalous subtree detection components, C4
 processes remote and Shell, and the leaked file password without the anomalous subtree detection component, and C5
 are identified as anomalous entities. After the fine-grained without anomalous subtree pruning. The experimental settings
 rules matching step, malicious files data.zip and shell.exe remains consistent with those of the previous subsection, and
 are labeled as anomalous. The related edges automatically the results are presented in Figure 7.
 receive interpretations like “D1: Generate malicious file” and In situations C2 and C3, EAG LE outputs a set of anomalous
 “D2: Generate malicious process” (Figure 9 (b)). Following nodes, and we calculate the evaluation metrics based on the
 the anomalous subtree detection module, a subtree with the comparison between the reported nodes and the ground truth.
 node data.zip as the root node is generated. The edges There is no significant dominance relationship between these
 without interpretations are matched with coarse-grained rules, two conditions. In C2, the only active module is the anomalyresulting in five related edges with interpretations such as based detection component, and its performance depends on
 “D3: Generate malicious process”, “D4: Generate malicious the training set and the model parameters. In C3, the rules
 file”, “D5: Untrusted remote connection”, “D6: Information matching component replaces the anomaly-based detection
 leakage”, and “D7: Untrusted deletion”. module, relying heavily on the ruleset. In C4, we combine the
 Scheme 2. As shown in Figure 10 (a), after the anomaly- reported nodes from the anomaly-based detection and rules
 based detection module, the malicious script scan.py and matching modules. Consequently, the Recall metric increases,

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 9. The snapshots of Scheme 1 after processing in each module.

 Fig. 10. The reconstructed attack graph of Scheme 2 and Scheme 3. Fig. 11. Performance with varying parameters.

 but the simple aggregation leed to a higher number of false
 be considered a constant compared to the substantial value
 positives, lowering the Precision metrics.
 of e. Consequently, the time complexity can be simplified
 C1 represents the condition with all components. Compared
 further to O(e). The anomalous subtree detection module
 with C3, C4 utilizes the anomalous subtree detection comalso operates at O(e) complexity, processing each edge only
 ponent, allowing the concentration of anomalous nodes into
 once. Consequently, the processing speeds of M1, M3, and
 a single subtree. This results in the removal of some false
 M4 are comparable. In contrast, the anomaly-based detection
 positives from the reconstructed attack scene. While some
 module employed in this paper’s evaluation is a deep learning
 true positives are also eliminated, the results demonstrate that
 model, imposing higher demands on computing resources.
 the increase in Precision has little impact on Recall. The
 This leads to lower processing speed, elevated memory usage,
 experimental results confirme our intuition behind designing
 and increased CPU utilization. Consequently, it acts as the
 the anomalous subtree detection module. In situation C5, we
 runtime bottleneck of the entire framework. We further discuss
 remove the anomalous subtree pruning algorithm and observe
 the issue of runtime overhead in §VI. When designing the
 that Recall does not increase, indicating that the anomalous
 anomaly detection module algorithm for EAG LE, we adopt
 subtree pruning algorithm does not remove the attack nodes.
 the implementation approach from [5], maintaining a fixedsize graph in memory while storing the complete provenance
 D. Runtime Performance graph on disk. This ensures stable memory usage and CPU
 In this subsection, we assess the runtime performance of utilization even when processing large-scale graphs.
 EAG LE with the aim of identifying the resource consumption of each module. The experiments focus on the Theia
 E. Parameters Study
 scene from the DARPA TC dataset, examining three key
 aspects: processing speed, CPU utilization, and memory usage. We investigate the influence of the parameters α and θ.
 The processing speed is quantified as the number of edges We utilize the Theia scene from the DARPA TC datasets for
 processed per second. These experiments are conducted on evaluation, maintaining one parameter constant at the baseline
 an Ubuntu 16.04.7 LTS machine equipped with 64 Intel(R) while testing the other. The baseline values are set at 2 for α
 Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30GHz and 128GiB of memory. and 0.5 for θ.
 The implementation runs on a multi-core setup. We evaluate • Parameter α. This parameter is configured to count the
 four modules of EAG LE, namely the fine-grained rules match- number of suspicious nodes in the anomalous subtree
 ing module (M1), anomaly-based detection module (M2), detection module (§IV-C). As illustrated in Figure 11(a),
 anomalous subtree detection module (M3), and coarse-grained EAG LE achieves optimal performance when α is set to
 rules matching module (M4). For the anomaly detection mod- 2. A high α value results in some anomalous nodes not
 ule, we test the runtime performance of its training phase and being recorded, leading to low Recall. Conversely, a low
 detection phase separately, noted as M2t and M2d respectively. value generates false positive nodes. Hence, a balanced
 The results, depicted in Figure 8, clearly indicate that the value is essential to strike a tradeoff.
 anomaly-based detection module exhibits the highest resource • Parameter θ. This parameter is implemented to prevent
 consumption, both in terms of memory usage and CPU uti- infinite accumulation issues when computing the anomaly
 lization. It acts as the runtime bottleneck during execution. score of nodes (§IV-C). Figure 11(b) demonstrates an
 The time complexity of the rules matching modules (M1 and increase in Recall as θ rises from 0.1 to 0.9. This behavior
 M4) is O(e*r), where e represents the number of edges, and can be attributed to the function of θ: it serves as the
 r denotes the number of rules. In a real-life scenario, r can decay factor for calculating the anomaly score. A larger

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7329

 VI. D ISCUSSION & L IMITATION

 Here, we discuss the limitations of EAG LE, common issues
 within the research community, and outline our future work.
 (a) Robustness. In the real world, attackers might design
 adversarial attacks [40], [41], [42] to bypass EAG LE.
 Currently, we haven’t specifically designed defenses
 against these attacks nor evaluated the system’s robust-
 Fig. 12. Results of the adaptive attack experiments. ness. The anomaly-based detection module is particularly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. EAG LE integrates
 anomaly scores from both the anomaly-based detec-
 θ implies a weaker decay effect, leading to more nodes tion and rules matching modules. Hence, attackers
 in the anomalous subtree and consequently higher Recall. would need to compromise both modules. Investigating
 However, an excessively large θ introduces numerous EAG LE ’s robustness against adversarial attacks is a focus
 benign nodes into the subtree, decreasing Precision. of our future research.
 The evaluation in this subsection highlights how the param- (b) Polluted training set. EAG LE employs a GAT anomalyeters of EAG LE influence its detection performance. Further based detection model to generate node anomaly scores
 discussions regarding parameter selection are provided in §VI. in a provenance graph. This model relies on a benign
 training set. If the training set contains anomalous nodes,
 false negative nodes might increase [43], [44]. However,
 F. Robustness the rules matching component can detect some of these
 false negatives, offering partial compensation.
 We evaluate the robustness of EAGLE when facing adaptive
 (c) Evaluation. We evaluate EAG LE using a public dataset
 attacks on the GAT model. Adversaries are categorized based
 and simulated engagement scenarios. However, both
 on their level of understanding of the model, ranging from
 the dataset and deployment schemes are simulations.
 weak [37], [38] to strong [39]. Considering that GAT is a graph
 Obtaining complete real-world attack data is challenging
 neural network model, we refer another GNN-based work [5]
 due to intrusions being fragmented, making attack scene
 to make assumptions about the adversary’s capabilities. We
 reconstruction difficult. Building a comprehensive realassumed a strong adversary in this scenario, one who possesses
 world dataset is essential for advancing the research
 detailed knowledge of the GAT model and can modify the data
 community, and we aim to achieve this goal in the future.
 within the provenance graph.
 (d) Parameters. EAG LE relies on two critical parameters:
 The adversary employs optimization-based evasion attacks
 α and δ (§IV-C). We recommend administrators adjust
 to evade EAGLE’s detection. Specifically, the adversary’s
 these parameters based on specific situations. Higher
 objective is to modify the features of a node x related to
 α values lead to larger subtrees in anomalous subthem in such a way that the modified node xnew generates the
 tree detection, potentially including more intrusion and
 smallest possible anomaly score detected by EAGLE. Since
 benign nodes. Lower δ values emphasize child nodes’
 node features do not affect the anomaly score generated by
 impact on the root, aiding long-term threat detection but
 the rules matching module, the goal is to minimize the value
 increasing false positives. Administrators must strike a
 of node xnew in the loss function loss(xnew ) of the GAT
 balance to optimize performance.
 model. As one of the fundamental principles of optimization-
 (e) System overhead and runtime bottleneck. Realbased evasion attacks, the adversary aims to minimize the
 world deployment concerns center around system
 perturbation between xnew and x as much as possible, limited
 overhead. The excessive scale of host data is considby δ. Therefore, the problem of evading the GAT model can
 ered the primary bottleneck in the practical adoption
 be formalized as the following optimization problem:
 and widespread implementation of current provenance
 kxnew − xk2 graph-based research [9]. EAG LE, designed to enhance
 argmin x̂ (loss(xnew )) s.t. < δ, xnew ∈ N (1) host security, should not hamper other tasks. Presently,
 kxk2
 there is the potential for optimizing the operational
 Results and analysis. We conduct experiments using the performance of the anomaly-based detection module. We
 DARPA TC dataset. Firstly, we select the attack nodes present plan to explore alternative, resource-efficient anomalyin the scenarios reconstructed by EAGLE. We use the optimiza- based detection methods. Another approach is offloading
 tion equation from Equation 1 to calculate the new features for data processing to the cloud, although challenges exist,
 these attack nodes. Secondly, we input the provenance graph such as pruning or compacting data without crucial
 containing these new nodes back into EAGLE to reconstruct information loss for attack scene reconstruction [45],
 the scenarios. We then calculate the values of Recall. The which is a focus of our future work.
 experiments are conducted under different settings of δ, and (f) Threat alert fatigue problem. Addressing the “threat
 the results are shown in Figure 12. As the constraint gradually alert fatigue problem” [46] is crucial for the sucrelaxes, the impact of the adaptive attack on Recall increases. cessful implementation of any security research. Both
 But overall, the impact remains acceptable. rule-based matching and anomaly detection inevitably

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 generate false positives. EAG LE mitigates this issue Hierarchical System Event Tree (HST) model to categorize
 through its Anomalous Subtree Detection module, which auditing events based on properties and filters false alarms
 locally contextualizes attack scenarios within the prove- according to alarm properties. Watson [54] proposes inferring
 nance graph to filter out potentially false alerts as much and aggregating the semantics of audit events to abstract
 as possible. The experimental results of the ablation behavior, which can bridge the gap between low-level audit
 study can further corroborate this point. As shown in events and high-level system behaviors. Flash [33] integrates
 Figure 7, the use of the anomalous subtree detection embedding with GNN to learn benign node behaviors and
 algorithm (C1) significantly improves precision com- effectively encode both local and global graph structures into
 pared to not using it (C4), indicating a reduction in the expressive node embeddings. Trec [31] explores identifying
 number of false positives. When false positives persist in APT tactics/techniques—a task typically reliant on rule-based
 the final reconstructed attack scenario, security analysts methods with high false positives. To overcome limited threat
 can trace whether the node originated from rule match- samples and labeling challenges, Trec first detects anomalous
 ing or anomaly detection modules, then accordingly nodes (NOIs), samples tactic-relevant subgraphs, and applies
 refine the rules or models to reduce the likelihood of few-shot Siamese learning for APT identification with minimal
 similar false alarms in future operations. samples.
 (g) Rules. In practice, without an appropriate rule set, These anomaly-based detection methods have a common
 EAG LE will degenerate into anomaly-based detection. limitation: they cannot interpret detected anomalies. Moreover,
 We recommend that users refer to public knowledge the challenge of modeling all benign behaviors often leads
 bases such as TTPs [20] for the design of rule sets. to false positives, making it difficult to reconstruct the attack
 scene using just one anomaly-based approach.
 VII. R ELATED W ORK
 EAG LE is specifically engineered for reconstructing attack B. Rules Matching Approaches
 scenes within a host, leveraging both rules matching Rule-based approaches necessitate a database of rules,
 approaches and anomaly-based detection models. We explore which can be generated from expert experience, technical
 the related work in these domains. reports, and other sources. Holmes [6] conducts the initial
 study utilizing rules to match anomalous edges in a provenance
 A. Anomaly-Based Detection Approaches graph, basing these rules on TTPs. Another notable rules
 matching approach is Poirot [7], which operates at the graph
 Before reconstructing an attack scene, it is essential to detect level, enabling more accurate detection of anomalous entities
 the attack steps. These detection methods typically fall into compared to Holmes. HINIT [55] proposes combining diverse
 two categories: rule-based (or misuse-based) and anomalynetwork threat intelligence to create a heterogeneous graph,
 based. anomaly-based detection approaches rely on identifying
 while EXTRACTOR [56] employs natural language processanomalies within attack steps. Unicorn [3] introduces an
 ing techniques to extract attackers and victims from network
 anomalous provenance graph detection method using graph threat intelligence, constructing rules for reconstructing attack
 kernel to extract evolving features from the provenance graph. scenarios. Pagoda [57] employs a rule database to detect
 ProvDetector [4] identifies anomalous paths by labeling nodes
 host-based intrusions, considering both detection accuracy
 with anomaly scores, calculated based on node frequency,
 and time. Reference [16] proposes studying subgraphs in the
 extending this to path anomaly score calculations. Kairos [10]
 provenance graph, embedding these subgraphs into vectors,
 designs a graph autoencoder model to learn a provenance
 and then employing GNN models for supervised training
 graph’s temporal evolution, compute the anomalous degree, and detection. ALCHEMIST [58] proposes combining system
 and reconstruct the attack footprints. ThreaTrace [5] employs logs and software logs, utilizing the fine-grained nature of
 the GraphSAGE model [47] to learn benign node behavior
 software logs compared to system logs. SLEUTH [59] uses
 and detect anomalous nodes at the node level. NodLink
 credibility labels and confidentiality labels to measure node
 [11] is also an anomaly-based PIDS which detects intrusion
 credibility and data importance, updating these labels while
 in node level. It is the first PIDS to conduct an openbacktracking and determining anomaly occurrences based on
 world evaluation. SHADEWATCHER [48] transforms system their values. MORSE [60], a subsequent work under the
 entity interactions into a recommendation system format, SLEUTH framework, addresses the problem of dependency
 predicting system entity preferences on interactive entities to
 explosion when backtracking the behavior of attackers.
 classify anomalies. IPG [49] utilizes an autoencoder model
 However, these rule-based approaches heavily depend on
 to detect anomalous graphs. CONAN [50] introduces a threethe correctness and completeness of the rules, limiting their
 phase detection model, concentrating attack campaigns into
 ability to reconstruct zero-day attack steps.
 phases and distinguishing malicious from benign behaviors.
 CONAN maintains the current states of processes and files
 for detection, similar to finite state automata (FSA). ATLAS C. Hybrid Approaches
 [51] employs a supervised model, extracting attack and non- Hybrid methods are quite common in the field of network
 attack sequences from provenance graphs to learn sequence intrusion detection. Reference [17] proposes an algorithm that
 characteristics, utilizing the LSTM [52] model for precise combines the C4.5 decision tree model and one-class SVM
 understanding of attack sequences. DistDet [53] trains a model to detect intrusions in network traffic data. Reference

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 WANG et al.: END-TO-END ATTACK SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 7331

 [18] proposes a connection detection system, which uses [13] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Erreira, A. Gupta, and
 association rule mining and a misuse module to classify L. Z. Granville, “AI/ML for network security: The emperor has no
 clothes,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New
 benign and attack connections. However, hybrid methods are York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 1537–1551.
 relatively less common in detecting host-based attacks and [14] D. Han et al., “DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learningreconstructing the attack scenario. APT-KGL [61] generates based anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3197–3217.
 virtual APT training samples from open threat knowledge, [15] F. Dong et al., “Are we there yet? An industrial viewpoint on
 models contextual information of system entities in a HPG provenance-based endpoint detection and response tools,” in Proc. ACM
 (Heterogeneous Provenance Graph), and learns entity repre- SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023, pp. 2396–2410.
 [16] E. Altinisik, F. Deniz, and H. Taha Sencar, “ProvG-searcher: A graph
 sentations within the HPG. APT-KGL takes advantage of both representation learning approach for efficient provenance graph search,”
 knowledge database and deep learning model. However, its 2023, arXiv:2309.03647.
 design objective is to detect abnormal entities rather than [17] G. Kim, S. Lee, and S. Kim, “A novel hybrid intrusion detection method
 integrating anomaly detection with misuse detection,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 reconstruct the attack scenario. vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1690–1700, Mar. 2014.
 [18] D. Barbara, “Adam: Detecting intrusions by data mining,” in Proc. IEEE
 Workshop Inf. Assurance Secur., vol. 1, Jun. 2001, p.1100.
 VIII. C ONCLUSION [19] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” Stat, vol. 1050, no. 20, pp. 1–12, 2017.
 We present EAG LE, a general framework designed for [20] T. M. Corp. (2023). Att&ck. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/
 reconstructing the attack scene on a host. The core components [21] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc.
 of EAG LE consist of anomaly-based detection and rule match- Symp. Cloud Comput., Santa Clara, CA, USA, Sep. 2017, pp. 405–418.
 [22] A. Bates, D. Tian, R. B. K. Butler, and T. Moyer, “Trustworthy wholeing, which are versatile and can be substituted with various system provenance for the Linux kernel,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Secur.
 established methods. To minimize false positives, we introduce Symp. (SEC), Austin, TX, USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 319–334.
 an innovative algorithm for detecting anomalous subtrees. [23] D. J. Pohly, S. McLaughlin, P. McDaniel, and K. Butler, “Hi-Fi:
 Collecting high-fidelity whole-system provenance,” in Proc. 28th Annu.
 Additionally, we propose two types of rules, ensuring detailed Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2012, pp. 259–268.
 interpretations of the final reconstructed scene. We assess [24] A. D. Keromytis. (2018). Transparent Computing Engagement 3 Data
 EAG LE using three public datasets and three simulated engage- Release. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-
 Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md
 ments. The results demonstrate its effective performance in [25] (2016). Mandiant: Exposing One of China’s Cyber Espionage Units.
 reconstructing attacks, both qualitatively and quantitatively. [Online]. Available: https://www.fireeye.com/content/dam/fireeye-www/
 services/pdfs/mandiant-apt1-report.pdf
 [26] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 R EFERENCES ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., vol. 5, 2018, p.2.
 [1] S. Singh, P. K. Sharma, S. Y. Moon, D. Moon, and J. H. Park, “A [27] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 comprehensive study on APT attacks and countermeasures for future learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 networks and communications: Challenges and solutions,” J. Supercom- Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
 put., vol. 75, no. 8, pp. 4543–4574, Aug. 2019. [28] G. Apruzzese et al., “The role of machine learning in cybersecurity,”
 [2] A. Alshamrani, S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, and D. Huang, “A survey Digit. Threats, Res. Pract., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–38, Jul. 2022.
 on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges, and [29] S. Jose, D. Malathi, B. Reddy, and D. Jayaseeli, “A survey on anomaly
 research opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2, based host intrusion detection system,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 1000,
 pp. 1851–1877, 2nd Quart., 2019. Apr. 2018, Art. no. 012049.
 [3] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn: [30] J. Jabez and B. Muthukumar, “Intrusion detection system (IDS):
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in Anomaly detection using outlier detection approach,” Proc. Comput.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18. Sci., vol. 48, pp. 338–346, Jan. 2015.
 [4] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via [31] M. Lv et al., “TREC: APT tactic / technique recognition via few-shot
 data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., provenance subgraph learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 2020. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024, pp. 139–152.
 [5] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based [32] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
 threats in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
 [6] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakr- [33] M. Ur Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Ul Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive
 ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
 suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2024,
 (S&P), May 2019, pp. 1137–1152. pp. 3552–3570.
 [7] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, [34] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
 “POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Data Mining, 2016, pp. 855–864.
 2019, pp. 1795–1812. [35] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw, Finding Groups in Data: An Intro-
 [8] S. T. King and P. M. Chen, “Backtracking intrusions,” in Proc. 19th duction to Cluster Analysis. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2009.
 ACM Symp. Oper. Syst. Princ., Oct. 2003, pp. 223–236. [36] N. Shervashidze, P. Schweitzer, E. J. V. Leeuwen, K. Mehlhorn, and
 [9] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: K. Borgwardt, “Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernels,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
 Auditing the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. vol. 12, no. 77, pp. 2539–2561, Feb. 2011.
 Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 2620–2638. [37] G. Apruzzese, H. S. Anderson, S. Dambra, D. Freeman, F. Pierazzi, and
 [10] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation K. Roundy, “‘Real attackers don’t compute gradients’: Bridging the gap
 using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy between adversarial ML research and practice,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Conf.
 (SP), May 2024, pp. 3533–3551. Secure Trustworthy Mach. Learn. (SaTML), Feb. 2023, pp. 339–364.
 [11] S. Li et al., “NODLINK: An online system for fine-grained APT attack [38] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
 detection and investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
 2024, pp. 1–18. ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 [12] A. Nadeem et al., “SoK: Explainable machine learning for computer Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 security applications,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy [39] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
 (EuroS&P), Jul. 2023, pp. 221–240. in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 7332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 [40] D. Zügner, A. Akbarnejad, and S. Günnemann, “Adversarial attacks on [52] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 neural networks for graph data,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf., Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
 Aug. 2018, pp. 6246–6250. [53] F. Dong et al., “Distdet: A cost-effective distributed cyber threat detec-
 [41] B. Wang and N. Z. Gong, “Attacking graph-based classification via tion system,” in Proc. 32th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
 manipulating the graph structure,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGSAC Conf. 2023, pp. 6575–6592.
 Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), London, U.K., 2019, pp. 2023–2040. [54] J. Zeng, Z. L. Chua, Y. Chen, K. Ji, Z. Liang, and J. Mao,
 [42] L. Sun et al., “Adversarial attack and defense on graph data: A survey,” “WATSON: Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via aggregation
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 7693–7711, Aug. of contextual semantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 2022. 2021, pp. 1–18.
 [43] G. Apruzzese, P. Laskov, and A. Tastemirova, “SoK: The impact of [55] J. Zhao, Q. Yan, X. Liu, B. Li, and G. Zuo, “Cyber threat intelligence
 unlabelled data in cyberthreat detection,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Eur. Symp. modeling based on heterogeneous graph convolutional network,” in
 Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Jun. 2022, pp. 20–42. Proc. 23rd Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses (RAID), 2020,
 [44] T. V. Ede et al., “DEEPCASE: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of pp. 241–256.
 security events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022, [56] K. Satvat, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “EXTRACTOR:
 pp. 522–539. Extracting attack behavior from threat reports,” in Proc.
 [45] T. Zhu et al., “General, efficient, and real-time data compaction strategy IEEE Eur. Symp. Security Privacy (EuroS&P), Sep. 2021,
 for APT forensic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 598–615.
 pp. 3312–3325, 2021. [57] Y. Xie, D. Feng, Y. Hu, Y. Li, S. Sample, and D. Long, “Pagoda: A
 [46] (2020). How Many Alerts is Too Many To Handle?. [Online]. Available: hybrid approach to enable efficient real-time provenance based intrusion
 https://www2.fireeye.com/StopTheNoise-IDC-Numbers-Game-Special- detection in big data environments,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 Report.html Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1283–1296, Nov. 2020.
 [47] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation [58] L. Yu et al., “ALchemist: Fusing application and audit logs for precise
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 1024–1034. attack provenance without instrumentation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 [48] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. [59] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruc-
 Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 489–506. tion from COTS audit data,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp.,
 [49] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “A hierarchical approach Vancouver, BC, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 487–504.
 for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neural [60] M. N. Hossain, S. Sheikhi, and R. Sekar, “Combating depennetworks,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–14, May 2021. dence explosion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation
 [50] C. Xiong et al., “Conan: A practical real-time APT detection system with semantics,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2020,
 high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., pp. 1139–1155.
 vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan. 2022. [61] T. Chen et al., “APT-KGL: An intelligent APT detection system based
 [51] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for on threat knowledge and heterogeneous provenance graph learning
 attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX ,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Dec. 26, 2022,
 Secur.), Jan. 2021, pp. 3005–3022. doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3229472.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:03:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.