IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025 781

 Enhancing Anti-Interference of Magnetic
 Tracking: A MagRobustNet-Based Framework
 With Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection and
 Measurements Recovery
 Shijian Su , Hai Lan, Huxin Gao , Member, IEEE, Houde Dai , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Hongliang Ren , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Magnetic tracking technology shows great Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anti-interference, magpromise for applications in medicine and industry. How- netic sensing, measurement recovery, robust tracking.
ever, it often suffers from diverse and unpredictable interferences in practical applications, such as hard-/soft-iron
interferences and sensor saturation, leading to reduced
localization accuracy or even tracking failure. Thus, we I. INTRODUCTION
propose a two-step framework to mitigate the impact of
 AGNETIC tracking is a low-cost, occlusion-free, and
interferences based on MagRobustNet, a UNet-like autoencoder network. In the first step, disjoint mask sets are
used in conjunction with MagRobustNet to detect anoma-
 M high-precise technique with great potential for numerous applications, including wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE)
lous measurements subject to disturbances. In the second localization [1], flexible robot shape sensing [2], automated
step, the interfered regions are masked, and MagRobustNet guided vehicle (AGV) navigation [3], and body motion capis applied again to recover their expected measurements ture [4]. However, magnetic tracking systems (MTSs) are senfrom neighboring normal data. Experimental results from sitive to ferromagnetic materials, which will result in degraded
testing in four interference scenarios showed that the pro- localization accuracy or even tracking failure. Thus, it is cruposed method improved the average position accuracy by
76.2%, enhancing the tracking system’s anti-interference
 cial to enhance the tracking system’s anti-interference ability
capability. In addition, the proposed method can indicate and robustness to avoid medical malpractices and financial
the interfered regions, thereby prompting the adjustment of losses.
the magnetometer array to an interference-free location and The factors affecting tracking robustness can be classified as
offering a new potential diagnostic method for localizing related to the tracking algorithm or environmental interferences.
ingested foreign bodies in clinical practice. Traditional MTSs are mainly based on the Levenber–Marquardt
 (LM) optimization algorithm [5], [6], [7], and therefore are
 sensitive to initial guesses. To address this issue, some re-
 Received 7 August 2024; accepted 10 September 2024. Date of searchers attempted to provide initial guesses for the LM algopublication 17 October 2024; date of current version 7 January 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants
 rithm using various initial estimation methods, such as particle
Council through the Collaborative Research Fund under Grant CRF swarm optimization (PSO) [8], whale optimization algorithm
C4063-18G, in part by the General Research Fund under Grant GRF (WOA) [9], artificial neural networks (ANN) [10], while others
14216022, in part by the NSFC/RGC Joint Research Scheme 2022/23 used end-to-end neural networks to directly regress the magnet
N_CUHK420/22, in part by the National Academy of Medicine, Healthy pose [11], [12]. Among these methods, AMagPoseNet [12]
Longevity Catalyst Awards (Hong Kong), in part by the Chinese University of Hong Kong Mainland Postdoctoral Sponsorship Program, and demonstrated superior localization accuracy and computation
in part by the Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macau Technology Research Pro- latency compared to traditional methods and is also independent
gram (Type C) under Grant 202108233000303. Paper no. TII-24-4005. of initial guesses.
(Corresponding author: Hongliang Ren.) Environment interferences in MTSs arise primarily from hard
 This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was
 and soft iron effects [13]. The hard iron effects are caused by
granted by the Animal Ethics Committee of Qilu Hospital of Shangdong objects that can generate magnetic fields, such as permanent
University under Application No. Dwll-2021-021, and performed in line magnets and electrified wires. The soft iron effect results from
with the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals. materials that distort the magnet’s magnetic field, such as ferro-
 Shijian Su, Huxin Gao, and Hongliang Ren are with the Depart- magnetic surgical instruments or iron plates. Fig. 1(a) shows
ment of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong (e-mail: shijiansu@foxmail.com; huxingao@cuhk.edu.hk; the potential interference sources presented in the operating
hlren@ee.cuhk.edu.hk). room. In addition, previous research has identified a reduction in
 Hai Lan and Houde Dai are with the Quanzhou Institute of Equipment localization accuracy at lower heights due to sensor saturation,
Manufacturing, Haixi Institutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jinjiang as depicted in Fig. 1(b).
362216, China (e-mail: Lanhai09@fjirsm.ac.cn; dhd@fjirsm.ac.cn).
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
 Sensor-level anti-interference: To address the impact of softhttps://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3461774, provided by the authors. /hard-iron interferences caused by currents and ferromagnetic
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3461774 materials in the environment, Wu et al. [13] employed the

 © 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more
 information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Factors impacting the robustness of MTS. (a) Potential interference sources presented in the operating room (surgical instruments,
robotic arm, iron plate, et al.). (b) Reduction in localization accuracy Fig. 2. Modeling an annular magnet based on the equivalent magneat low heights due to sensor saturation, reported from [12], where the tizing current, the Biot–Savart law, and the superposition principle.
magnetometer range was set to ±1200 uT.
 unpredictable interference fields. This study is the first to inoptimal maximum likelihood method to estimate the parameters troduce autoencoder networks to tackle this issue. Specifically,
of an error model, while Christensen et al. [14] utilized a neural we propose a two-step framework with anomaly detection and
network to learn a magnetic field distortion model. However, measurement recovery. The contributions of our framework are
existing techniques primarily focus on magnetic compass appli- summarized as follows.
cations and rely on precollected calibration data in specific usage 1) Designed a UNet-like autoencoder network, MagRobustenvironments, rendering them unsuitable for handling diverse Net, with partial convolution to accommodate ultralow
and unpredictable disturbances. As for the saturation induced resolution (5 × 5) measurements of MTSs.
by strong magnetic fields, Fu et al. [15] applied an external 2) Integrated anomaly detection and measurement recovery
electromagnetic coil for interference compensation. Currently, into our framework using only MagRobustNet. This not
no available research can address the saturation issue solely by only indicates anomalous regions subject to disturbances
post-processing without external hardware. but also improves the average position accuracy of MTS
 System-level anti-interference: To enhance the resistance of
 in four interference scenarios by 76.2%.
MTSs to environmental interferences, Su [16] et al. utilized
the Huber loss function to mitigate the impact of hard iron 3) Presented a model-to-real domain adaptation approach to
interference on localization. Still, this method is limited to ensure that our framework can be used for both learningtraditional optimization-based approaches and cannot identify based and optimization-based tracking methods.
which magnetometers are affected. Son [6] and Shi [17] et al.
introduced an actuator’s magnetic field to manipulate WCE with II. MAGNETIC FIELD MODEL
an embedded magnet. They accurately calculated the actuator’s
magnetic field based on magnetic models and subtracted it from A. Prior Mathematical Model of Annular Magnets
the raw measurements. However, they cannot address unknown As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), a sensor array composed of N
stochastic interferences caused by soft-/hard-iron effects and tri-axes magnetometers is adopted to perceive the magnetic
sensor saturation. Song [18] and Shao [19] et al. optimized the induction intensity generated by an annular magnet in space. The
sensor layout using the grid method and SNR evaluation, which ith magnetometer’s position in the magnet coordinate frame {m}
 m m m T
 i = [pxi , pyi , pzi ] . Based on the equivalent magnetizing
improved the system’s localization accuracy to some extent. is pm
Nevertheless, they were also unable to cope with these random current model and the Biot–Savart law, the magnetic induction
and diverse interferences. intensity dBl generated by a surface current element located at
 System-level anomaly detection: Diverse and unpredictable (x0 , y0 , z0 ) on the ith magnetometer can be expressed as
interferences can cause measured data to deviate from the normal
distribution [20]. Anomaly detection is recognized as a means μ0 μr Idl × P0 dv × P0
 dBl = =K (1)
to enhance the robustness of sensing systems by detecting and 4π |P0 | 3 |P0 |3
indicating the presence of interferences. Various anomaly detection techniques are available in sensing systems, including where μ0 and μr denote the magnetic permeability of vacuum
traditional methods, such as clustering [21] and support vector and the relative magnetic permeability of the medium, respecmachine [22], deep learning-based approaches, such as autoen- tively, and P0 is the vector from the point (x0 , y0 , z0 ) to point pm
 i .
coders [23] and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [24], The surface current I = Idl = Js dv, where I and dl represent
and hybrid methods combining traditional and deep learning, the current magnitude and direction, and Js is the current density
such as deep one-class classification [25]. However, detecting (A/m). Let K = Js μ4π0 μr , which is a constant determined by
interferences is often insufficient for MTSs, as our goal is to magnet material.
recover their expected measurements and obtain more reliable Assuming that the radius of a cylinder magnet is r1 . The
localization results. magnetic induction intensity at pm i can be estimated by
 Current research on anti-interference in MTSs is limited  r1
because it is challenging to separate the magnetic field gen- Bci (pi , r1 ) =
 m m
 dBz (2)
erated by the tracking target (permanent magnet) from diverse −r1
SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING 783

    
where dBz = ab dBl + bc dBl + cd dBl + da dBl is the Similarly, we define the objective function associated with the
magnetic induction intensity generated by the surface current magnetometer position and orientation as
Iabcda at the point pm
 i .
 L 
  2
 Applying the superposition principle of magnetic fields, the  s 
difference between the magnetic induction intensity produced by Epi = B̃ai (j) − Bsai (j)
 2
two cylindrical magnets with different radii yields an equivalent j=1
annular magnet with the same magnetic moment direction and (7)
 L 
  2
length. Then, the magnetic induction intensity at the point pm  s 
 i Eoi = B̃ai (j) − Oi · Bsai (j)
due to the annular magnet is given by j=1
 2

 ai (pi , r1 , r2 ) = Bci (pi , r1 ) − Bci (pi , r2 )
 Bm m m m m m
 (3)
 where Oi ∈ R3×3 represents the orientation compensation mawhere r1 and r2 denote its outer and inner radii, respectively. trix of magnetometer. By minimizing Epi and Eoi , we can
 Given the magnet pose ξ = [x, y, z, α, β, γ] in the system obtain a calibrated magnetometer position p̃si and a orientation
coordinate frame {s}, which describes the translation tsm = compensation matrix Õi . Substituting the calibrated K̃ and p̃si
[x, y, z]T and rotation Rsm = Rx (α)Ry (β)Rz (γ) of the frame into (4), and then, compensating the output Bsai by Õi , we can
{m} relative to {s}. The ith magnetometer’s position in the generate data that are closer to the real-world measurement.
frame {s} is psi = [psxi , psyi , pszi ]T , and the magnetic induction
intensity at psi can be calculated by
 III. METHODOLOGY FOR ROBUST MAGNETIC TRACKING
 ai (pi , r1 , r2 )
 Bsai = Rsm Bm m
 A. MagRobustNet-Based Framework for Robust
 −1
 = Rsm Bm
 ai (Rgm · (pi − tgm ), r1 , r2 )
 s
 (4) Tracking

 = F(psi , ξ), (i = 1, 2, . . ., N ). Fig. 3(a) depicts the MagRobustNet-based framework with
 anomaly detection and measurement recovery for robust mag-
The prior model (4) enables predicting the measurements of the netic tracking. The proposed framework can detect and indicate
magnetometer array for any given magnet pose. the interfered regions, offering an effective means for proactive
 movement away from interference sources. In addition, our
 framework possesses the ability to restore anomalous measure-
B. Model-to-Real Domain Adaptation ments to their expected values when interference is unavoidable.
 Training MagRobustNet requires a substantial amount of nor- The specific workflow of the proposed framework is as folmal data. We can employ the prior model (4) to generate a com- lows. First, the measurements obtained from the sensor array
prehensive and sufficient dataset, avoiding the laborious pro- undergo anomaly detection, yielding the reconstruction error
cess of manual data collection. However, a domain shift arises Er . Then, we compare the max(|Er |) with an adaptive threshold
between the generated and real-world data, primarily attributed defined in (16) to determine whether the input measurements
to several factors, including magnetometer measurement errors, contain anomalous components or not. If it includes anomalies,
manufacturing and welding errors in the magnetometer array, a corresponding binary mask is generated for MagRobustNet
and manufacturing errors in the magnets. to recover expected measurements of interfered regions from
 To mitigate the impact of these errors on localization, tradi- neighboring normal measurements. On the other hand, if it does
tional optimization-based methods introduce a calibration pro- not contain any anomalous components, the raw measurements
cedure [7], while deep learning-based methods, such as AM- are directly fed to the pose estimation algorithms, such as the
agPoseNet, design a CaliNet to facilitate the transfer from the LM-based tracking method and learning-based PoseNet.
real-world domain to the mathematical model domain, known
as real-to-model domain adaptation [12]. B. Network Architecture of MagRobustNet
 In this study, we present a method for data generation by
a precalibration operation, which enables model-to-real do- UNet is a popular autoencoder network that has achieved
main adaptation. Assuming the real measured sensor data of remarkable performance in image segmentation. The classical
the ith magnetometer is denoted as B̃sai , a total of L real UNet consists of four critical operations: convolution, downmeasurement samples are used for calibration. The magnetic sampling, upsampling, and concatenation. However, the coninduction intensity, Bsai , is a function related to the constant ventional UNet and its variants [26] are primarily designed for
K, i.e., Bsai = K B̂sai . We define the objective function related image-related tasks and are not directly applicable to MTSs, in
to K as which the measurement resolution is much lower than that of
 images.
 L 
  2 Therefore, we elaborately designed the UNet-like network
  s 
 EK = B̃ai (j) − K B̂sai (j) . (5) named MagRobustNet for our study, as shown in Fig. 3(b), which
 2
 j=1 possesses the following characteristics.
 1) Partial convolution operators replace standard convolu-
Minimizing Ek through the linear least squares method yields a tion operators to reduce the impact of invalid data on the
calibrated parameter K̃ specific to the actual magnet, i.e., output of the convolution operation.
 L 2) Downsampling is implemented by setting the padding
 B̃sai B̂sai
 K̃ = i=1
 L
 . (6) number of the convolution operator to zero rather than
 s s
 i=1 B̂ai B̂ai through pooling layers or setting the stride size.
784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 3. Illustration of robust magnetic tracking approach. (a) MagRobustNet-based framework for robust magnetic tracking, comprising three key
steps: anomaly detection, measurement recovery, and pose estimation. (b) Network architecture of MagRobustNet. (c) Measurement recovery aims
to restore abnormal measurements to normal data before feeding them into the back-end pose estimation algorithm. (d) Anomaly detection utilizes
three disjoint masks and MagRobustNet to reconstruct input measurements and detect interfered regions based on reconstruction error Er .

 3) Similar to downsampling, we adjust the padding number is unfeasible. Furthermore, concatenating feature maps with
 of the transposed convolution operator to regulate the matching resolutions between downsampling and upsampling
 output size. Thus, upsampling and downsampling form paths at the same depth level is an essential operation in the
 a symmetric operation. UNet-like network. A general approach to solving this problem
 In the convolution operation, the invalid data primarily orig- is to resize the input to a power of 2, such as 8 × 8, but this adds
inates from the padding operation and masking operation. No- unnecessary computations.
tably, the proportion of invalid data is surprisingly high for the
ultralow resolution measurements of MTSs. For example, given C. Measurement Recovery and Anomaly Detection
a 5 × 5 input measurement with 1-pixel padding on each side,
(7 × 7 − 5 × 5)/(7 × 7) = 48.98% of the data will be from In MTSs, when some of the magnetometers are subjected to
padding. These invalid data can cause sharp spikes or dips in interference, we expect to recover the expected measurements
filter response values, leading to spatial bias in the feature map of the interfered regions from neighboring normal data. One
and affecting the model performance [27]. Partial convolution possible way to do this is to estimate the magnet pose using the
was initially proposed by Liu et al. [28] to reduce the impact normal magnetometers, and then, predict the expected measureof invalid input data on the output of convolution operation. ments of the interfered magnetometers leveraging the estimated
Here, W and b denote the convolution filter weights and bias, magnet pose and the magnetic field model. This process can be
respectively, while I[w,h] and M[w,h] represent the input data and formulated as
corresponding binary mask for the current convolutional sliding   
 2
 
window. The operation of partial convolution at each position ξ̂ = arg min j B̃sai (j) − Bsai (j) , j ∈ SA
 2 (9)
can be defined as B̂sai (j) = F(psj , ξ̂), j ∈ SC .
   
 1[w,h] 1
  WT (I[w,h]  M[w,h] ) M + b, M[w,h] 1 > 0 Here, SA represents the set of normal magnetometers, and
I =  [w,h] 1
 0, otherwise SC denotes the set of interfered magnetometers. In general, two
 (8) tri-axis magnetometers are adequate for estimating the 6-D pose
 of a magnet. Given the redundant magnetometers in MTSs, far
where  denotes elementwise multiplication, and 1[w,h] repre- exceeding the minimal requirement of two, it becomes theosents the identity matrix with the same dimension as M[w,h] . retically feasible to recover the expected measurements from
As can be seen, output values depend only on the unmasked neighboring normal data.
inputs. The item 11 /M[w,h] 1 is a scaling factor that applies Masked image modeling (MIM) has emerged as a prominent
renormalization on only valid measurements. framework for self-supervised representation learning in com-
 The common downsampling operations, such as the pooling puter vision in recent years [29]. It involves randomly masking
layer and strided convolution, are not employed in MagRobust- a portion of the image and predicting the missing pixels using
Net due to the MTS’s low and odd measurement resolution from the surrounding context. Inspired by the MIM and driven by
a 5 × 5 magnetometer array. For example, with a convolution our measurement recovery needs, we can utilize a large number
stride of 2, the resolution of the MagRobustNet feature map of normal measurements alongside masks for self-supervised
in the downsampling path will be 5 × 5, 3 × 3, 2 × 2, and learning. The corresponding loss function is
1 × 1, respectively. However, finding a corresponding inverse
 Lr = N et(I  Mw ) − I1 , (w < N ) (10)
operation to output odd resolutions during the upsampling path
SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING 785

where Mw is a binary mask that randomly masks out w from N The reconstruction errors are also known as the anomaly
magnetometers. MagRobustNet trained by (10) then, possesses scores, with a higher reconstruction error indicating a
the ability of measurement recovery. higher likelihood that the measurement is an anomaly.
 Measurement recovery: As depicted in Fig. 3(c), if the in- MagRobustNet can be trained by minimizing the loss function
put measurements I contain anomalies, a corresponding binary Er 1 or Lr in (10). The main difference between these two
mask Mw is constructed by setting anomalous regions to 0 and loss functions is that during each backpropagation, the error
valid regions to 1. Supposing Io is output of the MagRobustNet, computed by Lr is masking only w/N of the input measurethe final reconstructed measurements Ir are ments, while the error computed by Er 1 is masking all the
 input measurements once. In our study, we use the disjoint
 Ir = I  Mw + Io  M̄w (11)
 masking method, i.e., Er 1 , to train MagRobustNet, which
where M̄w is the binary inverse of Mw . Consequently, Ir forces the MagRobustNet to reconstruct the masked regions
contains both the raw normal measurements I  Mw and the using information from the neighboring regions.
recovered measurements Io  M̄w .
 However, a key challenge is how to determine the interfered IV. EXPERIMENTS AND VERIFICATION
regions. The pixel-level reconstruction methods based on autoencoders and GANs are widely adopted in anomaly detection A. Experimental Platform and Datasets Collection
due to their intuitive nature and outstanding performance [23],
 1) Hardware Platform: We employed a 5 × 5 magnetome-
[24]. Considering the requirement of measurement recovery,
we adopt the UNet-like MagRobustNet to reconstruct the input ter array to perceive the magnetic induction intensities
measurements for anomaly detection. around the annular magnet (grad: N35, outer radius r1
 Anomaly detection: The reconstruction-based anomaly detec- = 5 mm, inner radius r2 = 3.5 mm, and length L =
tion relies on the assumption that the trained MagRobustNet can 20 mm). The sensor array consisted of 25 magnetometers
reconstruct measurements with the same distribution well but (STMicroelectronics LIS3MDL) that were evenly solnot those with interferences. The possibility of reconstructing dered on a printed circuit board (PCB) with a spacing of
anomalies is far less likely if the anomaly measurements were 40 mm between each magnetometer. The measurement
not visible to the MagRobustNet. To ensure the reconstructed range was set to ±800 uT in this study.
measurements are derived from neighboring regions rather than 2) Datasets: Our datasets consist of a generated dataset
taking shortcuts, we employ a masking strategy involving k (2.9376 million samples, of which 98% were used for
disjoint masks.
 training and 2% for testing) and a real-world test dataset,
 Fig. 3(d) illustrates the anomaly detection process based on k
disjoint masks, which is described as follows. as shown in Fig. 4. It is worth noting that no interference
 1) Randomly generate k disjoint binary masks M(i) such was added during the generation of the dataset, meaning
 that each measurement cell is masked exactly once. These that all samples in the training dataset are normal unlamasks will satisfy the following mathematical expression: beled data.
 3) Training Details: MagRobustNet was implemented in
 1  
 k k Pytorch and trained on the generated training dataset,
 M(i) = M̄(i) = 1 (12) employing the Adam optimizer with a base learning
 k − 1 i=1 i=1 rate of 1 × 10−4 . The learning rate was reduced using
 where M̄(i) represents the binary inverse of M(i). the cosine annealing schedule over 20 training epochs.
 2) Masked measurements I  M(i), (i = 1, 2, . . ., k) are Furthermore, PoseNet, an end-to-end pose estimation
 fed into MagRobustNet sequentially, which endeavors network proposed by [12], was also trained on the same
 to reconstruct the entire measurements by utilizing the generated dataset.
 unmasked measurements, i.e.,
 B. Assessment of Model-to-Real Domain Adaptation
 Ioi = N et(I  M(i)), (i = 1, 2, . . ., k). (13)
 This experiment primarily aimed to assess the efficacy of the
 3) The output measurements Ioi from the network are proposed model-to-real domain adaptation approach using the
 masked and synthesized into the final reconstructed mea- 271 normal samples from the real-world test dataset.
 surements Ira , i.e., Fig. 5(a) depicts the mean absolute errors (MAEs) between
 the measurements generated by the uncalibrated and calibrated
 
 k
 mathematical models and the actual measurements captured
 Ira = (Ioi  M̄(i)). (14)
 from the sensor array, with values of 1.72 and 0.99 uT, respeci=1
 tively. The t-SNE of samples from the three data domains is
 As Ira is extrapolated from neighboring measurements, presented in Fig. 5(b). Training PoseNet on the dataset generated
 excluding the input measurements that are reconstructed, by the uncalibrated mathematical model achieves an average
 the possibility of reconstructing anomalies is reduced. position accuracy of 2.35 ± 1.48 mm within the height range
 4) Finally, the reconstruction errors Er (difference between of 43–153 mm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). After undergoing the
 the input and output) can be calculated by pre-calibration operation, the localization accuracy of PoseNet
 improves to 1.85 ± 1.04 mm. The localization performance of
 
 k PoseNet closely aligns with the widely adopted optimization-
 Er = Ira − I = (Ioi  M̄(i)) − I. (15) based LM method. These results demonstrate that the
 i=1
786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 4. Overview of our datasets. (a) Generated training dataset was sampled from the prior mathematical model across the working space. (b)
Samples were collected at various heights, including 271 normal samples and 54 saturated samples (abnormal samples). (c) Collecting abnormal
samples under the interference of a ferromagnetic object (M2 hexagon key with 90 mm length). (d) Taking abnormal samples under the interference
of a small magnet (Φ × H = 6 mm × 1.9 mm). (e) Gathering abnormal samples in the presence of hybrid interference arising from a ferromagnetic
object and a small magnet. Samples from (b)–(e) together constitute a real-world test dataset with 271 normal samples and 204 abnormal samples.

 Fig. 6. Adaptive threshold determination and anomaly measurements
 detection. (a) Pearson correlation coefficient r for different N , where N
 denotes the number of maxima taken from each sample. (b) Correlation
 plot between the average of the maximum N values and the maximum
 reconstruction error, where the red line indicates the adaptive threshold
 function. Note that the samples in the figure are all normal, and the samples at the height of 33 mm are not included due to sensor saturation.
Fig. 5. Evaluating the effectiveness of model-to-real domain adapta-
 (c) Confusion matrix tested on the real-world test dataset. (d) Snapshots
tion. (a) MAE between the data generated by the mathematical model
 showing the process of anomaly measurement detection.
before and after calibration, and the 271 normal samples from the
real-world test dataset. (b) t-SNE of samples from the three domains,
illustrating that the data generated by the calibrated model is closer to
the real-world domain. (c) Comparison of the position accuracy before the measurement values varied widely, i.e., from approximately
and after calibration for pose estimation algorithms based on LM and 0 uT to ±18 000 uT. This results in significant variations
deep learning (DL, PoseNet) methods.
 in reconstruction errors for measurements at different heights.
 Thus, it is difficult to distinguish between normal and abnormal
precalibration operation can promote the transfer of generated samples using a fixed threshold.
data from the model domain to the real-world domain. We observed a positive correlation between the maximum
 reconstruction error max(|Er |) and the average of the maximum N values of input measurements I. Fig. 6(a) exhibits the
C. Anomaly Detection Pearson correlation coefficient r for various N . To get a higher
 The magnetic flux density produced by permanent magnets correlation, we took N = 12.
is inversely proportional to the third power of the distance. Our Further, we used a piecewise linear function to fit the reladatasets were acquired within the height range of 20–160 mm, so tionship between max(|Er |) and the average of the maximum
SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING 787

 The results in Fig. 7(b) show that the reconstructed measurements are closer to the ground truth, as indicated by the smaller
 MAE. When the interference source is iron, magnet, or hybrid
 (iron + magnet), the MAE distribution of the raw measurements
 shows two peaks corresponding to the interference sources
 placed at 20 and 30 mm from the magnetometer array during
 data collection. In contrast, the reconstructed measurements
 exhibited only one peak, also reflecting the effectiveness of
 MagRobustNet.

Fig. 7. Performance evaluation of measurements recovery. (a) Several E. Localization Accuracy Evaluation
snapshots show the process of generating a mask using the adaptive
threshold and recovering the desired measurements. (b) Comparison Our proposed framework is not restricted to learning-based
of MAE metrics before and after performing measurement recovery on pose estimation networks but can also be seamlessly applied to
abnormal samples. conventional optimization-based tracking methods. To validate
 the superiority of the MagRobustNet-based framework, we conducted a comparative analysis of five tracking methods in four
N values. The bias term of the piecewise linear function was
 interference scenarios, as depicted in Fig. 8. The five tracking
adjusted according to the acceptable false positive rate (FPR)
 methods considered are as follows.
on the normal data. In this study, we set the acceptable FPR
 1) LM and 2) PoseNet, where LM refers to the widely adopted
to 0.015, which corresponds to the allowance of misclassifying
 LM-based tracking approach [5], [6], [7], and PoseNet is the
four normal samples as abnormal. The adjusted function, which
 learning-based pose estimation network proposed by [12]. Both
we refer to as the adaptive threshold function, is shown as the
 LM and PoseNet are basic tracking methods that do not incorred line in Fig. 6(b) and can be formulated as
 porate anti-interference strategies.
 
 N 3) MagRobustNet+LM and 4) MagRobustNet+PoseNet,
 m= top(I, N )/N which utilize our MagRobustNet-based framework with LM and
 i=1 (16) PoseNet as the pose estimation algorithms.
 5) HuberLoss+LM [16], an anti-interference method based
 T (m) = max(0.23m − 15, 20) on the Huber loss and LM algorithm. To the best of the authors’
where m is the average of the maximum N values from each knowledge, HuberLoss+LM is the only previously proposed
input I. It is worth highlighting that the adaptive threshold solution to cope with the interferences targeted in this study.
function was determined solely based on normal samples. The experimental results in Fig. 8 illustrate that the lo-
 Fig. 6(c) presents a confusion matrix tested on the real-world calization accuracy of the LM and PoseNet methods is sigtest dataset using the adaptive threshold of (16). MagRobustNet nificantly improved in four interference scenarios after apachieved excellent results with a recall rate of 1.0, a precision of plying the MagRobustNet-based framework. Specifically, the
0.981, and an F1 score of 0.990. These metrics indicate that our MagRobustNet-based framework reduces the average position
model effectively captures anomalies, maintains a low false posi- error of PoseNet by 76.2% (10.18 to 2.42 mm) and the average
tive rate, and demonstrates well-balanced performance. Alterna- orientation error by 68.8% (from 12.69◦ to 3.96◦ ) across the four
tively, if we assume an acceptable FPR of zero, MagRobustNet scenarios. The improved localization performance (2.42 mm
would classify all normal samples correctly but misclassify one and 3.96◦ ) has significant practical implications for various
abnormal sample as normal, resulting in a recall rate of 0.995, a applications, including WCE tracking [1], AGV navigation [3],
precision of 1.0, and an F1 score of 0.998. and body motion capture [4].
 In both threshold cases, the misclassified samples predomi- Moreover, the MagRobustNet+PoseNet method exhibits sunantly occur at heights of 43 and 53 mm, where both saturated perior anti-interference performance compared to the MagRoand unsaturated samples coexist at the critical saturation bound- bustNet+LM method, possibly attributed to the fact that solving
ary. The performance of anomaly detection is influenced by both the magnetic tracking problem with the LM algorithm is based
the chosen thresholds and the dataset itself. on the assumption of Gaussian distribution. In contrast, PoseNet
 In our proposed framework, we prioritize a threshold with and MagRobustNet were trained on the same dataset, following
high recall, i.e., the threshold corresponding to an FPR of 0.015. the same data distribution and underlying patterns. Thus, the
This choice is motivated by the consideration that misclassifying measurements recovered by MagRobustNet better align with
a normal sample as anomalous merely results in an additional the expected input of PoseNet.
measurement recovery step, whereas, failing to detect an abnor- It should be noted that our proposed framework shows no
mal sample will directly affect the subsequent pose estimation advantage over the HuberLoss+LM approach in scenarios with
algorithm. iron interference. The performance difference is due to their
 distinct mechanisms for handling interference.
 Our proposed framework is based on measurement recov-
D. Measurement Recovery
 ery. When the number of interfered sensors increases, the area
 Fig. 7(a) illustrates generating a mask using the adaptive requiring recovery becomes larger, leading to a decrease in
threshold and recovering the expected measurements. Further, localization accuracy. The HuberLoss+LM approach, on the
we utilized the MAE metric to quantitatively assess the recovery other hand, reduces the weight of outlier measurements using
performance of MagRobustNet on abnormal samples, where the the Huber loss function, which behaves linearly for outliers
ground truth was generated from the prior mathematical model. and quadratically for normal measurements [16]. Consequently,
788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 8. Localization accuracy comparison of different methods under four interference scenarios. The localization accuracy of the methods based
on our proposed framework (MagRobustNet+LM and MagRobustNet+PoseNet) is significantly improved over the conventional LM and PoseNet
methods. When compared to the HuberLoss+LM approach, MagRobustNet+PoseNet demonstrates comparable performance in mitigating the
effects of soft and hard magnetic interferences (iron, magnet, hybrid) while exhibiting superior capabilities in handling sensor saturation.

 TABLE I
 MAGROBUSTNET PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT MASKING METHODS AND MASKING RATIOS

when the interference source is iron, which introduces smaller another conventional practice is randomly masking w out of
interference magnitudes over a larger area, the HuberLoss+LM the 25 magnetometers, as shown in (10). Table I shows the
method outperforms our framework. Conversely, when the inter- experimental results of the trained model based on disjoint mask
ference source is saturation, which introduces larger interference sets and the traditional masking method. To ensure a fair and
magnitudes over a smaller area, our proposed framework signif- reasonable comparison, each model applied an identical mask
icantly outperforms the HuberLoss+LM method. Despite not to the same abnormal sample during inference to reconstruct its
always outperforming the HuberLoss+LM method, our frame- expected measurements.
work offers following advantages. The results from Table I indicate that different values of k
 1) Versatility: It has broader applicability, being suitable for demonstrate their respective advantages in the four interference
 both deep learning-based and optimization-based track- scenarios. For instance, when the interference type is a magnet,
 ing methods, whereas the HuberLoss+LM method is only MagRobustNet performs optimally with k = 2. On balance, we
 applicable to optimization-based methods. selected k = 3 to ensure favorable performance across four types
 2) Enhanced Functionality: In addition to improving local- of interferences. In this case, the mask set consists of three
 disjoint binary masks, two of which have a masking ratio of
 ization accuracy similar to the HuberLoss+LM method,
 8/25, and the other one is 9/25.
 it can also indicate interfered regions, providing a means In addition, the results in Table I validate that the disjoint
 to actively avoid interference. masking method outperforms the conventional masking method.
 The superior performance of the disjoint mask sets method is
F. Ablation Study mainly attributed to its strategy to calculate the loss after all input
 In this study, we trained MagRobustNet using disjoint measurements are masked, rather than only masking part of the
mask sets to mask the input measurements. However, input measurements during each backpropagation, as shown in
SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING 789

 interference source, an iron plate in this case, mainly produces
 bias errors for localization. Moreover, the errors are nonlinear
 and vary with the position of the WCE (the distance between the
 two start points is 6.8 mm, and the two endpoints are 8.4 mm
 apart). Thus, the proposed method can help ensure accurate and
 reliable tracking results.

 V. CONCLUSION
 In this study, we propose a MagRobustNet-based framework
 with anomaly detection and measurement recovery to enhance
 the anti-interference of MTSs. Experiments on the real-world
 test dataset showed a 76.2% improvement in average position
 accuracy across four interference scenarios. Compared to the
 existing HuberLoss + LM method, the proposed framework
 exhibits broader applicability to both deep learning-based and
 optimization-based methods, and enhanced functionality in indicating interfered regions. In addition, our method offers a new
Fig. 9. Demonstration of clinical applications in a phantom and in potential diagnostic means for detecting and locating ingested
vivo experiments. (a) Snapshots of the experimental scene and mea- foreign bodies in clinical practice.
surements, where Es is derived from the reconstruction error Er after
bicubic interpolation. (b) Positioning errors of the foreign body at differ-
 A limitation of our proposed method is its inability to adent locations. (c) Indicating the presence of interference sources and dress interferences that can disturb all magnetometers, such as
prompting the adjustment of the array to an interference-free position. geomagnetic fields, as our approach relies on recovering the
(d) Motion trajectories of the WCE before and after performing mea- expected measurements of interfered regions from neighboring
surements recovery. normal data. In future research, we will further address the
 situation where all magnetometers are subject to interference to
(10). In contrast, the disjoint masking method uses (13)–(15) to improve the anti-interference capability and application scope
calculate the loss, which enforces MagRobustNet to reconstruct of MTSs.
expected measurements from neighboring data.
 REFERENCES
G. Demonstration of Clinical Applications [1] S. Sharma et al., “Location-aware ingestible microdevices for wireless
 monitoring of gastrointestinal dynamics,” Nature Electron., vol. 6, no. 3,
 Foreign body ingestion in children is a common occurrence pp. 242–256, 2023.
in clinical practice. As shown in Fig. 9(a), we conducted a [2] S. Song, Z. Li, H. Yu, and H. Ren, “Shape reconstruction for wire-driven
foreign body positioning experiment based on the reconstruction flexible robots based on bézier curve and electromagnetic positioning,”
 Mechatronics, vol. 29, pp. 28–35, 2015.
error Er (also known as score map) on a stomach model. The [3] S. Su, H. Dai, S. Cheng, and Z. Chen, “Improved magnetic guidance
experiment involved both the annular magnet and a foreign approach for automated guided vehicles by error analysis and prior knowlbody, making it challenging to observe where the foreign body edge,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 6843–6852,
was directly from the raw measurements I. However, the score Nov. 2020.
 [4] C. R. Taylor, S.S. Srinivasan, S. H. Yeon, M. O’donnell, T. Roberts, and
map allows us to visualize the location of the foreign body H. M. Herr, “Magnetomicrometry,” Sci. Robot., vol. 6, no. 57, 2021,
intuitively. Since the original score map resolution was only Art. no. eabg056.
5 × 5, bicubic interpolation was applied to increase the reso- [5] S. Zeising, A. S. Thalmayer, M. Lübke, G. Fischer, and J. Kirchner,
lution to 20 × 20. We uniformly collected 16 samples above “Localization of passively guided capsule endoscopes–a review,” IEEE
the magnetometer array and used the interpolated score map Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 21, pp. 20138–20155, Nov. 2022.
 [6] D. Son, S. Yim, and M. Sitti, “A 5-D localization method for a magfor position estimation. The positioning accuracy is shown in netically manipulated untethered robot using a 2-D array of hall-effect
Fig. 9(b). The results demonstrate that our method offers a new sensors,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 708–716,
potential diagnostic means for detecting and locating ingested Apr. 2016.
foreign bodies in clinical practice, though currently limited to [7] C. Hu et al., “Locating intra-body capsule object by three-magnet sensing
 system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 13, pp. 5167–5176, Jul. 2016.
ferromagnetic materials. [8] W. Yang . et al., “A six-dimensional magnetic localization algorithm for a
 In addition, detecting and indicating interfered regions is rectangular magnet objective based on a particle swarm optimizer,” IEEE
crucial for achieving high-quality and effective outcomes in Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 3092–3099, Aug. 2009.
practical applications. In vivo experiment shown in Fig. 9(c), [9] B. Lv, Y. Qin, H. Dai, and S. Su, “Improving localization success rate
our proposed framework successfully detected the presence of of three magnetic targets using individual memory-based WO-LM algorithm,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 19, pp. 21750–21758, Oct. 2021.
an interference source (a metal plate), prompting the adjustment [10] Y. Fu and Y. Guo, “Guideline on initial point finding and search bounds
of the array to an interference-free location. The metal plate was setting for biomedical magnetic localization,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22,
located in the middle of the operating table, which is often over- no. 16, pp. 16492–16504, Aug. 2022.
looked as a potential interference source. Even in cases where [11] N. Sebkhi et al., “A deep neural network-based permanent magnet localization for tongue tracking,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19, no. 20, pp. 9324–9331,
the MTS cannot avoid interference, our method can significantly Oct. 2019.
enhance the localization performance by recovering interfered [12] S. Su, S. Yuan, M. Xu, H. Gao, X. Yang, and H. Ren, “Amagposenet:
measurements. Fig. 9(d) compares the motion trajectories be- Real-time 6-DoF magnet pose estimation by dual-domain few-shot learnfore and after performing measurements when the WCE moves ing from prior model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 9,
about 30 mm under interference. The results indicate that the pp. 9722–9732, Sep. 2023.
790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

[13] Y. Wu and W. Shi, “On calibration of three-axis magnetometer,” IEEE Hai Lan received the bachelor’s degree in ap-
 Sensors J., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 6424–6431, Nov. 2015. plied physics from the College of Science, Minzu
[14] L. Christensen, M. Krell, and F. Kirchner, “Learning magnetic field dis- University of China, Beijing, China, in 2009,
 tortion compensation for robotic systems,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. and the master’s degree in condensed matter
 Intell. Robots Syst., IEEE, 2017, pp. 3516–3521. physics in 2012 from the University of Chinese
[15] J. Fu, Z. Ning, B. Li, and T. Lv, “Research on control algorithm of Academy of Sciences, Quanzhou, China, where
 strong magnetic interference compensation for mems electronic compass,” he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 Measurement, vol. 207, 2023, Art. no. 112370. in detection technology and automation equip-
[16] S. Su, H. Dai, S. Cheng, P. Lin, C. Hu, and B. Lv, “A robust magnetic ment.
 tracking approach based on graph optimization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. His current research interests include deep
 Meas., vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 7933–7940, Oct. 2020. learning and electromagnetic tracking.
[17] Q. Shi, T. Liu, S. Song, J. Wang, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “An optically aided
 magnetic tracking approach for magnetically actuated capsule robot,”
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 4003009.
 Huxin Gao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
[18] S. Song, X. Qiu, J. Wang, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “Design and optimization
 degree in mechanical engineering from Wuhan
 strategy of sensor array layout for magnetic localization system,” IEEE
 University, Wuhan, China, in 2018, and the
 Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1849–1857, Mar. 2017.
[19] G. Shao and Y.-X. Guo, “An optimal design for passive magnetic local- Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering with
 National University of Singapore, Singapore, in
 ization system based on SNR evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 2023, under the supervision of Prof. Ren.
 vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 4324–4333, Jul. 2020.
 He is a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Chinese
[20] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multi-
 University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong Kong.
 perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021.
 His research interests include surgical robotics,
[21] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
 robotic simulation, reinforcement learning, and
 detection in multivariate time series data,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100,
 2021, Art. no. 106919. autonomous control.
[22] M. Hosseinzadeh, A. M. Rahmani, B. Vo, M. Bidaki, M. Masdari, and
 M. Zangakani, “Improving security using svm-based anomaly detection:
 Issues and challenges,” Soft Comput., vol. 25, pp. 3195–3223, 2021. Houde Dai (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[23] M. Pota, G. De Pietro, and M. Esposito, “Real-time anomaly detection on the B.Eng. degree in biomedical engineering
 time series of industrial furnaces: A comparison of autoencoder architec- from the University of South China, Hengyang,
 tures,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 124, 2023, Art. no. 106597. China, in 2005, the M.S. degree in biomedi-
[24] P. Zhao et al., “Sgad-gan: Simultaneous generation and anomaly detection cal engineering from Tongji University, Shangfor time-series sensor data with generative adversarial networks,” Mech. hai, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree
 Syst. Signal Pr., vol. 210, 2024, Art. no. 111141. in mechanical engineering from the Techni-
[25] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. cal University of Munich, Munich, Germany, in
 Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402. 2014.
[26] L. Liu, J. Cheng, Q. Quan, F.-X. Wu, Y.-P. Wang, and J. Wang, “A survey He is currently a Professor with the Quanzhou
 on u-shaped networks in medical image segmentations,” Neurocomputing, Institute of Equipment Manufacturing, Haixi Invol. 409, pp. 244–258, 2020. stitutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Quanzhou, China. His research
[27] B. Alsallakh, N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, J. Yuan, and O. Reblitz- interests include intelligent sensors, information processing, and mobile
 Richardson, “Mind the pad–cnns can develop blind spots,” in Proc. Int. robots.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–13.
[28] G. Liu et al., “Partial convolution for padding, inpainting, and image
 synthesis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5,
 pp. 6096–6110, May 2023. Hongliang Ren (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
[29] Z. Xie et al., “Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling,” ceived the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineerin Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 9653– ing (specialized in biomedical engineering) from
 9663. the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
 Kong, in 2008.
 He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. He has been
 navigating his academic journey through the
 Chinese University of Hong Kong, UC Berkeley,
 Johns Hopkins University, Children’s Hospital
 Shijian Su received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. Boston, Harvard Medical School, Children’s National Medical Center,
 degrees in electronic science and technology and the National University of Singapore. His research interests include
 in 2012, 2015, and 2021, respectively, from robotics, mechatronics, artificial intelligence, actuators, and sensors.
 Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China, where he re- Dr. Ren was the recipient of the IFMBE/IAMBE Early Career Award
 ceived the Ph.D. degree under the Joint Pro- 2018, Interstellar Early Career Investigator Award 2018, ICBHI Young
 gram of Fuzhou University and the Quanzhou Investigator Award 2019, and the Health Longevity Catalyst Award 2022
 Institute of Equipment Manufacturing (QIEM), by NAM and RGC. He has served as an Active Organizer and Con-
 Quanzhou, China. tributor on the committees of numerous robotics conferences, including
 He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the a variety of roles in the flagship IEEE International Conference on
 Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese Robotics and Automation, IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
 University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong Kong. ligent Robots and Systems, as well as other domain conferences, such
From 2015 to 2018, he was a Researcher with the QIEM, Haixi Institutes, as ROBIO/BIOROB/ICIA. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Quanzhou. His research interests TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING and Medical
include magnetic tracking, intelligent perception, and robot localization. and Biological Engineering and Computing.