IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025 8981

 Ensemble Intrusion Detection Based on
 Heterogeneous Data Augmentation
 and Knowledge Distillation
 Longhui Wang , Xu Zhou , Weiping Ding , Senior Member, IEEE, Lifang Chen, and Qi Dai

 Abstract—The number and complexity of network at- multilayered structure and high complexity of deep learning
tacks and intrusion events are constantly increasing, timely models enable them to capture abstract, nonlinear relationships
detection of abnormal intrusion behavior is an important in data—crucial for identifying complex attack patterns. Comchallenge in the field of network security. To this end, this
article proposes an ensembled intrusion detection model pared to traditional machine learning, deep learning more combased on heterogeneous data augmentation and mutual prehensively analyzes the internal structure of data, enhancing
knowledge distillation (KD), KDEHDA. To enhance the di- its ability to detect hidden threats. Moreover, as hardware comversity of data, the training set is divided into multiple data puting power improves and algorithm optimization advances,
subsets using the bootstrap sampling method, and differthe efficiency and effectiveness of deep learning continue to
ent data augmentation methods are used on each subset to
obtain multiple balanced data subsets. To enhance the gen- improve, further advancing its role in intrusion detection [2].
eralization ability of the model, different base CNN models Despite deep learning’s impressive performance in intrusion
are trained using balanced data subsets, and KD is used detection, its complexity and high demand for computational
to transfer the weight information of CNN. The final result resources present substantial challenges. Deep learning models
is the voting ensemble of each CNN model. Experimental
 typically involve numerous parameters and hierarchical strucresults show that the proposed model is superior to the
existing optimal model. tures, leading to substantial time and resource consumption and,
 consequently, high computational costs. In practical applica-
 Index Terms—Data augmentation, Ensemble learning, In- tions, this computational cost becomes a significant barrier to
trusion detection, Knowledge distillation.
 deploying deep learning models [3]. For resource-constrained
 edge devices, such as IoT and mobile devices, large deep learn-
 I. INTRODUCTION ing models are challenging to deploy directly.
 Knowledge distillation (KD), a widely recognized model
 ETWORK attack techniques have become increasingly
N covert and complex. Intrusion detection, an effective active
defense strategy, has garnered growing attention. Traditional
 compression technique, has been extensively applied in intrusion
 detection [4]. It compresses models by transferring knowledge
 from a large, high-precision model, or “teacher model,” to a
intrusion detection models incorporating machine learning are
 smaller, lightweight model, known as the “student model.”
gradually proving inadequate in managing this increasingly
 This process enables the student model to substantially reduce
complex attack environment [1]. In recent years, deep learning
 computing resource requirements while maintaining a degree of
models have been widely applied in intrusion detection. The
 accuracy. This allows for the deployment of compact, distilled
 deep learning models that can perform efficient intrusion de-
 Received 20 May 2025; revised 9 July 2025; accepted 25 July 2025.
Date of publication 13 August 2025; date of current version 17 October
 tection, even on resource-constrained edge devices. However,
2025. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology traditional KD methods face two main issues [5]. First, the pre-
Project of Hebei Education Department under Grant BJ2025217 and in training of teacher networks is often resource-intensive. Achievpart by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
U2433216. Paper no. TII-25-3336. (Corresponding author: Qi Dai.)
 ing a high-precision teacher model usually requires multiple
 Longhui Wang was with the College of Science, North China Univer- adjustments and optimizations, making the process complex and
sity of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063210, China. He is now time-consuming. Second, architectural differences between the
with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaibei
Vocational and Technical College, Huaibei 235000, China (e-mail:
 teacher and student models may impact the effectiveness of KD.
wlh15636705691@163.com). Research shows that if the disparity between teacher and student
 Xu Zhou, Lifang Chen, and Qi Dai are with the College of models is too great, it may not only hinder effective learning but
Science, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063210, China (e-mail: sxzhouxu@126.com; hblg_clf@163.com;
 could also degrade performance [6]. These challenges are also
dai18232576157@163.com). encountered when applying KD to build lightweight intrusion
 Weiping Ding is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer detection models.
Science, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, China, and also with the
Faculty of Data Science, City University of Macau, Macau 999078, China
 We observed that ensemble learning enhances classification
(e-mail: dwp9988@163.com). by constructing and combining multiple classifiers, effectively
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3593924 optimizing weaker models [7]. In addition, the complexity

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
8982 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

of convolutional neural networks escalates exponentially with In contrast, our proposed KDEHDA framework introduces a
added hidden layers. By integrating multiple shallow networks, novel ensemble-based CKD mechanism, where multiple student
we can construct a lightweight intrusion detection model with models are trained collaboratively using heterogeneous data
both reduced capacity and high accuracy. The main contributions augmentations. The mutual distillation among peer models elimare as follows. inates the need for a fixed teacher and enables adaptive knowl-
 1) We propose a novel KD method, convolutional knowl- edge transfer. In addition, by integrating various augmentation
 edge distillation (CKD), enables the transfer of knowl- strategies tailored to the minority class, our method addresses
 edge across different data types within the model, en- data imbalance and overfitting simultaneously.
 hancing its adaptability.
 2) We apply multiple data augmentation methods to process
 intrusion detection datasets, effectively increasing data III. THE PROPOSED METHOD
 diversity and improving model robustness in handling This section outlines the proposed method, with Section III-A
 imbalanced datasets. detailing the algorithm’s motivation, Section III-B presenting
 3) We develop a new deep ensemble learning framework by the principle of the Bootstrap sampling method, Section III-C
 combining CKD with heterogeneous ensemble learning, explaining the CKD, and Section III-D providing the specific
 to achieve improved classification performance in intru- process of KDEHDA.
 sion detection tasks.
 The rest of this article are organized as follows. In Section II, we outline recent advancements in deep learning-based A. Motivation
intrusion detection models, including some lightweight models. In the field of large-scale data applications, deep neural net-
Section III discusses the rationale for introducing heterogeneous works are increasingly supplanting traditional machine learning
data augmentation and convolutional distillation and explains methods and have proven highly effective for complex tasks,
the research methodology. Section IV presents the experimental such as intrusion detection. However, binary classification in
framework, includes ablation experiments to demonstrate the intrusion detection frequently encounters severe class imbaleffectiveness of convolutional distillation, and provides the ex- ance [12], prompting researchers to employ data augmentation
perimental results of our method alongside other comparative to enhance dataset size by generating additional instances. Data
methods. Finally, Section V concludes this article. augmentation may exhibit variable efficacy across data types,
 and a single method may be inadequate to capture the full diversity of the data, increasing the risk of overfitting or underfitting.
 II. RELATED WORK This study addresses these issues by proposing KDEHDA,
 In recent years, KD and ensemble learning have emerged as a novel ensemble KD CNN framework. KDEHDA uses hetpromising solutions for building efficient and accurate intrusion erogeneous data augmentation, assigning distinct data subsets
detection systems. KD allows for transferring knowledge from to each student model, processed using diverse augmentation
a complex teacher model to a simpler student model, thereby techniques. This method diversifies training instances, thereby
reducing model complexity while maintaining performance. For enhancing robustness and adaptability across different environinstance, Wang et al. [8] proposed a lightweight model guided ments. KDEHDA eliminates reliance on a pretrained teacher
by a teacher with a stable loss function for better convergence. model; instead, a mutual learning mechanism facilitates knowl-
WangX et al. [9] employed a spatiotemporal residual teacher edge sharing by transferring convolutional kernel weights from
network to guide a compact student detector through multi- the highest-performing student model to others, which fosters
scale KD. Most existing KD methods can be categorized into flexibility in knowledge transfer and improves model generalresponse-based, feature-based, and relation-based approaches. ization without sacrificing computational efficiency—ideal for
Response-based methods transfer softened logits, while feature- resource-constrained intrusion detection systems.
based methods align intermediate representations. More recently, relation-based distillation, such as relational knowledge
distillation (RKD) [10], has gained attention for transferring the B. Bootstrap Sampling
structural relationships among instances instead of direct feature The bootstrap sampling is a resampling method that incorpovalues. rates replacement. Given a dataset containing m instances, each
 While these methods show effectiveness, they typically rely instance is randomly selected and added to the sampling set, then
on a manually designed or pretrained teacher model, which intro- returned to the initial data set, allowing it to be selected again
duces significant computational overhead and limits adaptability in subsequent draws. Following random m draws, a sampling
to new domains or datasets. Furthermore, most prior KD-based set of size m is produced. Certain instances in the original data
intrusion detection models do not incorporate diverse data views set may appear multiple times in the sampling set, while others
or tackle class imbalance simultaneously. may not be included at all. The probability of any sample not
 1 m
 To overcome these limitations, ensemble-based approaches being selected during these m sampling operations is (1 − m ) ,
have been adopted to improve robustness and generalization. taking the limit we get.
However, existing ensembles often lack intermodel communica- The instances that remain unsampled after multiple iteration during training, resulting in limited knowledge sharing [11]. tions constitute the out-of-bag samples, which can be used as
WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION 8983

validation sets to assess the classification performance of each error between the convolution kernels of the final convolution
subset layer of the student and teacher models as the distillation loss
  m
 1 1  M H W
 2
 lim 1 − = ≈ 0.368. (1) 1 t s
 m→∞ m e LM SE = Km,h,w − Km,h,w (5)
 M HW m=1 w=1 h=1
C. Convolutional Knowledge Distillation t
 where Km,h,w s
 and Km,h,w denotes the weights of the last
 Traditional KD methods can be broadly categorized into convolutional kernel of the student model and the teacher model
output KD [13] and intermediate-layer KD [14], both of which at the coordinates (m, h, w).
typically require the student and teacher models to be trained on The key innovation of our method lies in its ability to perform
identical or highly similar datasets. This dependence limits their KD directly on model parameters (convolution kernels), indeapplicability in heterogeneous or domain-shifted scenarios. pendent of the underlying data. This enables cross-domain and
 To address this limitation, we propose a novel technique called heterogeneous-model knowledge transfer, which is not feasible
CKD, which decouples the distillation process from the training with traditional distillation methods. Our proposed CKD opens
data. Instead of transferring knowledge via output logits or new avenues for collaborative learning and knowledge reuse in
feature maps, CKD directly transfers the convolutional kernels diverse data environments.
learned by the teacher network. This approach allows knowledge
transfer between models trained on different datasets, enhancing D. KDEHDA
flexibility and generalization in multisource or heterogeneous The KDEHDA process comprises two main stages: Data
environments. preprocessing and model training, which are detailed in Sections
 Assume that the convolution kernel K is a 3-D tensor with III-D1 and III-D2.
shape (M, H, W ), where M represents the number of output 1) Data Preprocessing: Initially, the intrusion detection
channels, in our experiments, we set the number of output dataset undergoes preprocessing to ensure compatibility with
channels to be the same, H and W denote the height and width deep learning models. The dataset includes both numerical and
of the kernel, respectively. K can be represented as a set of points nonnumerical features. Nonnumerical features are first transwithin a 3-D matrix formed using one-hot encoding, categorical labels are processed
  
 Km,h,w | m = 1, 2, . . . , M, via label encoding, and numerical features are scaled using
 K= . (2)
 h = 1, 2, . . . , H, w = 1, 2, . . . , W min-max normalization. To conform to the input format required
 Generally, convolution kernels typically have sizes of 3 × 3 by 2D-CNN models, the 1-D feature vectors are reshaped into
or 5 × 5, convolution kernels are employed to compute the two-dimensional matrices.
distillation loss. When convolution kernel sizes are inconsis- To enable heterogeneous training environments and robust
tent, interpolation is used to resize the smaller kernel to match model generalization, following the common setting used in
the dimensions of the larger kernel. This interpolation method practical implementations, such as Scikit-learn [15]. Specifiapplies bilinear interpolation, a technique that performs linear cally, we draw five training subsets from the original dataset
interpolation in two directions. In a 2-D plane, given a set via bootstrapping using a sampling ratio of 77% . Each subset is
of known points, bilinear interpolation estimates the value of independently sampled, and approximately 23% of the original
an unknown point. Bilinear interpolation involves performing instances are excluded from each sampling. These out-of-bag
linear interpolation first in the horizontal direction, then in the instances from all five rounds are then merged and deduplicated
vertical direction, interpolating across H and W (the height and to construct a unified validation set. This ensures that the validawidth of the convolution kernel). For example, change the size tion set remains diverse, comprehensive, and disjoint from the
(H, W ) to (H  , W  ) training subsets.
 To promote diversity and address class imbalance within the
 1 
  1
 training subsets, only the first training subset is left unmodified,
 K  (x , y  ) = ωi,j · K(xi , yj ) (3) serving as a baseline. The remaining four subsets are augi=0 j=0
 mented using different oversampling strategies: SMOTE, ROS,
where K  (x , y  ) denotes the value of the interpolated convo- ADASYN, and GAN-generated synthetic data. In each case,
lution kernel at coordinate (x , y  ), K(xi , yj ) is the value of the minority class is oversampled to match the majority class,
the original convolution kernel at the four neighboring points enhancing class balance and learning robustness. This process
(x0 , y0 ), (x0 , y1 ), (x1 , y0 ), and (x1 , y1 ), ωi,j is interpolation yields five distinct training subsets with varying characteristics,
weight which are later used for ensemble learning.
 2) Model Training: During training, multiple CNN models
 ωi,j = (1 − |x − xi |) · (1 − |y  − yj |) . (4)
 are trained on the balanced data subsets obtained through dif-
 Bilinear interpolation is well-suited for the continuous scaling ferent augmentation. The first training round serves as an iniof weight tensors, particularly for the smooth adjustment of tialization phase. In subsequent rounds, each CNN model is
convolution kernel weights. evaluated at the start of each round using the validation set,
 When the convolution kernels of the teacher and student with Macro − F 1 as the evaluation metric. The CNN model
networks are of the same size, CKD employs the mean squared achieving the highest Macro − F 1 score is designated as the
8984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Algorithm 1: Calculate Distillation Loss.
 Input: Convolution kernel in the last layer of the student
 Ks , convolution kernel in the last layer of the teacher Kt ,
 T(x)
 current epoch t, total epoch T , student output qi , real
 label y
 Output: Distillation loss L
 1: Begin
 2: for t = 1 to T do
 3: while H s = H t or W s = W t do
 4: K(H  , W  ) ← K(H, W )
 5: end while
 6: Lsoft ← (Ks , Kt )
 T(x)
 7: Lhard ← h(qi , y)
 8: α(t), β(t) ← (t, T )
 9: L ← α(t) ∗ Lsoft + β(t) ∗ Lhard
 10: t←t+1 Fig. 1. Adapative weights α and β.
 11: end for
 12: End
 on its respective training set. The later iterations correspond to
 the fine-tuning stage of KDEHDA. As training progresses, each
teacher model for that round, with the remaining models serving CNN model approaches convergence. By gradually reducing the
as student models. Macro − F 1 represents the average F 1 score weight of the hard loss, CNN model can enhance its performance
across all categories through the guidance of superior CNN models, thereby reducing
 n
 the risk of overfitting the training data. α and β are represented
 i=1 F 1i as follows:
 Macro − F 1 = (6)   
 n 1 πt
where F 1i denotes the F 1 of the category. β(t) = 1 + cos , α(t) = 1 − β(t). (8)
 2 T
 Macro − F 1 is employed as the evaluation metric for selecting the teacher model, as it comprehensively assesses the When the total number of iterations T is 300, the curves of
model’s classification performance across all classes. This study α and β changing with the number of iterations t are shown
balances the dataset using a heterogeneous data augmentation in Fig. 1. This design is inspired by the cosine learning rate
algorithm to improve classification performance on minority schedule in SGDR [16], which has demonstrated effectiveness
classes. However, balancing the dataset with data augmentation in improving convergence and reducing overfitting.
introduces a risk of overfitting. By using Macro − F 1, we main- The procedure of the calculate distillation loss is described
tain the model’s recognition capability for the majority class, in the Algorithm 1. The final result is determined through hard
allowing for the selection of the optimal student as the teacher voting among the CNN models, the process of KDEHDA is
model to guide other student models. illustrated in Fig. 2.
 During training, the loss function for the CNN teacher model
is the cross-entropy loss, while the student model’s loss function IV. EXPERIMENT STUDY
is a weighted combination of the cross-entropy loss and the To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, four
convolutional distillation loss. The student model’s loss function publicly available intrusion detection datasets are chosen for
can be expressed as experiments. In addition, set of ablation experiment are devised
 to showcase the effectiveness of each component. Section IV-A
 L = α(t) · Lsoft + β(t) · Lhard
 outlines the experimental setup, Section IV-B details the ablation
 M
  H W experiments, and Section IV-C provides the final experimental
 1 t s
 2
 = α(t) · Km,h,w − Km,h,w results and analysis.
 M HW m=1 w=1 h=1

 T(x) A. Experimental Setting
 + β(t) · h qi ,y . (7)
 1) Experimental Environment: The experiments were exe-
 In KDEHDA, α + β = 1, and we aim to avoid keeping the cuted on a system operating the Windows 11 operating system.
weights α and β fixed. We set β to follow a cosine decay function The hardware configuration included an Intel Core i5-12400F
with respect to the epoch, gradually decreasing as the epoch pro- processor and 16 GB of RAM. The Python programming
gresses, while α increases correspondingly. In the early stages language version 3.7.0 was used for implementation, and
of training, each CNN model may not yet be proficient in the the PyCharm integrated development environment (IDE) was
task. At this stage, setting a larger β facilitates the completion employed for coding and project management. Based on the
of basic tasks by each CNN model and improves performance Pytroch framework, the GPU is a GeForce RTX2070 s 8 GB.
WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION 8985

Fig. 2. KDEHDA flow chart.

 TABLE I
 DATASET CHARACTERISTICS AND INTRUSION STATISTICS

 2) Datasets: We collected four datasets from the Univer- TABLE II
 PARAMETER INFORMATION
sity of New Brunswick website, namely KDDCUP99, UNSW-
NB15, CICIDS17, and AAGM17. KDDCUP99 and UNSW-
NB15 have provided divided training sets and validation sets. For
CICIDS17 and AAGM17 datasets, we follow previous work [17]
to divide the datasets to ensure fairness in comparative experiments. In addition, to enhance the real-world applicability of
our evaluation and account for evolving threats, we incorporated
the recently published WEB-IDS23 dataset [18], which contains
 F 1 is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, where precision
up-to-date network traffic and attack scenarios. The dataset
 measures the ability of the intrusion detection system to identify
description is shown in Table I.
 only attacks, while recall can be considered as the ability of the
 3) Parameter Information: We use three-layer CNN as the
 system to discover all attacks.
base model, with an initial 8 channels, 32 output channels in
the final layer, dropout layer is applied to each layer to mitigate
 B. Ablation Experiment
overfitting. In our previous study, we observed that when using
CNN as the base model, the loss function consistently converged 1) Experiment on MNIST: To demonstrate the effectiveness
within approximately 200 epoch across the four datasets [19], of the proposed CKD method in a controlled and interpretable
so we set the epoch to 300. Additional parameters are provided setting, we conducted an ablation study using the MNIST
in Table II. dataset. Although MNIST is not a binary classification dataset,
 4) Evaluation Metrics: The evaluation metrics of the intru- such as intrusion detection benchmarks, it is widely used in the
sion detection model are the overall accuracy (OA) and F 1. deep learning community for evaluating novel training strategies
OA is the ratio of correct predictions in the prediction results. due to its simplicity and well-understood characteristics. Using
8986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. Comparison of accuracy and loss on training and validation sets with and without KD using teacher model (3 ∗ 3).

Fig. 4. Comparison of accuracy and loss on training and validation sets with and without KD using teacher model (5 ∗ 5).

MNIST allows us to isolate and visualize the impact of CKD both models gradually converge. However, the sporadic perforwithout the interference of task-specific complexities such as mance peaks throughout training demonstrate that KD provides
class imbalance or data noise. a more stable optimization path, and overall, the distilled models
 In this experiment, two teacher models were pretrained using achieve higher final accuracy and lower loss.
the full MNIST training set: one with 3 × 3 convolution kernels 2) Experiment on AAGM17 and CICIDS17: To demonstrate
and the other with 5 × 5 kernels, representing different receptive the effectiveness of CKD, we use the CICIDS17 and AAGM17
field configurations. To simulate a low-resource scenario, we datasets as examples. We set the number of iterations to 100.
trained student models using only 10% of the original training KD refers to CKD without a fixed teacher, while Null represents
data, thereby emphasizing the potential of KD to boost perfor- each independent CNN model, where the distillation loss is not
mance when labeled data is scarce. computed. Only the original cross-entropy loss is used for back-
 The student models were trained with and without the pro- propagation. The OA and F 1 scores for each CNN validation set
posed CKD, where the distillation loss used weighting factors are recorded in every training round. AAGM17 and CICIDS17
α = β = 0.5. Throughout training, we recorded accuracy and represent CNNs trained on data subsets without augmentation,
loss on both training and validation sets across epochs. Fur- while the remaining models are trained on balanced data subsets
thermore, the performance differences between student models enhanced by various data augmentation techniques. The results
with and without distillation are visualized in Figs. 3 and 4. As are plotted as a line graph, as illustrated in the Figs. 5 and 6.
observed, the performance gap is more pronounced during the From the results in Fig. 5 it can be observed that on the AAGM
early training stages, where KD accelerates learning and guides dataset, the ordinate value corresponding to the GAN algorithm
the student toward more generalizable representations. After is the largest, indicating that the classification performance of
the 10th epoch, the difference narrows, which is expected as the data subset enhanced by GAN outperforms that of other
WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION 8987

Fig. 5. Comparison line chart of OA and F1 of KD and null on AAGM17.

data augmentation algorithms. During the training process, the for intrusion detection based on deep learning, including
classifier trained on the GAN-enhanced data subset serves as MAGNETO [17], CNN-LSTM [20], HAE-HRL [21], Deepthe teacher model more frequently. By comparing the curves of Packet [22], TSIDS [23], RFG-HELAD [7], AlexNet [24],
each classifier, it is evident that the KD curve consistently out- VGG99 [25], MobileNetV2 [26], and ShuffleNet [27]. The comperforms the Null curve, demonstrating the guiding role of CKD. parison experiment uses the entire training set for model training
This method successfully transfers the implicit knowledge from and evaluates the results on the test set. The KDDCUP and
the strong classifier to the weak classifier, thereby improving the UNSW-NB15 datasets are predivided into training and test sets.
weak classifier’s performance. However, the CICIDS17 and AAGM17 datasets do not provide
 From the results in Fig. 6, it can be observed that on the such divisions. Therefore, this study extracts training and test
CICIDS17 dataset, each CNN model exhibits distinct advan- sets from the original datasets according to the proportions and
tages and disadvantages in different rounds, with no fixed or quantities specified by the comparison algorithms. The final
frequent CNN consistently serving as the teacher model. All results are presented in Tables III and IV, with the highest
curves utilizing KD outperform those without it. These results evaluation metrics for each dataset highlighted in bold.
indicate that KD plays an effective guiding role, particularly As shown in Tables III and IV, KDEHDA outperforms the
through CKD, where knowledge from high-performing models comparison algorithms on the KDDCUP99, UNSW-NB15,
is successfully transferred to lower-performing models. The and CICIDS17 datasets. On the AAGM17 dataset, the OA of
CKD strategy, which does not rely on a fixed teacher model, KDEHDA is 0.8989, slightly lower than MAGNETO’s 0.9016.
can flexibly select the most suitable teacher model for each Similarly, the F1-score of KDEHDA reaches 0.7343, while
task and continuously optimize the student model across mul- MAGNETO achieves 0.7361. These results indicate a
tiple training rounds. This approach significantly enhances the marginal performance gap between the two models on
model’s generalization ability, demonstrating the effectiveness this particular dataset. Unlike the other datasets used in
of the CKD method proposed in this chapter. our experiments—which include multiple categories of attack
 types—the AAGM17 dataset focuses solely on Android
 malware detection and contains only two types of instances. In
C. Compare With Other Methods such binary classification settings with limited label diversity,
 To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the advantages of heterogeneous data augmentation and
it is compared with other existing methods. The compari- knowledge ensemble strategies may not be fully exploited. On
son algorithms selected are binary classification algorithms the contrary, aggressive augmentation can potentially lead to
8988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Comparison line chart of OA and F1 of KD and null on CICIDS17.

 TABLE III
 OA OF DIFFERENT MODELS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

 TABLE IV
 F1 OF DIFFERENT MODELS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

overfitting due to the lack of interclass variability. Therefore, integration methods. Intrusion detection tasks typically involve
the slightly inferior performance of KDEHDA on AAGM17 is processing tabular data, which differs from image data in terms
likely due to the reduced effectiveness. of processing techniques. Traditional image data enhancement
 The superior performance of KDEHDA, compared to other techniques, such as cropping and inversion, are designed for
algorithms, can be attributed to its use of multiple heterogeneous image recognition models, such as AlexNet and are not fully
WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION 8989

Fig. 7. Robustness experiment of KDEHDA under Gaussian noise with varying σ values.

applicable to tabular data. In contrast, MAGNETO relies solely TABLE V
 MODEL PARAMETERS AND FLOPS
on GAN to address data imbalance. Although simple and effective, this approach may not fully capture the complex features
in the data. KDEHDA enhances the model’s generalization and
robustness by utilizing multiple heterogeneous integration methods. This approach not only enhances the dataset, but also
enables multiple models to learn from each other through KD,
further boosting detection performance. KDEHDA combines
the advantages of different models through heterogeneous integration, enhancing adaptability to data diversity. In addition,
KD facilitates mutual learning and knowledge transfer between
models, playing a key role in improving classification accuracy and preventing overfitting. One significant advantage of
KDEHDA over other KD methods is that it does not require baseline models, including heavyweight architectures, such as
a pretrained teacher model. This feature significantly reduces AlexNet (61.00 M parameters) and VGG99 (143.00 M paramtraining costs and time overhead. Traditional KD methods eters). Even when compared with lightweight models such as
typically require pretraining a teacher model and transferring MobileNetV2 (3.50 M parameters) and ShuffleNet (1.00 M
its knowledge to the student model, increasing both training parameters), KDEHDA remains more compact and efficient.
complexity and resource demands. KDEHDA omits this step This result supports the claim that KDEHDA is not only accuthrough distillation integration, making the training process rate, but also highly resource-efficient, making it well-suited for
more efficient and cost-effective. deployment in real-time or resource-constrained environments.
 To further illustrate the efficiency and practicality of the
proposed KDEHDA model, we conduct a quantitative analy-
 D. Robustness Experiment Under Gaussian Noise
sis of model complexity and computational cost. As shown
in Table V, KDEHDA has significantly fewer parameters To evaluate the robustness of the proposed KDEHDA model
(0.1939 M) and lower FLOPs (28.34 M) compared to most under real-world noisy conditions, Gaussian white noise with
8990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

zero mean and varying variance σ 2 was added to the input fea- [2] J. A. Alzubi, O. A. Alzubi, I. Qiqieh, and A. Singh, “A blended deep
 learning intrusion detection framework for consumable edge-centric IoMT
tures during the testing phase. The perturbed samples x̃ = x + ε industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2049–2057,
simulate potential sensor noise or environmental disturbances Feb. 2024.
that may occur during model deployment. The training data [3] Y. Lai et al., “A lightweight intrusion detection system using a finite
 dirichlet mixture model with extended stochastic variational inference,”
remained unchanged to isolate the model’s generalization ca- IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4701–4712, Aug.
pability under noise. 2024.
 The experimental results are illustrated in Fig. 7, which shows [4] Z. Li and W. Yao, “A two stage lightweight approach for intrusion detection
 in Internet of Things,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 257, 2024, Art. no. 124965.
the variation in OA and F1-score with increasing noise intensity [5] S. Sun, W. Ren, J. Li, R. Wang, and X. Cao, “Logit standardization in
σ. As expected, both OA and F1-score exhibit a gradual decline knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
as σ increases. However, the degradation remains relatively Recognit., 2024, pp. 15731–15740.
 [6] S. Yang et al., “Learning from human educational wisdom: A studentminor—less than 0.01—across all datasets, indicating strong centered knowledge distillation method,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
noise resilience. Intell., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 4188–4205, Jun. 2024.
 These findings confirm that the proposed KDEHDA model [7] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
 fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heteronot only achieves high classification performance under clean geneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
conditions, but also maintains robust and stable behavior under pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
noisy perturbations. This robustness makes it well-suited for [8] Z. Wang, Z. Li, D. He, and S. Chan, “A lightweight approach for network
 intrusion detection in industrial cyber-physical systems based on knowlpractical deployment in real-world intrusion detection scenarios. edge distillation and deep metric learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 206,
 2022, Art. no. 117671.
 [9] X. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Wang, and Z. Sun, “Spatial-temporal knowledge
 V. CONCLUSION distillation for lightweight network traffic anomaly detection,” Comput.
 Intrusion detection data typically exhibits significant class Secur., vol. 137, 2024, Art. no. 103636.
 [10] W. Park, D. Kim, Y. Lu, and M. Cho, “Relational knowledge distillaimbalance, with normal traffic instances far outnumbering at- tion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
tack traffic instances [28]. Accurately identifying attack traffic pp. 3967–3976.
is crucial in practical applications, as it directly impacts the [11] D. Simopoulos, D. Kosmidis, G. Anastassopoulos, and L. Iliadis, “A
 stacked ensemble deep learning model for predicting the intensive
system’s security and protection capabilities. We propose an care unit patient mortality,” Artif. Intell. Health, vol. 2, pp. 47–59,
innovative heterogeneous data augmentation ensemble learning 2025.
framework that improves dataset diversity by combining mul- [12] Q. Dai, L.-H. Wang, K.-L. Xu, T. Du, and L.-F. Chen, “Class-overlap
 detection based on heterogeneous clustering ensemble for multi-class
tiple augmentation algorithms, thereby enhancing the model’s imbalance problem,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 255, 2024, Art. no. 124558.
ability to identify minority classes. In addition, we introduce [13] G. Hinton, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” 2015,
CKD. This method transfers data diversity through the base arXiv:1503.02531.
 [14] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta, and Y. Bengio,
model during training, further enhancing the model’s generaliza- “FitNets: Hints for thin deep nets,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6550.
tion ability. CKD transfers knowledge between models, making [15] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” J. Mach.
the model more comprehensive and deeper in learning data Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
 [16] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
features. This enables the model to exhibit greater robustness warm restarts,” 2016, arXiv:1608.03983.
and accuracy when handling new instances. We use multiple [17] G. Andresini, A. Appice, L. De Rose, and D. Malerba, “GAN augmentation
shallow convolutional neural networks as base classifiers in our to deal with imbalance in imaging-based intrusion detection,” Future
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 123, pp. 108–127, 2021.
approach. This approach significantly reduces model complexity [18] E. Lanfer, D. Brockmann, and N. Aschenbruck, “Technical report: Genand computational overhead, while maintaining high accuracy. erating the WEB-IDS23 dataset,” 2025, arXiv:2502.03909.
 In summary, our solution, combining heterogeneous data- [19] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-F. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion
 detection model based on CNN and knowledge distillation,” Appl. Soft
enhanced ensemble learning and convolution kernel KD, im- Comput., vol. 165, 2024, Art. no. 112118.
proves intrusion detection model performance, while ensuring [20] S. S. Bamber, A. V. R. Katkuri, S. Sharma, and M. Angurala, “A hybrid
an efficient training process, offering broad practical application CNN-LSTM approach for intelligent cyber intrusion detection system,”
 Comput. Secur., vol. 148, 2025, Art. no. 104146.
potential. Nonetheless, our method also has some limitations. [21] Y. Xue, C. Kang, and H. Yu, “HAE-HRL: A network intrusion detection
First, the use of multiple data augmentation algorithms and system utilizing a novel autoencoder and a hybrid enhanced LSTM-CNNknowledge transfer mechanisms increases the complexity of based residual network,” Comput. Secur., vol. 151, 2025, Art. no. 104328.
 [22] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Attack classification of imbalanced intrusion
the training pipeline, which may lead to higher preprocessing data for IoT network using ensemble-learning-based deep neural network,”
and training time. Second, the effectiveness of our approach IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11888–11895, Jul. 2023.
may depend on the availability and quality of labeled intrusion [23] J. Fu, L. Wang, J. Ke, K. Yang, and R. Yu, “TSIDS: Spatial–temporal fusion
 gating multilayer perceptron for network intrusion detection,” Expert Syst.
datasets, especially for rare attack types. In future work, we plan Appl., vol. 263, 2025, Art. no. 125687.
to explore automatic selection of augmentation strategies and [24] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
extend our method to unsupervised or semi-supervised scenarios with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 84–90.
to alleviate data dependency. [25] K. Simonyan, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
 recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
 [26] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “Mo-
 REFERENCES bileNetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 [1] Z. Ye, J. Luo, W. Zhou, M. Wang, and Q. He, “An ensemble framework Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4510–4520.
 with improved hybrid breeding optimization-based feature selection for [27] N. Ma, X. Zhang, H.-T. Zheng, and J. Sun, “ShuffleNet v2: Practical
 intrusion detection,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 124–136, guidelines for efficient CNN architecture design,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 2024. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 116–131.
WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION 8991

[28] D. Arp et al., “Dos and donts of machine learning in computer security,” Lifang Chen was born in 1973. She received
 in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., Boston, MA: USENIX Association, the M.S. degree in technology for computer ap-
 Aug. 2022, pp. 3971–3988. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/ plications from Yanshan University, Qinhuangconference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/arp dao, China, in 2000. She received the Ph.D.
 degree in control theory and control engineering
 from the China University of Mining and Technology, Beijing, China, in 2008.
 Her research interests include data mining
 and processing, neural network modeling, con-
 Longhui Wang was born in 2001. He received
 trol theory, and engineering.
 the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Northeast Forestry University,
 Harbin, China, in June 2021, and the M.S.
 degree in cyberspace security from the North
 China University of Science and Technology,
 Tangshan, China, in January 2025.
 He is currently with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaibei Vocational and Technical College, Anhui, China. His
 research interests include network security and
 knowledge distillation.
 Qi Dai was born in 1991. He received the M.S.
 degree in mathematics from the North China
 University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, China, in 2020. He is currently working to-
 Xu Zhou was born in 1986. He received the ward the Ph.D. degree in control theory and con-
 M.S. degree in applied mathematics from Hebei trol engineering with the Department of Automa-
 University, Baoding, China, in 2013. He is cur- tion, College of Information Science and Engirently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mining neering, China University of Petroleum, Beijing,
 engineering with the College of Mining Engi- China.
 neering, North China University of Science and His research interests include data mining,
 Technology, Tangshan, China. machine learning, and imbalance learning.
 His research interests include data mining
 and machine learning.

 Weiping Ding (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 2013.
 He is currently a Full Professor with Nantong University, Nantong, China. From 2014 to
 2015, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with
 the Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung
 University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, China. In 2016, he
 was a Visiting Scholar with the National University of Singapore, Singapore. From 2017 to
2018, he was a Visiting Professor with the University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. He has published over 380 articles, including
more than 200 IEEE Transactions papers. Twenty of his authored/coauthored papers have been selected as ESI Highly Cited Papers. His
research interests include granular data mining and multimodal machine
learning. He serves as an Associate Editor, Area Editor, or Editorial
Board Member for over ten prestigious journals, including IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA,
and Information Fusion.