IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025 1167

 Ensuring Zero Trust IoT Data Privacy: Differential
 Privacy in Blockchain Using Federated Learning
 Altaf Hussain, Wajahat Akbar, Tariq Hussain , Ali Kashif Bashir, Maryam M. Al Dabel ,
 Farman Ali , and Bailin Yang

 Abstract—In the increasingly digitized world, the privacy and Index Terms—Blockchain, differential privacy, federated learnsecurity of sensitive data shared via IoT devices are paramount. ing, Internet of Things, zero trust security.
Traditional privacy-preserving methods like k-anonymity and
l-diversity are becoming outdated due to technological advancements. In addition, data owners often worry about misuse and
unauthorized access to their personal information. To address I. I NTRODUCTION
this, we propose a secure data-sharing framework that uses local HE SMART home systems (SHS) that use the Internet
differential privacy (LDP) within a permissioned blockchain,
enhanced by federated learning (FL) in a zero-trust environment.
 T of Things (IoT) have become very popular recently. The
 concept of SHS is also applied to create IoT applications
To further protect sensitive data shared by IoT devices, we
use the Interplanetary File System (IPFS) and cryptographic in various areas such as smart cities, agriculture, healthhash functions to create unique digital fingerprints for files. We care services, etc. [1]. The rapid increase in IoT devices
mainly evaluate our system based on latency, throughput, privacy results in generating vast amounts of data (i-e., big data)
accuracy, and transaction efficiency, comparing the performance every fraction of a second. These data contain sensitive
to a benchmark model. The experimental results show that
the proposed system outperforms its counterpart in terms of information about the owners, which requires security and
latency, throughput, and transaction efficiency. The proposed privacy [2], [3]. The term ’‘privacy” refers to the notion that
model achieved a lower average latency of 4.0 seconds compared an individual’s data will be treated discreetly or that access
to the benchmark model’s 5.3 seconds. In terms of throughput, to the data will require authorization. “Security” refers to the
the proposed model achieved a higher throughput of 10.53 TPS ability to protect sensitive data from both eavesdroppers and
(transactions per second) compared to the benchmark model’s 8
TPS. Furthermore, the proposed system achieves 85% accuracy, intruders [4], [5].
whereas the counterpart achieves only 49%. Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing (PPDS) methods address
 risks of re-identification of data owners or revealing sensitive information [6]. PPDS includes various techniques
 such as data masking [7], lightweight mutual authentica-
 Manuscript received 3 April 2024; revised 28 June 2024; accepted tion [8], encryption [9], k-anonymization [10], [11], and
2 August 2024. Date of publication 16 August 2024; date of current version
12 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer” and l-diversity [12] that meet privacy requirements [13]. However,
“Leading Goose” Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province these techniques have limitations such as background knowlunder Grant 2023C01150, and in part by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural edge, homogeneity, and inference attacks, while FL poisoning
Science Foundation of China under Grant LD24F020003. (Altaf Hussain and
Tariq Hussain are the first co-authors.) (Corresponding authors: Bailin Yang; attacks present a significant obstacle to achieving data pri-
Farman Ali.) vacy [14]. To address these limitations of the existing PPDS
 Altaf Hussain is with the Department of Computer Science and methods, a robust “Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA)” is needed
BI, Khushal Khan Khattak University, Karak 27200, Pakistan (e-mail:
altaf.hussain@kkkuk.edu.pk). to guarantee a secure mechanism for data transfer without risk-
 Wajahat Akbar is with the School of Electronic and Control Engineering, ing the re-identification of data owners’ sensitive information.
Chang’an University, Xi’an 710064, China (e-mail: wajahatakbar32@ The ZTA is a practical implementation emphasizing trust
gmail.com).
 Tariq Hussain and Bailin Yang are with the School of Computer as a vulnerability rather than a fundamental component in
Science and Technology and the School of Mathematics and Statistics, network security [15]. ZTA is based on segmenting networks
Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: into microcores and perimeters. It suggests that everything,
uom.tariq@gmail.com; ybl@zjgsu.edu.cn).
 Ali Kashif Bashir is with the Department of Computing and Mathematics, even inside the perimeters of a network, is untrusted instead
Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6BH Manchester, U.K., and also of building a trusted domain around the network. Thus, it
with the Centre for Research Impact and Outcome, Chitkara University promotes the “never trust, always verify” principle within
Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Rajpura 140401,
India (e-mail: Dr.alikashif.b@ieee.org). enterprise networks as well [16].
 Maryam M. Al Dabel is with the Department of Computer Science and Additionally, the current methods used to anonymize data
Engineering, College of Computer Science and Engineering, University of often depend on trusting the people who hold the data or the
Hafr Al Batin, Hafar Al Batin 39524, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: maldabel@
uhb.edu.sa). companies they hire to do it for them. This could be prob-
 Farman Ali is with the Department of Applied AI, School of Convergence, lematic if these parties are semi-honest and could potentially
College of Computing and Informatics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul cause harm [17], [18]. Likewise, if data controllers receive
03063, South Korea (e-mail: Farman0977@g.skku.edu).
 Data is available on-line at https://github.com/tariqaup/DP_Blockchain. data owners’ datasets with inadequate PPDS techniques, they
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3444824 could engage in malicious activities, posing as attackers with
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

harmful intentions such as stealing sensitive data or misusing
data owners’ sensitive information [19].
 Blockchain technology has recently emerged as a critical
solution for safeguarding sensitive data, providing a decentralized method for managing sensitive data records, ensuring
authentication, preventing tampering, and facilitating secure
data sharing [20]. Through its resilience, blockchain empowers
data owners to manage their data. Differential privacy (DP)
offers another mathematical framework for privacy-preserving
without disclosing sensitive information [21]. DP quantifies
the privacy loss associated with specific data analysis and
achieves this by introducing controlled or randomized noise
while maintaining the desired level of privacy. LDP, a type of
DP, preserves privacy at the individual data point level rather
than the aggregate level, ensuring that no individual data point Fig. 1. Attacker Model.
can be linked to a specific user [22].
 FL presents another significant advancement in PPDS techniques, particularly in the domain of machine learning [23].
Fl allows model training to be conducted across multiple
decentralized devices or servers without centralizing the sensitive data [24]. Instead, individual devices or nodes compute
model updates on their local data and only share encrypted
or aggregated information with a central server or among
themselves. This approach minimizes the risk of exposing
raw data to third parties, thereby enhancing privacy protection [24], [25]. By leveraging FL in conjunction with LDP and
blockchain technology, we can ensure the confidentiality of
sensitive information and maintain control over data ownership
and usage rights. The integration of FL further strengthens the
resilience of blockchain-based systems by enabling collaborative model training while preserving the privacy of individual
data points. To address the identified issues and limitations,
we propose a mechanism that combines blockchain technology
with LDP and FL to achieve robust data privacy and security Fig. 2. Poisoning Attack in FL.
for sharing sensitive data. This research is motivated by the
challenges outlined in [11], detailed below in the ’‘Motivation”
section. data with controllers in a zero-trust environment. Fig. 1, along
 with Fig. 2, serves to elucidate the attacker models, shedding
 light on how adversaries can potentially engage in malicious
A. Motivation activities, especially in the context of FL.
 In this section, we carefully examined the problems with FL is vulnerable to several attacks, compromising its prithe existing methods of sharing data owners’ data. Due to vacy and security guarantees. Data poisoning attacks involve
pressing privacy concerns, there is a fundamental lack of malicious participants injecting false data to skew the model
trust in any data controller or entity involved in this process. performance, as shown in Fig. 2. Model poisoning attacks
As illustrated in Fig. 1, sharing sensitive data directly with are more sophisticated, where adversaries manipulate model
controllers without applying any PPDS technique by data updates to degrade or control the final aggregated model.
owners could potentially be viewed as adversaries since Inference attacks seek to deduce sensitive information about
controllers may not be trusted to handle sensitive data. This the training data from the shared model updates. The proposed
ambiguity renders that the data controllers may be semi-trust work used blockchain technology to solve FL issues and
actors in this scenario. Moreover, The existing scheme [11] has prevent data poisoning, model poisoning, and inference
implemented k-anonymity on the data owners’ sensitive data attacks. Authenticating all entities through blockchain ensures
to reduce the risk of de-identification. But With k-anonymized their identities are verified. The main contributions of the
data, there remains the possibility of an attribution disclosure proposed model are:
attack due to a lack of trust for data controllers, as shown in • To enhance data privacy and security within IoT
Fig. 1. There is no sense in sharing sensitive information with networks, a novel approach is introduced that combines
controllers without any privacy whatsoever, and data owners LDP, Permissioned blockchain, and alongside FL in a
will never want to do so without any protection. In a nutshell, zero-trust environment that will protect against poisoning,
they consistently prioritize the utmost privacy when sharing background knowledge, and inference attacks.
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1169

 • The registration process on the permissioned blockchain used blockchain. Yet, its high computational demands and
 will provide an extra layer of security by verifying the scalability issues have raised concerns about its practicality
 identities of all the entities. for large-scale healthcare systems.
 • The experimental results demonstrate higher transaction Another technique, the Anomaly Detection System, is used
 efficiency, throughput, and low latency and outperforms by [35] to rescue the data in healthcare. Anomaly Detection
 with respect to its counterpart in other performance System has proven valuable in identifying unusual patterns in
 metrics. data access, thereby avoiding the detection of unauthorized
 activities. However, striking a balance between accurate detection and a low rate of false positives remains an ongoing
 II. R ELATED W ORK challenge. Moreover, these systems may struggle to identify
 IoT devices generate high volumes of data, so network new or previously unseen attack patterns.
security goes beyond conventional measures like firewalls and Bio-metric authentication is used, relying on unique physaccess control. In dynamic IoT environments, real-time mon- ical traits for robust user verification, significantly advancing
itoring, data handling and storage, access management, and healthcare data security. However, concerns regarding biometsecurity are all challenges [26]. The authors of [42] propose ric data compromise and the potential for false acceptance or
a zero-trust model that enables hierarchical mining based on rejection warrant careful consideration.
IoT. The authors describe IoT infrastructure as a zero-trust The researcher also uses the homomorphic encryption
model. To address this issue, Amatista has been introduced as technique in [36], allowing computations on encrypted data
a blockchain-based middleware. The relentless advancement without decryption, which holds promise for preserving priof technology has woven its threads of innovation into every vacy during data processing. Nevertheless, its computational
corner of the world where human beings exist, bestowing us intensity can lead to slower processing speeds, and successful
with improved features and applications that have transformed implementation often necessitates specialized expertise.
how we navigate the world. Now, this transformation is more Tokenization [37] has been employed to replace sensitive
palpable than in the realm of healthcare [27], [28]. With the data with tokens, thereby limiting the exposure of valuable
advancement of technology like 5G [29], the healthcare sector information within the system. While effective token managehas profoundly evolved, catalyzed by these technological ment is crucial, it’s important to note that tokenization might
strides. Among the most noteworthy shifts is the digitization of not comprehensively address all security concerns, such as
medical records, a repository of sensitive patient information insider threats.
that has transitioned from paper to electronic realms on the Firewalls and Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are used
network [30]. While this transition has streamlined many in [38]; they serve as essential safeguards by monitoring and
aspects of healthcare, it has also unveiled new avenues for controlling network traffic. However, their efficacy against
digital privacy and security breaches. In a world where advanced or zero-day attacks is limited, and the occurrence of
medical records encompass deeply personal and private data, false positives and negatives can impact their reliability.
sharing such intimate information electronically has spurred Data masking is used in [39], which involves obfuscating
the emergence of concerns [31], [32]. With advancements original data while retaining its format and offers a practical
in technology, the challenge of safeguarding the sanctity of approach for testing and analysis. However, reversible masking
medical records has become more pronounced, especially in techniques can potentially result in data leaks, and ensuring the
light of their historical attractiveness to data thieves. This consistency of masked data presents an additional challenge.
confluence of digitization and data vulnerability casts an even K-anonymization is used in [11] for enhancing privacy
greater imperative on fortifying the security and privacy of by generalizing data to a level where individuals cannot
patients’ information [20]. be uniquely identified. However, balancing privacy and data
 Encryption has emerged as a cornerstone of data security utility can be complex, and re-identification attacks remain a
strategies, ensuring the confidentiality of patient information major concern.
by rendering it unreadable without the appropriate decryption T-closeness in [40] Guarantees that the distribution of senkey. An encryption technique is used in [33]. However, sitive information within an equivalence class closely mirrors
implementing encryption techniques can introduce processing the distribution in the entire data set. However, achieving toverhead and potential obstacles to key management and closeness might necessitate significant data distortion.
distribution problems. L-diversity introduces diversity within anonymity groups
 Role-based Access Control (RBAC) has been used in [34] in [41] to mitigate the risk of attribute disclosure. However,
to restrict data access based on users’ roles, effectively achieving l-diversity can result in increased data distortion and
minimizing the risk of unauthorized data exposure. While a trade-off between privacy and data quality.
RBAC offers a structured approach to access management, its Table II represents existing schemes, their achievements,
complexity can lead to misconfigurations and challenges in and limitations.
accommodating evolving access requirements.
 In technological advancement, blockchain technology has
garnered attention for its potential to ensure data immutability III. P RELIMINARIES
and transparency, which are critical for maintaining trustwor- This section provides an in-depth overview of the proposed
thy audit trails in healthcare environments. Researchers in [21] method, encompassing its core functionality, definitions, and
1170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 N OTATIONS

 TABLE II
 S UMMARY OF T ECHNIQUES , ACHIEVEMENTS AND L IMITATIONS

communication model. We present a crucial safeguarding if, for any pair of data set D and D that vary only in the
approach to bolster security within the demanding landscape information of a single individual and for all measurable sets
of IoT networks. This method is designed to fortify the O ⊆ R,
security framework, ensuring its robustness and resilience. The Pr[A(D) = O]
following are some key concepts that will be used in the ≤ e .
 Pr[A(D ) = O]
proposed method, and they is necessary to understand their
 where the probability is taken over the randomness of the
importance in the data-sharing process.
 algorithm A.
 In this definition, ε is a non-negative privacy parameter.
A. Differential Privacy Smaller values of ε correspond to stronger privacy guarantees,
 with ε = 0 being perfect privacy (no information leakage).
 DP stands as a foundational concept in the domain of Theorem 1 (LDP): Let  > 0 be a privacy parameter, and
data privacy, providing a quantifiable measure of the level let D be a dataset. A randomized algorithm A is said to satisfy
of privacy safeguards provided by a specific data analysis or -Local DP if, for all possible outcomes O and for all datasets
query; its primary function is to ensure that the incorporation D and D that differ in a single data point, we have:
or omission of an individual’s data from the data set will not
 Pr[A(D) = O]
significantly modify the results of the analysis. In mathemat- ≤ e .
ical terms, its definition can be articulated as follows: Pr[A(D ) = O]
 A stochastic algorithm denoted as A, operating on a domain Proof: Let D and D be datasets that differ in exactly one
D and yielding results in the codomain R, guarantees ε-DP data point. We need to show that for any possible outcome
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1171

O of the randomized algorithm A, the following inequality
holds:
 Pr[A(D) = O]
 ≤ e .
 Pr[A(D ) = O]
 1) Step 1: Understand the Definition of -LDP: According
to the definition, a randomized algorithm A satisfies -LDP
if:
    
 Pr[A(D) = O] ≤ e · Pr A D = O ,
for all possible outcomes O and for any datasets D and D
 Fig. 3. Communication Model.
differing in one data point.
 2) Step 2: Express the Definition in Terms of the Ratio:
Rewrite the definition to express it in terms of a ratio:
 where L(M, Di ) is the local loss function for the user i. The
 Pr[A(D) = O] global loss function is the sum of the local losses across all
 ≤ e .
 Pr[A(D ) = O] users. The optimization process involves adjusting the model
 3) Step 3: Consider the Outcome Probability for Datasets parameters M iteratively to minimize this global loss function.
D and D : Let’s denote: The final result, M ∗ , is the set of model parameters that
 achieves the minimum global loss.
 PD (O) = Pr[A(D) = O]
    
 PD (O) = Pr A D = O C. Blockchain-Based Communication Model
We aim to show: This section provides a general overview and defines
 PD (O) the entities and underlying technologies considered in the
 ≤ e . proposed work. The proposed model involves three main
 PD (O)
 participants: IoT data owners, data controllers, and end users.
 4) Step 4: Apply the Definition Directly: From the defini- Data owners are the residents and citizens who participate in
tion of -LDP, we have: data collection; data controllers are the service providers (such
 PD (O) ≤ e · PD (O). as Google for Nest devices and Amazon for Ring devices)
 responsible for collecting, storing, and securing the data. A
 5) Step 5: Isolate the Ratio: Divide both sides of the data consumer is an entity that seeks to utilize data collected
inequality by PD (O): by IoT devices, such as companies analyzing usage patterns to
 PD (O) improve product performance and researchers studying urban
 ≤ e . behavior and smart home environments. FL and LDP are piv-
 PD (O)
 otal elements within this data-sharing framework. To achieve a
 6) Step 6: Conclude the Proof: The inequality PPD(O) ≤ e balance between security and privacy, All three key entities are
 D (O)
demonstrates that the probability of obtaining the outcome O registered on a permissioned blockchain, Providing seamless
when applying the algorithm A to dataset D is at most e times communication between data consumers. Data controllers and
the probability of obtaining the same outcome when applying processors. Concurrently, we adopt the concept of a selfthe algorithm to dataset D . This satisfies the definition of - sovereign identity (SSI) management system, an essential
LDP. Thus, we have shown that the randomized algorithm A component of digital identity management. This approach
satisfies -LDP for datasets D and D differing in a single data empowers individuals with full autonomy over their own
point. identities, granting them the authority to manage their identity
 information independently. We also develop a robust peer-to-
B. Federated Learning peer (P2P) network. Ensure reliable transfer of data through a
 communication channel. Data consumers and facilitators can
 In a federated learning scenario, our objective is to train
 benefit from a globally trained model. Verification of identity
a global model M across n decentralized user, each with its
 through interactions. Fig. 3 serves as a visual illustration of
local data set Di . The objective is to find the optimal model
 the communication model.
parameters M ∗ that minimize a global loss function. This can
be formally defined as:
 
 n IV. P ROPOSED M ODEL
 ∗
 M = arg min L(M, Di ) In this section, we demonstrate our blockchain-based
 M
 i=1 proposed model in detail. It uses LDP for anonymization and
 = arg min(L(M, D1 ) + L(M, D2 ) + . . . + L(M, Dn )) FL for collaborative model training. FL allows data owners
 M
  to train their models locally on their devices and share only
 = arg min Local Loss1 + Local Loss2 + · · ·
 M
  the encrypted model updates, ensuring that raw data remains
 + Local Lossn , (1) private and secure throughout the process.
1172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 4. Proposed model for secure IoT data sharing.

 Outlined below are several key steps of the model’s opera- also reveals the specifications file on IPFS, which
tion, as depicted in Fig. 4: includes the data controller’s publicly accessible decen-
 1) Registration of Entities: To validate the identities of tralized identities (DIDs). Data consumers acknowledge
 all entities—data owners, data controllers, and data the offer and access the data specs file uploaded on IPFS
 consumers—registration on a permissioned blockchain by the data controller.
 is required. This protects against interference in the data- 6) Exchange of Identity Proofs: Both parties establish
 sharing process and adds an extra layer of security. a secure P2P communication channel to exchange
 2) Blockchain bid posting and IPFS data storage: A information and identity proofs.
 company or researchers ( data consumers) submit a bid 7) Confirming Identity: The identities of both parties (i.e.,
 on the blockchain and upload a dataset specifications the controller and consumer) are verified using the SSI
 file to IPFS. Bids may include links to specification ledger.
 files, bid expiry dates, payment amounts, and tags (e.g., 8) Payment to the Controller: After agreeing to the terms
 smart home energy usage). A data set requirement file of the offer, the data utilized launches a P-to-P protected
 encompasses information about the data set schema, channel and makes the required payments to the data
 such as the type of device, energy consumption, and controller.
 timestamps. 9) Sharing the updated Global Model: Upon successful
 3) Accessing Bids on the Blockchain: The data controller verification, the final version of the updated model is
 (e.g., service providers) accesses the data set specifica- shared with the data consumer via the secure channel.
 tions and identifies all bids of interest posted by data 10) Compensation to data owners: After completing the
 consumers. process of anonymized data sharing, the data controller
 4) Requesting Data Acquisition to make an Offer: Data compensates the specific data owner.
 controllers interconnect with data owners to get their Algorithm 1 begins by registering each entity (i.e., data
 datasets. The data controller sends a base model for owners (P), data controllers (C), and data consumers (S)) on
 training on local data. Data owners train this model, add B (line 1-3). S then post bids on the B and upload their data
 differential private noise, and return updated parameters. specifications on I (line 4-6). C access these bids from the B
 This process iterates until the model is fully trained and and identify their bids of interest (lines 7-9). Subsequently, C
 a final updated global model is created. send their initial global model G to each P, who trains the
 5) Posting offer on Blockchain and Data Set Specifications model locally in the FL process and adds differential private
 on IPFS: Once the data controller has received the most and sends back the updated model θp (line 10-15). The process
 updated version of the global models, they formulate an in lines 10-15 repeats till the model is fully trained for the
 offer and post it on the blockchain. The offer includes a FL process, and finally, C receives updated global model G ∗
 link to the data specs file on IPFS. The data controller from P. C then formulate an offer based on G ∗ , post this offer
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1173

Algorithm 1 Blockchain-Based Secure Data Sharing With
LDP and FL
Input:
P: List of Data Owners
C: List of Data Controllers
S: List of Data Consumers
B: Permissioned Blockchain
I: Interplanetary File System (IPFS)
G: Initial Global Model
Output:
G ∗ : Final updated Global Model
·························································
 1: for each entity e ∈ (P ∪ C ∪ S) do Fig. 5. Latency.
 2: Register e on B
 3: end for
 V. I MPLEMENTATION AND R ESULTS
 4: for each consumer s ∈ S do
 5: s posts bids on B and uploads data specifications on I This section provides a detailed description of the model’s
 6: end for implementation and testing approaches. Using the Remix
 7: for each controller c ∈ C do Ethereum platform, we built a private Ethereum blockchain
 8: c accesses bids from B and identifies bids of interest network to enhance the effectiveness and throughput of
 9: end for blockchain transactions. In addition, the FL and LDP
10: for each controller c ∈ C do processes were executed using Python. Proof-of-Authority
11: for each owner p ∈ P do (POA) was the consensus protocol we chose. The simulation
12: c sends G to p has three main functions: registration, offer, and finalization.
13: p trains G locally, applies DP and sends updated Finalization is a payable function, whereas offer and registramodel parameters θp back tion are non-payable. A particular dataset is registered through
14: end for the register function, which is the first step. Subsequently,
15: end for offers are generated and responded to the registered bid using
16: for each controller c ∈ C do the offer function.
17: c formulates an offer and posts it on B We conducted experiments involving multiple arbitrary data
18: c uploads updated data set specifications on I owners in the FL context. Our experimentation comprised
19: end for 70 rounds of transactions, each encompassing the complete
20: for each consumer s ∈ S do trading procedures, including bidding, offers exchanges, final-
21: if s accepts the offer then ization, and FL rounds.
22: s makes payment to c through a secure P2P channel Subsequently, we conducted a comprehensive comparative
 analysis between the proposed scheme and the approach
23: c and s exchange identity proofs via a secure P2P presented by [11]. The findings are presented in the subsequent
 channel figures. In our experiments, we accessed the privacy accuracy,
24: Identities are verified using the self-sovereign identity transaction latency, throughput, transaction efficiency, correla-
 (SSI) ledger tion, and analysis of variance. The subsequent sections delve
25: end if into the detailed outcomes of the proposed experiments.
26: end for
27: for each controller c ∈ C do A. Latency
28: c shares the final updated global model G ∗ with s via Latency is the time required for a transaction to be submita secure P2P channel ted, integrated into the blockchain, and validated. It can be
29: end for calculated using the following equation (2) [27].
30: for each controller c ∈ C do
 Latency = Cost/Throughput (2)
31: for each owner p ∈ P do
32: c compensates p after successful data sharing We measured the transaction latency for 70 rounds of
33: end for transactions carried out within our proposed model and com-
34: end for pared these results with the benchmark model [11] as shown
 in Fig. 5. The latency assessment is conducted through the
 system’s processor clock, particularly during key bidding
on B and upload G ∗ dataset specification to I (line 16-19). If phases like registration, offering, and finalization, utilizing the
S accepts an offer, They make a payment to C and exchange formula specified in equation (2).
identity proofs via a secure P2P channel and verify identities Fig. 5 clearly shows that the proposed model outperformed
via SSI ledger (lines 20-26). C share G ∗ with S via a secure the benchmark in terms of latency. The proposed model
P2P channel. Finally, C compensates the specific P for their achieved a lower average transaction latency of 4.0 seconds,
contribution and successful data-sharing (lines 27-34). while the benchmark model had a latency of 5.6 seconds. The
1174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 6. Throughput.

 Fig. 7. Base model accuracy vs. proposed model federated accuracy.
increase in latency with each subsequent transaction is due
to the direct relationship between latency and the number of
transactions. As the transaction count grows, the time required
to process each transaction increases, consequently elevating
the overall latency.

B. Throughput
 Throughput on a blockchain refers to the rate at which valid
transactions are processed per second (tps). It is calculated
using the equation (3).
 Throughput(TP) = execution cost/latency (3)
 To assess the efficiency of our proposed model, we measured TP for key procedures (offer, finalize, register) during
the experiment. This throughput was calculated using the Fig. 8. Base model accuracy vs. proposed model personnel accuracy.
formula outlined in Equation (3). To visualize the performance
improvement, Fig 6 comprehensively compares throughput
between our model and benchmark models, all processing 70 an individual model, whereas federated accuracy represents the
transactions. accuracy achieved when aggregating models from all clients
 Fig. 6 compares the benchmark model and the proposed to a global model.
model’s throughput, clearly showing that the proposed model The proposed scheme demonstrated an enhanced privacy
achieved a higher throughput than its counterpart. The accuracy of 85% in both personal and federated settings
proposed model achieved an average throughput of 10.23 compared to the approach presented by [11], which achieved
tps, while the benchmark model achieved a throughput of an accuracy of 49%. The improved accuracy in our proposed
8 tps. It is important to note that an inverse relationship models can be attributed to the robust training mechanism
exists between the number of transactions and throughput; employed in FL and the applied LDP, which enhances data
as the number of transactions increases, throughput tends to accuracy. Both LDP and FL are new methods that improve
decrease. Therefore, in each subsequent transaction, through- accuracy and ensure strong data privacy. The experiments for
put decreases in Fig. 6. the proposed model were executed within a Python Anaconda
 environment to implement FL and LDP.
C. Accuracy
 D. Transaction Efficiency
 Accuracy represents the mean of the accurate prediction
 Another performance metric for the proposed model is
produced by the model, as shown in equation (4).
 transaction efficiency (TE). It can be calculated using the
 Accuracy = (validtransactions)/(TotalTransactions) (4) following equation (5).
 Total Throughput
To evaluate the accuracy of the proposed scheme, we exper- TE = . (5)
imented with 70 iterations on three different IoT-connected Resource Consumption
device data. We employed LDP to preserve privacy while cal- Throughput is the total number of transactions the system
culating the scheme’s accuracy for both federated and personal performs in a specific time. Resource consumption refers to the
(individual) settings. The results are presented in Figs 8 and 7, specific resources consumed to perform the total throughput;
respectively, subsequently comparing these results with those here, resource consumption is the execution cost in the
obtained by [11]. Personal accuracy signifies the accuracy of form of gas used. In the experiment, transaction efficiency
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1175

Fig. 9. Throughput Transactions efficiency (TTE).

is evaluated for 70 rounds of transactions. Fig. 9 visually Fig. 10. Consistency of transaction throughput.
represents the transaction efficiency comparison between the
proposed and base models. The visual representation shows
that the proposed model has better transaction efficiency than
the base model. The successive decrease in efficiency for
each subsequent transaction is due to the inverse relationship
between transaction efficiency and latency.

E. Performance Consistency of Transaction Throughput
 Standard deviation is a statistical measure that quantifies
the degree of variation or dispersion within a dataset. It is an
essential tool in understanding the consistency of data. In the
context of transaction throughput, a lower standard deviation
indicates more consistent performance, while a higher standard
deviation signifies greater variability. The standard deviation
(σ ) is calculated using formula in equation (6):
  Fig. 11. Analysis for privacy loss ().
 
 1  N
 σ = (xi − μ)2 (6)
 N iterations, indicating a slower rate of privacy improvement. On
 i=1
 the other hand, the proposed model begins with a lower ()
where N is the number of throughput values, xi represents each
 value near 4.0 and decreases more rapidly to approximately 0.1
throughput value, and μ is the mean throughput.
 over the same number of iterations, as shown in Fig. 11. This
 The performance of the proposed and base models is comfaster reduction suggests a more effective privacy-preserving
pared by analyzing the standard deviation of their throughput
 mechanism in the proposed model than the base model.
values. The proposed model shows σ of approximately 8.34,
while the base model has a slightly lower σ of about 6.57,
as shown in Fig. 10. Although the proposed model exhibits G. Comparing Throughput-Latency Trade-off
higher variability, it generally achieves a higher throughput, In Fig. 12 comparing through and latency trade-offs
indicating better performance when peak throughput is priori- between the base and the proposed models, we observe clear
tized. This analysis suggests that the proposed model in terms differences in how they handle the transaction processing. The
of achieving a higher transaction throughput. base model consistently shows lower throughput values at
 various latency levels compared to the proposed model. This
F. Comparative Analysis of Privacy Loss () suggests the proposed model can handle more transactions per
 unit of time while keeping latency in check better than the
 Privacy Loss () is a metric used to quantify the amount
 base model.
of privacy leakage or risk in a system, particularly in the
context s involving data privacy and security. A lower ()
value indicates better privacy preservation, suggesting less H. 95th Percentile Latency Comparison
information leakage per transaction. In performance investigation, the 95th percentile latency is
 We observe distinct trends in comparing the performance of a metric demonstrating the latency value less which 95% of
the base and proposed models based on their privacy loss () latency amount falls. This measure is crucial for considering
values. The base model initially starts with a higher () value the worst-case performance scenarios that an arrangement
of around 4.5 and gradually decreases to about 0.6 over 70 strength counter. The bar chart in Fig. 13 compares the 95th
1176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 12. Throughput-latency Trade-off.

 Fig. 14. Comparison of Precision, Recall, and F1-Score.

 equation (8). The F1-Score is the harmonic mean of precision
 and recall, utilizing equation (9), providing a balance between
 the two metrics.
 TP
 Precision = (7)
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall = (8)
 TP + FN
 Precision × Recall
 F1-Score = 2 × (9)
 Precision + Recall
 The bar chart in Fig. 14 illustrates the precision, recall, and
 F1-Score for the Base and Proposed Model. The proposed
Fig. 13. 95th percentile latency. model outperforms the base model across all three metrics,
 with a precision of 0.89, a Recall of 0.93, and an F1-Score
 of 0.91. In contrast, the base model has a precision of 0.80,
percentile latencies of base and proposed models. The base a recall of 0.83, and an F-Score of 0.82. This shows that the
model shows a 95th percentile latency of nearly 9.32 sec- proposed model predicts more accurately and retrieves a higher
onds, while the proposed model demonstrates a lower 95th proportion of the actual positives, achieving a better balance
percentile latency of around 7.96 seconds. This specifies that between precision and recall.
the proposed model not only achieves in terms of average
latency but also preserves more reliable performance under J. Linear Regression
high-load circumstances. The lower 95th percentile latency of 1) Correlation: The correlation coefficient (commonly
the proposed model recommends it can holder the widely hold denoted as r ) between variables X and Y in a dataset with
of the transactions more efficiently, making it a more robust n pairs of observations can be calculated using the following
excellent for applications with low latency responses. equation (10).
  n  n 
 n ni=1 (Xi Yi ) − i=1 Xi i=1 Yi
I. Comparison of Precision, Recall and F1-Score r=
  n 2  n 2
 In assessing the machine learning models, precision, recall, n ni=1 Xi2 − i=1 Xi n ni=1 Yi2 − i=1 Yi
and F1-score are crucial to measure the performance widely.
 (10)
Precision is the ratio of the true positive prediction to the
total number of predictions, demonstrative the accuracy of the X, Y: Variables for which correlation is being calculated
positive prediction, and can be considered using equation (7). : The summation symbol.
Recall is the ratio of the true positive prediction to the total n: Present the number of data points.
number of actual positives, imitating the model’s capability XY: Product of X and Y.
to recognize all the appropriate occurrences as shown in XY: Sum of the products of X and Y.
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1177

 TABLE III
 C ORRELATION M ATRIX FOR T HROUGHPUT (P ROPOSED M ODEL )

 TABLE IV
 A NALYSIS OF VARIANCE FOR T HROUGHPUT (P ROPOSED M ODEL )

Fig. 15. Throughput-based model correlation with explanatory variables. Fig. 16. Throughput proposed model correlation with explanatory variables.

 X, Y: Sum of X values and Y values, respectively.
 2) Analysis of Variance (ANOVA): ANOVA employs the Fstatistic to assess the significance of variation between group
means relative to variation within groups. One-way ANOVA
calculates the F-statistics as in equation (11).

 MSbetween
 F= (11)
 MSwithin

 The general steps for calculating ANOVA involve computing the sum of squares. The degree of freedom and mean
square are used to compute the F-statistic. Fig. 17. Latency-based model correlation with explanatory variables.
 Throughput Proposed Model: The R2 value indicates that
73% of the variability in the dependent variable, Proposed
Model, is explained by the three explanatory variables. P- accuracy with benchmark model accuracy, personal accuvalue of the F-statistic from the ANOVA table and a sig-level racy, and throughput base model is weakly positive, strongly
of 5%, the explanatory variables provide significantly more positive, and weak negative, respectively. The relationship
explanatory power than a basic mean. This highlights the between benchmark model accuracy and personal accuracy
substantial contribution of the explanatory variables to the and throughput base model is weak and negative. In contrast,
model. the personal accuracy and throughput base models have a
 Latency Proposed Model: The R-squared value indicates strong positive relationship.
that 49% of the variability in the dependent variable, the Fig. 16 shows the correlation for the throughput of the
Proposed Model, is explained by the three explanatory vari- proposed model. The proposed model has weak negative,
ables. P-value of the F-statistic in the ANOVA IV and a personal, and benchmark model accuracy, which has a weak
significance level of 5%, the explanatory variables provide positive relation with federated accuracy.
significantly more information than a basic mean. Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 show the correlation between the
 Fig. 15 shows the correlation for the throughput of the latency of the base and the proposed model, respectively.
base model. Fig shows that the relationship of federated In Fig. 17 benchmark model accuracy has a weak negative,
1178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE V
 C ORRELATION M ATRIX FOR L ATENCY (P ROPOSED M ODEL )

 TABLE VI
 A NALYSIS OF VARIANCE FOR L ATENCY (P ROPOSED M ODEL )

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON TABLE FOR BASE AND P ROPOSED S CHEME

 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE P ROSPECTS
 This research introduces a resilient, secure, and zerotrust architecture for exchanging sensitive information in IoT
 networks, ensuring the highest level of privacy preservation
 throughout the process. The approach integrates a robust P2P
 communication channel to guarantee the safe transmission of
 sensitive data. FL empowers models to operate locally and
 precisely on the data owner’s side, avoiding the need for central data aggregation. LDP further fortifies privacy by offering
 robust guarantees to each user during data collection and analysis. In the proposed framework, data owners have exclusive
Fig. 18. Latency proposed model correlation with explanatory variables. authority over implementing LDP, ensuring robust data privacy
 protection within a zero-trust architecture for sharing their
 data sets. Blockchain technology, which fosters a decentralized
while personal accuracy and latency have a strong positive environment, effectively eliminates the vulnerability of a single
relationship with federated accuracy. The latency base model point of failure. The blockchain meticulously records the
has a weak negative, and personal accuracy has a strong pos- registration of different entities, bids, offers, and prices, while
itive relation with benchmark model accuracy. Latency-based the data set specifications are saved in a decentralized file
models and personal accuracy have a weak negative relation. system, i.e., IPFS. The proposed architecture’s fundamen-
In Fig. 18, the benchmark model and personal accuracy have a tal performance metrics revolve around throughput, latency,
weak positive, while the latency proposed model has a strong privacy, accuracy, ANOVAN, and correlation matrix, all of
positive relation with federated accuracy. The latency proposed which are essential for ensuring its effectiveness. The results
model has weak negative and personal accuracy and a strong of our comparison metrics indicate the proposed model’s
positive relationship with benchmark model accuracy. Latency significant advantages over the base-scheme model. We intend
proposed model and personal accuracy have a weak negative to explore the integration of quantum cryptography to enhance
relation. data security further. Additionally, we plan to investigate
 the application of advanced machine-learning techniques to
 improve the accuracy and efficiency of our models. Further
K. Comparison Table studies will also focus on optimizing performance metrics
 In Table VII, we provide a side-by-side comparison of the to ensure scalability in larger environments and leveraging
base scheme, referenced from [11], and our proposed scheme, generative AI to create synthetic datasets for more robust
highlighting key performance metrics and security features. model training and validation.
HUSSAIN et al.: ENSURING ZERO TRUST IOT DATA PRIVACY: DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN BLOCKCHAIN USING FL 1179

 R EFERENCES [21] B. Zaabar, O. Cheikhrouhou, F. Jamil, M. Ammi, and M. Abid,
 “Healthblock: A secure blockchain-based healthcare data management
 [1] T. Magara and Y. Zhou, “Internet of Things (IoT) of smart homes: system,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 108500.
 Privacy and security,” J. Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 2024, no. 1, 2024, [22] A. El Ouadrhiri and A. Abdelhadi, “Differential privacy for deep and
 Art. no. 7716956. federated learning: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 22359–22380,
 [2] L. Y. Rock, F. P. Tajudeen, and Y. W. Chung, “Usage and impact of 2022.
 the internet-of-things-based smart home technology: A quality-of-life [23] C. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Bai, B. Yu, W. Li, and Y. Gao, “A survey
 perspective,” Univers. Access Inf. Soc., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 345–364, on federated learning,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 216, Mar. 2021,
 2024. Art. no. 106775.
 [3] T. Wang, S. Zhang, Q. Yang, and S. C. Liew, “Account service network: [24] T. Zhang, L. Gao, C. He, M. Zhang, B. Krishnamachari, and
 A unified decentralized web 3.0 portal with credible anonymity,” IEEE A. S. Avestimehr, “Federated learning for the Internet of Things:
 Netw., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 101–108, Nov. 2023. Applications, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Internet Things Mag.,
 [4] A. A. Abba Ari, O. K. Ngangmo, C. Titouna, O. Thiare, A. Mohamadou, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 24–29, Mar. 2022.
 and A. M. Gueroui, “Enabling privacy and security in cloud of
 [25] H. Cheng, T. Lu, R. Hao, J. Li, and Q. Ai, “Incentive-based demand
 things: Architecture, applications, security & privacy challenges,” Appl.
 response optimization method based on federated learning with a
 Comput. Informat., vol. 20, nos. 1–2, pp. 119–141, 2024.
 focus on user privacy protection,” Appl. Energy, vol. 358, Mar. 2024,
 [5] Z. Liu, Z. Xu, X. Zheng, Y. Zhao, and J. Wang, “3D path planning in
 Art. no. 122570.
 threat environment based on fuzzy logic,” J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 46,
 [26] B. Kaur et al., “Internet of Things (IoT) security dataset evolution:
 no. 3, pp. 7021–7034, 2024.
 Challenges and future directions,” Internet Things, vol. 2, Jul. 2023,
 [6] D. Han et al., “LMCA: A lightweight anomaly network traffic detec-
 Art. no. 100780.
 tion model integrating adjusted mobilenet and coordinate attention
 [27] L. Javed, A. Anjum, B. M. Yakubu, M. Iqbal, S. A. Moqurrab,
 mechanism for IoT,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 549–564,
 and G. Srivastava, “Sharechain: Blockchain-enabled model for sharing
 2023.
 patient data using federated learning and differential privacy,” Expert
 [7] C. Ni, L. S. Cang, P. Gope, and G. Min, “Data anonymization evaluation
 Syst., vol. 40, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. e13131.
 for big data and IoT environment,” Inf. Sci., vol. 605, pp. 381–392,
 [28] P. Tiwari, A. Lakhan, R. H. Jhaveri, and T.-M. Grønli, “Consumer-
 Aug. 2022.
 centric Internet of Medical Things for cyborg applications based on
 [8] M. N. Khan, H. U. Rahman, T. Hussain, B. Yang, and S. M. Qaisar,
 federated reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 “Enabling trust in automotive IoT: Lightweight mutual authenvol. 69, no. 4, pp. 756–764, Nov. 2023.
 tication scheme for electronic connected devices in Internet of
 [29] M. Kamrul Hasan et al., “A review on security threats, vulnerabilities,
 Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 6, 2024,
 and counter measures of 5G enabled Internet-of-Medical-Things,” IET
 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2024.3410300.
 Commun., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 421–432, 2022.
 [9] P. Panahi, C. Bayilmis, U. Çavusoglu, and S. Kaçar, “Performance
 [30] W. N. Price and I. G. Cohen, “Privacy in the age of medical big
 evaluation of lightweight encryption algorithms for IoT-based applicadata,” Nat. Med., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 37–43, 2019.
 tions,” Arab. J. Sci. Eng., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 4015–4037, 2021.
[10] J. Guo, M. Yang, and B. Wan, “A practical privacy-preserving publishing [31] K. Miyachi and T. K. Mackey, “hOCBS: A privacy-preserving
 mechanism based on personalized k-anonymity and temporal differential blockchain framework for healthcare data leveraging an on-chain and
 privacy for wearable IoT applications,” Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1043, off-chain system design,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 58, no. 3, 2021,
 2021. Art. no. 102535.
[11] M. Rodriguez-Garcia, M. A. Sicilia, and J. M. Dodero, “A privacy- [32] K. Dev, I. Chih-Lin, and S. A. Khowaja, “Guest editorial DENSE—Data
 preserving design for sharing demand-driven patient datasets over integrity, integration and security issues for consumer data in industry
 permissioned blockchains and P2P secure transfer,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 809–812,
 vol. 7, p. e568, Jun. 2021. Nov. 2023.
[12] B. B. Mehta and U. P. Rao, “Improved l-diversity: scalable anonymiza- [33] S. Das and S. Namasudra, “A novel hybrid encryption method to secure
 tion approach for privacy preserving big data publishing,” J. King Saud healthcare data in IoT-enabled healthcare infrastructure,” Comput. Elect.
 Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1423–1430, 2022. Eng., vol. 101, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 107991.
[13] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A comprehensive survey of [34] M. Fareed and A. A. Yassin, “Privacy-preserving multi-factor authenprivacy-preserving federated learning: A taxonomy, review, and tication and role-based access control scheme for the e-healthcare
 future directions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–36, system,” Bull. Electr. Eng. Informat., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2131–2141,
 2021. 2022.
[14] N. Deepa et al., “A survey on blockchain for big data: Approaches, [35] A. M. Said, A. Yahyaoui, and T. Abdellatif, “Efficient anomaly detection
 opportunities, and future directions,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., for smart hospital iot systems,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 4, p. 1026, 2021.
 vol. 131, pp. 209–226, Jun. 2022. [36] L. Zhang, J. Xu, P. Vijayakumar, P. K. Sharma, and U. Ghosh,
[15] E. B. Fernandez and A. Brazhuk, “A critical analysis of zero trust “Homomorphic encryption-based privacy-preserving federated learning
 architecture (ZTA),” Comput. Stand. Interfaces, vol. 89, Apr. 2024, in IoT-enabled healthcare system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10,
 Art. no. 103832. no. 5, pp. 2864–2880, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[16] S. M. Awan, M. A. Azad, J. Arshad, U. Waheed, and T. Sharif, “A [37] Y. Zhuang, C. R. Shyu, S. Hong, P. Li, and L. Zhang, “Selfblockchain-inspired attribute-based zero-trust access control model for sovereign identity empowered non-fungible patient tokenization for
 IoT,” Information, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 129, 2023. health information exchange using blockchain technology,” Comput.
[17] K. Yu, L. Tan, M. Aloqaily, H. Yang, and Y. Jararweh, “Blockchain- Biol. Med., vol. 157, May 2023, Art. no. 106778.
 enhanced data sharing with traceable and direct revocation in [38] T. Lenard and R. Bolboaca, “A statefull firewall and intrusion
 IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7669–7678, detection system enforced with secure logging for controller area
 Nov. 2021. network,” in Proc. Eur. Interdiscipl. Cybersecur. Conf., 2021, pp. 39–45.
[18] S. Shi, D. Han, and M. Cui, “A multimodal hybrid parallel network [39] M. Ahtesham, “Bigdata applications in healthcare: Security and privacy
 intrusion detection model,” Connect. Sci., vol. 35, no. 1, 2023, challenges,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Technol. Appl., 2022, pp. 231–240.
 Art. no. 2227780. [40] R. Bagai, E. Weber, and V. T. Gowda, “Data sanitization for t-closeness
[19] X. Qin, Y. Huang, Z. Yang, and X. Li, “A blockchain-based over multiple numerical sensitive attributes,” Trans. Data Priv.,, vol. 16,
 access control scheme with multiple attribute authorities for no. 3, pp. 191–210, 2023.
 secure cloud data sharing,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 112, Jan. 2021, [41] K. Oishi, Y. Sei, Y. Tahara, and A. Ohsuga, “Semantic diversity: Privacy
 Art. no. 101854. considering distance between values of sensitive attribute,” Comput.
[20] I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, and Y. Al-Hammadi, “Blockchain Secur., vol. 94, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 101823.
 for healthcare data management: opportunities, challenges, and future [42] M. Samaniego and R. Deters, “Zero-trust hierarchical management
 recommendations,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 34, pp. 11475–11490, in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr. Internet Things (ICIOT), 2018,
 Jul. 2022. pp. 88–95, doi: 10.1109/ICIOT.2018.00019.