IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025 3711

 ERFS: Efficient Feature Graph Representation for
 Intrusion Detection Based on Flow
 Semantic Association
 Yiqing Luo , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojuan Wang

 Abstract—The detection of network threats remains a fun- I. I NTRODUCTION
damental task in cyberspace defense. Graphs are capable of YBERSPACE has become the second realm of human
capturing rich structural information and retaining content
information. They are widely applicable in the field of threat
detection. However, existing graph-based threat detection meth-
 C existence. Its security concerns have emerged as a new
 focal point of national interests. With the rapid advancement
ods are computationally complex and challenging to apply of the Internet and the widespread adoption of information
in real-world network scenarios, where topologies may be technology, businesses, organizations, and individuals are
incomplete or invisible. To address this, we propose ERFS, increasingly confronted with cybersecurity threats. These
an efficient feature graph representation method for intrusion
detection based on flow semantic correlation. This method aims
 threats include a wide range of malicious activities, such
to enhance the feature representation of network behavior. The as hacker intrusions, phishing attempts, malware infections,
proposed method first constructs a semantic correlation graph data breaches, among others. These activities result in sigto depict the inherent semantic relationships within and between nificant financial and reputational damage for the victims.
network flows. This is followed by the use of a messaging As a result, detecting and uncovering threat behaviors is
network to update and learn the information of graph nodes.
The updated nodes are then aggregated into flow-level semantic
 crucial to safeguarding cyberspace. Within the vast data flow
feature representations for node classification, thereby achieving carried by network activities, a notable characteristic is its
threat detection. The key innovation of this approach lies in immense scale, extensive temporal and spatial spans, and
graph construction and learning. The semantic correlation graph widespread distribution. At the same time, malicious behaviors
is constructed based on contextual correlation features and does use encryption, fragmentation, obfuscation, and disguise to
not rely on topological information. It addresses the existing
dependency issue of traditional graph construction methods on
 deeply hide within this massive data deluge. This makes it
network topology. On the other hand, it introduces a small- exceedingly difficult to directly identify threatening behaviors
window learning mechanism and a global sharing mechanism for through raw network flow data analysis.
edge weights. These mechanisms enable graph learning within To effectively differentiate between normal and abnormal
a small-window range while globally sharing representations network traffic, feature extraction and application have become
of identical nodes and edge weight values. It also addresses
challenges in current graph construction methods, such as high
 essential. Features serve as crucial indicators for determining
computational complexity and low efficiency. Furthermore, the the normalcy of network traffic. They can also accurately
evaluation results indicate that this method achieved classification identify abnormal patterns, malicious behaviors, and potential
accuracies of 99.99%, 98.81%, 100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% on five threats, thereby providing a solid foundation for threat detecpublic datasets (CIC IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019, tion. Feature extraction converts complex raw data into a more
USTC-TFC2016, and ISCX VPN-nonVPN), respectively. These
results surpass those of existing advanced models. The code is
 representative and easily processed form. This significantly
available on: https://github.com/sixteen23333/ERFS. enhances the efficiency of threat behavior recognition and
 detection. Among these, graph-based network behavior feature
 Index Terms—Threat detection, high efficiency, semantic association graphs, global sharing mechanisms. representation methods are widely used in the field of threat
 detection. By representing the internal semantic relationships
 of network flows as a graph structure, behavior can be
 analyzed accordingly. Compared to raw data, graph structures
 Received 2 October 2024; revised 18 December 2024 and 11 February provide a more robust and abstract system view, making
2025; accepted 13 February 2025. Date of publication 18 February 2025; it more difficult for attackers to evade detection. Moreover,
date of current version 10 December 2025. This work was supported by the graphs provide richer semantics than raw data by preserving
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62402053 and
62227805. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and valuable relational information.
approving it for publication was C.-H. Lee. (Corresponding author: Mingshu The current methods for representing network behavior
He.) using graph structures still face certain limitations in terms
 Yiqing Luo is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: luoy- of both graph construction and scope. In the compositional
iqing@bupt.edu.cn). approach, existing graph-based flow detection methods focus
 Mingshu He and Xiaojuan Wang are with the School of Cyberspace on learning node representations and aggregating messages
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn; wj2718@bupt.edu.cn). in networks with known topologies [1], [2], [3]. However,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3543357 in practical applications, network topologies are often not
 2332-7731 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

readily available [4]. For instance, social networks may have between flows. The proposed correlation features reveal
incomplete or unmeasurable structures. Regarding the com- the behavioral semantic characteristics of each type of
position range, current methods typically involve constructing network flow, which can serve as “fingerprints” to differa graph for the entire database [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. This entiate them. Unlike existing graph construction methods
approach facilitates better extraction of global features at the that focus on connection information during transmission,
spatial level. Nevertheless, it also presents challenges related to this method emphasizes the semantic feature representacomputational complexity and time consumption, particularly tion of flow data. As a result, it reduces dependency on
due to the large number of edges. network topology and is suitable for real-world scenarios
 In summary, we face two key challenges: (1) How to where topology is either invisible or incomplete.
construct graph structures that represent behavioral association • To address the issues of low efficiency in existing graph
relationships in the presence of incomplete network topolo- construction methods, we propose a global sharing mechgies. (2) How to improve learning and testing efficiency of anism for edge weights and a learning mechanism for a
approaches that construct graphs based on entire databases. small window. This approach involves globally sharing
 To effectively tackle the task of threat detection and the representations and edge weights of identical nodes
address the aforementioned challenges, this paper focuses and generating a graph structure for each network flow.
on improving the composition method and graph learning Additionally, it connects byte nodes within a smaller
approach. Regarding composition, a consistent correlation window in the flow data, rather than directly and fully
between network flow data and network behavior has been connecting all byte nodes in the database. Evaluation
observed across various scenarios. The content correlation results demonstrate that this method achieves high accuwithin flow data reflects underlying behavioral patterns, racy rates with minimal iterative training requirements. It
regardless of topological transmission information. Therefore, also ensures fast iteration training processes.
we aim to reduce reliance on the topological information of • This method has been evaluated on five public datasets,
graph structure and instead explore network flow behavior which include data from the Internet, the Internet of
characteristics through dimensions such as contextual rele- Things (IoT), and the encrypted Internet. The results
vance and semantic features. In terms of graph learning, demonstrate its ability to effectively detect threats in
current methods often require recalculating node information various scenarios. It exhibits exceptional performance
during testing. This adds complexity, consumes time, and in the IoT detection scenario, achieving a remarkable
leads to poor generalization. To address this, our efforts focus detection accuracy of 100%. Furthermore, the extracted
on facilitating information sharing between the training and semantic correlation features exhibit a distinctive recognitesting processes. This allows the knowledge acquired from tion capability for various network threat behaviors. Each
training nodes to be generalized to testing nodes without the of these behaviors has unique behavioral and spatiotemneed for recalculation during the testing phase. As a result, poral characteristics. These threat behaviors include brute
efficiency is improved and application costs are reduced. force, HULK, DoS, DDoS, and other types of attacks.
 Building on the ideas outlined above, this paper proposes an The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
intrusion detection method based on flow semantic correlation. Section II outlines the motivation, contributions, and model
Unlike existing approaches that focus solely on connection design considerations for adopting semantic analysis ideas in
information, this method starts with the original flow data and threat detection. Section III describes the overall architecture
treats it as a specialized language. By analyzing the structural and design of the semantic association graph-based behavsimilarity between flow data and text data, we construct a ior analysis model. Section IV evaluates and validates the
semantic association graph to reveal underlying behavioral proposed model and discusses and analyzes the experimental
patterns in the network flow. Based on the constructed seman- structure. Section V presents the conclusions and discusses
tic association graph, this study aims to address the issues future work.
of complex calculations and low efficiency in existing graph
learning methods. To achieve this, we design a global sharing
mechanism for edge weights and a small-window learning
 II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
mechanism. The global sharing mechanism enables the sharing
of node representations and edge weights, eliminating the need A. Background
for recalculation during testing. Furthermore, by treating each In existing cyberspace, it can be divided into public
flow as a window unit, graph learning and updating unfold on networks and dedicated networks for different scenarios based
a smaller scale based on messaging networks. on the visibility of network flows, as shown in Fig. 1. The
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows. topology structure of the nodes in the private networks is
 • This paper proposes an efficient feature graph representa- invisible, and the private networks are connected to each other
 tion method for intrusion detection based on the semantic through the topology nodes of the public networks. In such a
 correlation of network flows. Drawing on the similarity scenario, the detection and discovery of network threats can
 between network flow data and natural language, the only be achieved by collecting and detecting flows on the
 concept of semantic analysis is applied to network threat public network topology path, and then tracing the source to
 detection. Using semantic features as the foundation, find the initial threat effector node to contain and block the
 the method learns and analyzes the semantic correlation spread and development of threats.
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3713

Fig. 1. The application scenarios and motivational ideas of this method.

 Due to the invisibility of dedicated networks and the flow. As for space, considering the effectiveness and efficiency
potential topological incompleteness, obtaining transmission of graph learning, we seek to use edge weight sharing to assign
information such as IP addresses and ports poses a significant global information to the data node representation in each
challenge. However, the majority of existing graph-based flow, thereby obviating the necessity for recalculating node
threat detection methods rely on network topology structures representations during testing while maximizing effectiveness
that encompass IP addresses and port details. While IP and efficiency. By learning the semantic association graph
address and port information offer robust behavioral indicators constructed in this way, we can obtain the representation of
for distinguishing network traffic from diverse sources and each byte, and then restore the semantic representation of each
destinations, they may not effectively fulfill threat detection network flow to determine behavior.
tasks in scenarios where acquiring topological information
proves challenging. For example, Zhang et al. [9] constructed
a traffic trajectory map with traffic as nodes, with the edges B. Related Work
being a combination of IP addresses and ports; Ge et al. [10] 1) Research on Network Flow Detection Based on Context
constructed a traffic behavior graph and defined nodes based Features: Network threats are often not isolated, but rather
on tuples of target IP and ports; Deng et al. [11] transformed associated with a series of related events or behaviors.
the topological structure of flows into graphical representations By extracting contextual features from network flows, the
for graph learning. correlation and dependency between these events or behav-
 Therefore, graph based threat detection methods need to iors can be revealed, thus providing a more comprehensive
break away from the dependence on topological information representation of network behavior. In existing research on
and mine network behavior as features from another dimen- context-based network flow detection, based on the method of
sion. Simultaneously, endeavors are imperative to enhance feature extraction, it can be divided into two categories: using
graph computation and learning methodologies in order to specific methods to extract features and using specific model
bolster efficiency and mitigate the cost associated with method algorithms to extract features.
application. Some studies have utilized text analysis techniques, such
 From the initial network flow data, we have observed a as N-Gram, TF-IDF, and PMI, for network flow detecconsistent correlation between network flow data and network tion to extract contextual features. Wang et al. [12], [13]
behavior across various scenarios. The intrinsic correlation employed the N-Gram word segmentation method for extractwithin the flow data itself and among different flows reflects ing semantic features in classification, demonstrating effective
underlying behavioral patterns, independent of topological identification of malicious flows with minimal false alarms.
transmission information. Building upon this observation, our AlEroud and Karabatis [14] incorporated time and locastudy aims to investigate the correlational features present tion information in flow analysis to establish semantic links
within and between the original flow data. Time and spa- between suspicious activities and generate a semantic link
tial characteristics have been widely proven to have good network for preliminary prediction of suspicious nodes.
representativeness for behavior. In terms of time series, we However, the aforementioned research still exhibits limitations
attempt to explore the correlation between data within each in terms of granularity and breadth of contextual feature
flow to describe the semantic composition structure of each learning; for instance, AlEroud et al.’s study is constrained by
3714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

a narrow scope of feature extraction focused on network flows Some studies are dedicated to examining the overall charactransmitted between the same nodes, resulting in coarse feature teristics and structural properties of graphs. Cao et al. [20]
granularity that fails to capture complete flow information. and Duan et al. [21] simultaneously consider the embed-
 In addition, several studies employ specific machine learn- ding features of graph structure in both time and space
ing and deep learning models or algorithms to analyze time dimensions. In their study, Cao et al. [20] utilized data
series data and uncover contextual features, such as RNN plane programmable SDN and in-band network telemetry to
and LSTM. Dai et al. [15] proposed a novel cross-modal sample and perceive the state of switches. They inputted
fusion model CMFTC that achieves superior performance this network state into a spatiotemporal graph convolutional
through the integration of packet-level features, context, and detection model to accurately identify the switches through
flow-level patterns, with the extraction of contextual features which DDoS attacks pass. Duan et al. [21] proposed a semibased on packet-level features using stacked extractors con- supervised intrusion detection method utilizing the dynamic
sisting of multiple blocks. Gao et al. [16] addressed the line graph neural network to transform the network flow into
anomaly detection issue in IoT scenarios by introducing a sequence of spatio-temporal graphs. This approach employs
a memory mechanism to suppress the model’s generaliza- Dynamic GNN to extract spatial information from individual
tion ability and designing a memory-enhanced time series discrete snapshots and capture the contextual evolution of
autoencoder (TSMAE), which incorporates long short-term communication between IP pairs across consecutive snapshots.
memory (LSTM) for decoding and encoding time series data Hu et al. [22] proposed a novel early network intrusion
to obtain contextual features. Li et al. [17] obtained initial detection method, Graph2vec+RF, which is based on graph
feature representations of payloads based on word embedding embedding technology. This approach involves constructing a
methods and subsequently proposed a network flow context flow graph for each bidirectional network flow from initial
learning algorithm for payload detection. Ling et al. [18] and interactive packets and utilizing graph embedding technology
Wu et al. [19] utilized image transformation of network flow to learn vector representations of the flow graphs, followed
data to conduct a comprehensive analysis of semantic rela- by classification using random forest. Wang et al. [23]
tionships within the graph. Their experiments demonstrated proposed a hybrid analysis model BotMark for detecting
that models incorporating graph semantic relationships outper- zombie networks, which extracted 15 statistical flow-based
formed those focusing solely on graph structural information. traffic features and 3 graph-based features. The behaviour was
Ling et al. [18] employed hierarchical learning to represent analyzed through a combination of detection results based
executable files by capturing the structural semantics of each on similarity score, stability score, and anomaly score. In
function, while Wu et al. [19] applied BERT and Graph addition, some studies focus on the relationship between
Isomorphism Network (GIN-JK) to capture both semantic nodes to form graph embeddings. Zhao et al. [6] specifically
and structural characteristics of control flow graphs. Although focused on the detection of robots and constructed a multithese representations effectively capture local behavioral pat- attribute heterogeneous graph by modeling IP, response, and
terns over time, they may overlook spatial global information other network flow objects. They employed a node embedding
in network behavior analysis. method based on weight learning to understand the interaction
 In conclusion, the context features offer a more comprehen- patterns among robots and incorporated them into a weighted
sive representation of online behaviors. Nevertheless, current similarity graph. Finally, the heterogeneous graph was input
feature extraction methods still possess certain limitations in into a graph convolutional model for learning.
terms of the scope and dimensionality of features. Some stud- As for graph learning methods, the traditional GCN model
ies solely concentrate on the contextual features of individual is still one of the mainstream learning models. Current
online flows, with feature dimensions restricted to time while research focuses on improving classic models and comdisregarding spatial global information. bining multiple models to embed node and topological
 2) Research on Graph-Based Network Flow Detection: structure information more effectively. Zheng et al. [5]
Graphs often provide a good description of the global relation- developed a modified GCN model for detecting encrypted
ships in hierarchical structures. In graph-based methods, most malicious traffic, utilizing IP addresses as nodes and flows
of them construct heterogeneous relationship graphs based as edges to construct a traffic trajectory graph. They also
on the topological structure between network flow, and use employed an enhanced GCN to effectively capture and learn
graph learning models to train and classify heterogeneous the structural and attribute information within the graph.
graphs, as shown in Table I. Considering the focal points Chen et al. [24], Chen et al. [25], and Shen et al. [26]
of existing research, we will analyze from two perspectives: combined multiple neural network models to jointly extract
graph embedding features and graph learning methods. graph structure features. Chen et al. [24] utilized a transformer-
 In terms of graph embedding features, effectively inputting based architecture for automatic learning of graph structures,
high-dimensional graph structures into neural networks graph convolutions, and modeling time-dependent relationand other learning models is challenging. Therefore, ships. They introduced influence-propagation convolution in
existing research designs graph embedding to discover graph learning and proposed multi-branch attention techniques
low-dimensional vector representations of high-dimensional to enhance inference speed. Chen et al. [25] introduced
graphs, achieving dimensionality reduction and representation a novel flow-graph expression model WFF, which involves
of the graph structure by extracting features such as the the transformation of bidirectional flows into graphs based
overall structure of the graph and relationships between nodes. on Markov properties within flows. The proposed model
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3715

 TABLE I
 A NALYSIS OF E XISTING G RAPH BASED T HREAT D ETECTION M ETHODS

implements WFF-based classification using graph convolution the representation of x after learning updates by the messaging
networks, gated graph neural networks, and capsule graph network. During the training and testing process, separate
neural networks, respectively. Shen et al. [26] developed traffic semantic correlation graphs will be constructed for the training
interaction graphs using bidirectional client-server interaction data and testing data. In the training phase, this approach
features and employed multilayer perceptrons to construct involves inputting the constructed semantic correlation graph
GNN-based classifiers. into an information propagation network for learning, and
 In summary, the majority of current graph-based flow saving the updated byte node representations and byte-byte
detection methods commence from the perspective of flows edge weight information in shared representation matrices
and packets, analyzing the spatiotemporal relationships of and shared weight matrices. During the testing phase, the
observed flows in the network over a period of time and semantic correlation graph constructed for the test data will
representing flows as graph structures. With regards to graph acquire corresponding information from the shared represenembedding, existing methods predominantly rely on spa- tation matrices and shared weight matrices as initial node
tiotemporal features for identifying flows, which is somewhat representations and edge weights. These will then be input into
reliable but entails computing statistical features for each an information propagation network for learning, aggregating
individual flow, resulting in a limited effective range for flow the updated byte node representations into a flow-level feature
detection. In terms of graph learning, current methods often representation for classification. The overall system diagram
utilize unimproved classic graph learning models such as and flowchart are shown in Fig. 3.
GCN, which tends to exhibit high complexity issues.
 A. Unified Data Representation
 III. M ETHODOLOGY Based on semantic analysis, certain pre-processing opera-
 The model mainly comprises a semantic association graph tions must first be performed on the network flow data to
and messaging network, as shown in Fig. 2. This method realize treating the flow data as text data and then classifying
performs a unified and standardized semantic field-slicing them based on their semantic association features.
process on the network flow based on the characteristics of According to the heavy-tailed feature of Internet traffic, we
its original semantic structure. Then, for each network flow, use the data from the previous part of each flow to analyze the
a graph structure containing semantic association relations data effectively. Therefore, in this method, we plan to use the
is constructed with the smallest unit, the byte, as the gran- first 500 bytes of data in each flow to make the technique more
ularity and the packet as the feature extraction unit. The efficient while ensuring the validity of the data. In similarity to
node representation and edge weights are shared through a the procedures followed by Wang et al. [13] and Li et al. [17],
global sharing mechanism. Subsequently, the message passing we will adopt the strategy of directly utilizing the original
mechanism (MPM) is used to update and learn the graph flow hexadecimal number sequence data to maintain the data’s
node feature information, and the self-attention tool is used to semantic and content integrity. For graph structures, when the
aggregate the updated node features into flow-level semantic length of a flow data exceeds or equals 500 bytes, we will
feature representations, thereby completing behavior detection truncate it and directly capture the first 500 bytes of data.
and recognition. In Fig. 2, nodes of different colors represent Data that is more minor than 500 bytes will not be processed
additional semantic data of network traffic, the solid black at this time. Additionally, to further simulate scenarios with
lines between nodes are byte data edges, and R(x) represents incomplete network topology in real networks, we removed
3716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. Model architecture.

Fig. 3. Overall system diagram and flowchart.

the MAC address information in the data link layer and the avoiding connection features in network flow transmission and
IP address information in the IP layer to achieve anonymity. instead start from raw flow data to represent the persistent data
 The traditional view of network traffic examines packets as correlation between network behaviors using a graph structure.
a collection of higher-level headers such as IP, TCP, and UDP. Based on the similarity between text data structure and flow
Each header has semantic fields, such as IP time to live, TCP data structure, we use text analysis ideas to construct the
port number, and UDP length fields. The standard semantic graph.
representation of network traffic collects these semantic fields Based on the inherent correlation between network flow
into a single representation. We propose a data slicing method and behaviour, it is observed that flows within the same
to make semantic analysis more applicable in network threat behaviour category exhibit certain similarities at the data level.
detection. This method preserves the original semantics of Considering the structural characteristics of flow data, we
the network flows, maximizing the possibility of maintaining propose to employ semantic analysis methods to investigate
the original data structure while standardizing the processing the correlation between data. Text analysis is a method used
of the flow data structure, as shown in Fig. 4. To better in the fields of natural language processing and computational
characterize the semantic structure of the network flow, we linguistics, with the goal of achieving a comprehensive underretain the original semantic structure of the packet headers standing and interpretation of textual data through techniques
and perform the word separation process accordingly, and for such as statistics, pattern recognition, and machine learning.
the payload content, we slice and dice using a fixed window Previous studies have utilized text analysis methods to explore
size Wd . features related to behavioural relationships [12], [13], [27],
 [28]. Recent studies have uncovered a significant resemblance
 between flow protocol data, mobile flow data, and natural
B. Semantic Association Map language [13], [27]. The n-gram word sequences in flow
 Combining the limitations of existing graph-based threat exhibit highly skewed frequency rank distributions similar to
detection methods in feature construction, we first consider those found in natural language [13]. As a result, it is viable
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3717

Fig. 4. Unified expression form for network flow data (payload slice with fixed window size N=2 for example).

to consider flow data as text data for the purpose of text anal- and the gathered information. The process of message-passing
ysis, enabling extraction of fine-grained semantic information can be formulated as follows:
contained within the flow for behaviour identification. For
 Mn = maxp ean va . (3)
instance, features such as transmission time and packet length a∈Nn
can be derived from packet header data, while behavioural vn = (1 − ωn )Mn + ωn vn . (4)
content features can be extracted from the overall structure of
payload data. Mn is the message received by node n from its neighbors;
 For each network flow, based on its smallest unit, bytes, we max is a reduction function that combines the maximum
model the entire corpus of flow data and construct a semantic values in each dimension to form a new vector as the output.
 p
association graph with byte data as nodes and their contextual Nn denotes the node with the p words closest to n in the
association relations as edges, using the flow as a unit. original text. ean is the edge weight from node a to node n,
 Each byte in a packet is treated as a node, and edges are which can be updated during training; vn denotes the previous
constructed between adjacent nodes. Furthermore, to address representation of node n. ωn is the node n which is a trainable
the poor scalability and high complexity of traditional graph variable that indicates how much vn information should be
learning models, we globally share exact node representations retained. vn denotes the updated representation of node n.
and edge weights. Boundaries with fewer than k occurrences The MPM mechanism causes a node’s representation to
in the training set are evenly mapped to a “common” edge, be influenced by its neighbors, meaning that the represenenabling full parameter training. Finally, the constructed graph tation can bring information from the surrounding context.
is represented as G = (V, E), where V is the set of nodes and Therefore, the semantic meaning of the same data byte
E is the set of edges, as follows: can be determined by the weighted information from the
 neighbors. Additionally, the parameters of the text-level graphs
 V = {vi |i ∈ [1, l ]}. (1) are extracted from a globally shared matrix, meaning that these
   representations can also encode global information like other
 E = eij |i ∈ [1, l ], j ∈ [i − p, i + p] . (2) graph-based models.
 After being updated sufficiently, the graph nodes are
where vi is the i-th byte data node, l is the number of byte aggregated into flow-level semantic representations using a
data in that network flow, eij is the edge between nodes vi self-attentive mechanism. The concept behind this is that each
and vj , and p denotes the number of adjacent words connected data byte plays a role in characterizing part of the semantics
to each word in the graph. in the network flow, while the critical node data should have
 a more explicit contribution. Ultimately, the representation of
 all nodes in a flow is used to predict behavioral labels:
C. Messaging Network ⎛ ⎛ ⎞⎞
 
 The message passing paradigm is a paradigm that aggre- yi = softmax ⎝Relu ⎝W vn + b ⎠⎠. (5)
gates neighboring node information to update central node n∈Ni
information, extending the convolutional operator to the
domain of irregular data and connecting graphs with neural where W is the matrix that maps the vectors to the output
networks. Due to its powerful information propagation and space, Ni is the set of nodes of the network flow, and b is the
integration capabilities, as well as its flexible and efficient deviation.
characteristics, the message passing paradigm has been widely Algorithm 1 describes the training and testing stages of this
applied in fields such as social networks, bioinformatics, and method.
finance. Based on this, this method adopts the message passing
mechanism proposed by Gilmer et al. [29] to learn and update IV. E VALUATION
graph structures. The proposed method was evaluated using five pub-
 MPM initially gathers information from neighboring nodes licly available datasets: CIC IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC
and adjusts its representation based on both its original data DDoS2019, USTC TFC2016, and ISCX VPN-nonVPN. One
3718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 Training and Testing Phase CIC DDoS2019 dataset contains benign traffic and the
Input: Training Graph Gtrain (Vtrain , Etrain ), Nodes a, n ∈ most up-to-date common DDoS attacks (volumetric and appli-
 Vtrain , Training labels {Yi , i is the sample of the training cation: low volume, slow rate), resembling real-world data.
 set}; Testing graph Gtest (Vtest , Etest ), Nodes b, m ∈ This dataset includes modern reflective DDoS attacks such as
 Vtest , Testing labels {Yj , j is the sample of the testing PortMap, NetBIOS, LDAP, MSSQL, UDP, UDP-Lag, SYN,
 set}; L is the loss function NTP, DNS, and SNMP. DDoS attacks are also one of the
Output: Prediction Results {yi , i is the sample of the training common attacks in IoT networks, and the CIC DDoS2019
 set}, {yj , j is the sample of the testing set} dataset validates the possible application of this model in IoT
 1: for epoch = 1, 2, · · · do scenarios.
 2: for n ∈ Ni do USTC TFC2016 dataset contains ten types of malicious
 3: Mn ← maxa∈Nnp ean va traffic under eight kinds of applications, including Zeus,
 4: vn ← (1 − ωn )Mn + ωn vn Virus, Tinba, etc. This dataset consists of two parts, including
 5: end for encrypted and unencrypted raw traffic. The first part contains
 6: yi = softmax (Relu(W n∈Ni vn + b)) 2015 types of malicious software traffic from public websites
 7: L = −Yi × log(yi ) − (1 − Yi ) × log(1 − yi ) collected by researchers at the Czech Technical University
 8: Update {ean , a, n ∈ Vtrain }, {vn , n ∈ Vtrain }, (CTU) from a natural network environment from 10 years to
 {ωn , n ∈ Vtrain } 2011. The second part contains ten types of regular traffic
 9: end for collected using the network traffic simulation device IXIA
10: for Batch b in Vtest do BPS. The addition of the USTC TFC2016 dataset can help
11: for m ∈ Nj do verify the potential application of this model in encrypted
12: ebm ← ean Internet scenarios.
13: Vm ← Vn ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset is widely used in encrypted
14: ωm ← ωn network flow classification. This data set captures a regular
15: Mm ← maxa∈Nmp ebm vb and a VPN-based session for each traffic type. Therefore,
16: vm ← (1 − ω )M + ω v it includes seven kinds of normal encrypted traffic, such as
 m m m m
17: end for VoIP, VPN-VoIP, P2P, VPN-P2P, and seven types of protocol-
18: yj = softmax (Relu(W m∈Nj vm  + b)) encapsulated traffic, totaling 28GB. The ISCX VPN-nonVPN
19: end for dataset validates the possible application of this model in
 encryption scenarios.
 2) Parameter Setting: We provided training and testing sets
 for all datasets, with the training set randomly split into a
dataset consists benign traffic and multiple types of malicious 7:3 ratio for training and validation. The performance on
traffic in an Internet scenario, two datasets contain various the validation set was adjusted based on hyperparameters,
types of DoS and DDoS attacks in an IoT scenario, and the including setting the initial learning rate of Adam optimizer to
remaining dataset includes encrypted and unencrypted raw 0.0005, L2 weight decay to 0.0001, neighborhood connectivity
traffic in the encrypted Internet scenario. parameter p to 3, and weight threshold parameter k to 2.
 3) Evaluating Metrics: In this work, we used accuracy,
 precision, recall, and F1-score to evaluate the classification
A. Evaluation Setup ability of the proposed method. These indicators are defined
 1) Dataset: We validated the method using the CIC as follows:
IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019, USTC TFC2016, Accuracy (ACC) is the ratio of the correctly labeled subjects
and ISCX VPN-nonVPN datasets. The detailed information of to the whole pool of subjects, i.e.,
the dataset is shown in Table II. TP + TN
 CIC IDS2017 dataset contains both benign and up-to-date Accuracy = . (6)
 TP + FP + FN + TN
common attack data, with mild background traffic generated Precision (PRE) is the ratio of the correctly positive labeled
by the Canadian Institute for Cyber Security using the B- subject to all positive labeled subjects, i.e.,
Profile system to characterize abstract behaviors of human
 TP
interactions, constructed for 25 users based on HTTP, HTTPS, Precision = . (7)
 TP + FP
FTP, SSH, and email protocols. The attack behavior data
include Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, DoS, Heartbleed, Recall (REC) is the ratio of the correctly positive labeled
Web Attack, Infiltration, Botnet, DDoS, etc. to all who are positive in reality, i.e.,
 CIC DOS2017 dataset used different tools to make four TP
 Recall = . (8)
attacks on the ten web servers with the highest connections TP + FN
in the ISCX dataset. It obtained eight separate application F1 score (F1) is the harmonic mean (average) of precision
layer DoS attack tracks, with a total size of 4.6 GB. DoS and recall, and we use a microscopic approach to this calcuattacks are one of the common attacks in IoT networks, and lation, i.e., Macro-F1.
the CIC DOS2017 dataset validates the possible application 2 ∗ Recallm ∗ Precisionm
 F 1 − Score = (9)
of this model in IoT scenarios. Recallm + Precisionm
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3719

 TABLE II TABLE III
 DATASET D ETAILS A NALYSIS OF THE R ANGE OF DATA E XPRESSION

 TABLE IV
 A NALYSIS OF PACKET H EADER DATA E XPRESSION S LICING M ETHODS

 n
 Precisionm = i=1 Precisioni (10)
 n
 n
 Recallm = i=1 Recalli (11)
 n

B. Evaluation Results
 We used the Python language for the evaluations Pytorch
for the network framework, and all evaluations were run
on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti graphics card. The
experiment is divided into five parts: data representation
analysis, parameter optimization analysis, overall comparison
analysis, learning efficiency analysis, and application scenario
analysis. The first two parts explore the possibility of model
optimization in terms of data and parameters, while the latter a) Analysis of the range of data expression: The raw
three mainly focus on model performance and analyze from network flow data is organized into packets, each comprising a
the aspects of overall comparison, model efficiency, and model header and payload. Following the application of our proposed
application scenarios. method for unified representation of network flow data pro-
 1) Data Expression Analysis: The representation of data cessing, we specifically selected three types of data ranges:
plays a crucial role in behavior characterization. The effective- packet headers, payloads, and complete contents encompassing
ness of language association graphs in representing behavior is both headers and payloads. The model’s detection performance
directly influenced by different data ranges and segmentation was assessed on various datasets for each corresponding
methods. Therefore, this section begins with the standardized data range as presented in Table III. It is important to note
expression of data and examines the efficacy of data represen- that when evaluating the detection performance of a specific
tation range and segmentation method, encompassing both the segment of the data representation range, other factors such as
data packet header and payload. The objective is to identify data segmentation methods and model parameters were kept
the optimal approach for data representation and investigate consistent to control variables.
the impact of various data representation methods on behavior Overall, the payload data possesses a greater capacity for
characterization. expressing behavioral information compared to the header
3720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE V
 A NALYSIS OF PAYLOAD DATA E XPRESSION S LICING M ETHODS window does not significantly alter the informational variance
 between the data, and the behavior can still be identified by the
 statistical characteristics between the data. Thus, the impact
 of varying slicing window sizes on semantic data slicing is
 minimal.
 The payload of a data packet refers to the specific content
 being transmitted across the network. To investigate the impact
 of different data segmentation methods on packet payload data,
 we utilized the unified representation proposed in this method
 to process network flow data. Subsequently, we selected four
 distinct segmentation windows (2, 4, 8, and 16) and assessed
 the model’s detection performance on various datasets using
 different packet payload segmentation methods, as presented
 in Table V. It is important to note that when examining
 the detection performance of a particular data segmentation
 method, other factors such as data range and model parameters
 are kept consistent to control variables.
 Overall, in comparison to header, the size of the payload
 slicing window can significantly impact the effectiveness
 of detecting network behavior. Although payload data lacks
 a specific structural expression, its detection accuracy is
 enhanced through a more fine-grained data slicing approach. In
 a unified representation of payload, the original transmission
 content is processed using a minimum grain size window 2,
 similar to previous research by [12], [27], which involves anadata. There exists a significant differentiation between standard lyzing payload content and extracting statistical and content
and malicious behaviors in terms of packet transmission features for classifying and identifying network behavior. For
content, which can be leveraged to enhance the identification instance, attacks such as DDoS and DoS exhibit significant
of network behaviors through the construction of a semantic feature information in both temporal and spatial dimensions
correlation graph aimed at characterizing its data features. of the payload; therefore, load feature information can be
 b) Analysis of data representation cuts: The data packet extracted with maximum granularity through semantic slicing
header contains packet-level statistics, including timestamps of payload information.
and lengths. Following the unified representation proposed 2) Parameter Optimization Analysis: A crucial aspect of
in this method, we selected segmentation windows of 2, 4, training graph neural networks involves fine-tuning the
8, and 16 to assess the model’s detection performance on hyperparameters to balance variance, bias, and classification
various datasets with different packet header segmentation performance. Therefore, this section focuses on analyzing the
methods, as presented in Table IV. It is important to note number of neighboring words (p) connected to each word in
that when examining the detection performance of a specific the semantic association graph and the weight threshold (k)
data segmentation method, other factors such as data range associated with shared edges. The model effect is analyzed
and model parameters are kept constant to ensure controlled explicitly by setting the magnitude of the values of the
variables. different parameters and adopting precision as a performance
 Table IV Illustrates that the header has a specific data metric.
expression structure. Although fixed window sizes of 2 and The network flow classification effects under different
4 provide more fine-grained data analysis, they also destroy numbers of neighborhood connections parameter p and other
the original data expression structure, which can lead to poor weight threshold parameter k are shown in Fig. 5(a) and
detection results. In the unified expression of the header data, Fig. 5(b). The findings suggest that optimal byte co-occurrence
each field contains specific semantic information, most of information is achieved with a neighborhood connection winwhich is statistical numerical information, such as storage dow size of 3. A window size that is too small fails to capture
length, timestamp high and low bits, etc. Slicing them accord- sufficient global word co-occurrence information, while a wining to a specific fixed-size window will not directly change dow size that is too large may introduce connections between
the information difference between the data, and the network nodes with weak associations. Furthermore, the weighting
behavior can still be identified by the statistical characteristics threshold assigned to joint edges can be effectively balanced
between the data. Therefore, the impact of different slicing for training the learning center of gravity when set at 2, thereby
window sizes on the semantic slicing of data is limited. In the enhancing learning efficiency without compromising feature
comprehensive representation of header data, each field con- learning effectiveness.
tains specific semantic information, predominantly comprising 3) Baseline Comparative Analysis: This section presents
statistical numerical data such as storage length and timestamp a comparison of the proposed method with several classical
high and low bits. Slicing these fields according to a fixed-size machine learning models, including CNN, Lenet, Resnet, and
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3721

Fig. 5. Analysis of model effects under different parameters.

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS R ESULTS B ETWEEN T HIS M ODEL AND performance compared to various other models across all three
 BASELINE M ODELS datasets. The detection accuracy reaches 99.99%, 98.81%,
 100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% for the CIC IDS2017, CIC
 DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019, USTC-TFC2016, and ISCX VPNnonVPN datasets, respectively.
 Overall, the CNN and Lenet models utilize convolutional
 kernels for information extraction from images, while the
 Resnet model incorporates skip connections within the CNN
 architecture to facilitate learning of residual mappings. The
 RNN model is capable of exploring both temporal and semantic information in the data.
 The baseline models, such as CNN, Lenet, and Resnet,
 aim to map the original network flow data to a new data
 space in order to analyze the differences in feature dimensions
 between normal and abnormal network flows. These models
 use convolutional layers to extract feature representations with
 spatial characteristics, while RNN models use recurrent layers
 to extract feature representations with temporal characteristics.
 Similarly, this method also maps the data to a new feature
 space but differs from the baseline methods by extracting
 semantic features containing temporal relationships and transmission content through constructing a semantic association
 graph. Subsequently, it updates graph information through
 message passing networks to extract feature representations
 with spatial characteristics. This detection mechanism allows
 for simultaneous extraction of time and space dimension
 data feature representations, providing a more comprehensive
 pattern representation.
 4) Comparative Analysis of Other Methods: To further
 investigate the efficacy of this approach, in addition to the
 baseline model, this section compares it with several advanced
RNN. Following parameter tuning, the learning rate for all network threat detection methods. The original network flow
baseline models is set to 0.01, with a batch size of 200. data used for comparison remains consistent, and parameters
The network depths for the CNN, Lenet, Resnet, and RNN such as learning rate and batch size are set according to the
models are determined to be 7, 5, 18, and 2 respectively. optimal parameters proposed by the model. The experimental
It is important to note that the original network flow data results are presented in Table VII.
utilized by both this method and all baseline models for From the presented results, it can be observed that the
comparison remains consistent. The experimental results are detection performance of this model across all five datasets
detailed in Table VI. Based on the experimental results, it exceeds that of all other evaluated models. As a whole, threat
is evident that this model demonstrates superior detection detection models can be divided into three parts: data, feature
3722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS R ESULTS B ETWEEN T HIS M ODEL AND S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS

selection, and feature learning, and most of these models On the data side, existing state-of-the-art research has also
have some similarity with the present method in one or two focused on mining feature information from raw network
aspects. Below, a comparative analysis will be conducted from flow data to characterize the flow using data slicing. Xu and
four aspects: detection mechanism, data, feature selection, and Zhou [30] constructed vocabularies for feature extraction and
feature extraction. payload embedding on a single-byte basis based on raw flow
 In terms of detection mechanism, analysis of existing data. DID [31] uses the flow’s basic content bytes as input
advanced models reveals that these models aim to transform to effectively differentiate content-based attacks. PBCNN [32]
the original flow data into a new space in order to investigate automatically extracts abstract features from packet bytes
the disparities in feature dimensions between normal and in the raw Pcap file, with a subsequent stage constructing
abnormal flows. Similar to these models, this method also representations from packets in the flow or session to fully
seeks to map the data into a new feature space. In contrast leverage fundamental data information. METC [42] uses the
to existing methods that extract temporal and associative raw packet data to input the CNN model. Zhao et al. [46]
features for analysis, this approach extracts semantic features divides the basic network flow into sessions and the packets
containing temporal relationships and transmission content within each session into 784-byte slices, using the sliced
by constructing a semantic association graph. Subsequently, data to describe the flow. Compared with these methods, this
it updates the graph information through message passing approach utilizes the original flow data. It expresses the data
networks to extract feature representations with spatial char- at a uniformly fine-grained level based on the semantic idea,
acteristics. This detection mechanism enables this method to retaining as much complete information as possible while
concurrently extract data feature representations in both time describing the behavior at a deeper level.
and space dimensions, thereby providing a more comprehen- Regarding feature selection, some existing advanced
sive pattern representation. research starts from the relationship between individual
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3723

network flows and behaviors, extracts relationship feature
information, and expresses it in graph form. For instance,
GraphDDoS [33] transforms flow data into an endpoint traffic
graph that encapsulates details about packet relationships
(within a single flow) as well as burst and periodic information
across multiple flows. Similarly, Pujol-Perich et al. [35] have
captured individual flow features and inter-flow relationship
features, presenting them through graphical representations.
Sun et al. [2] constructed a K-nearest neighbor (KNN) traffic
graph containing flow similarity information to represent the
flow data structure. They used an autoencoder to form the
self representation of the flow data. GCN-TC [1] combines
traffic statistical features and traffic tracking maps in the
GCN model. ICLSTM [47] converts flow data into ordinary
grayscale images and extracts key features using the constructed ICLSTM neural network. Compared with the above Fig. 6. Classification accuracy of training models on different datasets.
research, this method focuses more on the feature information
of the network flow itself. By mining the internal structural
relationships of the flow data, a semantic association graph
is constructed with byte data as nodes and its contextual in Figure 6. Generally, the detection performance improves
relationships as edges. when the business scenarios of the training and testing datasets
 For feature extraction, graph neural networks are com- are more similar. For instance, CIC DOS2017 dataset primonly used to process graph-structured data by their strong marily consists of dos attacks while CIC DDoS2019 dataset
information aggregation ability. Liu et al. [45] converted the mainly contains DDoS attacks, both causing depletion of
flow data into a single-channel grayscale image, which was key resources through a large volume of requests or data to
then fed into a GAN to achieve the learning of the original the target system. These datasets share similarities in attack
flow features. Izadi et al. [48] combined CNN, Ant-Lion principles, methods, and impact. Consequently, they contain
Heuristic Algorithm (ALO), and Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) similar attack features and based on traffic characteristics in
for encrypted flow identification. Lin et al. [49] proposed the training dataset, the model can recognize behaviors in the
a network structure based on CNN and RNN to learn spa- testing dataset as well.
tiotemporal features of encrypted flow data. Compared with In the event of substantial disparities between the business
the above studies, this method focuses more on aggregating scenarios in the training and testing datasets, our method
neighborhood information. It can use a reduction function still achieves a detection accuracy of over 65%. For instance,
to effectively recombine the information in the nodes for while the CIC IDS2017 dataset encompasses common Internet
update and aggregate it into a semantic representation at the attacks such as Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, and DoS,
flow level using a self-attention mechanism. The neighbor- the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset comprises 7 types of regular
hood information aggregation can help the model capture the encrypted traffic and 7 types of protocol encapsulated flow.
contextual information of the nodes better, while the self- The visibility and features of normal network flow differ
attention mechanism allows for precise aggregation, enabling significantly from those of encrypted flow. The model trained
more accurate prediction results. on the ids2017 dataset encounters challenges in applying its
 5) Generalization Ability Analysis: In the face of the intri- learned flow features to the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset due
cate and constantly evolving network environment, diverse to these differences. Moreover, commonly used payload featraffic from various backgrounds, varied network topologies, tures are ineffective in characterizing encrypted flows because
extensive business scenarios, and evolving attack patterns, it they cannot access packet payload content. In this scenario,
is imperative to generalize models. To verify and enhance the packet header features and overall distribution characteristics
generalization of network security methods, this section selects play a crucial role in identifying encrypted flows, such as
different datasets for cross-testing validation. These datasets packet length and timing. While semantic correlation graphs
exhibit variations in terms of network environment, topology, constructed using our method are effective only for part of
and business scenarios. By applying the trained model to the packet header data when it comes to encrypted flows;
datasets distinct from the training set, we can assess its their effectiveness is limited which results in poorer detection
performance in new environments and conditions. This process performance.
aids in testing the model’s capability to identify unknown or 6) Learning Efficiency Analysis: The primary innovation
unseen network traffic and attack patterns. During the evalu- of this approach in terms of model efficiency lies in the
ation process, the parameters of the model remain consistent proposal of a global weight sharing mechanism for edges and
across all evaluation experiments, as detailed in the section on a small window learning mechanism. This eliminates the need
parameter settings. to calculate edge weights during the testing phase, allowing for
 The effectiveness of this method in detecting various graph learning and updating on a smaller scale. Consequently,
datasets used as training and testing data sources is illustrated this section conducts an analysis of the overall complexity
3724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 7. Analysis of learning efficiency of this method on various datasets.

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF L EARNING E FFICIENCY B ETWEEN T HIS M ETHOD AND OTHER G RAPH L EARNING M ETHODS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

and learning efficiency of the method and compares it with In terms of model complexity, we initially conducted a
graph learning methods such as GCN and Transformer in theoretical analysis of the time and space complexity of this
terms of efficacy. During the evaluation process, consistent approach. The space complexity primarily hinges on the size
data was used, and after constructing the same semantic of the constructed semantic correlation graph, which is directly
correlation graph, different graph learning methods such as linked to the number of nodes and edges. Following definitions
GCN and Transformer were applied to learn from the semantic from previous methods for semantic correlation graphs, its
correlation graph. Following parameter tuning, the baseline space complexity can be denoted as O(Vtrain ∗ p + Vtest ∗ p).
models were configured with a learning rate set to 0.01, batch Here, Vtrain represents the training node set, Vtest denotes the
size at 200, and network depths for GCN, Transformer, MLP, testing node set, and p signifies the neighborhood connection
and GGNN models established at 2, 12, 3, and 7 respectively. quantity. With regards to time complexity, we analyze it
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3725

across three dimensions: constructing semantic graphs, graph each dataset representing distinct application scenarios and
learning, and aggregating node representations. The time com- investigates its ability to detect various threats across different
plexity for constructing a semantic correlation graph depends datasets, as illustrated in Figure 8.
on the number of nodes and has a complexity of O(Vtrain + In the context of the Internet, the CIC IDS2017 dataset
Vtest ). During graph learning based on message passing encompasses malicious traffic such as Botnet, Brute Force,
networks, its time complexity is related to the number of node DDoS, FTP, GoldenEye, Heartbleed, Hulk, infiltration,
updates and can be represented as O((Vtrain + Vtest ) ∗ 2). PortScan, and others. As depicted in Fig. 8, this method
After updating learning for testing nodes, it is necessary to use demonstrates effective identification of most attacks including
self-attention mechanism to aggregate updated node features Brute Force, HULK, infiltration and Slowloris. These attacks
into flow-level feature representation; this part has a time all have prominent behavioral characteristics in the time
complexity of O((Vtest )2 ). dimension. Their primary behavioral disparities stem from
 The training and testing accuracy of this method under their varied methods of attack: Brute Force involves attempting
different iterations is shown in Fig. 7. It can be observed that weak passwords to gain unauthorized access; HULK generates
this method only requires a small amount of iterative training numerous falsified network flows on the web server to directly
to achieve high accuracy, and each iteration requires less time target its resource pool; infiltration employs a comprehensive
for training, thereby enhancing the overall efficiency of method array of tactics for network penetration; and Slowloris utilizes
deployment. slow HTTP requests to maliciously occupy server connections
 The efficiency comparison analysis between this method without releasing them. These attacks present significant variand other graph learning methods is shown in Table VIII. ations in flow data content and are better characterized by
Compared with this method, the compared method adopts a semantic features based on network flow content.
unified composition method, but adopts different graph learn- In the IoT scenario, the CIC DOS2017 dataset encompasses
ing methods. To better display performance differences, other eight types of DoS attacks and benign traffic, while the CIC
graph learning models do not incorporate global edge weight DDoS2019 dataset comprises seven common types of DDoS
sharing mechanisms and small window learning mechanisms. attacks and mild traffic. Malicious behavior consumes network
The hyperparameter settings for all methods remain consistent. bandwidth and resources by sending numerous packets and
Analysis shows that this method has significant advantages in forging the source address of packets, ultimately paralyzing
learning efficiency. The byte nodes in this method are only hosts and network systems. In this scenario, denial of service
connected to adjacent byte nodes in the network flow data, attacks such as DoS and DDoS have obvious spatiotemporal
while other graph learning models connect nodes within a characteristics, with behaviors that possess unique semantic
relatively large window. Furthermore, the global sharing of representations. By extracting co-occurrence information to
edge weights obviates the necessity for recalculating weight characterize the semantics of traffic behavior, benign network
relationships between nodes during the testing process, thereby flows can be effectively distinguished from abnormal ones.
reducing computational overhead. We also found that this For the encrypted Internet scenario, the USTC TFC2016
method performs better than other graph learning models. dataset contains ten types of malicious flows across eight
Based on the semantic association graph composition method, kinds of applications, and the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset
the GCN model connects graph nodes within a large window, includes seven types of regular encrypted flows and seven
which cannot distinguish the importance between different types of protocol encapsulated flows. Unlike regular network
byte nodes. In contrast, our proposed method incorporates a flows, encrypted network flows conceal their payload contents.
self-attention mechanism to enable differential expression of Most existing methods for identifying encrypted flows rely
byte data in various network flows. Additionally, the edge on statistical features such as packet length and packet time,
weight global sharing mechanism facilitates training of each which have been proven to be effective [50], [51]. For some
byte data node across the entire corpus containing all network simple encrypted malicious traffic, this method has a good
flow data with consistent configuration. detection effect, such as Zeus, Virut, Tinba, etc. However,
 7) Application Scenario Analysis: The evaluation of this its effectiveness is somewhat reduced for Neris and Cridex
model utilized five public datasets, which can be classified into attacks. This may be due to the fact that the core features of
three types of real network detection scenarios: Internet, IoT, these attacks are not fully captured in flow data. Specifically,
and encrypted Internet. Specifically, the CIC IDS2017 dataset the Neris attack operates as a spam zombie network primarily
represents Internet scenarios, while the CIC DOS2017 and using port 25, making characteristics such as port number,
CIC DDoS2019 datasets represent IoT scenarios. The USTC- transmission time, and packet quantity crucial. The Cridex
TFC2016 and ISCX VPN-nonVPN datasets are indicative of attack spreads through removable drives and implants itself in
encrypted Internet scenarios. The model demonstrated strong infected systems by modifying registry key values.
detection performance across five datasets. However, notable To further investigate the representativeness of raw flow data
variations in detection performance were observed among the on behavior, we conducted attention visualization experiments
different datasets. Given that these datasets represent diverse on flow data using the CIC DDoS2019 dataset. Taking a
application scenarios, a comprehensive analysis of the model’s denial-of-service attack as an example, our method achieved a
specific detection performance in various application scenarios detection accuracy of 93.41% on the CIC DDoS2019 dataset
is essential. Therefore, this section conducts an in-depth after 50 training iterations, as shown in Fig. 9. Due to
examination of the model’s specific detection performance on limitations in data length, only the initial 30 bytes of data were
3726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. The classification performance of this method in different application scenarios.

extracted. As the raw network flow data passes through the treated as a specific language and semantic correlation graphs
attention layer of the message passing network, it demonstrates are constructed to capture the inherent semantic correlations
varying role weights. Notably, in IoT scenarios, the high- within the flow data. To enhance the effectiveness of our
weighted attention values primarily focus on payload data, method, we have designed a global sharing mechanism that
with increased emphasis on recurring data content. Combined enables the sharing of node representations and edge weights.
with the principle and process of a DDoS attack, this method Utilizing a messaging network facilitates small-scale graph
can more effectively uncover behavioral patterns by cap- learning and updating, which are then aggregated into flowturing semantic content relationships within the raw flow level semantic representations for threat detection and behavior
data. recognition. The final evaluation results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in extracting flow data features across
 various scenarios, achieving high classification accuracies of
 V. C ONCLUSION 99.99%, 98.81%, 100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% on the CIC
 This study presents a novel threat detection method based IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS 2019, USTC TFC2016,
on semantic association graphs. In this method, flow data is and ISCX VPN-non VPN datasets.
LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION 3727

 [12] S. Wang, Q. Yan, Z. Chen, B. Yang, C. Zhao, and M. Conti, “Detecting
 android malware leveraging text semantics of network flows,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1096–1109, May 2018.
 [13] S. Wang et al., “TextDroid: Semantics-based detection of mobile
 malware using network flows,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
 Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2017, pp. 18–23.
 [14] A. F. AlEroud and G. Karabatis, “Queryable semantics to detect cyberattacks: A flow-based detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
 Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 207–223, Feb. 2016.
 [15] J. Dai, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMFTC: Cross modality fusion efficient multitask encrypt traffic classification in IIoT environment,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3989–4009, Nov./Dec. 2023.
 [16] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang,
 “TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for internet of things
 time series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans.
 Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 [17] Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Cheng, and H. Xu, “Word embedding-based contextsensitive network flow payload anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd
 Int. Conf. Appl. Mach. Learn. (ICAML), 2021, pp. 191–194.
 [18] X. Ling et al., “MalGraph: Hierarchical graph neural networks for robust
Fig. 9. Attention Visualization of flow Data in CIC DDoS2019 Dataset.
 windows malware detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
 (IEEE INFOCOM), 2022, pp. 1998–2007.
 [19] B. Wu, Y. Xu, and F. Zou, “Malware classification by learning semantic
 This method is currently only suitable for more straightfor- and structural features of control flow graphs,” in Proc. IEEE 20th
ward encrypted Internet scenarios, but it has some ability to Int. Conf. Trust Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), 2021,
 pp. 540–547.
detect encrypted network threats. In future research, we plan [20] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting
to create a model specifically for encrypted network traffic and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial-temporal graph
scenarios to meet different threat detection needs. We will also convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19,
 no. 6, pp. 3855–3872, Nov./Dec. 2022.
focus on tracking and tracing threats to strengthen defense [21] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
capabilities and improve security strategies. line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
 2023.
 R EFERENCES
 [22] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward
 [1] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical early and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedfeatures for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. ding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831,
 Commun. (ICC), 2019, pp. 1–6. 2023.
 [2] B. Sun, W. Yang, M. Yan, D. Wu, Y. Zhu, and Z. Bai, “An encrypted [23] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “BotMark:
 traffic classification method combining graph convolutional network and Automated BotNet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based
 autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf. and graph-based traffic behaviors,” Inf. Sci., vol. 511, pp. 284–296,
 (IPCCC), 2020, pp. 1–8. Feb. 2020.
 [3] L. Zhang, H. Shi, K. Zhang, H. Sun, and W. Zhang, “GraphMAL: [24] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 A network malicious traffic identification method based on graph graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
 neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl. (NaNA), 2023, detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 pp. 262–267. Jun. 2022.
 [4] Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Deng, K. Huang, and C. Yang, “Complex networks [25] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, D. Niu, X. Qiu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Zhou, “WFF-EGNN:
 identification using Bayesian model with independent laplace prior,” Encrypted traffic classification based on weaved flow fragment via
 Chaos, vol. 31, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 13107. ensemble graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun.
 [5] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, T. Feng, and L. Maglaras, “GCN-ETA: High- Netw., vol. 1, pp. 389–411, 2023.
 efficiency encrypted malicious traffic detection,” Security Commun. [26] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen-
 Netw., vol. 2022, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Jan. 2022. tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 [6] J. Zhao, X. Liu, Q. Yan, B. Li, M. Shao, and H. Peng, “Multi-attributed graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 heterogeneous graph convolutional network for BOT detection,” Inf. Sci., pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 vol. 537, pp. 380–393, Oct. 2020. [27] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach
 [7] N. Okui, Y. Akimoto, A. Kubota, and T. Yoshida, “A graph construction to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
 method for anomalous traffic detection with graph neural networks using Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016.
 sets of flow data,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf.
 [28] Y. Liu, N. Xi, and Y. Zhi, “NLEU: A semantic-based taint analysis for
 (COMPSAC), 2023, pp. 1017–1018.
 vetting apps in Android,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl. (NaNA),
 [8] X. Zhong and G. Wan, “Six-graphsecurity: Industrial Internet intrusion
 2021, pp. 327–333.
 detection based on graph neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Inf.
 Technol. Mechatron. Eng. Conf. (ITOEC), vol. 7, 2023, pp. 1340–1344. [29] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
 [9] L. Zhang, L. Tan, H. Shi, H. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Malicious traffic “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. 34th Int.
 classification for IoT based on graph attention network and long short- Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
 term memory network,” in Proc. 24st Asia–Pac. Netw. Oper. Manag. [30] T. Xu and P. Zhou, “Feature extraction for payload classification: A
 Symp. (APNOMS), 2023, pp. 54–59. byte pair encoding algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Comput.
[10] R. Ge, Y. Zhang, C. Si, G. Zhou, and W. Zhou, “MateGraph: Toward Commun. (ICCC), 2022, pp. 1–5.
 mobile malware detection through traffic behavior graph,” in Proc. IEEE [31] M. Soltani, M. J. Siavoshani, and A. H. Jahangir, “A content-based
 24th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 8th Int. Conf. Data deep intrusion detection system,” Int. J. Inf. Security, vol. 21, no. 3,
 Sci. Syst. 20th Int. Conf. Smart City 8th Int. Conf. Depend. Sensor pp. 547–562, Jun. 2022.
 Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl. (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2022, [32] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 pp. 801–809. for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
[11] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow Art. no. 108117.
 topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in [33] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph
 label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported
 no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023. Cooper. Work Design (CSCWD), 2022, pp. 1275–1280.
3728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[34] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. Martínez-del Rincón, Yiqing Luo is currently pursuing the
 and D. Siracusa, “LUCID: A practical, lightweight deep learning Doctoral degree with the School of Electronic
 solution for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and
 vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020. Telecommunications, China. Her research interests
[35] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Su’arez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. Barlet- include behavior recognition, anomaly detection,
 Ros, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for robust and deep learning.
 intrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 49,
 no. 4, pp. 111–117, 2021.
[36] H. S. Ilango, M. Ma, and R. Su, “A feedforward–convolutional neural
 network to detect low-rate dos in IoT,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 114,
 Sep. 2022, Art. no. 105059.
[37] Z. Deng et al., “SequenceShield: A robust and accurate DDoS detection
 method via serializing the traffic with direction information,” in Proc.
 IEEE 24th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 8th Int. Conf.
 Data Sci. Syst. 20th Int. Conf. Smart City 8th Int. Conf. Depend. Sensor
 Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl. (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2022,
 pp. 499–507.
[38] Z. Wu, H. Zhang, P. Wang, and Z. Sun, “RTIDS: A robust transformerbased approach for intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
 pp. 64375–64387, 2022.
[39] M. S. Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, S. Dev, and A. D. Jurcut, “DDoSNet: A
 deep-learning model for detecting network attacks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st
 Int. Symp. World Wireless Mobile Multimedia Netw. (WoWMoM), 2020,
 pp. 391–396.
[40] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “FlowGuard: An
 intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, Oct. 2020. Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[41] W. Xu, J. Jang-Jaccard, T. Liu, F. Sabrina, and J. Kwak, “Improved degree from the Beijing University of Posts
 bidirectional GAN-based approach for network intrusion detection using and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2022,
 one-class classifier,” Computers, vol. 11, no. 6, p. 85, 2022. where he is currently an Assistant Professor with
[42] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted the School of Cyberspace Security. His research
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, interests include network security, anomaly deteclessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., tion, and machine learning.
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
[43] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “deep − full − range: A
 deep learning based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion
 detection framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190, 2019.
[44] M. He, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Xi, L. Jin, and X. Wang, “Deep-featurebased autoencoder network for few-shot malicious traffic detection,”
 Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 6, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2021.
[45] Liu et al., “A weakly-supervised method for encrypted malicious traffic
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Grids Clouds PoS(ISGC), 2022, pp. 1–9.
[46] G. Zhao, Z. X. Wang, and Z. Yang, “An encrypted traffic classification
 model based on the raw traffic and spatiotemporal characteristics,”
 in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Technol. Comput. Eng., 2022,
 pp. 1208–1213.
[47] B. Lu, N. Luktarhan, C. Ding, and W. Zhang, “ICLSTM: Encrypted
 traffic service identification based on inception-LSTM neural network,”
 Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1080, 2021.
[48] Izadi, M. Ahmadi, and R. Nikbazm, “Network traffic classification using
 convolutional neural network and ant-lion optimization,” Comput. Elect.
 Eng., vol. 101, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 108024.
[49] C. Y. Lin, B. Chen, and W. Lan, “An efficient approach for encrypted Xiaojuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree in electraffic classification using CNN and bidirectional GRU,” in Proc. 2nd Int. tronic science and technology from the Beijing
 Conf. Consum. Electron. Comput. Eng. (ICCECE), 2022, pp. 368–373. University of Posts and Telecommunications, where
[50] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPIC: A generic representation for she is currently an Associate Professor with
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE the School of Cyberspace Security. Her research
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jul. 2021. interests include deep learning, complex networks,
[51] W. Chen, F. Lyu, F. Wu, P. Yang, G. Xue, and M. Li, “Sequential and human gesture recognition.
 message characterization for early classification of encrypted Internet
 traffic,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3746–3760,
 Apr. 2021.