ETGuard: Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection
 in Blockchain-based Power Grid Systems

 Peng Zhou1 , Yongdong Liu2,⋆ , Lixun Ma2 , Weiye Zhang2 , Haohan Tan2 ,
 Zhenguang Liu2 , and Butian Huang2
 1
 State Grid Zhejiang Electric Power Company, LTD. Information and
arXiv:2408.10657v1 [cs.CR] 20 Aug 2024

 Communication Branch, China
 2
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China
 {malx}@zju.edu.cn

 Abstract. The escalating prevalence of encryption protocols has led
 to a concomitant surge in the number of malicious attacks that hide
 in encrypted traffic. Power grid systems, as fundamental infrastructure,
 are becoming prime targets for such attacks. Conventional methods for
 detecting malicious encrypted packets typically use a static pre-trained
 model. We observe that these methods are not well-suited for blockchainbased power grid systems. More critically, they fall short in dynamic
 environments where new types of encrypted attacks continuously emerge.
 Motivated by this, in this paper we try to tackle these challenges from
 two aspects: (1) We present a novel framework that is able to automatically detect malicious encrypted traffic in blockchain-based power grid
 systems and incrementally learn from new malicious traffic. (2) We mathematically derive incremental learning losses to resist the forgetting of
 old attack patterns while ensuring the model is capable of handling new
 encrypted attack patterns. Empirically, our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance on three different benchmark datasets. We also constructed the first malicious encrypted traffic dataset for blockchain-based
 power grid scenario. Our code and dataset are available at https://github.
 com/PPPmzt/ETGuard, hoping to inspire future research.

 Keywords: Blockchain · Network security · Malicious encrypted traffic
 detection · Incremental learning.

 1 Introduction
 The immutable and decentralized nature of blockchain has led to applications
 such as Bitcoin, decentralized crowdfunding, and cross-industry finance [31].
 While research often focuses on system and software issues like consensus mechanisms [29], smart contracts [18], and virtual machines, cybersecurity challenges,
 particularly malicious traffic attacks, are often neglected.
 In blockchain-based power systems, critical national infrastructure, malicious
 traffic poses severe risks such as widespread power outages and energy data
 ⋆
 Yongdong Liu is the corresponding author.
2 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

breaches. Although encryption protocols are widely adopted to secure data, they
can be exploited by attackers to hide malicious activities. Detecting malicious
encrypted traffic in power systems involves distinguishing attack patterns from
benign packets [15]. Research in this area generally follows two approaches: one
[12,7,9] uses decryption analysis to reveal clues in encrypted sequences, while another [22,23] examines statistical differences using deep learning. Current methods face two main issues: poor performance on blockchain-based power grids,
leading to a significant drop in F1 scores, and difficulties with novel attack sequences due to reliance on static models.
 To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach incorporating incremental learning to adapt to new attacks. Our method involves training a model
with self-supervised learning to extract detailed packet features and deriving
incremental learning losses to preserve old data while learning new attack patterns. We update the model using replayed samples combined with these losses.
Additionally, we introduce the GridET-2024 dataset, which includes real-world
traffic data from the State Grid of China, to evaluate detection in blockchainbased power grid scenarios. To evaluate our method, we conducted extensive
experiments on three benchmark datasets, as well as ablation studies to assess key components. Our method demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on
these datasets. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
 • We propose ETGuard, a novel framework for detecting malicious encrypted
 traffic in blockchain-based power grids. It is the first method to automatically
 identify these attacks and adapt to new traffic patterns incrementally.
 • We derive a loss function for effective incremental learning, supported by
 rigorous theoretical analysis, to manage new attack patterns while mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Additionally, we introduce a sample buffer for
 efficient storage and replay of representative traffic samples.
 • We have collected real-world data from blockchain-based power grid systems
 and created the GridET-2024 dataset, the first of its kind for detecting malicious encrypted traffic in this context. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
 performance on several benchmark datasets.

2 Problem Statement
Problem formulation. Given a sequence of encrypted packets s = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn },
we are interested in developing a fully automated model to determine whether
the packet sequence is malicious. Put differently, we aim to estimate the label
ŷ for each encrypted packet sequence s, where ŷ = 1 represents s is a malicious
sequence, and ŷ = 0 indicates that s is benign.

3 Method
Method Overview The detailed architecture of our proposed framework is
outlined in Fig. 1. Overall, the framework consists of three key components:
 ETGuard 3

 • Data Preprocessing: Raw packets are cleaned and processed, ensuring that
 the packets from an individual client are sorted into a packet sequence and
 are separated from the packets of other clients. To extract features from these
 sequences, we use an unsupervised auto-encoder with stacked bi-GRUs.
 • Incremental Learning Module: To adapt to novel attacks while preventing
 catastrophic forgetting, we introduce an incremental learning module and
 mathematically derive the incremental learning losses.
 • Detection Module: The detection module learns the feature distinctions between benign and malicious sequences to continuously identify potential attacks. The learning process is supervised by the classification loss and incremental learning losses.
In what follows, we will elaborate on the details of these components one by one.

 Fig. 1: The framework of ETGuard.

3.1 Data Preprocessing
The preprocessing module aims to clean and process raw packet data into distinct
sequences for different clients. Since packet sequences cannot be directly input
into a network, we employ an unsupervised auto-encoder with stacked bi-GRUs
to extract features from each client’s packet sequence.
 Specifically, raw traffic data consists of packets organized by a five-tuple (i.e.,
source and destination IP addresses, source and destination ports, and transport
layer protocol). We group packets with the same five-tuple into sequences s and
sort them chronologically. Irrelevant packet information, such as IP addresses
and port numbers, is removed from each sequence.
 The resulting sequences, sinput , are formatted with components l, d, and
tm , where: l = {b1 , b2 , . . . , bn } denotes the packet length sequence, d = tn − t1
represents the duration of sinput , tm is the mean time interval between packets.
4 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

 The feature extractor uses an auto-encoder with multiple bi-directional Gated
Recurrent Units (bi-GRUs) [8], serving as both encoder and decoder. The encoder transforms the input sequence into a feature vector, which the decoder
uses to reconstruct the sequence. A multi-layer perceptron in the reconstruction
layer restores the original embedded sequence. The encoder learns an accurate
representation of encrypted network traffic by minimizing reconstruction loss
during training.
 Compared to traditional methods [2,3,16] that focus on specific versions of
TLS handshake metadata or message types [23], our approach captures the finegrained behavior of network traffic more effectively.

3.2 Mathematical Derivation of Incremental Learning Objectives
In this subsection, we introduce the incremental learning module, and provide
the key mathematical derivations of incremental learning objectives within this
module.
 We use the incremental learning method based on empirical replay [24,6,27]
with targeted modifications for encrypted traffic scenarios to realize the incremental update of the model when facing new types of traffic attack. Specifically,
we maintain a sample buffer to store representative traffic samples. When new
malicious encrypted traffic arises, we incrementally update the model through
a anti-forgetting loss function to detect new attack patterns. The new traffic
samples are updated into the buffer using a reservoir sampling algorithm [28],
serving as a representative sample set for subsequent incremental model updates.

Sample Buffer The sample buffer is used to store representative traffic samples to achieve experience replay during incremental learning. When the model
learns new traffic patterns, it replays previous samples from the sample buffer
to effectively prevent catastrophic forgetting. We implement the update of the
sample buffer using the reservoir sampling algorithm. When new traffic samples arrive, the sample buffer is dynamically updated to ensure diversity and
representativeness.

Incremental Learning Loss Function The goal of the incremental learning
module is to detect the ongoing emergence of new malicious traffic attacks. To
enable the model to learn from new datasets, the loss function and optimization
objectives are defined as follows:

 min Lce = E(x,y)∼D [ℓ(fθ (x), y)], (1)
 θ

where θ denotes the model parameters, Lce represents the loss function using
cross-entropy, D denotes the dataset, fθ (x) denotes the detection model, and y
denotes the true target of the sample.
 To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, we introduce a new loss function aimed
at balancing the learning between new and old data. We use the past data on the
 ETGuard 5

updated model to obtain an output fθ (x) that closely approximates the output
of the pre-update model trained on past traffic data, denoted as fθ∗t .

 Lil = αE(x,z)∼M [DKL (softmax(z)||fθ (x))] . (2)
 In the above equation, z represents the output logits of the model on the past
traffic data. In order to reduce the resource consumption, we use z to replace the
model output fθ∗t . The logits z are softmaxed to obtain the probability vector,
which is used to calculate the KL scatter with the model output fθ (x).

Theorem 1. If two logits output by the model are similar, the KL divergence
between them can be approximated as the Euclidean distance.

Proof. Assume logits z1 and logits z2 are two close vectors, we set the sample
space of logits z, R = {1, ..., n}, n is the dimension of logits z, so we can express
z2 as:
 z2 = z1 + ϵ∆z, (3)
for some small ϵ > 0 and perturbation vector ∆z = [∆z(1) · · · ∆z(n)]T . Next,
we approximate the KL divergence locally.
  
 X z1 (i)
 DKL (z1 ∥z2 ) = z1 (i) log . (4)
 z2 (i)
 i∈R

Substituting z2 (i) = z1 (i) + ϵ∆z(i) into the KL divergence formula gives:
  
 X z1 (i)
 DKL (z1 ∥z2 ) = z1 (i) log . (5)
 z1 (i) + ϵ∆z(i)
 i∈R
  
 z1 (i)
Applying the second-order Taylor approximation to log z1 (i)+ϵ∆z(i) :

 ϵ2 X ∆z(i)2
 DKL (z1 ∥z2 ) = + o(ϵ2 ). (6)
 2 z1 (i)
 i∈R

This implicitly assumes z1 (i) > 0 for all i ∈ R. Introducing the weighted Euclidean norm, the KL divergence becomes:

 ϵ2
 DKL (z1 ∥z2 ) = ∥∆z∥2z1 + o(ϵ2 ) = ∥z1 − z2 ∥. (7)
 2
Thus, under the local approximation, the KL divergence approximates a weighted
Euclidean distance.

 By Theorem 1, Lil can be simplified to:
 h i
 2
 Lil = αE(x,z)∼M ∥z ′ − g(x′ )∥2 . (8)
6 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

 To handle significant changes in new attack patterns and avoid bias towards
previous patterns, we introduce a smoothness loss function:
 Llb = βE(x′′ ,y′′ ,z′′ )∼M [ℓ(y ′′ , h(x′′ ))] . (9)
 To balance the contributions of Lil and Llb , we use a coefficient k:
 k = 0.5 + softmax(Lil · γ). (10)
 The final loss function is:
 h i
 2
 Lce + αE(x′ ,y′ ,z′ )∼M ∥z ′ − g(x′ )∥2 + kαE(x′′ ,y′′ ,z′′ )∼M [ℓ(y ′′ , h(x′′ ))] . (11)

3.3 Detection Module
Due to the substantial volume of traffic data and the high traffic rate in the
blockchain-based power grid scenario, the real-time performance and resource
consumption of the model are critically demanding. The MLP model architecture, being relatively simple, requires lower computing resources and offers faster
training speeds. It is capable of monitoring traffic data in real time, and experiments have demonstrated that the MLP model is sufficient to meet the task
requirements. Therefore, the MLP model is chosen to detect malicious traffic.

4 Evaluations
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on multiple malicious encrypted traffic detection datasets to evaluate our framework. Next, we introduce
the experimental setup, followed by presenting the comprehensive empirical results.

4.1 Experimental Setup
Datasets
 • CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 (DoHBrw) [21]: The DoHBrw dataset provides a mix of benign and malicious DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH) traffic, all data
 is encrypted traffic. The normal traffic is generated by querying benign DNS
 servers using the DoH protocol. Tunneling tools such as dns2tcp, DNSCat2,
 and Iodine are used to generate malicious DoH traffic.
 • CIC-AndMal2017 (CIC) [14]: CIC collected a rich variety of malicious
 attacks from several sources. The malicious traffic samples come from 42
 unique malware families, which can be classified into four categories: Adware,
 Ransomware, Scareware, and SMS Malware.
 • GridET-2024 (GridET): To better detect the encrypted attacks of realworld blockchain-based power grid scenario, we create the dataset GridET-
 2024. Benign traffic samples are collected by capturing power grid system
 interaction traffic data. Malicious traffic data samples are sourced from
 malware-traffic-analysis.net and USTC-TFC2016 dataset to ensure the diversity of malicious traffic attack patterns.
 ETGuard 7

Implementation Details We implement our detection framework and all baselines by using Python 3.8.5. We run these models on a Linux server with NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. We list all the parameters used by our framework in
Table 2. In particular, we set n = 50 and d = 32 to make a better capability of
capturing fine-grained behaviors of network traffic. Then, we apply Grid Search
to find the appropriate values for α and γ. The values of α and γ are 0.5 and
10, respectively. In particular, buffer size is a hyperparameter manually tuned to
best fit the specific scenario. We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate
the performance of ETGuard with various buffer sizes.

Table 1: Statistics of Datasets Table 2: Parameter Settings of ETGuard
 Module Para. Value Description
 Dataset Normal Malicious n 50 Number of used head packets
 V 32 Embedding size of GRU-AE
 DoHBrw 688,489 6,112 Feature Extraction
 H 8 Hidden size of each GRU layer
 CIC 894,367 62,972 B 2 Number of GRU layers

 GridET 43,611 27,141 Incremental Learning
 α 0.5 Coefficient of loss L2
 γ 10 Coefficient to balance loss L2 and loss L3

Evaluation Metrics We use ACC and F1 Score as metrics to evaluate the
malicious traffic detection and incremental learning performance of ETGuard.

4.2 Performance on Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection
In this section, we benchmark our method against state-of-the-art malicious
encrypted traffic detection methods for two public dataset and one power grad
scenario dataset GridET.
 In public dataset evaluations, we train and test methods on DoHBrw, and
CIC, respectively. Fig. 2 presents public dataset comparison results. From Fig. 2,
we observe that our method is capable of consistently outperforming existing
methods on all five benchmarks. For example, the F1 score of our method is
0.92 on DoHBrw while the state-of-the-art detection method RAPIER [23] is
0.88. The F1 score of our method is also outperformed FS [17] in all datasets. In
addition, we also use the CoinFlip algorithm and PacketLen algorithm, which
simulate randomly guess and only utilize packet length, respectively, to detect
encrypted traffic.

 Table 3: F1 scores of Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection Methods
 Dataset RAPIER FS CoinFlip PacketLen ETGuard (Ours)
 DoHBrw 0.88 0.76 0.28 0.56 0.92
 CIC 0.84 0.71 0.27 0.46 0.86
 GridET 0.83 0.73 0.31 0.49 0.94

 The blockchain-based power grid scenario malicious traffic detection is more
challenging for existed detection methods. To evaluate the detection abilities
of the methods on this scenario, we train and test the models on the GridET
8 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

dataset. Table 3 demonstrate the state-of-the-art malicious encrypted traffic detection methods still suffer from relatively low F1 score on the GridET dataset,
which reveals that such methods are fall short to extract the critical features of
traffic sample in the blockchain-based power grid scenario.

 Fig. 2: Performance on Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection.

 Overall, our method achieves state-of-the-art general scenarios and blockchainbased power grid scenario malicious encrypted traffic detection performance. For
general scenarios comparisons, our method improves the F1 score on DoHBrw
from 0.88 to 0.92, and on CIC from 0.84 to 0.86. In contrast with general scenarios methods, our method also attains 0.94 F1 score on GridET, outperforming
the current state-of-the-art method RAPIER.

4.3 Performance on Incremental Learning
To evaluate the performance of our method on incremental learning, we create a
new dataset DoHBrw/CIC. Specifically, we combine all benign samples from the
DoHBrw dataset with a selection of malicious samples from the CIC dataset.
We further divide the datasets into six sub-datasets {A0 , A1 , A2 , A3 , A4 , A5 }. In
each of these sub-datasets, the benign traffic is all of the same type DoHBrw,
while the malicious traffic all consists of different types of malicious attacks.
We use A0 for pre-training the model, while the other sub-datasets are used for
incremental updates to the model. We established a separate test set for each
round, where the test set for round i includes all attack types observed from
rounds 0 to i.
 We compare ETGuard against five incremental learning methods (ER [25],
DER [6], DER++ [6], GSS [1], SI [30]) on DoHBrw/CIC. To assess the efficacy of the incremental learning module within our approach, we extracted this
component from ETGuard, resulting in a variant dubbed ETGuard-V. We then
evaluated the performance of ETGuard-V to conduct an ablation study. We
further provide an upper bound given by training all attack samples (FULL).
 ETGuard 9

 Fig. 3: The Performance of Incremental Learning Methods.

 Fig. 3 reports performance in terms of average accuracy across all rounds.
Experimental evidence ETGuard achieve state-of-the-art performance in almost
all settings.

Fig. 4: The Performance of Incremental Learning Methods in Different Round.
 At the same time, we observe that the performance of ETGuard is almost
always better than that of ETGuard-V. And as the number of rounds increases,
the gap in detection performance between ETGuard-V and ETGuard gradually widens, which further proves the effectiveness of our incremental learning
module.

5 Related Work

5.1 Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection

Traditional malicious encrypted traffic detection mainly uses signature-based
methods [12,7,9] to detect malicious encrypted traffic. However, the method
10 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

relies heavily on the quality of decryption operations and rules for traffic [13,4].
With the growth of artificial intelligence technology[26,19], machine learning
is increasingly being adopted for detecting malicious encrypted traffic. Machine
learning enhances detection by extracting statistical features from traffic, offering
faster and more accurate results compared to traditional methods. For example,
Fu et al, utilized frequency domain features for real-time detection [11]. Barradas
et al, detect attacks by applying random forests [5]. In addition to traditional
traffic detection or packet inspection [20,3], Fang et al. [10], on the other hand,
detects TLS traffic by collecting features of the traffic communication channel
(packets consisting of the same destination IP and destination port) and uses
Random Forest (RF) to enhance malware traffic detection performance. All these
methods are not effective in detecting attacks on new encrypted traffic.

5.2 Incremental Learning
The core challenge of incremental learning is to balance the conflict between
remembering information about old tasks and absorbing information about new
tasks, the so-called catastrophic forgetting problem. To overcome this problem,
existing methods fall into two main categories: replay-based methods and parameter optimization-based methods. Replay-based methods mitigate Catastrophic
Forgetting by replaying some samples of old tasks while learning new ones. The
replayed samples can be real historical data, i.e., empirical replay. It can also
be pseudo-samples generated by generative models (e.g., Generative Adversarial
Networks, GAN), i.e., generative replay. iCaRL [24] is a representative of the
empirical replay-based approach, which combines knowledge distillation methods to update the model parameters on a representative sample pool. However,
iCaRL updates the parameters of old tasks and therefore suffers from overfitting
to old data.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we try to tackle the malicious encrypted traffic detection problem
from two aspects: (1) We propose a novel framework termed ETGuard, which
to our knowledge is the first approach tailored for automatically identifying
malicious traffic attacks in blockchain-based power grid systems. (2) We lay the
mathematical foundation for establishing an incremental learning model that can
effectively adapt to new types of attacks. We utilized real data collected from
the State Grid and constructed the malicious encrypted traffic dataset GridET.
We extensively evaluated the proposed method on three benchmark datasets.
Empirical results show that our method consistently delivers state-of-the-art
performance on malicious encrypted traffic detection across general scenarios
and the blockchain-based power grid scenario.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by State Grid Zhejiang Electric Power
Company, LTD. Information and Communication Branch, China (Grant number 5211XT
24000D).
 ETGuard 11

References

 1. Aljundi, R., Lin, M., Goujaud, B., Bengio, Y.: Gradient based sample selection for
 online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 32
 (2019)
 2. Anderson, B., McGrew, D.: Identifying encrypted malware traffic with contextual
 flow data. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and
 security. pp. 35–46 (2016)
 3. Anderson, B., McGrew, D.: Machine learning for encrypted malware traffic classification: accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity. In: Proceedings of the
 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on knowledge discovery and data
 mining. pp. 1723–1732 (2017)
 4. Azeez, N.A., Bada, T.M., Misra, S., Adewumi, A., Van der Vyver, C., Ahuja, R.:
 Intrusion detection and prevention systems: an updated review. Data Management,
 Analytics and Innovation: Proceedings of ICDMAI 2019, Volume 1 pp. 685–696
 (2020)
 5. Barradas, D., Santos, N., Rodrigues, L., Signorello, S., Ramos, F.M., Madeira,
 A.: Flowlens: Enabling efficient flow classification for ml-based network security
 applications. In: NDSS (2021)
 6. Buzzega, P., Boschini, M., Porrello, A., Abati, D., Calderara, S.: Dark experience
 for general continual learning: a strong, simple baseline. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 15920–15930 (2020)
 7. Chiba, Z., Abghour, N., Moussaid, K., Omri, A.E., Rida, M.: Newest collaborative
 and hybrid network intrusion detection framework based on suricata and isolation
 forest algorithm. In: Proceedings of the 4th international conference on smart city
 applications. pp. 1–11 (2019)
 8. Chung, J., Gulcehre, C., Cho, K., Bengio, Y.: Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 (2014)
 9. Dong, C., Lu, Z., Cui, Z., Liu, B., Chen, K.: Mbtree: Detecting encryption rats
 communication using malicious behavior tree. IEEE Transactions on Information
 Forensics and Security 16, 3589–3603 (2021)
10. Fang, Y., Li, K., Zheng, R., Liao, S., Wang, Y.: A communication-channel-based
 method for detecting deeply camouflaged malicious traffic. Computer Networks
 197, 108297 (2021)
11. Fu, C., Li, Q., Shen, M., Xu, K.: Realtime robust malicious traffic detection via
 frequency domain analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference
 on Computer and Communications Security. pp. 3431–3446 (2021)
12. Gupta, A., Sharma, L.S.: A categorical survey of state-of-the-art intrusion detection
 system-snort. International Journal of Information and Computer Security 13(3-
 4), 337–356 (2020)
13. Khraisat, A., Gondal, I., Vamplew, P., Kamruzzaman, J.: Survey of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges. Cybersecurity 2(1), 1–22 (2019)
14. Lashkari, A.H., Kadir, A.F.A., Taheri, L., Ghorbani, A.A.: Toward developing
 a systematic approach to generate benchmark android malware datasets and
 classification. In: 2018 International Carnahan conference on security technology
 (ICCST). pp. 1–7. IEEE (2018)
15. Li, Y., Guo, H., Hou, J., Zhang, Z., Jiang, T., Liu, Z.: A survey of encrypted
 malicious traffic detection. In: 2021 International Conference on Communications,
 Computing, Cybersecurity, and Informatics (CCCI). pp. 1–7. IEEE (2021)
12 P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

16. Liu, C., Cao, Z., Xiong, G., Gou, G., Yiu, S.M., He, L.: Mampf: Encrypted traffic
 classification based on multi-attribute markov probability fingerprints. In: 2018
 IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). pp.
 1–10. IEEE (2018)
17. Liu, C., He, L., Xiong, G., Cao, Z., Li, Z.: Fs-net: A flow sequence network for
 encrypted traffic classification. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference On
 Computer Communications. pp. 1171–1179. IEEE (2019)
18. Liu, Z., Qian, P., Yang, J., Liu, L., Xu, X., He, Q., Zhang, X.: Rethinking smart
 contract fuzzing: Fuzzing with invocation ordering and important branch revisiting.
 IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security (TIFS) 18, 1237–1251
 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2023.3237370
19. Liu, Z., Wu, S., Xu, C., Wang, X., Zhu, L., Wu, S., Feng, F.: Copy motion from
 one to another: Fake motion video generation. In: IJCAI. pp. 1223–1231 (2022).
 https://doi.org/10.24963/IJCAI.2022/171
20. Mirsky, Y., Doitshman, T., Elovici, Y., Shabtai, A.: Kitsune: an ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09089
 (2018)
21. MontazeriShatoori, M., Davidson, L., Kaur, G., Lashkari, A.H.: Detection
 of doh tunnels using time-series classification of encrypted traffic. In: 2020
 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl
 Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and
 Big Data Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Technology Congress
 (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech). pp. 63–70. IEEE (2020)
22. Ni, J., Chen, W., Tong, J., Wang, H., Wu, L.: High-speed anomaly traffic detection
 based on staged frequency domain features. Journal of Information Security and
 Applications 77, 103575 (2023)
23. Qing, Y., Yin, Q., Deng, X., Chen, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, K., Xu, K., Zhang, J., Li,
 Q.: Low-quality training data only? a robust framework for detecting encrypted
 malicious network traffic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04798 (2023)
24. Rebuffi, S.A., Kolesnikov, A., Sperl, G., Lampert, C.H.: icarl: Incremental classifier
 and representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2001–2010 (2017)
25. Riemer, M., Cases, I., Ajemian, R., Liu, M., Rish, I., Tu, Y., Tesauro, G.: Learning
 to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing interference.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11910 (2018)
26. Shuai, C., Zhong, J., Wu, S., Lin, F., Wang, Z., Ba, Z., Liu, Z., Cavallaro, L., Ren,
 K.: Locate and verify: A two-stream network for improved deepfake detection. In:
 ACM MM. pp. 7131–7142 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3581783.3612386
27. Van de Ven, G.M., Siegelmann, H.T., Tolias, A.S.: Brain-inspired replay for continual learning with artificial neural networks. Nature communications 11(1), 4069
 (2020)
28. Vitter, J.S.: Random sampling with a reservoir. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS) 11(1), 37–57 (1985)
29. Yadav, A.K., Singh, K., Amin, A.H., Almutairi, L., Alsenani, T.R., Ahmadian, A.:
 A comparative study on consensus mechanism with security threats and future
 scopes: Blockchain. Computer Communications 201, 102–115 (2023)
30. Zenke, F., Poole, B., Ganguli, S.: Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
 In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 3987–3995. PMLR (2017)
31. Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H.N., Chen, X., Wang, H.: Blockchain challenges and
 opportunities: A survey. International journal of web and grid services 14(4), 352–
 375 (2018)