IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 801

 Facing Differences of Similarity: Intra- and
 Inter-Correlation Unsupervised Learning
 for Chest X-Ray Anomaly Detection
 Shicheng Xu , Wei Li , Zuoyong Li , Member, IEEE, Tiesong Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Bob Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract — Anomaly detection can significantly aid doc- environments. Finally, a comparison with 18 state-of-thetors in interpreting chest X-rays. The commonly used art methods on three datasets demonstrates the superiority
strategy involves utilizing the pre-trained network to extract and effectiveness of the proposed method across various
features from normal data to establish feature represen- scenarios.
tations. However, when a pre-trained network is applied
to more detailed X-rays, differences of similarity can limit Index Terms— Medical anomaly detection, correlation
the robustness of these feature representations. Therefore, learning, feature fusion, transfer learning, chest X-ray.
we propose an intra- and inter-correlation learning framework for chest X-ray anomaly detection. Firstly, to better I. I NTRODUCTION
leverage the similar anatomical structure information in
 -RAY images are commonly used by physicians to diagchest X-rays, we introduce the Anatomical-Feature Pyramid
Fusion Module for feature fusion. This module aims to
obtain fusion features with both local details and global
 X nose and evaluate various medical conditions, such as
 pneumonia, chest fractures, and pneumothorax. Despite being
contextual information. These fusion features are initialized considered intuitive, accurate, and an efficient diagnostic tool,
by a trainable feature mapper and stored in a feature bank X-ray images still require interpretation by skilled radiologists.
to serve as centers for learning. Furthermore, to Facing
Differences of Similarity (FDS) introduced by the pre- Even experienced practitioners, who rely on visual inspection
trained network, we propose an intra- and inter-correlation of chest X-ray images, face challenges such as time-consuming
learning strategy: 1) We use intra-correlation learning to analysis and the potential for missed diagnoses and misdiagestablish intra-correlation between mapped features of noses. Several deep learning methods have shown significant
individual images and semantic centers, thereby initially efficacy in automatically analyzing X-ray images, thus easing
discovering lesions; 2) We employ inter-correlation learning
to establish inter-correlation between mapped features of the workload burden on radiologists [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
different images, further mitigating the differences of simi- However, the scarcity of large, well-annotated X-ray datasets
larity introduced by the pre-trained network, and achieving impedes supervised learning performance. Therefore, unsupereffective detection results even in diverse chest disease vised anomaly detection has become a primary research focus
 in X-ray medical imaging [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13],
 Received 11 August 2024; accepted 11 September 2024. Date of
publication 16 September 2024; date of current version 4 February [14]. However, compared to natural datasets, the differences
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science between normal and abnormal data in X-ray images are more
Foundation of China under Grant 62471207 and Grant 62276146; in subtle. Therefore, this poses significant challenges for chest
part by Key Technological Innovation and Industrialization Projects in
Fujian Province (School-Enterprise Joint) under Grant 2024XQ002; in X-ray anomaly detection.
part by the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province under Grant Currently, anomaly detection models solely utilize normal
2021J011014, Grant 2023R1050, and Grant 2023J011390; and in part data to construct feature representations. During the testing
by the Scientific and Technological Major Special Project of Fujian Provincial Health Commission under Grant 2021ZD01004. (Corresponding phase, these models identify anomalies by analyzing whether
author: Zuoyong Li.) the feature representations significantly deviate from the nor-
 Shicheng Xu is with the College of Computer and Information Sci- mal distribution. Most medical anomaly detection [7], [8], [9],
ences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China
(e-mail: fafuxsc1121@163.com). [10] relies on simulating pseudo-anomalous data to construct
 Wei Li is with the College of Computer Science and Mathemat- effective feature representations. Due to the diverse and unpreics, Fujian University of Technology, Fuzhou 350118, China (e-mail: dictable nature of anomalies, simulating pseudo-anomalous
liwei33660@163.com).
 Zuoyong Li is with Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Pro- data does not closely match real anomalies. Moreover, simcessing and Intelligent Control, School of Computer and Big Data, Min- ulating an anomaly set containing all possible anomalies is
jiang University, Fuzhou 350121, China (e-mail: fzulzytdq@126.com). impractical [15]. Methods based on Teacher-Student archi-
 Tiesong Zhao is with Fujian Key Laboratory for Intelligent Processing
and Wireless Transmission of Media Information, Fuzhou University, tectures [12], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20] implicitly describe
Fuzhou 350108, China (e-mail: t.zhao@fzu.edu.cn). the normal feature distribution by optimizing the differences
 Bob Zhang is with the PAMI Research Group, Department of Computer between teacher and student features distribution (learning norand Information Science, University of Macau, Macau, China (e-mail:
bobzhang@um.edu.mo). mal feature distribution). However, the student network may
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2024.3461231 unexpectedly produce abnormal feature distribution similar to

 1558-254X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

those in the teacher network. To overcome this issue, methods
based on distribution mapping (mapping the normal feature
distribution to a specific distribution) have shown improved
potential. Recently, distribution mapping methods primarily
employ techniques such as normalization flows [21], [22],
[23] and feature fine-tuning [13], [14], [24], [25], [26], [27].
The normalization flow-based methods primarily transform the
output of the pre-trained network into a Gaussian distribution.
Feature fine-tuning methods primarily map the output of the
pre-trained network to the feature distribution in a memory
bank or reduce the feature distribution differences between various positive samples through contrastive learning strategies.
The pre-trained network plays a crucial role in distribution
mapping methods and is also essential for the field of medical
anomaly detection [28]. However, the pre-trained network is
trained on large-scale datasets like ImageNet [29], which do
not include medical images. Although these methods perform
well on datasets such as MVTecAD [30], their application to
more subtle X-ray datasets may be limited by the introduction Fig. 1. (a) The use of a network pre-trained on ImageNet has led to
of bias [31], [32]. These biases stem from differences of differences of similarity, thereby causing significant differences in feature
 distribution. (b) Through intra-correlation learning, features are mapped
similarity between the pre-trained dataset domain and the into hyperspheres corresponding to their semantics, thereby effectively
target dataset domain. For example, in the ImageNet, the constructing feature representations. (c) By integrating inter-correlation
structure of objects and scenes is conveyed through a combi- learning, error mapping caused by differences of similarity are corrected,
 thereby alleviating significant differences in feature distribution. (Note:
nation of color, shape, and texture, which are highly complex Features of various colors represent distinct semantics.)
and variable. In contrast, structures in X-rays are typically
more direct and apparent because X-rays primarily depict the
internal anatomical structures of the body in a straightforward of fuzzy mapping features, resulting in a higher-density
and intuitive manner, focusing mainly on internal rather than representation of mapped features. Inter-correlation learning
external features of objects. establishes inter-correlation between different images. In the
 The motivation here is to address the bias introduced case of error mapping, the mutual antagonism of intra- and
by using the pre-trained network, while detecting subtle inter-correlation learning guides the optimization direction of
lesions–from the way humans discover anomalies. When error mapping, as shown in Fig. 1. Finally, the feature mapper
an ordinary person without medical knowledge detects lesions trained by the intra- and inter-correlation learning framework
on chest X-rays, apart from obvious lesions (intra-correlation can be used for anomaly detection. Our FDS is compared with
learning), the most effective method is to search for lesions by several state-of-the-art methods on the pediatric pneumonia
pairwise comparison of the same positions (inter-correlation ZhangLab dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and
learning). Inspired by this, we propose an intra- and inter- the multi-disease CheXpert dataset. The results show that
correlation learning framework for anomaly detection in chest our proposed method outperforms other methods in anomaly
X-rays, aimed at Facing Differences of Similarity (FDS). detection performance. The main contributions are as follows:
Firstly, we consider that X-ray images usually focus on specific • We proposed an intra- and inter-correlation learning
body regions and therefore exhibit similar structural features. framework FDS for chest X-ray anomaly detection, which
To fully utilize this fixed anatomical structure information, applies Facing the Differences of Similarity to mitigate
we propose an Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion (AFPF) the biases introduced by the pre-trained network. This
module for feature fusion. The features fused by the AFPF framework is able to construct more robust feature repremodule are initialized by a trainable feature mapper and stored sentations, thereby demonstrating exceptional capabilities
in a feature bank as semantic centers. Next, we reevaluate the in anomaly detection.
relationship between mapped features and semantic centers, • We have developed an AFPF module specifically for
identifying two mapping scenarios that influence the detec- X-ray images, designed to preserve local details while
tion of subtle lesions: fuzzy mapping and error mapping. enhancing its effectiveness in capturing subtle yet
Fuzzy mapping refers to mapping features close to multiple large-scale lesion patterns, including patchy, cloudy,
related semantic centers. Error mapping involves mapping fea- or filamentous appearances.
tures near semantic centers that are semantically mismatched. • We conducted comprehensive experiments using three
Therefore, we propose intra- and inter-correlation learning to distinct datasets: the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab
optimize the mapping ability of the feature mapper, enabling dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and the
it to detect subtle lesions. Specifically, intra-correlation learn- multi-disease CheXpert dataset. We compared FDS with
ing establishes intra-correlation between individual images several state-of-the-art baseline methods. Results from
and semantic centers. In the face of fuzzy mapping, intra- these experiments showed that our FDS consistently
correlation is established to determine the unique center outperforms other methods in detecting anomalies across
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 803

 pediatric and adult populations, as well as under various In the field of medical anomaly detection, [11] introduced a
 disease conditions. contrastive learning paradigm to address the issue of collapse
 The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section II in Teacher-Student architecture. Reference [12] achieved accudiscusses the application of anomaly detection in natural and rate classification of X-ray images by dynamically maintaining
medical images. Section III offers an in-depth explanation a memory queue based on spatial position information to
of our proposed FDS framework for chest X-ray anomaly suppress abnormal features. However, when attempting to
detection. Section IV presents extensive experimental results minimize the differences between normal feature distributions,
to validate the effectiveness of FDS. Section V discusses the the student network may unexpectedly generalize and produce
advantages and disadvantages of FDS. Finally, Section VI abnormal feature distributions similar to those in the teacher
provides a summary of our work. network [19].
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 C. Distribution Mapping-Based Anomaly Detection
A. Anomaly Simulation-Based Anomaly Detection
 While there are no abnormal data in the training dataset for Methods based on distribution mapping utilize a pre-trained
anomaly detection, it is possible to simulate pseudo-anomalous network to extract embedding vectors from normal traindata, thereby training the anomaly detection model in self- ing images, subsequently mapping these embedding vectors
supervised learning. A simple and effective strategy, known into a specific distribution. Distribution mapping is prias CutPaste [33], randomly selected a rectangular region in marily achieved through techniques such as normalization
the original image and then copied and pasted the content to flow [21], [22], [23] and feature fine-tuning [13], [14], [24],
different locations in the image. [25], [26], [27]. During the testing phase, anomaly scores
 In the field of medical anomaly detection, Tan et al. success- are determined by calculating the distance between the test
fully utilized foreign patch interpolation (FPI) [7] and Poisson images and the feature distribution. Csflow [21] and Fastimage interpolation (PII) [8] to simulate anomalies based on flow [22] suggested transforming normal feature distributions
natural variations in normal anatomy, particularly in abnormal into Gaussian distributions through normalization flow [35].
images of brain MRI and abdominal CT scans. NSA [9] Padim [24] performed feature extraction on sample patches,
also explored simulating more natural synthetic anomalies in estimated the Gaussian distribution of patches, and calculates
X-ray images through the integration of Poisson image editing anomaly scores using Mahalanobis distance. On the other
and parameter adjustments for anomaly localization. Anat- hand, PatchCore [25] constructed a feature bank with the
Paste [34] introduced an anatomical-aware pasting method most representative patches to maximize normality. CFA [26]
that uses a threshold-based lung segmentation preprocessing adopted feature adaptation based on a coupled hypersphere
task to create pseudo-anomalies in normal chest X-ray. Due layer, enhancing the distinguishability of subtle anomaly. Refto the subtle differences in medical images compared to erence [27] addressed the collapse issue that occurs within
natural datasets, [10] proposed CropMixPaste to generate the unit space with standard contrastive loss by proposing the
enhanced predictions of density shadow-like anomalies and Mean-Shifted contrastive loss.
encouraged the model to detect local irregularities. However, In the field of medical anomaly detection, there is relthe occurrence of synthetic anomalies does not closely match atively less exploration of methods based on distribution
real anomalies. In practice, simulating an anomaly set that mapping. Reference [13] employed differentiable top-k feature
includes all possible lesions is impossible due to the diverse adaptation to learn an attention-enhanced patch descriptor,
and unpredictable nature of lesions [15]. improving the ability to detect anomalies in complex medical
 imaging data. Reference [14] proposed SubMSF to address the
B. Teacher-Student Architecture-Based Anomaly challenges of model collapse or feature deterioration that may
Detection occur in the abnormal detection of leukocyte medical images.
 However, techniques relying on distribution mapping utilize
 The Teacher-Student architecture is based on a pre-trained
 extensive datasets such as ImageNet [29] for pre-training.
teacher network and a trainable student network, accurately
 While they demonstrate effectiveness on industrial datasets
localizing by leveraging the expression differences between the
 like MVTecAD [30], their applicability to medical data is
teacher and student networks. Various solutions have been proconstrained, potentially introducing biases in medical anomaly
posed in the past to enhance the discrimination and localization
 detection [31], [32]. Reference [36] attempted to circumvent
capabilities of different anomaly phenomena. For instance,
 pre-trained network by employing defect contrast positioning
[17] and [18] designed decoder architectures for the student
 but did not observe notable performance enhancements in
network, avoiding the drawbacks of having identical archidetecting subtle anomalies in X-ray images. Consequently,
tectures and data flows between teacher and student networks.
 further investigation is warranted to refine the distribution
Reference [19] introduced simulated anomalies to enhance the
 mapping method for analyzing chest X-ray images.
constraints on anomalous data. Simultaneously, [19] employed
a segmentation network to adaptively fuse multi-level feature III. M ETHOD
similarities, aiming for more accurate anomaly localization.
Reference [20] mitigated the limitations of Teacher-Student A. Overall Framework
architecture by compressing the latent space and simulating In this section, we will introduce the proposed anomaly
pseudo-anomalous data to suppress anomalous features. detection method FDS for chest X-ray images based on
804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed framework FDS: Initially, we extract features using a pre-trained network and employ an Anatomical-Feature
Pyramid Fusion (AFPF) module to fully leverage similar structures in X-ray images for obtaining fusion features. Subsequently, these fusion features
are initialized by a trainable feature mapper and stored in a feature bank. Next, intra- and inter-correlation learning are utilized to search the feature
bank, thereby guiding the construction of robust feature representations by the feature mapper. During testing, we compute the Euclidean distance
between the mapped features and the feature bank center to derive the anomaly score. (Note: Features of various colors represent distinct semantics,
and examples xi and xj are from the same batch.)

intra- and inter-correlation learning, as shown in Fig. 2. pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset may lead to biases in
Reiss et al.’s research [37] suggests that using a pre- feature mapping. In response to this issue, we have conducted
trained network can output relevant features for anomaly a detailed analysis of the mapping relationship between feadetection. Therefore, we use the WideResNet50 model pre- tures and semantic centers, identifying the following three
trained on ImageNet as the initial feature extractor σ . The main mapping scenarios: (1) Correct mapping: The feature
initial training dataset X train consists of normal images is accurately mapped near a semantic center that matches
(∀xi ∈ X train : yi = 0), where yi ∈ {0, 1} represents whether similar semantics. (2) Fuzzy mapping: The feature is mapped
the image xi is normal (0) or abnormal (1). The testing near multiple semantic centers, leading to unclear semantic
dataset X test includes both normal and abnormal images expressions. (3) Error mapping: The feature is mapped near a
(∀xi ∈ X test : yi ∈ {0, 1}). We set the output of the j-th layer semantic center that does not match its semantics. The specific
as σ j (xi ), we use the output of the first three blocks ( j ∈ mapping scenarios are shown in Fig. 3. We employ intra-
{1, 2, 3}) of the feature extractor σ as the features for subse- and inter-correlation learning to implement distinct coping
quent fusion. We use the Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion strategies tailored to various mapping scenarios. To facilitate
Module AF P F(·, ·, ·) to obtain fused features Fi ∈ R T ×D , this, we use a feature mapper φ(·) based on the feature bank
where T = H W , H and W are the height and width of c to establish the relationship between the mapped feature
 φ Fi,t and the semantic center ct , transferring knowledge
 
fused features, and D represents the sum of dimensions of the
feature extractor σ . Current anomaly detection methods [13], from the ImageNet domain to the target domain of chest
[26] use a network pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset to X-ray images. where, Fi,t ∈ R D , tϵ {1, · · · , H W }, and ct
extract features. By reducing the distance from features to their is the nearest neighbor searched in the feature bank c for the
nearest semantic center, it achieves high-density clustering feature Fi,t . Our objective is to use inter-correlation learning
of features around the semantic center. Therefore, anomaly to leverage the information correlation at the same positions in
detection can be performed based on the degree to which different images to transform error mapping into correct mapfeatures deviate from their semantic center. However, it is ping. Intra-correlation learning is employed to establish mutual
noteworthy that because there is a semantic difference between correlations between the mapped features and the semantic
the ImageNet dataset and the target chest X-ray dataset, these centers. Intra-correlation learning transforms fuzzy mapping
nearest semantic centers do not necessarily represent seman- into correct mapping and ensures high-density expression of
tically similar semantic centers. Therefore, using a network features for correct mapping. Therefore, during the testing
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 805

Fig. 3. Differences between the ImageNet domain and the target chest Fig. 4. For similar structures in X-ray images, we propose an AFPF
X-rays domain give rise to various mapping scenarios. (Case 1) The module. By combining outputs from different levels of the feature extracmapped feature is close to its corresponding semantic center, termed tor, we obtain more comprehensive features.
Correct Mapping. (Case 2) The mapped feature is equidistant from
multiple semantic centers, termed Fuzzy Mapping. (Case 3) The mapped
feature is close to the semantic center, but contradicts its intended
 the same size and concatenated to obtain the required fused
semantic, termed Error Mapping. (Note: Features of various colors features Fi . The proposed fusion module is shown in Fig. 4
represent distinct semantics.) and defined as follows:
 (
 avg σ j (xi ) ,
 
 j ∈ {1, 2}
phase, abnormality is measured by calculating the Euclidean f j,i = (2)
 attn max σ j (xi ) , j ∈ 3
 
distance between the sample and the semantic centers.
 Fi = Con f 1,i , i f 2,i , i f 3,i
   
 (3)
B. Feature Extraction where avg(·) represents average pooling, max(·) represents
 1) Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion Module: The outputs max pooling, attn(·) represents Multihead-Attention, i(·) repfrom different layers represent distinct information [38]. The resents upsampling using bilinear interpolation, and Con[·, ·, ·]
output from lower layers is more characteristic of the structural represents Concatenation operation.
properties of X-ray images, while the output from higher 2) Feature Bank: In order to better utilize the anomaly-free
layers contains more semantic information. Therefore, we use image features extracted by the model, current methods [13],
the AF P F(·, ·, ·) to obtain fused features Fi . This helps the [25], [26], [37] use a feature bank for storage. By building
model learn more discriminative features, thereby improving a feature bank, we can better guide the feature mapper
its performance. The AF P F module is defined as follows: φ (·) for intra-correlation and inter-correlation learning to face
 Fi = AF P F (σ1 (xi ) , σ2 (xi ) , σ3 (xi )) (1) differences of similarity. Feature bank is represented as c ∈
 RT ×D , where T = H W is the size of the feature bank,
 Now, let’s delve into the specific details of this module which corresponds to the number of semantic centers. H
to understand how to effectively fuse the outputs of lower and W represent the height and width of the fused features,
and higher-level features to obtain information with both local respectively. We dynamically update our feature bank using
details and global context. Notably, the ImageNet pre-trained the Exponential Moving Average (EMA):
network, which is primarily tailored for natural image clas- (n − 1)cn−1 + φ (Fn )
sification, introduces a bias that is inappropriate for medical cn = (4)
 n
image anomaly detection. Consequently, utilizing the features
extracted by the feature extractor σ is not optimal. To address where n represents the number of updates to the feature bank.
this issue, average pooling is employed to average values After N updates, the feature bank c will contain the overall
within the pooling window, significantly reducing the position average semantic features of all data, where N represents the
sensitivity of local features and ensuring translation invari- number of images in the training dataset. The formula for the
ance [39]. Considering the structural and positional variations entire process unfolds as follows:
in X-ray images, average pooling, denoted avg(·), is applied N
 1X
to σ j (xi ) for j ∈ {1, 2}. Furthermore, max pooling, which c= φ (Fi ) (5)
 N
captures the maximum value within the pooling window, i
preserves the most significant features and enhances their
discriminability [40]. Given the consistent patient postures C. Intra-Correlation Learning
in X-ray anomaly detection and the primarily semantic dis- In the field of medical anomaly detection, pre-trained nettinctions between abnormal and normal images, we augment works play a crucial role [28]. Most current methods [24],
semantic feature discriminability by extracting local max- [25], [26] utilize these networks for feature extraction. These
ima from σ j=3 (xi ) using max pooling, indicated by max(·). pre-trained networks provide generic features (such as tex-
Additionally, the diffuse interstitial pattern of pneumonia is ture and edge features) from the ImageNet domain to the
characteristically manifested by reticular opacities, ground- target domain, enabling transfer learning capabilities [41]. This
glass opacities, and either fine nodular or patchy infiltrates. generic feature indicates a certain degree of similarity between
To capture these long-range dependencies and enhance the the ImageNet domain and the target domain. We levermodel’s sensitivity and generalization to the data, we use age this similarity to establish associations between mapped
Multihead-Attention to aggregate the features obtained from features and semantic centers through intra-correlation, effecmax pooling. Finally, the processed features are upsampled to tively handling both correct mapping and fuzzy mapping.
806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Initially, intra-attraction ensures that during correct mapping,
the mapped features exhibit high-density expression around
the semantic centers. However, due to differences of similarity
between the ImageNet and target domains, mapped features
may not anchor to a semantic center, leading to fuzzy mapping.
To address this issue, fuzzy mapping is transformed into
correct mapping through intra-repulsion using additional hard
negative semantic centers.
 1) Intra-Attraction: To achieve primarily the transfer learning
 Fig. 5. The optimization process of intra-correlation learning effectively
from the pre-trained dataset to the target chest X-ray dataset, handles fuzzy mapping, ensuring a unique semantic center for fuzzy
we guide the correctly mapped features φ Fi,t to densely
 
 mapping. However, when features are erroneously mapped, it results in
 incorrect optimization and shifts the feature to the wrong semantic center.
surround the feature  bank c. By searching for the K nearest (Note: Features of various colors represent distinct semantics.)
semantic centers ctk k ∈ argmin D φ Fi,t , ct
  
 in the
 K
feature bank c, the mapped feature φ Fi,t is then mapped we used a network pre-trained on ImageNet [29], which
 

into a hypersphere with a radius of R centered at ctk . The value does not contain medical images, and there are significant
of R allows gradient descent, and by continuously adjusting differences between the ImageNet domain and the chest
R, the mapped features exhibit a high-density representation. X-ray dataset domain [31], [32]. These differences imply
L intra−att is set as a penalty when the distance from ctk that features semantically similar in the ImageNet domain do
exceeds the radius R: not necessarily maintain the same semantic similarity in the
 T K chest X-ray image domain. For example, in the ImageNet,
 1 XX n   o
 similar colors or grayscale levels do not consistently reflect
 max 0, D φ Fi,t , ctk − R 2
 
 L intra−att =
 TK similarity, as they might contain completely different objects
 t=1 k=1
 or scenes. However, in X-ray images, similar gray levels
 (6)
 may indicate similar types of tissues or pathological states.
 2) Intra-Repulsion: In X-ray imaging, we observe the ‘over- These differences of similarity across domains may lead to
lap’ phenomenon of various internal tissue structures, which error mapping, significantly affecting the model’s ability to
occurs because multiple layers of tissues with different den- represent features and further impacting the accuracy of lesion
sities are presented simultaneously on the same plane image. detection. As illustrated in example xi in Fig. 5, if the mapped
 feature φ Fi,t is semantically dissimilar to its neighboring
 
This overlapping effect causes some tissue structures to appear
similar in the image, thereby leading to fuzzy mapping. semantic center ct , then during the intra-correlation learning
To address the situation of fuzzy mapped feature φ Fi,t process, this feature might be erroneously attracted into the
simultaneously belonging to multiple semantic centers ctk , hypersphere of the dissimilar neighboring semantic center ct .
we employ additional hard-negative semantic centers to repel To address this issue, we propose inter-correlation learning
the fuzzy mapped  feature, thereby mapping the fuzzy mapped to establish relationships between mapped features of differfeature φ Fi,t to the correct semantic center ct . By search- ent X-ray images. Our aim is to approximately capture the
( for the K -th to K + J -th )nearest semantic centers
ing semantic information within the target X-ray image domain
 j by utilizing the inter-correlation between different X-ray
 ct j ∈ arg min D φ Fi,t , ct
  
 from the mapped feature images. This approach guides the erroneously mapped features
  [K ,K +J ] φ Fi,t towards semantic centers ct that are semantically
φ Fi,t to the neighboring semantic center ct , we then repel
the mapped feature φ Fi,t from a hypersphere centered at similar, thereby enhancing the model’s feature representation
 j capability.
ct with a radius  of R. This process maps the fuzzy mapped 1) Inter-Attraction: Since subjects in X-ray images typically
feature φ Fi,t to the correct ctk hypersphere. Therefore, we set
 j maintain a fixed posture, features at the same positions usually
L intra− f ar as the repulsion penalty imposed by ct : have similar semantic information. Therefore, inter-correlation
 T J learning selectively reduces the distance between mapped
 1 XX n   j o
L intra−r ep = max 0, R 2 − D φ Fi,t , ct −α features at the same position  in different images, moving
 TJ the mapped features φ Fi,t closer to the correct semantic
 t=1 j=1
 (7) center ct , thereby mitigating the issue of error mapping.
  a uniform distribution of the mapped feature
 Firstly, to achieve
The hyperparameter α is used to control the balance between Ai,t = φ Fi,t around the semantic center, as opposed to the
intra-attraction and intra-repulsion. unit hyperspherical origin o, the distance from the center is
 updated from the original origin o to the semantic center ct .
D. Inter-Correlation Learning → → →
 Ct Ai,t = O Ai,t − OCt (8)
 When a feature is mapped to a neighboring semantic center,
that feature shares similar semantics with this semantic center. →
However, the accuracy of mapping is closely related to the where Ct Ai,t represents the vector from the semantic center ct
 →
quality of features extracted by the pre-trained network. Since to the mapped feature Ai,t , O Ai,t represents the vector from
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 807

 optimization. The distance to the G nearest
  mapped features
 φ φ
 
  F i,r for the mapped feature Fi,t is represented as
 g
 di,t g ∈ arg min φ Fi,t , φ Fi,r , t ̸ = r . The L inter −cont
  
 G
 g
 is set to prevent the distances di,t from being extended:
  
 g
 L inter −con = max di,t (11)
 Therefore, the combined use of intra- and inter-correlation
 learning for transfer learning to optimize the parameters of
 φ(·) is defined by the total loss as follows:
Fig. 6. The Importance of inter-constraints: Sole reliance on interattraction does not ensure the correct optimization direction. Through Loss = L intra−att + L intra−r ep + L inter −att + L inter −con
inter-constraints, the mapped features influenced by inter-attraction can
adjust their positions based on the distance to neighboring features, (12)
thereby avoiding erroneous optimization. (Note: Features of various
colors represent distinct semantics, and examples xi and xj are from
the same batch.) E. Anomaly Score
 Inspired by [13] and [26], we adopt the Euclidean distance
 →
the origin o to the mapped feature Ai,t and OCt represents between the K nearest semantic centers and mapped features
the vector from the origin o to the semantic center ct . To learn φ Fi,t to calculate the anomaly score of mapped features,
semantic information between different images, we divide each as follows:
batch size into two parts, and sequentially obtain images xi and Di,t,k = min k D(φ Fi,t , ct )
 
 (13)
x j . By calculating the cosine similarity between the mapped
 The closer the mapped feature φ Fi,t is to the semantic
 
features Ai,t and A j,t at the same positions in different images
xi and x j , we can obtain the similarity measures at different center ctk , the more evident the normal feature is. We employ
locations. the so f tmin function to calculate the weights of the feature
 → → φ Fi,t with respect to these K centers.
 → → Ct Ai,t · Ct A j,t
 sim (Ct Ai,t , Ct A j,t ) = 1 − → →
 (9) e−Di,t,0
 Si,t = P K · Di,t,0 (14)
 Ct Ai,t · Ct A j,t k=1 e
 −Di,t,k

 → where Si,t represents the anomaly score of the mapped
 The subsequent use of sim i j,t is to represent sim(Ct Ai,t , feature φ Fi,t . We use the maximum feature anomaly
 
 →
Ct A j,t ). When sim i j,t is smaller, it indicates a higher semantic value Si,t in the image as the image’s anomaly value
similarity between Ai,t and A j,t . We selectively reduce the Simagei = Max (S i,t ). By calculating the Precision and
distance between the H most semantically similar mapped Recall between each image’s anomaly value Simagei and its
features, i.e., decreasing their similarity measure. The simi- label yi , we determine the F1. Finally, we use the F1 of the
larity measure between the H most similar mapped features image to determine the threshold for the image anomaly score,
 as follows:
  
 
is expressed as sim i j,h h ∈ arg min sim i j,t . L inter −att is
 H
defined as the penalty based on sim i j,h : 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 = (15)
 H
 1X ( Precision + Recall
 L inter −att = sim i j,h (10) 1, Simagei ≥ argmax(F1)
 H Scor ei = (16)
 h=1 0, Simagei < argmax(F1)
 2) Inter-Constraints: As shown in the Fig. 6, relying solely where argmax(·) represents the function that returns the index
on inter-attraction could lead to an incorrect optimization of the maximum value in the F1 array.
tendency during the mapping process, where correctly mapped
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
features are wrongly attracted to semantic centers that are
not semantically similar. We refer to this phenomenon as A. Public Benchmarks
erroneous optimization. Inspired by previous research [42], We utilized three publicly available chest X-ray image
which suggests preventing mismatches by limiting the distance datasets to evaluate the performance of the FDS, including:
between the most similar matching pairs, we establish inter- the ZhangLab dataset for pediatric pneumonia, the RSNA
constraints by limiting the distances from φ Fi,t and φ F j,t
 
 dataset for adult pneumonia, and the CheXpert dataset covto their respective G most similar mapped features in the ering 12 complex diseases. These datasets were developed
image. As shown in the Fig. 6, through inter-constraints, and curated by their respective authors and included ethical
the targets of inter-attraction, φ Fi,t and φ F j,t , can
  
 statements for research purposes, ensuring the absence of
adjust their positions based on the distance to neighboring potential biases.
features, allowing the inter-attraction to guide the feature The ZhangLab Chest X-ray dataset [43] was released by
mapping in a more accurate direction and avoid erroneous the Shiley Eye Institute, University of California San Diego,
808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 B ENCHMARK T ESTING R ESULTS FOR THE T ESTING DATASETS . T HE I NDICATORS FOR THE TOP T HREE P OSITIONS IN THE B ASELINE A RE
 R EPRESENTED BY O RANGE , B LUE , AND G REEN , R ESPECTIVELY. T-S R EFERS TO THE T EACHER -S TUDENT A RCHITECTURE

USA. It comprises 5,232 pediatric chest X-ray images. The mapper and optimized it during the training phase. In the
training dataset comprises 3,883 images depicting pneumonia preprocessing phase, the size of each chest X-ray image was
cases and 1,349 images depicting normal cases. The testing resized to 224×224 pixels, the same size as the images predataset includes 234 normal images and 390 pneumonia trained on ImageNet. During training, we used AdamW as
images from a total of 624 patients. Based on the settings the optimizer, set the batch size to 8, and the training period
described in [12], we completed the model training on the to 100 epochs. The learning rate was set to 5 × 10−4 , and
training dataset. To prevent the leakage of information from the weight decay was set to 3 × 10−5 . Finally, in the intrathe testing dataset, we tested using the weights obtained in the correlation learning, the hyperparameters K and J were both
last epoch of the training phase. set to 3. The initial value of the radius R was set to 1 × 10−5 ,
 The RSNA dataset [44] released by the Clinical Center of and gradient descent was allowed. In the inter-correlation
the National Institutes of Health, USA, includes chest X-ray learning, the hyperparameters H were set to 3, and G was
images from 26,684 patients. Among these images, 8,851 are set to 1. All hyperparameter selections were based on good
marked as normal, 6,012 show pneumonia, and another 11,821 experimental performance achieved on the selected network
are neither normal nor indicative of pneumonia. Following the (WideResNet50).
setup in [34], we train our models on the training dataset and
use the model weights from the final training epoch for testing.
 The Stanford CheXpert dataset [45] was released by C. Comparison With State-of-the-Art
the Department of Radiology, Stanford University, USA. We employed 18 advanced baseline models for training
It encompasses 12 diseases, namely Pleural Effusion, Enlarged and testing on the ZhangLab Chest X-ray and Stanford
Cardiomediastinum, Lung Opacity, Consolidation, Pleural CheXpert and RSNA datasets, which encompass methods
Other, Fracture, Atelectasis, Lung Lesion, Cardiomegaly, such as anomaly simulation, Teacher-Student architecture, and
Edema, Pneumonia, and Pneumothorax. Our evaluation was distribution mapping. They are: PatchCore [25], Padim [24],
limited to anterior-posterior (PA) view images, comprising RD [17], RD++ [20], Csflow [21], Fastflow [22], Pyra-
5,249 normal chest X-ray images and 23,671 chest X-ray midflow [36], Simplenet [15], CFA [26], NSA [9], PII [8],
images exhibiting diseases. Following the setup in [12], FPI [7], CutPaste [33], CropMixPaste [10], SQUID [12],
we trained on the training dataset and tested using the weights EDC [11], AnatPaste [34], Mean-Shifted [27]. We evaluated
from the last epoch. their performance using standard metrics: Area Under the ROC
 Curve (ROCAUC), Accuracy (ACC), and F1 Score (F1). The
 performance of our proposed FDS and various state-of-the-art
B. Experimental Settings baseline models is presented in Table I.
 The experiments in this paper were conducted using Python 1) ZhangLab Chest X-Ray: We attained superior results
3.9 and PyTorch 1.12.1 on the Ubuntu system, equipped compared to other baselines, achieving ROCAUC, F1, and
with an Intel i5-12490F CPU and an NVIDIA GEFORCE ACC of 0.979, 0.967, and 0.959, respectively. The methods
RTX 3090 24G GPU. We chose to use the WideResNet50 PII and CropMixPaste, employing Anomaly Simulation techpre-trained on ImageNet as the backbone network for the niques, yielded favorable results due to their effective anomaly
initial experiments and the WideResNet50 backbone network simulation strategies, achieving ROCAUC of 0.871 and 0.868,
was fully frozen. We used 1 × 1 CoordConv as the feature respectively. Based on this, AnatPaste further enhances the
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 809

process by using a threshold-based lung segmentation pre- TABLE II
processing task to directly create pseudo-anomalies in the W E E VALUATED THE P ERFORMANCE OF M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT
 C OMPONENTS ON THE Z HANG L AB C HE X PERT AND RSNA DATASETS .
thoracic area of X-ray images, achieving ROCAUC of 0.901. R ED I NDICATES THE D ECREASE IN I NDICATORS D UE TO THE
The Teacher-Student Architecture method RD++, employed L ACK OF I NTER -C ONSTRAINTS
on the ZhangLab dataset, which exclusively contains pneumonia anomalies, achieved excellent results through compact
feature representation and the suppression of abnormal features, with ROCAUC, ACC, and F1 of 0.913, 0.882, and
0.859, respectively. Among Distribution Mapping-based
methods, Fastflow demonstrated outstanding results owing to
its Transformer-based architecture’s ability to better attend to
anatomical structures in X-ray images. Additionally, CFA utilizing proposed coupled hyperspherical adaptation, enhances
feature distinctiveness. Mean-Shifted achieved ROCAUC of
0.938 through its contrastive loss.
 2) RSNA: The dataset includes imaging related to adult
pulmonary diseases, primarily focusing on pneumonia and its
complications. In comparison with other benchmark models, TABLE III
our method achieved ROCAUC, F1, and ACC values of 0.829, O N THE Z HANG L AB , C HE X PERT, AND RSNA DATASETS ,
 W E E XAMINED THE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT ATTENTION
0.755, and 0.757, respectively. In the anomaly simulation M ODULES ON O UR AFPF M ODULE
methods, PII and AnatPaste, which simulate anomalies based
on the natural changes in normal anatomical structures, both
achieved good ROCAUC results of 0.775. EDC based on
a Teacher-Student architecture, effectively and consistently
learned the features of X-ray images through the introduction of a contrastive learning paradigm. In the distribution
mapping methods, Fastflow primarily learns data distributions
through bijective transformations, focusing heavily on local
texture features, which resulted in poor performance in global
semantic understanding and thus did not meet expectations in components of FDS. Initially, using only intra-attraction for
the RSNA dataset. Meanwhile, CFA maintained good perfor- transfer learning to address correct mapping scenarios yielded
mance in processing images of adult lung turbidity through its ROCAUC scores of 0.889, 0.699, and 0.742 on the ZhangLab,
adaptive strategy. CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, respectively. Utilizing the
 3) Stanford CheXpert: We achieved superior results com- AFPF module allows the retention of local details while
pared to other baselines, with ROCAUC, F1, and ACC effectively capturing subtle lesions in the chest area, sigreaching 0.861, 0.791, and 0.798, respectively. The Anomaly nificantly influencing the ZhangLab dataset, which contains
Simulation method proposed by CropMixPaste tends to only pneumonia abnormalities, achieving ROCAUC of 0.947.
generate lesions resembling density shadows, leading to Incorporating intra-repulsion effectively manages fuzzy mapimproved performance on the more complex CheXpert dataset, ping, achieving ROCAUC scores of 0.971, 0.785, and 0.797 on
which includes 12 diseases. Meanwhile, AnatPaste specifically the ZhangLab, CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, respectively.
designed for simulating pneumonia lesions, also demonstrates When only inter-attraction is used to address error mappings,
good performance on the CheXpert dataset. The Teacher- the ROCAUC on the ZhangLab and RSNA datasets reaches
Student Architecture method RD++ demonstrated superior 0.978 and 0.815, respectively. However, due to some corperformance on the ZhangLab dataset. However, its perfor- rect mappings lacking inter-constraints and being mistakenly
mance is not as good on the more complex CheXpert dataset optimized as error mappings, the ACC and F1 scores on the
compared to our method, indicating that complex medical ZhangLab dataset decrease by 0.002 each, and the F1 score on
lesions affect the effectiveness of RD++’s compact feature the RSNA dataset decreases by 0.001. By introducing interrepresentation and suppression of abnormal features. SQUID constraints, optimal results are achieved on the ZhangLab,
utilizing spatial-aware memory queues to detect lesions, CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, with ROCAUC values of 0.979,
exhibits a better focus on lesion areas in more complex chest 0.861, and 0.829, respectively.
X-ray images. In the Distribution Mapping-based methods, 2) Impact of Attention: In Table III, we evaluated the perfor-
Csflow achieves excellent results on complex datasets through mance of various attention mechanisms in the feature fusion
joint likelihood estimation of multiscale features, achieving module. Coordinate [46] embeds positional information into
ROCAUC of 0.778. channel attention, capturing long-range dependencies while
 preserving precise location information. Shuffle Attention
D. Ablation Studies (SA) [47] optimizes information processing by combining spa-
 1) Impact of Different Modules: Table II presents the results tial and channel attentions with Shuffle units and channel shufof an ablation study assessing the contributions of different fle operations. HaloNet [48] enhances accuracy by introducing
810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. ROC Curves for the ZhangLab, CheXpert, and RSNA datasets are presented. When the TPR (True Positive Rate) reaches 0.95, the
intersection of the red line with the ROC Curves indicates the corresponding FPR (False Positive Rate), referred to as FPR@TPR95.

chunked local attention and attention downsampling tech- TABLE IV
niques. ECA [49] effectively captures local cross-channel T HE S ETTING OF THE TOP - K H YPERPARAMETERS K, J, H, G IN I NTRA -
 AND I NTER -C ORRELATION L EARNING H AVE AN I MPACT ON THE FDS
interactions using one-dimensional convolutions. Triplet [50]
effectively captures cross-dimensional interactions through a
three-branch structure. SK [51] enhances the neural network’s
adaptability by introducing a dynamic selection mechanism
among multiple kernel sizes. Upon comparisons, we found
that the Multihead-attention module is more suitable for our
Anatomical Feature Pyramid Fusion (AFPF) and outperforms
other modules in performance. Therefore, we believe that
after employing the Multihead-attention module, it can better
capture the anatomical structures in X-ray images.
 3) Impact of Hyperparameters: We investigated the impact
of four hyperparameters, namely K, J, H, and G, within the
intra- and inter-correlation learning Top-k setting of FDS.
As illustrated in Table IV, the best results were obtained when
K, J, and H were all set to 3, with model performance declining
as these values increased. The optimal result was achieved
when G was set to 1; however, Setting G to 2 or 3 resulted
in a notable decline in model performance due to increased
constraints, which restricted intra-attraction and consequently
led to a significant decrease in performance.
 4) ROC Curve: As shown in Fig. 7, we have demonstrated feature extraction, we conducted ablation studies with a model
the image AUC curves of the FDS method on the ZhangLab, pre-trained on medical images to explore whether the FDS can
CheXpert, and RSNA datasets. The key metric (FPR@TPR95) mitigate these biases.
is the false positive rate (FPR) when the true positive rate ChexNet [52] provides DenseNet121 weights (called Chex-
(TPR) reaches 0.95, marked with a red line. FPR@TPR95 is Dense) pre-trained on 112,120 frontal chest X-ray images
the proportion of healthy samples misdiagnosed as diseased involving 30,805 unique patients with 14 disease labels.
when nearly all true cases are detected, which is crucial RadImageNet [53] provides DenseNet121 weights (called
for medical judgment in healthcare applications. The more RadDense) and ResNet50 weights (called RadRes) pre-trained
leftward the intersection of the AUC curve with the standard on 1.35 million annotated images of musculoskeletal, nervous
red line (TPR=0.95), the lower the FPR@TPR95, indicating system, oncology, gastrointestinal, endocrine, and pulmonary
a lower rate of misdiagnosis. In these three chest X-ray image pathologies from CT, MRI, and ultrasound images. These
datasets, the FDS method achieved the lowest FPR@TPR95, images include medical images marked with 3 modalities,
demonstrating its potential high accuracy in the field of 11 anatomical structures, and 165 pathology labels.
medical anomaly detection. This series of quantitative anal- As shown in Fig. 8(a), the model pre-trained on ImageNet
yses further validates the FDS method’s exceptional anomaly achieved ROCAUC of only 0.441 in the first epoch, which
detection performance across different styles of chest X-ray was due to significant bias from the pre-trained weights.
image datasets. In contrast, the ChexDense weights, pre-trained on medical
 data, reached ROCAUC of 0.676, while the RadDense weights
 achieved ROCAUC of 0.722. As training progressed, it was
E. Robustness Experiment observed that FDS could reduce the bias from using ImageNet
 1) Whether Pre-Trained Bias Is Mitigated?: Due to biases pre-trained weights, showing significant improvement by the
introduced by using an ImageNet pre-trained network for second epoch and surpassing the performance of models using
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 811

Fig. 8. Training processes of (a) DenseNet121 and (b) ResNet50 networks pre-trained on various datasets.

medical pre-trained weights by the third epoch, maintaining higher performance in subsequent training. Additionally,
Fig. 8(a) also demonstrates that models pre-trained on larger
medical datasets can achieve better detection performance,
although their performance still did not exceed that of the models pre-trained on ImageNet, because the large data volume of
ImageNet provides richer and more discriminative features for
the model, which is why we continued to use the ImageNet
pre-trained model as the feature extractor.
 Similarly, we compared the performance on ResNet50,
as shown in Fig. 8(b). The model pre-trained on ImageNet Fig. 9. Several advanced models of the distribution mapping type
achieved ROCAUC of 0.506 in the first epoch, indicating undergoing robustness analysis.
an initial bias caused by the pre-trained ImageNet data. The
RadRes weights achieved ROCAUC of 0.705 in the first epoch,
 F. Visualization Results
showing a better initial performance. As training progressed,
it was demonstrated that FDS could effectively alleviate the Grad-CAM has been employed for anomaly localizabias introduced by the ImageNet pre-trained data, enhancing tion [10], [25], [33]. Given the similarity between normal
model performance. and abnormal textures, obtaining pixel-level labels for local-
 2) Disease-Free Training Requirement?: In medical anomaly ized anomalies in chest X-ray images can be challenging.
detection, so-called unsupervised methods are not fully unsu- Therefore, we utilize Grad-CAM visualization [54] to identify
pervised, as the model requires training on healthy images. regions most likely to exhibit anomalies. In Fig.10, we present
The removal of images without lesions depends on manual the visual comparison results of pneumonia X-ray images
annotation of healthy or diseased labels at the image space. (from the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab dataset and the
Consequently, there is a phenomenon where abnormal samples adult pneumonia RSNA dataset) and multi-disease chest X-ray
are erroneously labeled. To assess the robustness of the model, images (from the CheXpert dataset). We utilize features from
we evaluated our approach against four other distribution the final convolutional layer of each model to compute gradimapping paradigms within the ratios (disease images/ healthy ents for Grad-CAM.
images) of 0% to 40% proportions. As shown in Fig. 9, 1) Pneumonia X-Ray: In Fig. 10(a), we showcase the localwhen the ratio is between 0% and 4%, FDS experiences a ization capabilities of several advanced algorithms for pedisignificant decline from 0.979 to 0.837. This is because FDS atric pneumonia (ZhangLab) and adult pneumonia (RSNA).
learns abnormal patterns through intra-attraction that we do not FDS demonstrates a strong ability to focus on the entire lung,
want to learn. However, as the ratio gradually increases from effectively covering the entire lesion area. Through the lung
4% to 40%, FDS does not exhibit a continued severe decline segmentation preprocessing task, AnatPaste can effectively
as anticipated. This is because intra-correlation better ignores simulate and focus on local lesions in the lungs; however,
some abnormal patterns due to its handling of fuzzy mapping, it may overlook anomalies in the diffuse interstitial pattern.
while the constraints of inter-correlation learning ensure a The method proposed by CropMixPaste mainly concentrates
better optimization direction for error mapping. Conversely, on specific local areas, which may lead to the neglect of the
as the ratio escalates, CFA consistently shows a downward entire lesion. Additionally, since its anomaly simulation is not
trend. Padim, which models the normal class probabilities limited to the lungs, it may cause attention to be diverted to
using a multivariate Gaussian distribution, undergoes a gradual areas outside the lungs. NSA seems to focus on overly subtle
decrease after experiencing slight fluctuations between 8%- areas, which may make representation learning challenging
12%. On the other hand, PatchCore, employing core subset as it pursues naturally simulated anomalies. In complex chest
sampling to reduce redundancy while potentially missing some X-ray images, RD++ utilizes a student network to learn normal
abnormal patterns, exhibits a variability range from 0% to feature distributions, with the learned content tending toward
40%. the corners of chest X-ray images. SQUID using spatial-aware
812 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 10. (a) Visual results of Grad-CAM for pneumonia using CropMixPaste, SQUID, NSA, AnatPaste, RD++, and our proposed method. (b) Visual
results of Grad-CAM using our proposed method on the CheXpert dataset for twelve different diseases.

memory queues for anomaly detection, can effectively focus 2) Multi-Disease X-Ray: Given the diversity of chest dison the lungs. However, due to automatically omitting patterns eases, in Fig. 10(b), we further present the Grad-CAM
of minority groups, when medical instruments are present, visualization results of FDS on the CheXpert dataset, which
it may lead to attention being concentrated on areas we do comprises 12 diseases. We observe that FDS currently strugnot wish to emphasize. gles to precisely locate anomalies at the pixel level. However,
XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 813

this limitation is understandable for several reasons. Firstly, VI. C ONCLUSION
FDS operates as an unsupervised approach, unlike methods In this work, we propose an intra- and inter-correlation
such as [1], [2], [3], [4], and [6], which rely on pixel- framework FDS for exploring anomaly detection in chest
level annotations for normal and abnormal images. Secondly, X-ray images. Firstly, our FDS introduces an AFPF module
the diverse nature of chest diseases can lead to various that can fully utilize the anatomical structural information in
complications. For instance, pneumonia may cause fluid accu- chest X-ray images. Subsequently, we employ an intra- and
mulation between the lung and the pleura (the thin tissue layer inter-correlation learning strategy for facing the differences of
surrounding the chest cavity), resulting in pleural effusion. similarity introduced by the pre-trained network. With these
Consequently, the complexity of chest X-ray images further techniques, the method can alleviate the challenge of anomaly
hampers pixel-level localization. Nonetheless, FDS demon- detection in diverse chest disease environments. To assess the
strates the ability to comprehensively cover lesion areas for effectiveness of our approach, experiments were conducted
the 12 diseases provided by the CheXpert dataset, thereby on two different types of datasets. The experimental results
effectively aiding medical experts in diagnosis. demonstrate that our method surpasses several state-of-the-art
 methods in chest X-ray anomaly detection.
 V. D ISCUSSION
 Based on our experimental results, our method outper-
 R EFERENCES
forms existing methods on the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab
dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and the multi- [1] F. Li, X. Lu, and J. Yuan, “MHA-CoroCapsule: Multi-head attention
 routing-based capsule network for COVID-19 chest X-ray image clasdisease CheXpert dataset. In methods based on anomaly sification,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1208–1218,
simulation, the significant differences between simulated May 2022.
pseudo-lesions and real lesions in the test datasets greatly [2] K. Sanchez, C. Hinojosa, H. Arguello, D. Kouamé, O. Meyrignac, and
 A. Basarab, “CX-DaGAN: Domain adaptation for pneumonia diagnosis
limit the performance of such models. In methods based on on a small chest X-ray dataset,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41, no. 11,
teacher-student networks, due to the subtlety of the lesions, pp. 3278–3288, Nov. 2022.
the student network tends to generalize and generate abnormal [3] F. Wang et al., “Lumbar bone mineral density estimation from chest
 X-ray images: Anatomy-aware attentive multi-ROI modeling,” IEEE
feature distributions similar to those of the teacher network. Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 257–267, Jan. 2023.
Methods based on distribution mapping inevitably use pre- [4] A. Souid, N. Sakli, and H. Sakli, “Toward an efficient deep learntrained networks as feature extractors. Although Pyramidflow ing model for lung pathologies detection in X-ray images,” in
 Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC), May 2022,
attempts to avoid using the pre-trained network through defect pp. 1028–1033.
contrast localization, the results are not ideal. Existing dis- [5] E. Tiu, E. Talius, P. Patel, C. P. Langlotz, A. Y. Ng, and P. Rajpurkar,
tribution mapping-based methods mainly rely on similarity “Expert-level detection of pathologies from unannotated chest X-ray
 images via self-supervised learning,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 6,
measures (e.g., Euclidean distance, Mahalanobis distance, no. 12, pp. 1399–1406, Sep. 2022.
cosine similarity) for transfer learning and anomaly detection. [6] R. O. Ogundokun, A. B. Adelodun, A. A. Adebiyi, M. Daniyal, and
For instance, CFA and PatchCore use Euclidean distance as M. Odusami, “Application of pre-trained CNN methods to identify
a similarity measure for training. This neglects the similarity COVID-19 pneumonia from chest X-ray,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Sci.,
 Eng. Bus. Sustain. Develop. Goals (SEB-SDG), vol. 1, Apr. 2023,
differences between different dataset domains, thereby affect- pp. 1–6.
ing the model’s feature representation capability. Mean-shifted [7] J. Tan, B. Hou, J. Batten, H. Qiu, and B. Kainz, “Detecting outliers
through an improved contrastive loss, brings the positive with foreign patch interpolation,” Mach. Learn. Biomed. Imag., vol. 1,
 pp. 1–27, Apr. 2022.
samples closer together, allowing the model to indirectly learn [8] J. Tan, B. Hou, T. Day, J. Simpson, D. Rueckert, and B. Kainz,
the similarity of the target X-ray dataset, thus achieving a good “Detecting outliers with Poisson image interpolation,” in Proc. 24th Int.
detection performance. However, the data augmentation meth- Conf., Strasbourg, France, Sep. 2021, pp. 581–591.
 [9] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic
ods Mean-shifted employs might introduce anomalies (e.g., anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in
Flipping X-ray images may cause abnormal phenomena such Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, pp. 474–489.
as situs inversus), thereby hindering detection performance. [10] W. Li, G.-H. Liu, H. Fan, Z. Li, and D. Zhang, “Self-supervised
 multi-scale cropping and simple masked attentive predicting for lung
Therefore, we address the similarity differences by distin- CT-scan anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 43, no. 1,
guishing between possible mappings (correct mapping, fuzzy pp. 594–607, Jan. 2024.
mapping, erroneous mapping) and using intra-correlation and [11] J. Guo, S. Lu, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “Encoder-decoder contrast
 for unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images,” IEEE Trans.
inter-correlation learning. Our method avoids the risk of Med. Imag., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1102–1112, Mar. 2024.
introducing anomalies, while approximating the similarity of [12] T. Xiang et al., “SQUID: Deep feature in-painting for unsupervised
the target domain, thereby enhancing the model’s feature anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 23890–23901.
representation capability. [13] Y. Huang, G. Liu, Y. Luo, and G. Yang, “ADFA: Attention-
 Although our method FDS, demonstrates excellent anomaly augmented differentiable top-K feature adaptation for unsupervised
detection performance across several datasets, it confronts a medical anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process.
 (ICIP), Oct. 2023, pp. 206–210.
common challenge faced by most X-ray anomaly detection [14] W. Li, T. Lai, G. Liu, H. Fan, and Z. Li, “Novelty detection of leukocyte
methods: accurately localizing lesions. This difficulty stems image via mean-shifted feature and directly optimized subspace,” IEEE
from the presence of tissues with varying densities on the same Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
 [15] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
plane in X-ray images, which creates only subtle differences for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
between lesions and normal tissues. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
814 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

[16] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee, [35] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normal-
 “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc. izing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 1530–1538.
 pp. 14902–14912. [36] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution
[17] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc.
 one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746. pp. 14143–14152.
[18] J. Guo, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “ReContrast: Domain-specific [37] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting
 anomaly detection via contrastive reconstruction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc.
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2024, pp. 1–20. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
[19] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg: pp. 2806–2814.
 Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,” [38] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convoluin Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), tional networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2014, pp. 818–833.
 Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923. [39] Y.-L. Boureau, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, “A theoretical analysis of feature
[20] T. D. Tien et al., “Revisiting reverse distillation for anomaly detection,” pooling in visual recognition,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), (ICML), 2010, pp. 111–118.
 Jun. 2023, pp. 24511–24520. [40] F. Saeedan, N. Weber, M. Goesele, and S. Roth, “Detail-preserving
[21] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully pooling in deep networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 9108–9116.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022, [41] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable are
 pp. 1088–1097. features in deep neural networks?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
[22] J. Yu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization via 2D Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 1–9.
 normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [42] C. Zhao, Y. Ge, F. Zhu, R. Zhao, H. Li, and M. Salzmann, “Progressive
 Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 19–25. correspondence pruning by consensus learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
[23] Y. Zhao, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “AE-FLOW: Autoencoders with Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 6464–6473.
 normalizing flows for medical images anomaly detection,” in Proc. 11th [43] D. S. Kermany et al., “Identifying medical diagnoses and treat-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent, 2022, pp. 1–14. able diseases by image-based deep learning,” Cell, vol. 172, no. 5,
[24] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis- pp. 1122–1131, Feb. 2018.
 tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,” [44] A. Stein et al. (2018). RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489. [Online]. Available: https://kaggle.com/competitions/rsna-pneumonia-
[25] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and detection-challenge
 P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in [45] J. Irvin et al., “CheXpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncer-
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, tainty labels and expert comparison,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 pp. 14318–14328. 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 590–597.
[26] S. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Song, “CFA: Coupled-hypersphere-based fea- [46] Q. Hou, D. Zhou, and J. Feng, “Coordinate attention for efficient
 ture adaptation for target-oriented anomaly localization,” IEEE Access, mobile network design,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 vol. 10, pp. 78446–78454, 2022. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13713–13722.
[27] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “Mean-shifted contrastive loss for anomaly [47] Q.-L. Zhang and Y.-B. Yang, “SA-Net: Shuffle attention for deep
 detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 2, convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
 pp. 2155–2162. Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021, pp. 2235–2239.
[28] J. Bao, H. Sun, H. Deng, Y. He, Z. Zhang, and X. Li, “BMAD: [48] A. Vaswani, P. Ramachandran, A. Srinivas, N. Parmar, B. Hechtman,
 Benchmarks for medical anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. and J. Shlens, “Scaling local self-attention for parameter efficient visual
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 4042–4053. backbones,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[29] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12894–12904.
 challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, [49] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, and Q. Hu, “ECA-Net: Efficient
 Dec. 2015. channel attention for deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
[30] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” pp. 11534–11542.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), [50] D. Misra, T. Nalamada, A. U. Arasanipalai, and Q. Hou, “Rotate to
 Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592. attend: Convolutional triplet attention module,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
[31] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 3139–3148.
 “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Com- [51] X. Li, W. Wang, X. Hu, and J. Yang, “Selective kernel networks,”
 put. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, 2021. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
[32] N. Tajbakhsh et al., “Convolutional neural networks for medical image Jun. 2019, pp. 510–519.
 analysis: Full training or fine tuning?” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 35, [52] P. Rajpurkar et al., “CheXNet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection
 no. 5, pp. 1299–1312, May 2016. on chest X-rays with deep learning,” 2017, arXiv:1711.05225.
[33] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- [53] X. Mei et al., “RadImageNet: An open radiologic deep learning research
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. dataset for effective transfer learning,” Radiol., Artif. Intell., vol. 4, no. 5,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, Sep. 2022, Art. no. e210315.
 pp. 9664–9674. [54] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
[34] J. Sato et al., “Anatomy-aware self-supervised learning for anomaly D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
 detection in chest radiographs,” iScience, vol. 26, no. 7, Jul. 2023, gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Art. no. 107086. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.