IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025 279

FALL: Prior Failure Detection in Large Scale System
 Based on Language Model
 Jaeyoon Jeong , Insung Baek , Byungwoo Bang , Junyeon Lee , Uiseok Song , and Seoung Bum Kim

 Abstract—As the scale of high-performance computing systems increased demand for HPC systems across different industries,
(HPC) continues to expand, the frequency of failures within the and as a result, HPC system manufacturers are creating more
system also increases. The follow-up steps in the event of a failure complex and substantial systems. However, because of their
are necessary because efficient prevention measures are absent.
These actions, however, result in decreased operating efficiency as complexity and substantial number of parts, HPC systems scale
the system normalizes. To solve this problem, recent research has significantly in size while also increasing the incidence of system
utilized deep learning to predict failures in advance by examining breakdowns [4], [5].
log messages. One common method uses log ID extracted from HPC systems are prone to a wide range of failures, which can
log messages as input data. However, these methods could lead to lead to the shutdown of the system in question if the failure is
information loss in log messages and may not accurately capture
log message properties. In this study, we propose the prior failure severe. The system that was shut down must be restarted and its
detection in large-scale systems using language models (FALL) that burden transferred to another system as part of the subsequent
reflects the properties of log messages. The FALL uses log messages step needed to get things back to normal [6], [7]. However,
as text data and only uses normal data for training. The FALL during the process of restoring normal operation to the affected
makes use of sharpening, which concentrates on the minimal lexical node, the large-scale loading of existing calculations results in
change between normal and abnormal log messages. In addition, by
leveraging the characteristics of log messages with limited vocab- a substantial delay, thus reducing the availability of the HPC
ularies, the FALL utilizes only some tokens for anomaly detection. system. [8], [9]. As a result, the ability to accurately predict
The experiments’ results from log data from real industry-based system failure is an important aspect because it can improve
HPC systems show that the FALL achieves superior performance the availability of the HPC system and reduce the time and cost
in early failure detection. associated with failures [10]. Utilizing the system log message
 Index Terms—Self-supervised learning, language model, data produced by the HPC system is an effective way to address
anomaly detection, sharpening, limited vocabulary, HPC system. this issue.
 System log message data is a form of real-time information
 I. INTRODUCTION that reflects the present status of the different components that
 HIGH-PERFORMANCE computing (HPC) system is a make up the HPC system, such as nodes [11]. System log
A powerful computational platform that is capable of quickly
processing complex calculations [1]. It is usually composed
 message data possesses unstructured characteristics because
 of its expression in natural language sentences. Furthermore,
of high-performance hardware and software. In the past, HPC the collection is unbalanced, with relatively few anomalous
systems were mostly employed for engineering simulations re- log message records compared to regular log message records.
quiring a lot of computing power, as those in nuclear, and particle In addition, as each component concurrently produces system
physics. However, with the advent of artificial intelligence and log messages, a large amount of redundant data is obtained in
information technology, HPC systems have become increasingly real-time [12]. System log message data is therefore a prime
vital for processing and analyzing large datasets [2], [3]. This has resource for determining an HPC system’s status [11], [12], [13],
 [14], [15], [16].
 Manuscript received 1 April 2023; revised 12 March 2024; accepted 16 The study of the state of HPC systems using system log
March 2024. Date of publication 2 May 2024; date of current version 16 message data can be broadly divided into two fields: failure
January 2025. This work was supported in part by the Samsung Advanced detection [11], [15], [16], [17] and failure prediction [12], [14],
Institute of Technology, Brain Korea 21 FOUR, in part by the Ministry of
Science and ICT (MSIT) in Korea under the ITRC support program supervised, [18], [19]. Finding out whether some given log message data is
in part by the Institute for Information Communication Technology Planning normal or abnormal is the goal of the research field of failure
and Evaluation under Grant IITP-2020-0-01749, and in part by the National detection. This area of study is being actively pursued from
Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by the Korea government under
Grant RS-2022-00144190. (Corresponding author: Seoung Bum Kim.) different perspectives, utilizing methods such as machine learn-
 Jaeyoon Jeong, Insung Baek, and Seoung Bum Kim are with the School ing [20], [21] and deep learning [11], [15], [16], [17]. The goal
of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, of failure prediction, on the other hand, is to identify pre-alerts
South Korea (e-mail: jj950310@korea.ac.kr; insung_baek01@korea.ac.kr;
sbkim1@korea.ac.kr). in the log sequence, a collection of log messages, to anticipate if
 Byungwoo Bang, Junyeon Lee, and Uiseok Song are with the Samsung failures will occur in the HPC system in the future [19]. However,
Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics Company Ltd., Su- research in this field is more difficult than failure detection
won 16678, South Korea (e-mail: byungwoo.bang@samsung.com; junyeon2.
lee@samsung.com; us.song@samsung.com). because predicting future failures is challenging [12]. Although
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3396166 the log message data was supplied in the form of natural language

 1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

phrases in earlier studies on failure prediction, the problem was approaches are examples of applying anomaly detection techonly handled from the standpoint of mapping log messages to niques to the text field, but they have a limitation in that the
log IDs and using them [12], [14], [18]. However, this approach embedding is conducted on word units, thus the model may not
not only results in a loss of information within the log message accurately learn information about the structure and meaning of
but also fails to fully consider the unique characteristics of the sentences.
log message data. This study introduces the failure detection in With the development of deep learning, anomaly detection has
large-scale systems using language models (FALL), a technique also gained attention under the name of deep anomaly detection,
for the early detection of system failures based on natural and various methods have been proposed. Deep anomaly deteclanguage processing (NLP). Unlike prior studies on failure tion allows for the effective learning of complex data which can
prediction, which have mainly relied on mapping log messages enhance the performance of the model. Similar investigations
to log IDs, this study addresses the problem by applying NLP using deep anomaly detection in the field of text have also
methods, recognizing that log messages are expressed in natural been conducted [27], [28]. As an illustrative example of prior
language sentences. Additionally, this study uses an anomaly research, [28] proposed the use of an long short-term memory
score for early failure identification that takes into account the (LSTM)-based autoencoder and showed improvement in the
restricted language included in log message data as well as the performance of document classification. The model was nevtwo separate vocabulary similarities between normal and ab- ertheless limited in that it could not efficiently learn contextual
normal log messages. An experiment was performed using data information because of the vanishing gradient problem inherent
obtained from an actual HPC system to show the effectiveness to LSTM.
of the proposed FALL, which achieved the best performance. To overcome these limitations, recent studies have suggested
The main contributions of this study are as follows: anomaly detection methods appropriate for text data [29], [30].
 r We present a novel method in the field of early failure In particular, [30] proposed a representation learning method
 detection by applying system log message data as natu- that combines the replacement masked detection (RMD), a new
 ral language sentences. Unlike previous studies that have self-supervised learning technique with efficiently learning an
 mainly used log IDs, this study utilizes the natural lan- encoder that classifies token replacements accurately (ELECguage characteristics of log messages to predict failures TRA) [31], a language model. They also proposed a text fieldand enhance performance in different scenarios. appropriate anomaly detection method tailored for sequence data
 r The proposed method considers the limited vocabulary and demonstrated the superior performance of their proposed
 characteristic of log messages as well as the small vocab- method using 20 Newsgroups [32] and AGNews [33] datasets.
 ulary difference between normal and abnormal log mes- However, the system log message data used in this study differs
 sages. Moreover, a failure prediction strategy for anomaly from the dataset utilized in [30] because it possesses the features
 detection that is well suited to handling imbalanced data is of ’similar vocabulary between normal and abnormal’ and ’limprovided for the first time. ited vocabulary.’ Therefore, this study aims to adapt the method
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II in [30] to suit the characteristics of this system log message data
provides an overview of the related research on natural language to establish an appropriate method for early failure detection.
anomaly detection and system log-based failure prediction.
Section III explains the proposed FALL in detail. Section IV
presents the data and experimental setup used in the study as B. Failure Prediction in HPC System
well as the results of the experiment. The study is concluded Failure prediction is a more difficult field of research than
in Section V by summarizing the key findings and outlining failure detection because it involves predicting future failures
prospective directions for further research. that may occur in the system based on the data obtained thus far.
 Prior research has used a variety of machine learning techniques
 II. RELATED WORK including decision trees, support vector machines and principal
 component analysis to anticipate mistakes in HPC systems [21],
A. Anomaly Detection for Text
 [34], [35]. Some studies have used deep learning methods to
 Obtaining high-quality abnormal data, in reality, can be a predict system failures [14], [18]. Specifically, [14] used a total
time-consuming, and costly task. To address this, the anomaly of three LSTM layers and proposed an algorithm that predicts
detection method utilizes only normal data to train the network failures in the HPC system by assigning an ID to each log
to identify normal features and effectively classify abnormal message and using it as input to the model. However, the log
and normal instances [22], [23]. This technique has been used message itself was not used in these experiments; instead, the
for several text classification applications, such as document log’s ID was used, which may have resulted in the loss of
classification and sentence classification, with the usage of one- message-specific information and a failure to adequately account
class support vector machine (OCSVM) for document classifi- for the special properties of log message data.
cation serving as a representative example [24]. Furthermore, A recent approach utilizing a transformer model was proposed
other studies have proposed anomaly detection methods for in [12] in which natural language-based preprocessing was apclassifying normal documents and abnormal documents using plied to system log message data to extract the format of the log
a clustering algorithm based on latent Dirichlet allocation [25] messages, which were then assigned an ID and used as input for
and a non-negative matrix decomposition algorithm [26]. These the model. The model creates a log sequence that is projected to
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 281

Fig. 1. Example of the preprocessed log message.

happen in the future and, if an abnormal log is present, forecasts Fig. 2. Illustration of labeling process of log sequence.
an anomaly. The model produces a log sequence that is expected
to occur in the future and predicts an anomaly if an anomalous
log is present in the generated sequence. This technique uses
 messages, and can be expressed as Si = (ti , ti+1 , . . . , th−1 , th ).
self-supervised learning of the log creation to attempt to predict
 The label for the log message sequence Si is determined based
errors, however, it has drawbacks due to the classification-based
 on the occurrence of failures within a defined future time interval
approach and the insufficient use of the log messages as natural
 after the lead time from the last log message xi+29 in the
language.
 sequence. It is classified as normal if there are no failures within
 this period; otherwise, it is classified as abnormal. Furthermore,
 III. MAIN METHOD - FALL the sliding window technique was applied by considering the log
 This section presents the proposed method, FALL. By adding message sequence Si as one window, with the window stride
lexical similarity and limited vocabulary, which are traits of set to 15 based on the system log message xi . That is, when
system log message data, into the detecting anomalies in text the current log sequence is Si , the next log sequence becomes
using ELECTRA (DATE) [30], a text-based anomaly detection Si+1 = (xi+15 , xi+16 , . . . , xi+44 ).
approach, the FALL is created to be better suitable for early The window size and stride were set based on the advice of
system failure identification. The proposed method involves the industry experts. First, the window size, if too small or too large,
following three key phases: preprocessing, training, and testing. would result in either too little or too much information used for
 the model’s judgment. Second, the choice of stride was made
A. Preprocessing and Windowing to ensure the availability of log sequence data and to enhance
 the diversity of log message arrays within log sequences. Sub-
 In contrast to previous studies [14] and [18], which utilized sequently, industry experts reviewed the collected log sequence
log IDs in the preprocessing stage, this study does not employ dataset to determine whether data should be removed. This prolog IDs, and only conducts minimal preprocessing of system log cess aims to prevent biased learning and training inefficiencies
message data such as converting to lowercase, removing punctu- through the removal of duplicate data. Finally, the labeled log
ations, and processing numbers. In particular, the numbers in the sequence dataset was only used for training with the normal data.
system log message data are substituted with the word “NUM”
as in [11]. Through this preprocessing, the loss of information
contained in the system log message can be minimized while B. Replaced Token Detection and Replaced Mask Detection
enabling the anonymization of sensitive information within the The structure and training method of the proposed FALL is
log messages [36]. Fig. 1 shows the system log message as a similar to the DATE, which is based on ELECTRA [31]. Fig. 3
result of the preprocessing. In addition, repetitive and sequential shows the overall training process of the FALL. A discriminator
logs are eliminated during the preprocessing stage, leaving only and a generator are the two primary parts of the FALL.
one instance [36]. The generator, functioning as a masked language model
 In this study, the preprocessing system of log message data is (MLM), substitutes the masked tokens in the input with difdivided by node, which is a component of the HPC system, and ferent tokens. Here, masked tokens are those concealed by the
then sorted in chronological order. Fig. 2 shows the labeling pro- model in a manner that obscures their meanings within the input
cess for the sorted log message. Each log message, represented sentence. Specifically in this study, a random generator is used
as x, consists of a total of n tokens, which can be expressed as the generator, implying that masked tokens are replaced by
as x = (t1 , t2 , . . . , tn ). To serve as input for the model, the uniformly selecting words from the vocabulary generated by the
log sequence, Si , is composed of 30 consecutive log messages, tokenizer. The discriminator performs two tasks simultaneously:
with Si = (xi , xi+1 , . . . , xi+29 ). In other words, Si consists of the replaced mask detection (RMD) task which predicts the
h tokens, which represent the total number of tokens in 30 log masking pattern applied to the input and the replaced token
282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. A schematic overview of training phase. First, masking is applied to Si . Second, the masked token in Ŝi is replaced with another word. Finally, S̃i is fed
into the discriminator to carry out the RTD and RMD tasks.

detection (RTD) task which predicts whether each token in The discriminator consists of a transformer encoder with RTD
the input is a replaced or original token. Both generator and head and RMD head, and receives the output S generated by the
discriminator are composed of transformer encoders. While the generator as its input. The RTD head is responsible for evaluating
discriminator is also utilized in the evaluation stage to detect if each token in the input is an original token or a replacement
early failures, the generator is only used for model training. token, allowing the discriminator to differentiate between log
 As mentioned above, the input of the FALL is a normal log sequences based on token units. Simultaneously, the RMD head
sequence, S in which 30 log message data tokens are sequentially detects the masking pattern applied to the log sequence input,
connected. The total number of tokens in S, denoted as ‘h,’ enabling the discriminator to learn the ability to discriminate
will either be greater or less than the model’s hyperparameter, log sequences in terms of their sequence-level characteristics. In
the max sequence token length. When ‘h’ is less than the max other words, the generator and discriminator learn the contextual
sequence token length, we use meaningless [PAD] tokens to fill properties of tokens and sequences for normal log sequences.
the gap and match the token count to the max sequence token At this stage, the model learns the overall loss, comparising
length. On the other hand, when ‘h’ is greater than the max MLM loss, RTD loss, and RMD loss as detailed in (3), (4), and
sequence token length, the sentence is divided into sequences (5). This overall loss is governed by (2), with λ and μ serve as
based on the max sequence token length, and they are processed hyperparameters defining the ratio of RTD loss to RMD loss.
sequentially.
 For the input S of the model, K masking patterns, determined Ltotal = LM LM + μLRT D + λLRM D (2)
in advance, are randomly applied, with the masking pattern ⎡ ⎤
 h
being a predefined format that determines the masking locations ⎢ ⎥
applied to the tokens within the input sentence. For example, LM LM = E ⎢
 ⎣ −logPG (ti |S̃; θG )⎥
 ⎦ (3)
assuming that mi is one of K masking patterns and S to which i=1
 s.t.ti =tmask
mi is applied can be expressed as Ŝ = (t1 , t2 , tmask
 3 , t4 , . . . , th ). ⎡
 i
 ⎤
The generator receives Ŝ as an input, and the mask token inside h
Ŝ is replaced with another word according to the probability of ⎢ ⎥
 LRT D = E ⎣ −logPG (tmask
 i |S̃; θD )⎦ (4)
the vocabulary learned by the generator. Finally, the generator i=1
produces S, which can be expressed as follows: ti =[CLS]

 LRM D = E[−logPM (m = mi |S̃; θD )]. (5)
  
 S̃ = t1 , t2 , t3 , t4 , . . . , th
  C. Anomaly Score Based on Characteristics of Log Sequence
 ˜ ti , ti = tmask
 i
 ti = (1) The performance of the model is assessed through the
 ri ∼ PG (ti |S̃ : θG ), ti = tmask
 i anomaly detection task by using only the discriminator. Based
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 283

Fig. 4. A schematic overview of testing about the FALL. First, we use the trained discriminator to compute the replacement probability of the input. Second, we
apply sharpening method to the calculated replacement probabilities. Finally, we generate the anomaly score by sorting the probabilities in descending order and
utilizing only a portion of them.

on the likelihood that each token exiting the RTD head is a
replacement token, the anomaly score is determined to decide
whether it is normal or abnormal. For instance, when a normal
log sequence is an input into the discriminator during evaluation,
the tokens in the log sequence are tokens learned by the model,
so the discriminator assigns a low probability to each token.
However, because the model has not learned the abnormal log
sequence, it is concluded that it has been substituted and a higher Fig. 5. Examples of slight lexical differences between normal and abnormal
probability is provided than the token of the usual log sequence. log sequences.
These reasons lead to the establishment of an anomaly score that
depicts the traits of the log sequence based on the likelihood that
emerges from the RTD head. location arg1 is overheating. These two log messages are nearly
 In this study, the anomaly score was determined by consider- identical in all words except for ‘present’ and ‘overheating.’
ing the unique characteristics of log sequences in the probability In essence, the differentiation between normal and abnormal
calculated by the RTD head as shown in Fig. 4. The perfor- hinges on a small portion. Additionally, because system log
mance of early failures detection was specifically enhanced by messages in a log sequence combine normal and abnormal log
adding the properties of log sequences into an existing text-based messages, the lexical differences between log sequences are even
anomaly detection algorithm. Log sequences have two distinct less distinguishable.
characteristics: “small lexical difference between normal and As a result, we used the sharpening method to effectively
abnormal log sequence” and “restricted vocabulary.” distinguish between normal and abnormal log sequences. Sharp-
 First, the lexical difference between normal and abnormal ening is a technique to regulate the difference in input values
log sequences is relatively small. Natural language typically while preserving the relative ranks of each label. Sharpening
shows a wide range of vocabulary usage in certain topics such can be done by (6) in which L and T represent the number of
as economy, medicine, and sports. We can solve the problem labels and a temperature that regulate the degree of difference.
of identifying abnormality in natural language-based environ- Tokens associated with early failure indicators are given higher
ments by making use of lexical variations. However, in the probabilities by applying sharpness to the probabilities from the
context of log sequences, the distinctions in vocabulary are not RTD head, while the other tokens are given lower probabilities.
signed because the system log pertains to a specific domain and
 1
comprises both normal and abnormal entries. In Fig. 5, we can
 tiT
find the normal log message ‘Memory device at location arg1 sharpen(S, T ) := 1 . (6)
 L
 j=1 tj
 T
is present’ and the abnormal log message ‘Memory device at
284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 6. The overall flow of how FALL performs anomaly detection involves taking 30 log messages and predicting the early detection of future errors.

 Second, the vocabulary utilized in system log messages is re- TABLE I
 DESCRIPTION ABOUT DATASET
stricted compared to general natural language. Sentences written
by humans are included in the datasets used for natural language
processing, which results in a broad and diversified vocabulary.
However, because the log message is a sentence generated
based on a predefined format, following the status of the HPC
system, the number, and types of vocabulary are quite limited
in comparison to typical natural language processing datasets.
Indeed, the complete dataset of log messages we collected IV. EXPERIMENTS
consisted of a total of 18,779 words. This number is significantly
lower than the words commonly used in everyday language A. Dataset and Experiment Setup
and slightly more than half of the word count used in large To measure the effectiveness of the proposed FALL, which
language models, which is 30,522. Given the limited vocabulary, operates similarly to Fig. 6, we collected and used as a dataset
the vocabulary related to pre-alert failures is also limited. For the baseboard management controller (BMC) log messages and
instance, consider a system log message that reads ‘The storage syslog messages among the system log messages of the HPC
battery for disk drive bay arg1 is absent.’ In this message, the system in actual operation. The BMC is a specialized microcononly word that serves as an indication of pre-alert and error is troller that is integrated into many computer systems and gathers
‘absent.’ information on the physical conditions of a computer, server,
 Consequently, computing the anomaly score solely using the or another hardware device such as temperature and humidity.
subset of tokens that are most likely to be alternate tokens is more Based on these data, the BMC expresses the status of the device
effective for early failure detection than evaluating the probabil- as a log message, referred to as a BMC log message. Syslog
ity of all other tokens for each token from the RTD head. Given is a log generation and management tool commonly used in
the characteristics of these log messages, only a proportion of Linux/Unix environments, which records all events occurring
1/n tokens with a high likelihood of being replacement tokens on devices as log messages [37]. Therefore, syslog messages
among all tokens in the log sequence were used to calculate the are valuable data that allows device administrators to monitor
anomaly score. The resulting anomaly score reflecting the two issues, performance, and other conditions of the devices. In this
characteristics of the log sequence can be defined as follows: experiment, the two types of system log message data were
 combined into a single dataset, rather than being treated as separate datasets. By evaluating both the general health of the HPC
 system and the physical condition of its hardware components,
 Anomaly score
 ⎛ m ⎞ one can predict failures effectively. Table I shows a summary
 n of the dataset containing over 33 million system log messages
 n ⎝
 = (reverse sort(Sharpen(S, T ))⎠ . (7) that were gathered from October 7, 2021 to July 30, 2022. The
 m i=1 system log messages consist of approximately 3 million BMC
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 285

 TABLE II constructed to reflect the reality of having a low proportion
 DESCRIPTION OF FIVE EXPERIMENT SCENARIOS ABOUT
 CLASSIFICATION MODEL
 of failures within the dataset, while the validation dataset was
 composed of a larger number of failures log sequences to assess
 the model’s ability to identify a diversity of failures.
 Tables II and III provide summaries of the classification
 model and anomaly detection model datasets, respectively. The
 anomaly detection model in Table III does not employ error data
 during training, and this aspect is duly accounted for. Except
 for this difference, the remaining aspects of both datasets are
 identical.
 The proposed FALL that consists of generator and discriminator uses transformer encoders in the first layer for the generator and transformer encoders in the fourth layer for the
 discriminator. A word from vocabularies chosen using a uniform
 distribution replaces the mask token as a result of the generator’s
 TABLE III
 DESCRIPTION OF FIVE EXPERIMENT SCENARIOS ABOUT ANOMALY random selection. In addition, the masking pattern was set to K
 DETECTION MODEL = 50, and the maximum length of the log sequence, which serves
 as the input of the model, was set to 128. The hyperparameter
 for the sharpening method, T, was set to 1/2, particularly 1/n =
 1/4 when calculating the anomaly score. Furthermore, the ratio
 of loss functions used for model training was set to μ = 50 and λ
 = 100, and AdamW was used as the optimizer. A total of 20,000
 training steps were performed in a batch of 128. We performed
 experiments by using the same evaluation protocols on three
 different random seeds and used the averaged performance and
 standard deviation.
 The majority of the experiment involved two comparison tests
 using classification models and one comparison experiment using a text-based anomaly detection technique. The classification
 models including recurrent neural network (RNN), LSTM [38],
 gated recurrent unit (GRU) [39], and 1D convolution neural
log messages and about 30 million syslog messages, collected network (1D CNN) were evaluated after training using both
in a ratio of 1:10. normal and failure log sequences. On the other hand, isolation
 Following the preprocessing and labeling processes outlined forest [40], OCSVM [41], deep support vector data description
in Section III-A, a series of scenarios was developed by varying (deep SVDD) [42], and DATE [30] were used in comparative
the lead time and prediction interval. These scenarios were then tests with anomaly detection models, and only normal log seapplied to the obtained log message dataset as presented in quences were used for training.
Tables II and III. Based on the current log sequence, there are a
total of five scenarios that estimate the probability that an error B. Evaluation Metrics
will happen in 10 seconds, 30 seconds, 60 seconds, 180 seconds,
and 300 seconds in the future. In this study, we assess the performance of early failure
 The process of building each scenario dataset is as follows: detection using both the area under the receiver operating charac-
The collected log sequence dataset is initially divided into teristic curve (AUC-ROC), a commonly used metric in the field
normal and abnormal datasets. Subsequently, each dataset is of anomaly detection and the average number of false positives
split into training and test dataset while preserving the dataset’s (FP) as key evaluation metrics.
time-series structure. The normal and abnormal training data are For all key values, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
merged into the training dataset, and the normal and abnormal curve shows the true positive rate (TPR) (8), which is the ratio of
test data are merged into the test dataset. Finally, both the errors predicted by the model to real errors, and the false positive
resulting training and testing datasets are randomized using a rate (FPR) (9), which is the ratio of mistakes falsely predicted
predetermined seed number to mitigate potential bias in the by the model to the actual number of normal cases.
model’s learning process. TP
 The training dataset used about 350,000 log sequences for TPR = (8)
 TP + FN
each scenario out of all log sequences, and among them, about
 FP
3,000 log sequences, indicating failures, accounted for only 1% FPR = . (9)
of the entire dataset. The validation dataset used approximately FP + TN
110,000 log sequences for each scenario, and about 20,000 logs The ROC curve is a graph showing the change in performance
that are errors in the entire dataset. The training dataset was of the model about the change in the threshold value. The area
286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE IV
 COMPARISON RESULTS FOR RNN, LSTM, GRU, 1D CNN, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
 DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE

under the ROC curve is referred to as AUC and ranges from 0.5 of max pooling in identifying pre-alert tokens during the 1D
to 1. A higher value indicates better performance of the model. CNN process. However, the CNN filters, although leveraging
In other words, it was projected that the proposed FALL would local features of the log sequences, do not fully capture the
operate normally after the lead time if its anomaly score did not contextual information. This results in decreased performance in
exceed a particular threshold and that an error would happen the scenarios except for the first scenario. On the other hand, in
after the lead time if it did. Finally, after calculating TPR and the case of the FALL, we found performance above 0.91, which
FPR by changing the threshold value, the ROC curve, and AUC is a higher AUC value in all scenarios except for first scenario
value were computed. than other comparative models, showing that failures can be
 Furthermore, in this study, we used the average number of FP effectively predicted early. In contrast to RNN-based models,
as the second evaluation metric. FP refers to the errors where which perform worse in scenarios with shorter prediction interthe model incorrectly classifies actual negatives as positives. vals than those with longer prediction intervals, the proposed
This evaluation metric is particularly significant in the field FALL exhibits a constant performance of 0.91 or higher across
of early failure detection. The reason is that misclassifying all prediction intervals.
normal situations as failure situations can lead to substantial Furthermore, Table V demonstrates that the proposed FALL
costs. If the HPC system is predicted to experience an er- model outperforms other classification models in three scenarror in a few minutes even though it is functioning correctly, ios. Overall, the results in Table V exhibit notable discrepancies
administrators will take subsequent actions accordingly. This from those in Table IV. For instance, looking at the performance
results in unnecessary interventions incurring both temporal of the GRU in the first scenario, Table IV positioned it as the
and financial costs. While the first evaluation metric, AUC, third best model, while in Table V, it generates over 25,000
is commonly used in anomaly detection tasks, it still has the FP. Similarly, when considering the results for the LSTM in the
potential to overlook the occurrence of FP. Therefore, we second scenario, Table IV ranked it as the fourth best model,
adopt the average occurrence of FP as well as AUC as an whereas in Table V, it produced the lowest number of FPs, with
evaluation metric, ensuring a more precise and comprehensive just 235. As discussed in Section IV-B earlier, this illustrates
assessment. how the actual number of FPs is concealed by AUC performance.
 However, the proposed FALL model consistently achieved commendable performance in both Tables IV and V. Particularly, the
C. Results number of FPs generated is impressive, staying below 700 in all
 Table IV, shows the comparative experimental results of the scenarios.
proposed FALL and the classification model, revealing that the Tables VI and VII presents the comparative experimental
FALL achieved superior performance in all scenarios except for results of the proposed FALL and the anomaly detection models.
first one. In general, all scenarios indicate AUC performance Because isolation forest, OCSVM, and deep SVDD are not
of around 0.7 or higher for RNN-based models because they anomaly detection models that are particularly suited for text
are usually well-suited for sequence data. Additionally, even data, additional embedding techniques were required. In this
though abnormal log sequences are uncommon, RNN-based case, embedding was conducted in a total of three ways. The
models seem to have predicted failures very effectively probably first method was the global vectors for word representation
because latent representations for them were trained. Further- (GloVe) average approach that proceeds with embedding in word
more, the 1D CNN model demonstrates performance above units through GloVe [43] and computes the average of each
0.9, which is higher AUC value in all scenarios than RNN- word vector. The second technique used the fastText average
based models. The results also present that the 1D CNN model method which calculates the average of each word vector after
achieved superior performance in the first scenario, surpassing embedding in word units using fastText [44]. Finally, we used Inother models. This outcome can be attributed to the efficacy ferSent [45] that conducts embedding on a sentence-by-sentence
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 287

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON RESULTS FOR RNN, LSTM, GRU, 1D CNN, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
 DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP

 TABLE VI
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR ISOLATION FOREST, OCSVM, DEEP SVDD, DATE, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION
 UNDER FIVE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE

 TABLE VII
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR ISOLATION FOREST, OCSVM, DEEP SVDD, DATE, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION
 UNDER FIVE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP

basis. We trained and assessed the three models by altering account the characteristics of log sequences. Table VII folthe three embedding methods, and the final performance was lows a similar trend. In comparison to Table V, it is evcalculated based on the highest performance for each model. ident that the performance of the classification models, on
 It can be seen that the performance of the isolation for- the whole, lags behind. Additionally, despite DATE displayest, OCSVM, and deep SVDD models, which are optimized ing generally high performance in Table VI, the significantly
for an image or structured data, is lower than that of RNN- higher count of FPs can be observed. In essence, one can
based models. In contrast, DATE and FALL, which are conclude that FALL is better suited for log data compared to
text-data-specific anomaly detection methods achieved 0.9 or DATE.
greater in all scenarios. The proposed FALL yielded higher Additional experiments were conducted to confirm the impact
performances than the DATE in all scenarios, albeit not sig- of sharpening and the utilization of selective tokens on the FALL.
nificantly. These tests show that the proposed FALL is suc- Table VIII depicts the extent to which each factor influenced
cessful for early failure detection by properly taking into the proposed method by AUC performance. Consequently, both
288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. Graphs depicting average and range of false positive values for each principal scenario according to method. The left graph illustrates the false positive
performance results for classification models, and the middle graph represents the false positive performance results for anomaly detection models. The right graph
illustrates the false positive performance results for each component of FALL. In each graph, the solid line represents the average false positive value, and the band
around the line signifies the minimum and maximum values.

 TABLE VIII the FALL, which merged these two components, outperformed
 PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR EACH COMPONENT OF THE FALL IN TERMS OF
 AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
 the baseline model DATE by boosting the AUC value by an
 DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE average of roughly 0.008 for each scenario.
 Furthermore, in Table IX, it is evident that the application of
 individual elements leads to a reduction in the number of FPs.
 Notably, when using only partial tokens for anomaly score, as
 opposed to sharpening, a substantial improvement is observed.
 However, when additional elements are incorporated into the
 existing DATE, an increase in standard deviation is noticed,
 indicating instability in its performance.
 Fig. 7 presents graphs illustrating the mean false positive
 values and the range (minimum/maximum) for each principal
 scenario categorized by methodology. We intended to conduct
 performance comparisons that include not only standard devi-
 TABLE IX ation but also comparisons of minimum and maximum values.
 PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR EACH COMPONENT OF THE FALL IN TERMS OF This approach allows for precise comparisons among models
 AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE with similar false positive values. The x-axis represents the
 DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON FP SCORE
 lead time in seconds, and the y-axis denotes the count of false
 positives. Specifically, the left graph represents the false positive
 performance graph for classification models. In the case of other
 classification models, notable performance discrepancies were
 observed depending on the scenario. However, for the proposed
 FALL model demonstrate consistent and stable performance
 across all scenarios. Moreover, upon inspecting the graph for
 anomaly detection in the center and the graphs for each component of FALL on the right, it becomes evident that FALL
 outperforms other models. Especially, considering the entire
 range (min/max), the proposed model consistently exhibited superior performance. In essence, FALL not only exhibits superior
variables had an effect on AUC performance, and the FALL that performance but also demonstrates a universal efficacy.
used both variables had the greatest AUC value. In addition, Lastly, additional experiments were conducted to determine
when each element was applied individually, it can be shown if the proposed model FALL performs effectively on different
that performance gradually increased in the DATE, the baseline datasets. The datasets used for these experiments were the
model, except for the second scenario. Sharpening increases the Thunderbird [46] and BGL [46] datasets, which are benchmark
lexical difference between the regular log sequence and the ab- datasets [47] in the field (https://github.com/logpai/loghub).
normal log sequence, allowing the model to distinguish between Both datasets consist of log messages collected from highthe two types of logs with accuracy. The experiment reveals performance computing (HPC) systems, aligning well with the
that the AUC value on average was increased by approximately scenarios assumed in this paper. Tables X and XI present the
0.0008 for each scenario. Additionally, utilizing only certain evaluations of DATE and FALL based on the Thunderbird and
tokens reflects the characteristics of log messages with a limited BGL datasets, respectively. In the Thunderbird dataset, it is
vocabulary, by choosing, and utilizing tokens that are essential evident that FALL outperforms DATE in terms of AUC in all
for early error detection. This also resulted in an increase in the scenarios except the second one. Particularly noteworthy is the
AUC value by an average of 0.004 for each scenario. In the end, significantly lower average number of FP achieved by FALL.
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 289

 TABLE X such area for development. Currently, only numbers are replaced
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DATE AND FALL BASED ON THE
THUNDERBIRD DATASET, USING AUC AND THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP AS
 with a token called NUM, which may lead to loss of information.
 PERFORMANCE METRICS It is expected that the model would be able to acquire more
 predictive information and perform better by tokenizing specific aspects like IP addresses or file locations within the log
 messages.
 Furthermore, research into the number of node failures and the
 correlation analysis between them would be highly meaningful.
 In this paper, we focus solely on predicting the future occurrence of node failures through the model. For example, in [48],
 research was conducted on examining the correlation between
 failures when one or more node failures occurred. Based on
 this research, conducting a post-analysis on the correlation of
 failures after early detection of node failures could lead to even
 more significant research.
 TABLE XI
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DATE AND FALL BASED ON THE
 Finally, research on predicting specific errors among system
 BGL DATASET, USING AUC AND THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP AS failures such as CPU errors, DRAM errors, etc., using a natural
 PERFORMANCE METRICS language prediction model is a plausible avenue. In this paper,
 we designed a model optimized for predicting node failures and
 demonstrated its effectiveness. However, we did not explore
 research on specific error types that lead to node failures. Investigating specific errors poses additional challenges, requiring
 more extensive data and potentially encountering imbalanced
 data, which could impede effective learning by natural language
 models. Addressing these challenges with natural language
 models has the potential to enhance the efficiency of error prediction within HPC systems, with the added benefit of simplified
 maintenance for the natural language prediction model.

 REFERENCES
This advantage of FALL is equally evident in the BGL dataset. [1] S. Almeida, “An introduction to high performance computing,” Int. J.
As observed in Table XI, FALL exhibits superior performance Modern Phys. A, vol. 28, no. 22/23, 2013, Art. no. 1340021.
 [2] W. Fan, F. Xiao, J. Fan, Z. Han, L. Sun, and R. Wang, “Fault-tolerant
compared to DATE in the first, third, and fifth scenarios, accom- routing with load balancing in LeTQ networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
panied by consistently lower average FP counts in all scenarios. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 68–82, Jan./Feb. 2023.
Thus, FALL demonstrates its robust performance across differ- [3] D. Xiang, B. Li, and Y. Fu, “Fault-tolerant adaptive routing in dragonfly
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 16, no. 2,
ent log data sources. pp. 259–271, Mar./Apr. 2019.
 [4] M. Schulz, B. Lucas, T. Macaluso, D. J. Quinlan, and J. Wu, “Inter-agency
 workshop on HPC resilience at extreme scale,” Nat. Secur. Agency Adv.
 V. CONCLUSION Comput. Syst., Feb. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:15095322
 This study presents a text-based anomaly detection method, [5] F. Cappello, G. Al, W. Gropp, S. Kale, B. Kramer, and M. Snir, “Toward
FALL, for the early detection of failures in HPC systems. For exascale resilience: 2014 update,” Supercomput. Front. Innovations: Int.
the first time in the field, the FALL creates tasks for anomaly J., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–28, 2014.
 [6] M. Rodríguez-Pascual, J. Cao, J. A. Moríñigo, G. Cooperman, and R.
detection using log sequences as natural language. To address Mayo-Garc ía, “Job migration in HPC clusters by means of checkthe problem of misclassification caused by the small vocabulary point/restart,” J. Supercomput., vol. 75, pp. 6517–6541, 2019.
difference between normal and error log sequences, the proposed [7] N. El-Sayed and B. Schroeder, “Understanding practical tradeoffs in
 HPC checkpoint-scheduling policies,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
method utilizes a sharpening. Furthermore, by focusing on the Comput., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 336–350, Mar./Apr. 2018.
features of limited vocabulary, anomaly detection performance [8] F. Cappello, “Fault tolerance in petascale/exascale systems: Current
is improved by using only some tokens that are essential for knowledge, challenges and research opportunities,” Int. J. High Perform.
 Comput. Appl., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 212–226, 2009.
early failure detection. Empirical findings show that the FALL [9] E. N. Elnozahy and J. S. Plank, “Checkpointing for peta-scale systems: A
enhances early failure detection by utilizing the characteristics look into the future of practical rollback-recovery,” IEEE Trans. Dependof log sequences. Experiments demonstrate that the FALL out- able Secure Comput., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 97–108, Second Quarter 2004.
 [10] A. Gainaru, F. Cappello, M. Snir, and W. Kramer, “Failure prediction for
performs other methods, achieving an average AUC value of HPC systems and applications: Current situation and open issues,” Int. J.
more than 0.91. High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 273–282, 2013.
 While the FALL showed excellent performance in early fail- [11] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LAnoBERT: System log anomaly detection
 based on BERT masked language model,” 2021, arXiv:2111.09564.
ure detection of HPC systems, there are opportunities for future [12] K. A. Alharthi, A. Jhumka, S. Di, and F. Cappello, “Clairvoyant: A logresearch to enhance the method. Preprocessing log messages based transformer-decoder for failure prediction in large-scale systems,”
with domain-specific tokens appropriate for system logs is one in Proc. 36th ACM Int. Conf. Supercomput., 2022, pp. 1–14.
290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

[13] K. Zhang, J. Xu, M. R. Min, G. Jiang, K. Pelechrinis, and H. Zhang, [39] J. Chung, Ç. Gülçehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical eval-
 “Automated it system failure prediction: A deep learning approach,” in uation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,”
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2016, pp. 1291–1300. 2014, arXiv:1412.3555. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
[14] A. Das, F. Mueller, C. Siegel, and A. Vishnu, “Desh: Deep learning for 3555
 system health prediction of lead times to failure in HPC,” in Proc. 27th [40] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
 Int. Symp. High- Perform. Parallel Distrib. Comput., 2018, pp. 40–51. Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[15] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly [41] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
 detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
[16] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Self- [42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 attentive classification-based anomaly detection in unstructured logs,” in Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1196–1201. [43] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “GloVe: Global vectors
[17] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust anomaly de- for word representation,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang.
 tection and localization for interleaved unstructured logs,” IEEE Trans. De- Process., 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
 pendable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2762–2780, Jul./Aug. 2023. [44] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word
[18] A. Das, F. Mueller, and B. Rountree, “Aarohi: Making real-time node vectors with subword information,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
 failure prediction feasible,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Parallel Distrib. Process. vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017.
 Symp., 2020, pp. 1092–1101. [45] A. Conneau, D. Kiela, H. Schwenk, L. Barrault, and A. Bordes, “Su-
[19] J. R. Campos, E. Costa, and M. Vieira, “Online failure prediction for com- pervised learning of universal sentence representations from natural lanplex systems: Methodology and case studies,” IEEE Trans. Dependable guage inference data,” 2017, arXiv: 1705.02364. [Online]. Available:
 Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3520–3534, Jul./Aug. 2023. http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02364
[20] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based [46] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
 problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
 Softw. Eng. Companion, 2016, pp. 102–111. Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
[21] Z. Lan, Z. Zheng, and Y. Li, “Toward automated anomaly identification [47] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection of
 in large-scale systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 21, no. 2, system log datasets for AI-driven log analytics,” 2020, arXiv: 2008.06448.
 pp. 174–187, Feb. 2010. [48] S. Ghiasvand, F. M. Ciorba, R. Tschüter, and W. E. Nagel, “Lessons learned
[22] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and E. Vázquez, from spatial and temporal correlation of node failures in high performance
 “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and computers,” in Proc. 24th Euromicro Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Netw.-
 challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, no. 1/2, pp. 18–28, 2009. Based Process., 2016, pp. 377–381.
[23] C. C. Aggarwal, Outlier Analysis Second Edition. Springer Int. Publishing, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.co.kr/books?id=
 KyG1DQAAQBAJ
[24] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, 2001.
[25] A. Mahapatra, N. Srivastava, and J. Srivastava, “Contextual anomaly
 detection in text data,” Algorithms, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 469–489, 2012.
[26] R. Kannan, H. Woo, C. C. Aggarwal, and H. Park, “Outlier detection for Jaeyoon Jeong received the BS degree in applied
 text data: An extended version,” 2017, arXiv: 1701.01325. statistics from Konkuk University, Seoul, South Ko-
[27] L. Bontemps, V. L. Cao, J. McDermott, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Collective rea, in 2021. He is currently working toward the MS
 anomaly detection based on long short-term memory recurrent neural degree with the School of Industrial and Management
 networks,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Future Data Secur. Eng., Can Tho City, Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea.
 Vietnam, Springer, 2016, pp. 141–152. His research interests include anomaly detection and
[28] L. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class document classification via neural their industrial applications.
 networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 70, no. 7/9, pp. 1466–1481, 2007.
[29] L. Ruff, Y. Zemlyanskiy, R. Vandermeulen, T. Schnake, and M. Kloft,
 “Self-attentive, multi-context one-class classification for unsupervised
 anomaly detection on text,” in Proc. 57th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
 Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4061–4071.
[30] A. Manolache, F. Brad, and E. Burceanu, “DATE: Detecting anomalies in text via self-supervision of transformers,” in Proc. Conf. North Insung Baek received the BS degree from Korea
 Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Hum. Lang. Technol., 2021, University, Seoul, Korea, in 2016, where he is curpp. 267–277. rently working toward the PhD degree in industrial
[31] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, and C. D. Manning, “ELECTRA: Pre- and management engineering. His research interests
 training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,” in Proc. include explainable artificial intelligence algorithms
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020, pp. 1–18. [Online]. Available: and their application to games and visions.
 https://openreview.net/pdf?id=r1xMH1BtvB
[32] K. Lang, “NewsWeeder: Learning to filter netnews,” in Proc. 12th Int.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., A. Prieditis and S. Russell, Eds. San Francisco CA:
 Morgan Kaufmann, 1995, pp. 331–339.
[33] X. Zhang, J. Zhao, and Y. LeCun, “Character-level convolutional networks
 for text classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015,
 pp. 649–657. Byungwoo Bang received the BS degree in com-
[34] C. A. Rincón, J.-F. Pâris, R. Vilalta, A. M. Cheng, and D. D. puter engineering from Dongguk University, in 2007,
 Long, “Disk failure prediction in heterogeneous environments,” in and the MS degree in software engineering from
 Proc. Int. Symp. Perform. Eval. Comput. Telecommun. Syst., 2017, the Graduate School of the Department of Computer
 pp. 1–7. Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
[35] E. W. Fulp, G. A. Fink, and J. N. Haack, “Predicting computer system South Korea, in 2014. He is currently working toward
 failures using support vector machines,” in Proc. 1st USENIX Conf. Anal. the PhD degree on the topic of RAS with the Depart-
 Syst. Logs, 2008, Art. no. 5. ment of Industrial Management, Korea University,
[36] S. Ghiasvand and F. M. Ciorba, “Assessing data usefulness for failure while working with Samsung Advanced Institute of
 analysis in anonymized system logs,” in Proc. 17th Int. Symp. Parallel Technology, Suwon, South Korea. He is currently the
 Distrib. Comput., 2018, pp. 164–171. leader of the RAS team. His research interests include
[37] R. Gerhards, “The syslog protocol,” RFC, Tech. Rep., vol. 5424, pp. 1–38, detecting supercomputer’s failure using various techniques in high performance
 Mar. 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5424 computing systems.
[38] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL 291

 Junyeon Lee received the BS degree in human envi- Seoung Bum Kim received the MS degree in inronment and design from Yonsei University, in 2013, dustrial and systems engineering, and the PhD deand the MS degree in software from the Graduate gree in industrial and systems engineering from the
 School of the Department of Computer Science and Georgia Institute of Technology, in 2001 and 2005,
 Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea, respectively. He is a professor with the School of
 in 2021. He is currently a staff researcher with the Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea Uni-
 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Suwon, versity. From 2005–2009, he was an assistant pro-
 South Korea. His research interests include improv- fessor with the Department of Industrial and Manuing reliability and availability in high performance facturing Systems Engineering, University of Texas
 computing systems. at Arlington. His research interests utilize machine
 learning algorithms to create new methods for various
 problems appearing in engineering and science. He has published more than 150
 internationally recognized journals and refereed conference proceedings.

 Uiseok Song received the BS degree in computer science and the MS degree in distributed computing from
 the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2016
 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a researcher
 with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
 Suwon, South Korea. His research interests include
 AI and fault analysis for systems and devices.