IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 5044613

 FC2P: Feature Cross-Channel Projection for
 Unsupervised Anomaly Segmentation
 Yichi Chen , Weizhi Xian , Junjie Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Xian Tao , Senior Member, IEEE, and Bin Chen

 Abstract—Unsupervised anomaly segmentation plays a critical challenging and complex visual tasks, including medical diagrole in real-world industrial product quality inspection. While nosis [1], [2], industrial defect detection [3], and autonomous
feature reconstruction-based methods have shown promising driving [4], necessitate anomaly detection. In practical appliperformance by detecting anomalies through differences between
pretrained features and their reconstructions, existing approaches cations, abnormal samples are extremely scarce, while the
often suffer from shortcut learning, and leading to reconstruction abnormal categories are often unpredictable. To this end,
failures and inaccurate anomaly representation across multi- many researchers from both industry and academia [5], [6],
stage features. To address these limitations, we propose feature [7] conduct anomaly segmentation in an unsupervised setcross-channel projection (FC2 P), a novel approach for anomaly ting, where only normal samples are available for training.
segmentation. FC2 P divides features into two subsets based
on neighboring channels and employs two autoencoders for The mainstream approaches to tackle this problem encomclosed-loop prediction, effectively mitigating shortcut effects while pass embedding-based methods [8], [9] [10], knowledge
capturing semantic relationships for efficient reconstruction. In distillation-based methods [11], [12] [13], and reconstructionaddition, we introduce an anomaly exposure network (AExNet), based methods [14], [15] [16], [17].
which progressively amplifies anomalies across multistage feature The proposed approach in this study falls under the category
residuals, generating precise anomaly score maps for accurate segmentation. Extensive experiments on MVTec AD and of reconstruction-based methods, which dominate unsuper-
Visa benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed FC2 P vised anomaly segmentation. Reconstruction-based methods
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, with average pre- implicitly learn the latent distribution of normal data, using
cision (AP) scores of 79.8% and 44.8%, respectively. Moreover, autoencoders [17], [18], generative adversarial networks [14],
visualization results on real industrial data further show the [19], and denoising diffusion probabilistic models [20], [21],
practicality of our proposed method. The code will be made
publicly available at https://github.com/Karma1628/work-2 to through the minimization of reconstruction loss during trainensure reproducibility and facilitate further research. ing. At inference time, these methods assume that the latent
 manifold learned exclusively from normal samples cannot
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anomaly segmentation, feature cross-channel projection (FC2 P), feature reconstruction, effectively reconstruct abnormal regions. Therefore, the reconself-supervised learning. struction residual, calculated as pixelwise differences between
 the reconstructed result and the original input, serves to
 I. I NTRODUCTION represent the pixel anomaly scores.
 A promising subbranch of reconstruction-based methods

A NOMALY segmentation aims at detecting pixels that
 deviate from normal behavior within an image. Many
 involves reconstructing multistage features [7], [23], [24]
 extracted from normal images using a pretrained network.
 Previous reconstruction-based methods primarily operate in
 Received 4 June 2025; accepted 26 August 2025. Date of publication
10 September 2025; date of current version 18 September 2025. This work was image space, where slight reconstructive perturbations of pixsupported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under els produce reconstruction errors comparable to those induced
Grant 62373350; in part by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association, by real anomalies, failing to meet the basic assumption. As
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), under Grant 2023145; in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing under Grant CSTB2023NSCQ- shown in the first row and third column of Fig. 1, for
MSX0070; in part by the Science and Technology Project of Shenzhen under the image reconstruction method DRAEM [6], the failure
Grant GXWD-20220811170603002; and in part by the Beijing Nova Program to accurately reconstruct the texture details of the carpet
under Grant 20240484687. The Associate Editor coordinating the review
process was Dr. Xianqiang Yang. (Corresponding author: Xian Tao.) produces numerous false positives (red circles) near actual
 Yichi Chen is with Chengdu Institute of Computer Application, Chinese cutting anomalies. In contrast, pretrained features are inher-
Academy of Sciences, Chengdu 610041, China (e-mail: chenyichi21@ ently more informative and discriminative, which increases
mails.ucas.ac.cn).
 Weizhi Xian is with Chongqing Research Institute, Harbin Institute of the representational distance between normal and abnormal
Technology, Chongqing 401151, China (e-mail: wasxxwz@163.com). regions, thereby mitigating the aforementioned interference.
 Junjie Wang and Bin Chen are with the International Research Institute As illustrated in the first row and fourth column of Fig. 1,
for Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518000,
China (e-mail: jjwanghz@stu.hit.edu.cn; chenbin2020@hit.edu.cn). feature reconstruction method DFR [7] produces almost no
 Xian Tao is with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, false positives near the anomaly in the carpet.
Beijing 100190, China, and also with the School of Artificial Intelligence, However, feature reconstruction-based methods still face
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail:
taoxian2013@ia.ac.cn). two primary challenges in practical applications. One is
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3608319 common in reconstruction schemes, where the reconstructive
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 2. Different feature reconstruction frameworks. (a) Conventional identical
 feature reconstruction, where the reconstructive target treats the input data and
Fig. 1. Qualitative results of image reconstruction-based method DRAEM the target as identical, allowing the autoencoder to take shortcuts and merely
[6], feature reconstruction-based method DFR [7] and the proposed FC2 P on replicate the input. (b) Our proposed FC2 P uses the similarity of neighborhood
the MVTec AD [22] dataset for anomaly segmentation. The categories are channel feature maps, enabling the autoencoder to perform two nonidentical
carpet, transistor, and cable (top to bottom). The interior regions of green proxy tasks: inpainting the pseudo-anomaly and predicting the neighborhood
boundaries in the second column denote abnormal areas from actual binary channel feature maps, thereby mitigating the aforementioned issue.
segmentation masks. Compared with previous methods, our proposed method
not only significantly enhances the saliency of anomaly segmentation but also
effectively suppresses false alarms in normal backgrounds. motivates the use of deep autoencoders to learn this mapping, as an additional normal attribute to fully leverage the
network sometimes overgeneralizes, resulting in anomalies in structural characteristics of the pretrained network. Fig. 2(a)
features also being well reconstructed. This occurs because and (b) illustrates the framework differences between conthe reconstruction network’s output is identical to the input ventional identical feature reconstruction and our proposed
during training, leading to shortcuts where the network merely FC2 P, respectively. Previous methods aggregate multichannel
replicates the original input. The second row of Fig. 1 illus- feature maps into a unified representation, focusing on scale
trates the issue of false negatives caused by overgeneralizing, differences [25], [26] or improving network architecture [27],
as previous reconstruction-based methods, both in image and [28] [29] to enhance reconstruction quality. However, they
feature space, reconstruct the background instead of the miss- often suffer from shortcut issues due to the reconstruction
ing transistor. Another challenge is that anomalies can be target being identical to the input. In contrast, our method uses
overwhelmed in multistage features, thus preventing effective deep autoencoders to simultaneously perform two nonidentical
segmentation and leading to missed detections. Each feature prediction tasks, effectively mitigating this problem. Specifistage contains information at different scales and semantic cally, normal images are superimposed with synthetic patterns
levels, leading to varying emphasis on different anomalies. to simulate pseudo-anomalies, so the extracted features are
Intuitively, summing the feature reconstruction residuals over actually corroded according to certain rules. The features
channels to represent the anomaly score for each spatial are then split into two nonoverlapping feature subsets based
location is inadequate. In DFR [7], four stages of features on neighborhood channels. Due to the intrinsic correlation
suffice for detecting pixel-level anomalies in the texture-based between neighborhood channel feature maps, autoencoders
tile, but as deeper features are introduced, the performance can be employed for closed-loop prediction from one feature
deteriorates. In addition, this issue also manifests in situations subset to another to ensure the integrity of the features. In
where anomalies are suppressed by other anomalies. As shown addition, the autoencoder must not only predict neighborhood
in the third row and fourth column of Fig. 1, the missing channel relationships but also complete the pseudo-anomaly
anomaly of the cable is severely suppressed by the color inpainting task. Inpainting anomalies in features helps to
change anomaly (red circle) in DFR [7]. This is because the reduce the impact of noise and redundant information, while
latter anomaly accounts for a low proportion in the feature also allowing anomalies to vary in scale and shape, thus
reconstruction residuals, which cannot be revealed in the enhancing the robustness of reconstruction.
anomaly score map by traditional summation methods. Furthermore, considering that anomalies can be over-
 To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose fea- whelmed in the multistage representation space of features, we
ture cross-channel projection along with an anomaly exposure design an AExNet to adaptively estimate the anomaly score
network (AExNet), called FC2 P, a novel feature reconstruc- map from neighborhood feature reconstruction residuals. The
tion framework for anomaly segmentation and detection. It network is trained under the popular self-supervised frameis observed that the feature map of each stage is derived work [6], [30], guided by pseudo-abnormal binary masks,
from the abstraction and nonlinear combination of all feature and has been shown to generalize well for detecting real
maps from the previous stage. Therefore, the intuition behind anomalies. Specifically, the key component is the Siamese
our method is that there is a potential mapping relationship anomaly propagator (SAP), which leverages the similarity
between the feature maps of the neighborhood channels, between neighborhood subsets to obtain enhanced common
governed by the structure of the pretrained network. This representations of anomalies and propagates them across
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

stages. Notably, the feature reconstruction residuals are divided coverage compared with GANs, AnoDDPM [21] proposes a
into aggregated and multiscale morphologies, which are multiscale simplex noise diffusion process that controls the
decoded using the U-Net structure. This design, inspired target size of pseudo-noises to detect larger anomalies.
by the divide-and-conquer approach, not only balances the However, deep autoencoders tend to “generalize” so well
representation of anomalies across the entire feature space but that they directly replicate abnormal areas in their reconalso gradually enhances anomalies across hierarchical stages. struction, resulting in misdetections of anomalies. To address
 Extensive experiments conducted on various benchmark this issue, MemAE [15] introduces an updatable memory
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. module with an attention mechanism to enhance the latent
Notably, the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art space, encouraging reconstruction to approach the normal
(SOTA) anomaly segmentation performance with an average prototype in memory. MemSTC-Net [16] combines the advanprecision (AP) metric of 79.8% on the widely used MVTec tages of [15] and [17], dynamically storing structure–texture
AD [22] dataset and 44.8% on the challenging Visa [31] information in the memory bank. Nevertheless, MemSTCdataset. We also conduct comprehensive ablation studies and Net performs poorly in reconstructing details because the
visualizations to validate the effectiveness of our proposed memory module constrains the representation capacity of the
components. The main contributions of our proposed method autoencoder. A viable solution is to reconstruct an image,
are summarized as follows. whose partial regions are randomly removed guided by masks,
 1) We propose FC2 P, a new paradigm for feature recon- in an inpainting manner as in [36]. To generate diverse masks,
 struction. The inherent relationship among the neigh- SCDAN [37] introduces multiple scale and strip directions
 borhood feature maps enables the autoencoder to in them to encourage the reconstructive network to learn
 accomplish two nonidentical prediction tasks, thereby the semantic context from different locations, scales, and
 mitigating the issue of over generalization in the con- directions. However, during inference, SCDAN requires iterventional reconstruction scheme. ating over all combinations of masks. To improve inference
 2) We propose an AExNet to adaptively estimate an efficiency, SSM [5] designs a progressive mask refinement
 anomaly score map based on the similarity between approach, which iteratively refines masks and focuses them
 neighborhood reconstruction residuals. Its design inher- on the abnormal regions based on reconstruction errors.
 its the divide-and-conquer principle, which is conducive Although image reconstruction-based methods are straightto simultaneously perceiving anomalies in features both forward, the limited and uniform nature of normal samples
 globally and hierarchically. restricts the representations that autoencoders can learn, mak-
 3) Extensive experiments on several datasets demonstrate ing them inadequate for handling complex anomalies. This
 the superiority of our proposed FC2 P over several SOTA article introduces inpainting pseudo-anomalies within discrimmethods for both unsupervised anomaly segmentation inative pretrained features, thereby compelling the autoencoder
 and detection tasks. The visualization results in real- to learn diverse normal representations.
 world scenarios also demonstrate the practicality of our
 method.
 B. Feature Reconstruction-Based Methods

 II. R ELATED W ORKS Deep feature extractors [38], [39] trained on largescale datasets [40] have become integral components in
A. Image Reconstruction-Based Methods anomaly segmentation methods. Generalized pretrained fea-
 Reconstruction-based methods assume that the reconstruc- tures, derived from diverse natural images [41], generate more
tive network trained on normal samples generates higher discriminative representations for normal images, thereby
reconstruction errors on abnormal regions. Therefore, anomaly increasing the discrepancies between normal and abnormal
segmentation can be achieved through the discrepancy between data. Embedding-based methods [8], [9], [42] and knowlthe test image and its reconstruction. AEs [15], [17] and GANs edge distillation-based methods [11], [13], [43] are among
[14], [19], [32], both of which follow the encoder–decoder the pioneering approaches in applying pretrained features
framework, are commonly employed reconstructive networks. in anomaly detection tasks. The embedding-based methods
Moreover, leveraging the inherent prior information in the aim to model the pretrained region descriptors in statistical
image can enhance reconstruction performance. For example, approaches, such as multivariate Gaussian distributions [9]
EdgeRec [33] reconstructs the original RGB image from its and normalizing flows [10], to explicitly quantify deviations
grayscale edge, incorporating skip connections in the autoen- of anomalies within the distribution. Knowledge distillationcoder to preserve high-frequency information. To improve based methods [11], [13], [44] assume that the student network
EdgeRec, ensuring consistency between the image and its cannot imitate the behavior of anomalies in the pretrained
structure, P-Net [17] incorporates the encoded latent space teacher network. However, these methods are highly sensiof the image into the structural latent space. Furthermore, tive to the configuration of pretrained networks, including
it has been demonstrated that using GANs and DDPMs can the selection of stages, network structure, and distribution
improve generation results [34], [35]. For instance, GANomaly design [41].
[32], one of the first GANs used for anomaly detection, learns In contrast, feature reconstruction-based methods are more
representations in both image and latent vector space jointly effective at capturing the latent space distribution of normal
in an adversarial training process. To achieve superior mode pretrained features and offer greater flexibility in structural
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of FC2 P. During the training phase, pseudo-abnormal images and their corresponding normal images are fed into the pretrained feature
extractor to obtain multistage aggregated features. Two autoencoders separately project subsets of features from the pseudo-abnormal feature, which are
divided by neighborhood channel split, onto normal feature subsets, thereby accomplishing proxy tasks for neighborhood prediction and inpainting. The
feature reconstruction residual subsets are then fed into the AExNet that is trained under the supervision of pseudo-abnormal masks. During the testing phase,
the data flow of test images is kept consistent with that of the pseudo-abnormal images.

design. DFR [7] first proposed using convolutional autoen- pseudo-abnormal image and its inpainted in a self-supervised
coders to reconstruct multiscale pretrained features with a manner. This not only reduces overfitting to pseudo-anomalies
single forward pass, achieving smooth segmentation results. but also enhances the ability to segment abnormal regions
ADTR [23] introduces a transformer-based autoencoder to with finer granularity. To reduce dependency on external data
address the identity mapping issue in convolutional networks. during the synthesis of pseudo-anomalies in [6], DSR [48]
UTRAD [24] integrates skip connections and pyramid struc- samples discrete latent space features to generate pseudotures in the transformer-based autoencoder to detect multiscale anomalies, improving the detection of anomalies near the
structural and nonstructural anomalies. distribution. Furthermore, DiffAD [49] employs latent diffu-
 However, because the reconstruction target is identical to sion models [50] to improve image reconstruction performance
the original input data, autoencoders tend to uncontrollably and proposes interpolated channels to increase reconstruction
replicate input behavior. In contrast, our proposed approach diversity. The discriminative network can also be integrated
enables the reconstruction network to effectively circumvent with other methods, extending beyond image reconstruction, to
the identity mapping process by accomplishing two proxy segment discrepancies. For instance, MemSeg [30] introduces
tasks: inpainting pseudo-anomalies in features and projecting a memory module that stores multistage normal features to
across feature channels, thereby enhancing its reconstructive guide the decoding process of the discriminative network
capabilities for structure and semantic information. The latter through an attention mechanism. DeSTSeg [12] proposes
primarily relies on the fact that the cross-channel feature a segmentation network that perceives feature differences
maps are combined by the unique structure of the pretrained between the denoising student network and the fixed teacher
network, thus motivating us to exploit the potential correlation network. The denoising student network is trained on pseudobetween them. abnormal samples to generate feature representations similar
 to those of the teacher network. To further improve the student
C. Self-Supervised Learning Approaches network’s feature representation of abnormal regions, DAF
 Recent self-supervised learning methods have yielded [51] introduces auxiliary loss heads to supervise each stage
promising results in anomaly segmentation by introducing of the student network.
pseudo-abnormal samples to learn the boundaries between However, these works focus on processing overall differabnormal and normal pixels. CutPaste [45] generates pseudo- ences and do not fully consider the propagation of anomalies
anomalies by cutting and pasting parts of normal images across different feature stages. Although DAF uses auxiliary
and then employs a one-class classifier to distinguish them. losses to supervise the stages of the student network, it
However, for anomaly segmentation, the use of Grad-CAM still simply aggregates their results, making the anomaly
[46] in CutPaste can only roughly locate anomalies. Sub- score map coarse. In contrast, our proposed method adopts
sequently, DRAEM [6] proposes leveraging a discriminative the idea of divide and conquer, not only considering the
network with U-Net [47] to learn pixel differences between the overall performance of anomalies in aggregated features,
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

but also allowing anomalies to progressively enhance across maps can integrate both low-level and high-level semantic
stages. representations of both normal and abnormal images. Compared with DeSTSeg [12], where features are reconstructed
 III. M ETHODS hierarchically, this strategy can facilitate the interaction of
 information across different stages.
 This section elaborates on the principle of our proposed
FC2 P, whose training framework is illustrated in Fig. 3.
The model consists of three cascaded components: paired B. Feature Cross-Channel Projection
feature extraction, FC2 P, and an AExNet. Specifically, dur- The proposed FC2 P is motivated by the observation of the
ing the training phase, pseudo-abnormal images and their features extracted via the pretrained network. In pretrained
corresponding normal images are fed into a weights-shared networks, it is evident that the feature map xij ∈ RHi ×Wi of
pretrained network to extract aggregated multistage discrim- stage i with channel index j originate from the abstraction
inative features. Subsequently, the features are divided into and nonlinear combination, which is denoted as f j (·), of
two subsets through neighborhood channel split, achieving the features φi−1 from the preceding stage i − 1. Then, the
closed-loop prediction by cross-channel feature projection. feature map xij and its neighborhood feature map xij+1 can be
The novelty lies in projecting the pseudo-abnormal feature formulated as follows:
subset onto the neighborhood normal feature subset, thus
avoiding the replication of original input behavior caused xij = f j (φi−1 ) , xij+1 = f j+1 (φi−1 ) (2)
by identical reconstruction. Finally, the AExNet accurately
 where f is typically determined by the structure of the
segments anomalies, which could be overwhelmed in the
 pretrained network. Obviously, there exists an inherent correfeature reconstruction residuals, for effectively producing the
 lation between the neighborhood feature maps. The correlation
precise anomaly score map.
 F·7→· (·) can be presented as follows:
     
A. Paired Feature Extraction xij = F j+17→ j xij+1 = f j−1 f j+1
 −1
 xij+1
     
 The training of our model requires pseudo-abnormal images xij+1 = F j7→ j+1 xij = f j+1
 −1
 f j−1 xij . (3)
synthesized on normal samples as self-supervised signals. In
this work, the synthesis algorithm for pseudo-abnormal images This insight inspires us to leverage deep networks to realize
is consistent with [6], which involves utilizing a binarized the mutual projection across channels. Furthermore, under
2-D perlin noise map as a mask to alpha blend external texture the introduction of pseudo-anomalies, this projection also
data from [52] onto normal images. Formally, in the training encompasses an inpainting function.
phase, given a normal image XN ∈ RH×W×C , where H, W, and Specifically, for the feature Φ, feature maps of neighborhood
C denote the dimensions of image height, width, and channels, channels are divided into two subsets Ae ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×(Csum /2) and
its pseudo abnormal image XP is generated at the same time Ao ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×(Csum /2) , referred to as neighborhood channel split.
using a binary pseudo-mask MP ∈ RH×W×1 and an external The above process can be presented in detail as follows:
texture image XE . The synthesis process can be expressed as
 Ae = cat Φk | k = 2 j
 ˚ 
follows:
 Ao = cat Φk | k = 2 j − 1
 ˚ 
 (4)
 XP = XN MP + α (XN MP ) + (1 − α) (XE MP ) (1)
 where Φk ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×1 is the feature map of channel index
where MP = 1 − MP , is the elementwise product, and α ∈
 k in feature Φ and j = (1, 2, . . . , (Csum /2)). cat(·) denotes the
(0, 0.8] denotes the opacity factor, controlling the degree of
 concatenation along the channel dimension. Therefore, followpseudo-anomalies to increase diversity.
 ing the neighborhood channel split of ΦN and ΦP , the normal
 To obtain more discriminative representations, a frozen
 neighborhood feature subsets (AeN , AoN ) and pseudo-abnormal
pretrained network [53] with four different stages is employed
 neighborhood feature subsets (AeP , AoP ) can be obtained.
to extract multistage features from images. Considering that
 To explore the latent feature distribution of normal samthe features from the last stage are more abstract and highly
 ples, the convolutional autoencoder is used to accomplish
correlated with the training task, they are typically discarded
 two proxy tasks: inpainting pseudo-anomalies and predicting
in fine-grained downstream tasks [54]. Let φi ∈ RHi ×Wi ×Ci
 the neighborhood feature map. Specifically, an encoder is
be the feature map extracted from stage i, where Hi , Wi ,
 employed to compress features into a latent space, followed by
and Ci denote the height, width, and channels of the feature
 a decoder that maps this latent space back to the corresponding
map, and i = 1, 2, 3. Subsequently, these feature maps from
 normal neighborhood features. The projection process can be
different stages are aggregated using a simple strategy, which
 formulated as follows:
involves resizing them to the resolution of the largest feature
map (H1 , W1 ) and then concatenating them along the channel ÂeN = D1 E1 AoP
 
dimension. Therefore, by aggregating the feature maps of ÂoN = D2 E2 AeP
 
 (5)
the first three stages (φ1 , φ2 , φ3 ) extracted from XN and XP ,
the normal feature ΦN ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×Csum and pseudo-abnormal where ÂeN , ÂoN ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×(Csum /2) are the projected features,
feature ΦP ∈ RH1 ×W1 ×Csum can be obtained in pairs, where E1 , E2 and D1 , D2 denote the encoders and decoders used for
Csum = C1 +C2 +C3 . Intuitively, aggregating multistage feature the projection process, respectively. Given that neighborhoods
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Therefore, this similarity can be utilized to calibrate and filter
 out the noise information. For S e and S o with their feature
 subsets, weights shared 3 × 3 convolutional blocks are utilized
 to learn consistent feature representations of anomalies. Furthermore, to obtain unified feature reconstruction residuals,
 the neighborhood features encoded with shared weights are
 concatenated and integrated with the previous stage by other
 convolutional blocks. These blocks can calibrate the unstable
 offsets in neighborhood features and encode these features into
 more compact features Fall , F1 , F2 , and F3 , where Fall denotes
 the fused aggregated feature and others are fused features of
 different stages.
 Finally, the fused compact features from SAP are gradually
 incorporated into the decoding process through skip connections according to their resolution. Interestingly, anomalies
 propagate from lower to deeper stages in SAP, while the
Fig. 4. SAP of AExNet for self-supervised learning. Not only the aggregated decoding process supports the propagation of anomalies from
feature reconstruction residuals are fused, but the representation of anomalies
in their multistage feature sets is encoded with shared weights and integrated low to high resolution. This ensures that anomalies are exposed
with the previous stage by other convolutional blocks. in each feature stage. Furthermore, the aggregated Fall are
 connected to the last decoder with F1 , following a squeezeand-excitation (SE) [55] head to adaptively weight the feature
are mutual and nonoverlapping, two autoencoders are required
 maps for predicting the precise anomaly score mask Mpre .
to complete the closed-loop mapping, which can concurrently
maintains the integrity of the projected feature.
 Finally, reconstruction-based anomaly segmentation meth- D. Self-Supervised Loss Functions
ods typically employ pixelwise reconstruction errors to For the FC2 P, the training objective is to minimize the
describe the severity of anomalies. For the features, a sim- discrepancy between the normal neighborhood features AeN and
ple approach is to directly use the elementwise L2 distance AoN and the reconstructed features ÂeN and ÂoN . Therefore, we
between the original input and its reconstruction as follows: introduce the projection loss Lpro , which can be expressed as
 S e (i, j, k) = kÂeN (i, j, k) − AeN (i, j, k) k2 follows:
 Lpro =k ÂeN − AeN k22 + k ÂoN − AoN k22 (7)
 S o (i, j, k) = kÂoN (i, j, k) − AoN (i, j, k) k2 (6)
 H1 ×W1 ×(Csum /2) where k · k22 is the mean square error, commonly used for
where S , S ∈ R
 e o
 are feature reconstruction
 training autoencoders. It is worth noting that autoencoders
residuals, and i, j, and k denote the index of height, width, and
 under the guidance of Lpro accomplish two proxy tasks: one
channel, respectively. As the distance increases, it indicates
 is to inpaint the pseudo-anomalies in features, and the other
that the region is more likely to be abnormal.
 is to predict the features of the neighborhood channels.
 To supervise the pixel-level anomaly prediction of the
C. Anomaly Exposure Network AExNet, we introduce segmentation loss Lseg under the guid-
 Anomalies at each spatial position can be manifested ance of pseudo-abnormal mask, which can be represented as
through the collective element discrepancies across channels. follows:
However, features typically vary in both resolution and number
 Lseg = LDice Mpre , MP + LCE Mpre , MP
  
of channels for stages, making the direct summation of errors (8)
along the channel dimension suboptimal. To address this issue, where LDice (·) denotes the dice loss [56] and LCE (·) denotes
we propose an AExNet, as shown in Fig. 3, inspired by the pixelwise binary cross-entropy loss. Since our proposed
the divide-and-conquer approach. Specifically, considering that method follows an end-to-end training mode, the overall loss
anomalies behave various in different stages, resulting in being can be expressed as follows:
overwhelmed in aggregation, a SAP is further proposed to
allow discrepancies, enhancing through the stages as illustrated Ltotal = λLpro + (1 − λ) Lseg (9)
in Fig. 4. The aggregated feature reconstruction residual is split
 where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the loss weight.
into three subsets according to their original stages, and their
resolutions are simultaneously restored. Hence, for S e and S o ,
their three-stage feature subsets {S 1e , S 2e , S 3e } and {S 1o , S 2o , S 3o } IV. E XPERIMENTS
can be obtained, where the subscript numbers denote the stage In this section, our proposed method is validated on the
they belong but their channel count is only half of the original. MVTec AD [22] and Visa [31] datasets and compared with
Notably, the reacquisition of multiscale information is pivotal SOTA methods for image-level anomaly detection and pixelfor anomaly segmentation practices. level anomaly segmentation. To evaluate the effectiveness,
 Since neighborhood features possess inherent correlations, ablation studies are conducted in terms of the network archithey typically exhibit high similarity in response to anomalies. tecture and loss function. Furthermore, to demonstrate the
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

 TABLE I
 P IXEL -L EVEL A NOMALY S EGMENTATION R ESULTS W ITH AUC/AP (%) M ETRICS ON MVT EC AD DATASET. S UPERSCRIPT † : R EPRODUCED
 R ESULTS F ROM AVAILABLE O FFICIAL I MPLEMENTATIONS . T HE O PTIMAL AND S UBOPTIMAL R ESULTS A RE S HOWN IN B OLD
 AND U NDERLINE , R ESPECTIVELY. S UBSEQUENT TABLES F OLLOW THE C ONSISTENT P RESENTATIONS

practicality, visualization results are shown on the KSDD2 [57] 4) KSDD2 [57] is a surface defect detection dataset with
and Magnetic Tile [58] datasets that are obtained from real- over 3000 images, obtained while tackling a real-world
world scenarios. Finally, the efficacy of the proposed AExNet industrial problem. The image resolution is approxis demonstrated through the visualization of abnormal features imately 230 × 630 pixels. It contains 2979 normal
at different stages. images and 356 defective images with several different
 types of defects (scratches, minor spots, and surface
 imperfections)
A. Experimental Setups 2) Evaluation Protocols: As in previous studies [6], [7],
 1) Datasets: The proposed method is validated on two [59], the area under the receiver operating characteristic
popular and challenging anomaly detection datasets. Further- curve (AUC), the AP, and area under the per region overlap
more, to demonstrate its effectiveness and practicality, we (AUPRO) metrics are considered for evaluating the pixel-level
perform visual validation on two datasets derived from real- anomaly segmentation task. In addition, the AUC metric is
world industrial scenarios. All four datasets provide precise also employed to detect image-level anomalies. Both evaluapixel-level ground truth for validating anomaly segmentation tion protocols distinguish normal from abnormal instances by
performance. thresholding anomaly scores, with the AP focusing more on
 the accuracy of segmentation within abnormal regions.
 1) MVTec AD [22] comprises 5354 images distributed 3) Implementation Details: The resolution of images and
 over ten categories of objects and five categories of masks is resized to 256 × 256 for both the training and
 textures. Each category consists of approximately 200 testing phase. The Swin Transformer [53] pretrained using
 normal images for training and 100 defective images the ImageNet dataset serves as the feature extractor. The loss
 for testing. The resolution of original images ranges weight λ is set to 0.5 by default. Adam optimizer is applied
 between 700 × 700 and 1024 × 1024 pixels. with a learning rate of 1e−4 . The image-level anomaly scores
 2) Visa [31] contains 10 821 images, including 9621 normal are obtained following the approach in [6]. Our models are
 samples and 1200 abnormal samples, which are divided trained in an end-to-end mode for 400 and 200 epochs on
 into 12 distinct subsets. Four of the subsets belong to MVTec AD and Visa, respectively, using a batch size of 8 on
 the PCB category, and their structures are relatively a single NVIDIA GTX 3090Ti, following the default PyTorch
 complex. In some categories, such as capsules, multiple 2.2.1 framework.
 objects together constitute the target to be detected.
 Hence, this dataset is more challenging for anomaly
 detection and segmentation. B. Comparisons With SOTA Methods
 3) Magnetic Tile [58] originates from a real industrial This section presents quantitative results of the proposed
 scene, the largest magnetic tile production base in Zhe- method on the MVTec AD and Visa dataset in detail, verifying
 jiang, China. It contains 1344 images, including 952 the superiority of our method over SOTA methods.
 normal samples. The defect samples are divided into five 1) Results on MVTec AD Dataset: Table I shows the
 subcategories, including blowhole, break, crack, fray, pixel-level AUC and AP results for anomaly segmentation
 and uneven, which are defects on the magnetic tiles. on the MVTec dataset, while Table II showsthe pixel-level
 The images exhibit large resolution differences and have AUPRO results. The baseline methods compared include
 different aspect ratios. In addition, the brightness of the DFR [7], DRAEM [6], DSR [48], MemSeg [30], SimpleNet
 images, the shape of the defects, and the texture of the [59], DAF [51], DiffAD [49], DeSTSeg [12], SSMCTP [60],
 tiles are also inconsistent. MambaAD [61], and GLAD [62]. The results show that the
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF P IXEL -L EVEL A NOMALY S EGMENTATION W ITH AUPRO (%) ON MVT EC AD AND V ISA DATASETS

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF I MAGE -L EVEL A NOMALY D ETECTION W ITH AUC (%) ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. R ESULTS
 A RE AVERAGED OVER A LL C ATEGORIES

 TABLE IV
 R ESULTS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION AND S EGMENTATION W ITH AUC AND
 AP (%) M ETRICS ON THE V ISA DATASET, C OMPARING W ITH S EVERAL
 SOTA M ETHODS . R ESULTS A RE AVERAGED OVER
 A LL C ATEGORIES

Fig. 5. Comparison of inference speed (FPS) versus pixel AP for different
methods on MVTec AD benchmark.
 and Table II shows the pixel-level AUPRO results on the Visa
proposed method outperforms all current SOTA methods for dataset. The baseline methods compared include DFR [7],
the anomaly segmentation task and achieves a new SOTA on PatchCore [8], DRAEM [6], SimpleNet [59], DAF [51], D3AD
the MVTec AD dataset, obtaining 98.7% AUC and 79.8% AP. [63], DeSTSeg [12], and MambaAD [61]. For the anomaly
Focusing on AP protocols that better evaluate segmentation detection task, our proposed method achieves performance
performance, our method improves the score by a significant comparable to SOTA methods. Considering the anomaly seg-
4.1↑ compared with the current SOTA knowledge distillation- mentation results, our method is on par with the SOTA method
based method DeSTSeg with two-stage training mode and SimpleNet under the AUC. However, for the AP, our method
by 13.0↑ compared with the SOTA image reconstruction- shows clear advantages, improving upon SimpleNet by 8.8↑.
based method GLAD using a high computational cost latent SimpleNet adds Gaussian noise to the features to simulate
diffusion model. It is noteworthy that the proposed method anomalies and uses a simple binary classifier for detection. In
achieves optimal results in nine categories for AUC and eight contrast, our method generates more precise pseudo-anomalies
categories for AP, which is comparable to the SOTA method in the feature and utilizes the proposed AExNet to mine
in other categories, as well as yielding the best AURPO anomaly representations in the multistage features, resulting
result. Furthermore, Table III shows the image-level AUC in more accurate anomaly score maps. For AUPRO, our
results of our method for anomaly detection on this dataset. method outperforms the current SOTA methods DeSTSeg
In addition, the frames per second (FPS) for inference speed and MambaAD by 2.9% and 2.5%, respectively. Notably,
versus pixel AP is shown in Fig. 5. Our method strikes the proposed method outperforms most previous methods
a tradeoff between speed and performance, highlighting its on the precise anomaly segmentation task. Previous SOTA
adaptability for practical applications. The results demonstrate methods averaged around 36.0% AP, while our method reaches
that the proposed method achieves comparable performance to 44.8%, outperforming the SOTA method PatchCore by 8.1%↑.
current SOTA methods. In summary, the evaluation of anomaly These experimental results strongly demonstrate the excellent
segmentation and anomaly detection validates the effectiveness performance of our method in anomaly segmentation and also
and robustness of our proposed method. demonstrate its effectiveness and generalization capabilities.
 2) Results on Visa Dataset: Table IV reports the AUC 3) Visualization Results: We present comprehensive qualand AP average results over all categories for image-level itative results on the MVTec AD dataset to compare the
anomaly detection (Det.) and pixel-level segmentation (Seg.), anomaly segmentation performance of our method with several
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

Fig. 6. Qualitative visualized results for anomaly segmentation. The last row is the ground truth of the given input abnormal image. Compared with the
baseline methods, including DRAEM (second row), SimpleNet (third row), DAF (fourth row), and SOTA DeSTSeg (fifth row) on MVTec AD datasets, our
proposed approach FC2 P (sixth row) has a more accurate and compact anomaly location capability. Specifically, the superiority of our segmentation results
is manifested in the suppression of false positives within normal backgrounds and the accurate delineation of the contours of actual anomalies.

SOTA methods, as shown in Fig. 6. Our method outperforms SOTA methods, yielding more accurate and significant
anomaly segmentation results that closely align with the
ground truth. Specifically, our method excels in two key
aspects: 1) accurately delineating abnormal regions with welldefined boundaries and 2) reducing false positives in normal
regions. For example, our method accurately segments the
color anomalies in the cable’s circular periphery without
detecting the inner core. Notably, the anomaly segmentation
maps generated by our method for the carpet are more accurate
than the provided annotations, closely matching the actual
anomaly shapes.
 Visualizations of the Visa dataset further demonstrate the
superiority of our method in anomaly segmentation. The
defects in the dataset are often small and challenging to detect,
as shown in Fig. 7. Furthermore, some categories exhibit
complex textures, such as the PCB. Despite these challenges,
our method achieves superior anomaly segmentation, with
more comprehensive and meaningful segmentation results and
fewer false positives in both object and background areas. Fig. 7. Qualitative results of anomaly segmentation on the challenging Visa
 Fig. 8 shows visualizations of several cases from the real dataset, comparing with DRAEM and SOTA method DeSTSeg. The categories
 from top to bottom are, respectively: candle, cashew, pcb1, pipe fryum, and
magnetic tile defect and KSDD2 datasets. The predicted pcb4. The proposed method demonstrates significant segmentation capabilities
anomaly score map closely matches the true label. Notably, on objects with complex structures as well as on small defects, and it generates
the true label in the second column does not mark the small fewer false positives in backgrounds.
defect at the bottom (likely missed), whereas our proposed
method detects it. The results demonstrate the effectiveness gradually added, resulting in the following six experiments:
and practical implications of the proposed method. 1) adding inpainting ability (inp.); 2) adding prediction ability
 (pre.); 3) adding inpainting and prediction ability as complete
 FC2 P; 4) adding SAP module without Fall ; 5) using vanilla
C. Ablation Study encoder in U-Net to segment Fall ; and 6) training with all
 This section analyzes the contributions of the components proposed components. The baseline method exhibits substanof the proposed method. tial improvement when the capabilities of two nonidentity
 1) Influence of Different Components: Table V presents reconstructions are added (compared with 66.5 in Table I).
the ablation studies on the MVTec AD dataset to assess the Furthermore, we perform a density analysis of the pixel
effectiveness of each component of the proposed method. DFR anomaly scores between the baseline and our proposed FC2 P,
[7] is chosen as our baseline, and various capabilities are as shown in Fig. 9. It can be observed that our proposed
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 8. Visualization results on the Magnetic Tile (left) and KSDD2 (right)
datasets. Fig. 10. Performance with varied loss weights on MVTec AD for anomaly
 detection (AUC) and segmentation (AP). The red dashed line indicates the
 TABLE V mean value. Optimal performance is achieved when the reconstruction loss
A BLATION S TUDIES FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION AND S EGMENTATION and segmentation loss are balanced. Furthermore, adjusting the weights can
 W ITH D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF O UR P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE be employed to favor different tasks.
 ON MVT EC AD DATASET. R ESULTS A RE R EPRESENTED AS THE
 AVERAGE AP S CORE OVER A LL C ATEGORIES

 Fig. 11. Performance with segmentation loss components for anomaly
 detection and segmentation in all metrics. The combination of both CE and
 dice losses indeed compensates for their respective deficiencies. Not only
 maintains the accuracy of anomaly pixel classification in unbalanced classes
 but also enhances the model’s sensitivity to abnormal regions.

 λ controls the balance between reconstruction loss and segmentation loss during end-to-end training, thereby affecting
 the resulting anomaly score maps. As the reconstruction loss
 weight gradually increases to 0.4, the performance of imagelevel anomaly detection improves from 97.1% to 99.1%.
 Beyond this threshold, the feature reconstruction module
Fig. 9. Probability density of both normal and abnormal pixel anomaly FC2 P tends to overfit, resulting in a plateau in anomaly
score for feature reconstruction residual with FC2 P, comparing with the base
method. detection performance. However, as the proportion of segmentation loss decreases, there is a noticeable decline in the
method achieves a more compact distribution with less overlap AP metric for anomaly segmentation. This suggests that the
for both abnormal and normal pixels, making it easier to AExNet, designed to mine anomalies from feature residuals,
distinguish them. These results show that traditional feature is inadequately trained. Although the feature reconstruction
reconstruction-based methods suffer from overgeneralization. component is well-trained, the segmentation network fails
When the AExNet is added, anomaly segmentation perfor- to extract anomalies from the features to produce accumance improves significantly by at least 9% AP. Moreover, our rate segmentation results. The results indicate that optimal
approach improves by +10.3%↑ when using Fall with vanilla performance is achieved when the reconstruction loss and
encoder, indicating that it actually contains rich abnormal segmentation loss are properly balanced. In addition, it is
information. When the SAP module is added with Fall , our observed that reconstruction loss is more conducive to imageproposed method achieves the optimal result. Based on the level anomaly detection, making it beneficial for adapting to
divide-and-conquer approach, the gradual enhancement of various task types.
anomalies at different stages, combined with the integration of Furthermore, ablation analysis is conducted on the compooverall feature reconstruction residuals, significantly improves nents of the segmentation loss, as shown in Fig. 11. Since the
anomaly segmentation performance. CE loss focuses on independent pixel predictions, it performs
 2) Influence of Loss Function: Fig. 10 illustrates the effect poorly when used alone in class-imbalanced segmentation
of loss weights on the performance of anomaly detection and tasks, particularly in anomaly segmentation where normal
segmentation on the MVTec AD dataset. The loss weight pixels vastly outnumber abnormal pixels. In contrast, the dice
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

 TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDIES FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION AND S EGMENTATION
 W ITH D IFFERENT BACKBONES ON MVT EC AD AND V ISA DATASETS

 TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDIES FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION AND S EGMENTATION
 W ITH D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS ON MVT EC AD DATASET

 Fig. 12. Some examples of visualization of different feature residual stages
 on MVTec AD dataset. The sixth column represents the results of aggregating
 the three stages. The proposed method can exploit the advantages of all stages
 and produce precise anomaly score maps, eliminating false positives in normal
 areas.

 stage play a key role, achieving relatively good results with
 just this stage. This is because shallower features tend to
 focus on detailed information in abnormal regions, while
loss focuses on the overall structural similarity of the abnormal deeper features are more concerned with semantic aspects.
regions, which alleviates the class-imbalance issue to some Interestingly, the SOTA methods SimpleNet and Patchcore
extent; however, the lack of confidence in pixel classification both utilize stages 2 and 3 to achieve optimal performance.
results in an AP of only 79.8%. Interestingly, combining However, the anomaly score map is often inaccurate due to
these two types of losses compensates for their respective the absence of shallow information. It can be observed that
limitations, not only maintaining the accuracy of abnormal our proposed method fully exploits the characteristics of all
pixel classification but also increasing the model’s sensitivity feature stages, achieving optimal results in both detection and
to abnormal regions, thereby significantly improving anomaly segmentation. This is primarily due to the fact that the AExNet
segmentation performance. not only considers anomalies as a whole but also enables
 3) Influence of Pretrained Network: Table VI illustrates anomalies to gradually enhance across the stages of feature
the impact of different pretrained backbones, including CNN- reconstruction residuals.
based (ResNet [38], WRN [64], and DenseNet [65]) and Furthermore, to validate that our method addresses the issue
Transformer-based (PVT [66], HorNet [67], and Swin [53]) of anomalies being overshadowed at different feature stages,
models with their versions, on the performance of anomaly we visualize the feature reconstruction residuals and their
detection and segmentation. The results on the MVTec AD aggregation for anomaly segmentation in Fig. 12. We observe
and Visa datasets demonstrate the significant advantage of that anomaly segmentation performance varies across different
backbones following the Swin Transformer framework in both stages and categories. For instance, the print anomaly on the
anomaly detection and segmentation tasks. First, the Swin hazelnut is more prominent in stage 1, but aggregating all
Transformer not only captures long-range dependencies, a levels can obscure this detail. Similarly, the two anomalies
characteristic absent in CNNs, but its hierarchical structure on the pill are suppressed by false positives in stage 3,
also facilitates the processing of multiscale information. This is rendering them insignificant in the aggregated results. Our
essential for understanding both the macrostructure of normal method alleviates this issue by reducing false alarms in normal
images and their fine-grained details. In addition, the window- areas and producing clear outlines of abnormal areas. Notably,
based self-attention mechanism enhances the model’s ability even when the shallower stages (stages 1 and 2) fail to detect
to bridge local and global contexts, facilitating the accurate the color anomaly on the carpet, our method can still extract
identification and localization of abnormal regions. weak details to assist deeper stages in generating a precise
 4) Influence of Feature Stages: Table VII illustrates the anomaly score map.
impact of combining different feature stages on anomaly
detection and segmentation performance in the MVTec AD
dataset. The results demonstrate that optimal performance V. C ONCLUSION
can be achieved by combining features from all three stages. This article proposes a novel feature reconstruction-based
Notably, the combination of stages 1 and 2 is more beneficial framework named FC2 P to address the challenging and practifor segmentation, while the combination of stages 2 and 3 is cal task of unsupervised anomaly segmentation. The proposed
more beneficial for detection. The features from the second method primarily alleviates the issues of overgeneralization
5044613 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

and overwhelming that are typically encountered in traditional [12] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
feature reconstruction-based approaches. Specifically, features Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
are split into two subsets based on neighboring channels, and Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
two autoencoders are employed for their closed-loop predic- [13] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
tion, driven by our observation of the potential relationship “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp.
between neighboring channel feature maps in the pretrained 14897–14907.
features. In addition, for the feature reconstruction residual [14] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidtsubsets, an AExNet is proposed, adopting the divide-and- Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with
 generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
conquer principle, so that anomalies are gradually enhanced May 2019.
across feature stages and combined with the aggregated feature [15] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryresiduals to decode a precise anomaly score map. The pro- augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
posed method outperforms SOTA methods on two widely used pp. 1705–1714.
benchmark datasets in both anomaly detection and anomaly [16] K. Zhou et al., “Memorizing structure-texture correspondence for image
segmentation. Finally, the superiority and practicality of the anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
 no. 6, pp. 2335–2349, Jun. 2022.
proposed method in anomaly segmentation are thoroughly
 [17] K. Zhou et al., “Encoding structure-texture relation with P-Net for
demonstrated through visual qualitative analysis. anomaly detection in retinal images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 Limitations: Although the proposed method achieves strong 2020, pp. 360–377.
performance, it sacrifices some inference efficiency. This is [18] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “EfficientAD: Accurate visual
 anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
primarily caused by the aggregation of multistage pretrained Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 128–138.
features, which increases the number of channels and leads to [19] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Skip-GANomaly:
significant computational overhead during the reconstruction Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder–decoder anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
process of the autoencoders. [20] H. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Zeng, Z. Wu, and Y.-G. Jiang, “DiffusionAD:
 Future Work: In future work, we plan to integrate knowledge Norm-guided one-step denoising diffusion for anomaly detection,” 2023,
from large vision-language models [68] or vision founda- arXiv:2303.08730.
 [21] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM:
tional models [69] into our approach. This integration aims Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
to enhance the generalization capability of our method for simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
anomaly detection and segmentation tasks. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 649–655.
 [22] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 R EFERENCES in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[1] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, [23] Z. You, K. Yang, W. Luo, L. Cui, Y. Zheng, and X. Le, “ADTR:
 “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” 2020, Anomaly detection transformer with feature reconstruction,” in Proc.
 arXiv:2012.02364. Neural Inf. Process., 2023, pp. 298–310.
[2] A. Frotscher, J. Kapoor, T. Wolfers, and C. F. Baumgart- [24] L. Chen, Z. You, N. Zhang, J. Xi, and X. Le, “UTRAD: Anomaly
 ner, “Unsupervised anomaly detection using aggregated normative detection and localization with U-transformer,” Neural Netw., vol. 147,
 diffusion,” 2023, arXiv:2312.01904. pp. 53–62, Mar. 2022.
[3] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for [25] H. Zhi, H. Qin, L. Zhang, J. Guo, and B. Song, “CFFDist: Cross-scale
 unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE feature fusion distillation network for industrial anomaly localization,”
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–11, 2025.
[4] D. Bogdoll, M. Nitsche, and J. M. Zollner, “Anomaly detection in [26] W. Hu, W. Yu, Y. Tang, Y. Xie, and W. Zhang, “REDAD: A reliable
 autonomous driving: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. distillation for image anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 4487–4498. vol. 74, pp. 1–13, 2025.
[5] C. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Self-supervised [27] Y. Guo, M. Jiang, Q. Huang, Y. Cheng, and J. Gong, “MLDFR: A
 masking for unsupervised anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE multilevel features restoration method based on damaged images for
 Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 4426–4438, 2023. anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20,
[6] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discrimina- no. 2, pp. 2477–2486, Feb. 2024.
 tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” [28] B. Zhu, Z. Gu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “ADFormer:
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, Generalizable few-shot anomaly detection with dual CNN-transformer
 pp. 8310–8319. architecture,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–16, 2025.
[7] Y. Shi, J. Yang, and Z. Qi, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation [29] H. Yao, Y. Cao, W. Luo, W. Zhang, W. Yu, and W. Shen, “Prior normality
 via deep feature reconstruction,” Neurocomputing, vol. 424, pp. 9–22, prompt transformer for multiclass industrial image anomaly detection,”
 Feb. 2021. IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 11866–11876,
[8] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler, Oct. 2024.
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. [30] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,”
 pp. 14298–14308. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835.
[9] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis- [31] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spottribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,” the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
 2020, arXiv:2011.08785. segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
[10] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution [32] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
 defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc. Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, 14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2019, pp. 622–637.
 pp. 14143–14152. [33] T. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Du, B. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Reconstruction
[11] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed from edge image combined with color and gradient difference for
 students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent industrial surface anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2210.14485.
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [34] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 27th Int.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
CHEN et al.: FC2 P: FEATURE CROSS-CHANNEL PROJECTION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY SEGMENTATION 5044613

[35] J. Ho, A. N. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic [60] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 models,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 pp. 1–7. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
[36] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting [61] H. He et al., “MambaAD: Exploring state space models for multi-class
 for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021, unsupervised anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2404.06564.
 Art. no. 107706. [62] H. Yao, M. Liu, Z. Yin, Z. Yan, X. Hong, and W. Zuo, “GLAD: Towards
[37] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic better reconstruction with global and local adaptive diffusion models
 context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, May 2021, pp. 3110–3118. 2024, pp. 1–17.
[38] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for [63] J. Tebbe and J. Tayyub, “D3AD: Dynamic denoising diffusion probaimage recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. bilistic model for anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04463.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. [64] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
[39] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for arXiv:1605.07146.
 large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556. [65] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
[40] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 2261–2269.
 no. 6, pp. 84–90, May 2017. [66] W. Wang et al., “Pyramid vision transformer: A versatile backbone for
[41] L. Heckler, R. König, and P. Bergmann, “Exploring the importance of dense prediction without convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 pretrained feature extractors for unsupervised anomaly detection and Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 548–558.
 localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [67] Y. Rao, W. Zhao, Y. Tang, J. Zhou, S.-N. Lim, and J. Lu, “HorNet: Effi-
 Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2023, pp. 2917–2926. cient high-order spatial interactions with recursive gated convolutions,”
[42] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet: in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 10353–10366.
 Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE [68] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natu-
 Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 1906–1915. ral language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021,
[43] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature pp. 8748–8763.
 pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257. [69] A. M. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
[44] Z. Gu et al., “Remembering normality: Memory-guided knowledge Comput. Vis., Sep. 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
 distillation for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16355–16363.
[45] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, Yichi Chen received the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from
 pp. 9659–9669. the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2025.
[46] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and His research interests include image anomaly detection and continual
 D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via learning.
 gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.
[47] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
 Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2015, pp. 234–241. Weizhi Xian received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
[48] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DSR—A dual subspace re- from the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
 projection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. China, in 2023.
 Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 539–554. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Chongqing Research
[49] X. Zhang, N. Li, J. Li, T. Dai, Y. Jiang, and S.-T. Xia, “Unsupervised Institute and the Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology,
 surface anomaly detection with diffusion probabilistic model,” in Proc. Chongqing. His research interests include pattern recognition, anomaly
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 6759–6768. detection, visual quality assessment, and video coding.
[50] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
 “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
 pp. 10684–10695.
[51] Y. Cai, D. Liang, D. Luo, X. He, X. Yang, and X. Bai, “A discrepancy Junjie Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) is currently pursuing the
 aware framework for robust anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Ph.D. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, under
 Informat., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3986–3995, Mar. 2024. the supervision of Prof. Zhuotao Tian and Prof. Bin Chen.
 His research interests include computer vision, multimodal perception, and
[52] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
 topics related to multimodal large language models.
 “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
[53] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
 Xian Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in control
[54] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie, theory and control engineering from the Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese
 “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China, in 2016.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 936–944. He is currently an Associate Professor with IA, CAS. His current research
[55] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc. interests include machine learning and automated surface inspection for
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2018, pp. 7132–7141. industries.
[56] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-Net: Fully convolutional
 neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation,” in Proc.
 4th Int. Conf. 3D Vis. (3DV), Oct. 2016, pp. 565–571.
[57] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedefect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput. Bin Chen received the B.E. degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
 Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459. in 1992, the M.S. degree from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2001,
[58] Y. Huang, C. Qiu, Y. Guo, X. Wang, and K. Yuan, “Surface defect and the Ph.D. degree from Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 2005.
 saliency of magnetic tile,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. He has been a Research Professor with the International Research Institute
 Eng. (CASE), Aug. 2018, pp. 612–617. for Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China,
[59] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network since 2020. He has also been a Professor with the University of Chinese
 for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Academy of Sciences, Beijing, since 2006. His research interests include
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411. machine vision, deep learning, and artificial intelligence.