IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2529914

 FeatDAE: Introducing Features With Denoising
 Autoencoder for Anomaly Detection
 Zheyuan Zhou , Student Member, IEEE, Jichun Wang , Zian Yu , Zili Wang , Member, IEEE,
 Xiaojian Liu , Lemiao Qiu , Member, IEEE, and Shuyou Zhang

 Abstract— Anomaly detection (AD) is a critical task in construct a latent space of normal samples by minimizing the
manufacturing inspection. Reconstructive AD methods restore discrepancy between the original normal instances and their
the normal appearance of an object, ideally modifying only reconstructions. It can be further subdivided into the following
the anomalous regions. However, previously commonly used
reconstruction-based architecture always struggles with over- two paradigms. Generative methods [6], [7], [8] assume that
generalization and overfitting problems, leading to poor recon- an autoencoder will be optimized to reproduce normal patterns,
struction performance on real defective samples. In this study, thereby failing to accurately reconstruct anomalous regions.
we propose a more general denoising autoencoder, by introducing As a result, the poor reconstruction of defective areas leads to
a feature hierarchy design to address these challenges in unsu- significant differences between the reconstructed output and
pervised AD. In particular, we operate feature transformation in the input images. This discrepancy can be used to identify and
the latent space to cope with the robustness of unseen anomalies
in reality. Furthermore, the method enhances the discriminative localize the anomalous regions. However, the high generalizacapability of the model by focusing on multiple knowledge, tion capacity of autoencoders allows them to even reconstruct
including pixel color, histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) anomaly fidelity, especially when similar local features are
feature, and deep features. Additionally, a feature alignment presented [9], as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). This overgeneralmodule is proposed to manage the varied sizes and morphologies ization violates the basic assumption of generating anomaly
of features. Experiments conducted on both the MVTec AD
dataset and the VisA dataset demonstrate that our FeatDAE
 maps based solely on the reconstruction error, significantly
significantly outperforms existing methods, achieving state-of-the- increasing the rate of false negatives (FNs). Discriminative
art results with high efficiency. methods [1], [10], [11] train models by synthesizing anoma-
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection (AD), denoising autoencoder,
 lies to extend these models to recognize real defects. They
industrial defect detection, self-supervised learning, unsupervised simultaneously generate masks indicating the locations of
learning. anomalies and enhance the network’s ability to discriminate
 and localize defects by incorporating a segmentation head.
 I. I NTRODUCTION However, it often suffers from overfitting problems, where the

A NOMALY detection (AD) aims to identify instances that
 contain anomalous and localized regions that deviate
from normal object patterns, playing an essential role in
 synthetic samples may be far from the real defects. A simple
 classification network can achieve nearly 100% accuracy in
 distinguishing between synthesized anomaly samples and real
various applications such as industrial quality control [1], [2], anomaly samples after only a few training epochs. Training
[3]. However, the scarcity and diversity of anomalies pose with such a set results in an unclear discriminator that genersignificant challenges in collecting and labeling, resulting in alizes poorly to real anomalies, where indistinct objects could
the inability to construct large datasets to train a classifier or be included in inlier feature space, causing large false-positive
detector. In addition, the pattern differences between normal (FP) detections, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The discriminative
and abnormal images are usually fine-grained, while defects model shows improvement but still struggles to accurately
may occupy only a small fraction of image pixels. Therefore, reconstruct anomalous not covered by the simulation.
AD based on only normal data encounters unique challenges To simultaneously address the above-mentioned problems,
different from those of a typical supervised learning problem. we propose a new feature-level denoising autoencoder explic-
 Many recently popular and successful unsupervised AD itly for surface AD, dubbed as FeatDAE, as illustrated in
models are reconstruction-based [4], [5]. These models learn to Fig. 2. Our FeatDAE introduces feature radial transformation
 Received 4 January 2025; revised 17 March 2025; accepted 3 April 2025. (FRT) and feature omnidirectional injection (FOI) in the
Date of publication 29 April 2025; date of current version 2 June 2025. This latent space after the encoder and incorporates a meticulously
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of symmetrical decoder to seamlessly restore the latent noised
China under Grant 52375271 and in part by the “Pioneer” and “Leading
Goose” Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province under
 representation back to the reconstruction result. By concur-
Grant 2024C01044. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was rently introducing distinct perturbations at both the image
Dr. Xianqiang Yang. (Corresponding author: Xiaojian Liu.) and feature levels, our FeatDAE is proficient in discern-
 The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Fluid Power and ing the intrinsic information and distribution of the data,
Mechatronic Systems, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China (e-mail:
liuxj@zju.edu.cn). showcasing enhanced robustness when addressing a myriad
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3565336 of real-world anomalies. Second, the objects we reconstruct
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin while
 maintaining a high inference speed of 110 FPS.

 II. R ELATED W ORKS
 AD: has been the focus of extensive research in recent
 years, and a plethora of approaches have been proposed to
 tackle this challenging task in industry. These methods can be
 broadly categorized into two main paradigms: reconstructionbased and embedding-based.
 Reconstruction-based methods involve training an autoencoder network [6], [9], [14], [15], [16], [17] or a generative
 model [4], [18], [19] and operate under the assumption that
Fig. 1. Pilot study on reconstruction-based methods. (a) Generative model
takes the original image X or the noise-added image X ′ as input, and is
 anomalies will be poorly reconstructed, thereby making them
trained using the reconstruction loss L rec to reconstruct its input. The anomaly distinguishable by their reconstruction error. However, due to
map M is obtained by comparing the input X with the reconstruction the excellent generalization capabilities of the autoencoder,
result Xb. (b) Discriminative model combines the synthesized image X ′
 this assumption does not always hold, causing suboptimal
with the reconstruction result X b, and is supervised by the corresponding
synthesized mask M′ and the segmentation loss L seg to produce a more performance. Some recent works [6], [20], [21] involved
accurate localization of defects. As shown, the minor discrepancy between masking parts of the image or adding random noise, leading to
the input X and the reconstructed result X b renders it difficult to accurately
 better robustness of the autoencoder. Some methods [1], [10],
discern and differentiate anomalies. This highlights the challenge inherent
in reconstruction-based methods, which stems from their limited capacity to [11], [22], [23], [24] are inspired by supervised segmentation
distinctly characterize real anomaly samples. tasks, by synthetically generating defects during the training
 phase with the idea that the model can then generalize on real
 anomalies. However, this discriminative model often leads to
 overfitting the training set and does not generalize well to real
encompass information of various granularity and types, such defects.
as pixel color, hand-crafted descriptors, and deep features. Embedding-based methods utilize feature maps [25], [26],
The diversity in the reconstructed targets further contributes [27] extracted through a pretrained network to learn normality
to a comprehensive and precise depiction of features, thereby on these maps. Certain methods [28], [29], [30] operate under
enhancing the downstream AD performance. In addition, the premise that the characteristics of normal data conform
we have devised a feature alignment module to address the to a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Consequently, these
varied sizes and morphologies of the reconstructed features. approaches leverage the normal training examples to estimate
The aligned features are then fed into the head to handle the pertinent parameters and assume they will not be effective
discrepancies in a trainable manner, alleviating the overfitting for anomaly data. Moreover, a variety of approaches [31], [32],
of synthetic defects. [33], [34] based on normalizing flow have emerged, which
 The main contributions of our paper are summarized as endeavor to approximate the density by projecting an arbitrary
follows. distribution onto a Gaussian distribution. Nevertheless, all
 1) We introduce stochastic perturbations in both the input these methodologies presuppose that the distribution of normal
 and latent space, extending and generalizing the concept regions will be adequately represented within the training data,
 of the denoising autoencoder. This approach directly rendering them ineffective when confronted with rare normal
 addresses the issue of overfitting to simulated defects, regions that remain unseen during the training phase, thereby
 a common problem in recent discriminative methods. resulting in FPs while facing real anomalous samples.
 2) We propose a multifeature reconstruction mechanism Denoising autoencoder [35] is an extension of the basic
 that enables the autoencoder to learn from different types autoencoder and is trained to use a corrupted version of
 of features. The aligned features demonstrably mitigate the input to reconstruct the original input. A variety of
 the issue of overgeneralization and reduce the high FN methods [36], [37], [38], [39], [40] can be considered as
 rate. a generalized denoising autoencoder. Building on advance-
 3) We introduce a novel framework, FeatDAE, specifically ments in natural language processing [41], [42], [43], recent
 designed for surface AD. FeatDAE is capable of han- studies [44], [45], [46] have shown that modern vision
 dling a wide variety of anomalies effectively, making it Transformers hold significant potential when applied to repversatile and adaptable to different applications. resentation learning. The inherent disadvantage of two-stage
 4) Extensive experiments on the challenging MVTec AD methods stems from their reliance on a pretrained VAE [47],
 dataset [12] and the VisA dataset [13] demonstrate tasked with transforming originally continuous data into
 the effectiveness and versatility of our method across intentionally discretized target visual tokens. Conversely,
 various scenarios. Our FeatDAE sets a new state of the end-to-end training for masked autoencoders [48], [49] sigart in AD, achieving 96.3% region-wise AUPRO and nificantly enhances the model’s performance in terms of both
 81.5% pixel-wise AP on the MVTec AD dataset, and efficacy and efficiency. Our approach further adds noise at the
 93.3% region-wise AUPRO and 47.1% pixel-wise AP feature level to improve the generalization of the model while
 on the VisA dataset. These results surpass the previous maintaining accuracy and efficiency.
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

Fig. 2. Comparison of different architectures for defect detection and localization. (a) Generative model exhibits overgeneralization, leads to a failure in
accurately localizing regions of test-time anomaly samples. (b) Discriminative model struggles to reconstruct real-world anomalies that differ significantly from
the simulated ones, highlighting its limitations in handling unseen or more complex anomalies. (c) Our proposed FeatDAE addresses these issues by applying
transformations at the feature level, significantly expanding the simulated space of anomalous and mitigating the overfitting problem. By reconstructing multiple
types of features, our method achieves a more robust and accurate AD.

Fig. 3. Overview of our framework. By adding Perlin noise at the input space and making feature transformation at the latent space, our FeatDAE is able
to learn more essential features of the sample. The reconstructed features are sent to the feature alignment module along with the noising features, and the
final result is obtained after the segmentation head.

 III. M ETHODOLOGY normal samples, the derivation of a conclusive anomaly map is
 achieved.
A. Framework Fig. 3 depicts the proposed FeatDAE framework for AD.
 Let I train = {I1train , . . . , Intrain } be the training set with At the training stage, the original input image I train ∈ I train
anomaly-free samples only, and I test = {I1test , . . . , Imtest } be is first fed into a freeze features extractor to obtain normal
the testing set containing both normal and abnormal images. histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) feature XHOG and deep
The goal of AD is to learn from the normal samples in the features Xdeep . Second, the image-level noise is added to the
training set to accurately identify and locate faults when input image and together they are passed into the encoder.
presented with a test set. Normal samples in both the training Furthermore, our proposed FRT and FOI are integrated into
and test sets are considered to follow the same pattern. the latent space to enrich and simulate a diverse array of defect
Any out-of-distribution is deemed abnormal. By juxtaposing characteristics. The decoder generates the corresponding mulinput samples of unknown normalcy with previously modeled timodal features{X d pix , Xhog , Xdeep }, which are sent into the
 d [
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

feature alignment module together with the previous noising mirror symmetry. Specifically, the encoder downsamples the
 ′ ′
features {Xpix , X ′ hog , Xdeep }. These aligned features are finally input image into latent space Z by four residual blocks while
optimized in the segmentation head to localize the anomalous the corresponding decoder replaces all downsampling with
regions. For inference, the denoising autoencoder takes the bilinear upsampling restores the noise-added Z ′ .
input image I test ∈ I test to restore the features X b. The pixel- To mitigate the aforementioned issues, we have proposed
level anomaly map is generated in an end-to-end manner with FeatDAE, a feature-level denoising autoencoder. Inspired by
the aligned input features X and reconstructed features X b, and the success of denoising autoencoders in enhancing network
the corresponding image-level anomaly scores are computed generalization by introducing noise in the pixel space, our
through postprocessing. method operates on features within the latent space. Specifically, FeatDAE applies two operations in the latent space:
 FRT and FOI. Our goal is to increase the diversity of samples
B. Feature-Level Denoising Autoencoder
 in the latent space, thereby reducing overfitting to pixel-level
 Autoencoder is a neural network that is trained to recon- synthetic defective samples and guiding the network to focus
struct its input [50], [51]. The main purpose is to learn, its generalization on real anomaly samples.
in an unsupervised manner, an “informative” representation 1) Feature Radial Transformation: For a batch containing
of the data that can be used for various implications such as B identities, where each feature map Z ∈ RC×H ×W , we notice
clustering. Let X be the input data and X
 b be the output data, that traditional convolution kernels often focus only on local
the aforesaid can be formulated as follows: information, which may not fully capture global context
 b = F(X )
 X (1) even after passing through multiple layers of deep networks.
 To enhance the model’s global understanding and increase
where F is the function of the encoder. As formally defined diversity in the latent space, we introduce a radial movement to
in [52], the distance between the reconstructed samples Xb and each feature, moving it away from the batch samples’ hidden
the inputs X is regarded as the optimization objective. After space centroid. The centroid of a feature map can be defined
being well-trained on anomaly-free sets, the expected outcome as the average spatial coordinates of its nonzero elements. For
of the autoencoder is to accurately reconstruct normal samples simplicity, we assume the centroids are calculated over the
but not abnormal ones. Therefore, the distance between each spatial dimensions (H, W ) for each channel c
pixel in the input and output can be directly treated as an !
 (h, w) w (h, w)
 P H PW P H PW
 w=1 h · Z i w=1 · Zi
anomaly map. ci = h=1
 , P
 h=1
 .
 (h, w) w=1 Zi (h, w)
 P H PW H PW
 Denoising autoencoder [35] can be viewed as a regular- h=1 w=1 Z i h=1
ization option, which can extract more crucial information (3)
compared to stander autoencoder [53]. As the difference in the
reconstruction errors in anomalous and nonanomalous regions The center Z ∈ RC×H ×W for the batch samples is computed
increases, the downstream AD results improve [6]. Similar as the mean across all feature maps
to an ordinary autoencoder, a denoising autoencoder can be B
 1 X
represented as Z= Zi (4)
 B i=1
 b = F X′
 
 X (2)
 where i indexes the individual feature maps within the batch.
where X ′ are generated from X by noise addition. Similarly, the centroid of the center Z is
 However, adding noise at the pixel level has several limita- !
 w=1 h · Z(h, w) w=1 w · Z(h, w)
 P H PW P H PW
tions. We observe that methods for simulating noise [1], [10] c= h=1
 , P H PW
 h=1
 .
 w=1 Z(h, w) w=1 Z(h, w)
 P H PW
inevitably suffer from overfitting. Specifically, while they can h=1 h=1
effectively reconstruct noisy training images, they struggle to (5)
accurately reconstruct real anomaly images. In other words,
the pixel-level noise, initially intended to enhance general- The translation vector (tx , t y ) of the translation matrix T
ization, has paradoxically become a source of overfitting. for the ith sample is calculated as the difference between the
Simultaneously, the images themselves contain inherent redun- centroid of the feature map ci and the centroid of the center c
dancies. For an extreme example, consider shifting all columns
 (tx , t y ) = ci − c. (6)
to the right by one pixel; while the ℓ2 distance between the
old and new images would significantly increase, the intrinsic This ensures that the translation moves the feature map away
information conveyed by the image remains unchanged. The from the center in the direction from c to ci , with the
encoder typically extracts features from the pixels to obtain magnitude being a proportion α of the distance between the
a high-dimensional representation Z, which simplifies and two centroids. The translation matrix T is addressed by
decouples the data to some extent. Hence, we argue that  
 0 0 tx
manipulating features in the latent space can be more effective
 T = 0 0 t y . (7)
in increasing the separation between normal and abnormal
 0 0 1
samples, thereby better accommodating the various defects
encountered in real-world scenarios. For instance, we use Rotation can break this locality, acting as a form of “feature
ResNet [54] as the encoder and decoder architecture, and rearrangement” that changes the spatial structure of features
the model consists of several residual-like blocks to ensure and forces the model to understand and integrate these changes
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

at a higher level, which is especially important for latent space noise. By adjusting β, we can effectively balance the degree
features requiring global understanding. Specifically, when we of perturbation and the preservation of the feature structure,
randomly select an angle θ to rotate the extracted 2-D feature ensuring that the data remains representative of the underlying
map, the rotation transformation around the origin by an angle distribution while providing sufficient variability to train a
θ can be represented by the following matrix: more generalized model.
 cos(θ ) − sin(θ ) 0
  

 R(θ ) =  sin(θ ) cos(θ ) 0. (8) C. Reconstruction Targets
 0 0 1 For autoencoder based on reconstruction, a crucial issue
 lies in selecting the target feature X for reconstruction.
 To combine the rotation and translation into a single affine We simultaneously consider reconstruction at different levels
transformation, we multiply the rotation matrix R(θ ) by the of granularity, including pixel features Xpix directly from
translation matrix T with a scale factor α ∈ [0, 1]. Applying the image samples, histogram of oriented gradients (HOG)
the combined affine transformation to the original coordinates features Xhog extracted through traditional operators, and deep
(x, y) in the feature map Zi gives us the final transformed features Xdeep obtained through a pretrained neural network.
coordinates (x ′ , y ′ ) Pixel color is the most simple and straightforward target for
 cos(θ ) − sin(θ ) α · tx feature reconstruction. In various similar tasks such as image
  ′   
 x x
  y ′  =  sin(θ ) cos(θ ) α · t y  y . (9) inpainting [37] and mask prediction [56], pixel color recon-
 1 0 0 1 1 struction has been widely employed. Specifically, we treat
 the image from the dataset I as the reconstruction target
 2) Feature Omnidirectional Injection: Our approach aims Xpix for the autoencoder. Unlike the masked image modeling
to expand the distribution of anomalies in the hidden space. approaches [48], [49] that only count the masked area, our
Inspired by the widely adopted practice of adding noise at method computes the loss of all pixels.
the image level for data augmentation [55], we introduce HOG is a feature descriptor widely used in computer vision
Gaussian noise with a mean of 0 directly into the latent space. and image processing for object detection. It characterizes
As the depth of neural networks escalates, they are predisposed local object appearance and shape based on gradient orientato the vanishing gradient problem, a phenomenon where the tions within an image. Given an image I , HOG first computes
gradients diminish exponentially as they are backpropagated the gradient information
through the layers, which can impede the learning process and
degrade the performance of deep models [54]. In the context G x (x, y) = p(x + 1, y) − p(x − 1, y) (11)
of our proposed method, noise introduced at the input image G y (x, y) = p(x, y + 1) − p(x, y − 1) (12)
level tends to have a diminishing impact as it is propagated
through the network. By the time this noise reaches the latter where G x (x, y) and G y (x, y) are the horizontal gradient and
stages of the network, particularly the decoder, its influence vertical gradient at pixel p(x, y), respectively. The gradient
is substantially attenuated. This observation motivates us to magnitude G(x, y) and orientation θ (x, y) are calculated as
 q
introduce noise directly into the latent space, an approach ∇G(x, y) = G x (x, y)2 + G y (x, y)2 (13)
that capitalizes on the inherent robustness of the deeper
 G y (x, y)
  
decoder layers. We aim to augment the model’s ability to θ (x, y) = arctan . (14)
generalize from the training data to unseen data, especially G x (x, y)
when faced with real-world anomalies that were not present The next process involves dividing the image into small
during training. The injection of noise into the latent space connected regions called cells and computing histograms
serves as a form of regularization, which not only helps for each cell. Specifically, the gradients within each cell
mitigate the risk of overfitting but also improves the model’s are then accumulated into orientation histogram vectors of
resilience against various types of anomalies. Consequently, several bins, voted by gradient magnitudes. The final HOG
this strategy enhances the overall robustness and adaptability descriptor is the concatenation of all normalized histograms
of the computer vision system, making it more reliable and from the cells, which captures local texture patterns and
effective in practical defects. edge directions. Since HOG operates on localized cells of
 Unlike the introduced FRT, which imposes a directional bias the image, it maintains good invariance to geometric and
on the feature transformation, the FOI does not specify the photometric transformations. The coarse spatial sampling and
transformation direction. It diffuses features uniformly across fine orientation sampling allow robustness while strong local
all dimensions, leading to a more isotropic distribution of normalization handles illumination changes. The efficiency
the anomalies in the latent space. To control the intensity of and robustness to various conditions make HOG suitable for
the Gaussian noise, we employ a random scaling factor β, pattern recognition [57], [58] and feature reconstruction [59].
allowing us to modulate the magnitude of the perturbation. We collect HOG in each RGB channel to include color
This is achieved according to the following formula: information which can improve its performance. The image
 Z ′′ = Z ′ + β · N 0, σ 2
 
 (10) samples I that computed the HOG feature map on the whole
 image are formed into Xhog . Our method then learns to restore
where Z ′ represents the latent representation after the pre- the histograms Xhog from the input noising image X ′ .
vious FRT, N (0, σ 2 ) denotes the Gaussian noise, and β is a Deep features are obtained by extracting intermediate layer
randomly determined coefficient that scales the strength of the features from a neural network. The neural network transforms
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

the input data into a more expressive form, which is capable
of capturing the essence of the data across various contexts.
Taking inspiration from knowledge distillation [60], we design
our student networks to learn from the teacher networks
similarly. However, unlike knowledge distillation, our method
involves different inputs for the teacher and student networks.
Our DAE serves as the student network and performs denoising reconstruction on input anomaly images, whether they
are real anomalous or noise-added. In contrast, the teacher
network processes anomaly-free images. Further, to better
leverage the semantic information from low-resolution to
high-resolution, we proposed a layer-by-layer deep features
reconstruction hierarchy. In our method, we use an ImageNet
[61] pretrained ResNet [54] as our feature extractor to derive
features from normal images. Specifically, the deep features
 Fig. 4. Features alignment module. At each scale, the input and reconstructed
 2
{Xdeep , Xdeep
 3
 , Xdeep
 4
 } are obtained from the conv2_x, conv3_x, features are fused through pixel-wise multiplication. The merged features
and conv4_x blocks with strides of {4, 8, 16} pixels relative to then undergo a resizing operation to ensure uniformity in size, followed
the input image. by concatenation along the feature dimensions. The spectrum of multiscale
 features comprises pixel color, HOG, and deep features.

D. Features Alignment Module scale k, we calculate their vector-wise cosine similarity loss
 As illustrated in Section III-C, our reconstruction targets along the channel axis
incorporate a variety of distinct feature types. Pixel color Xk · X
 ck
features have the lowest dimensionality and primarily capture L cos
 k =1−   (15)
the original texture information necessary for reconstructing
 ck ∥2 , ϵ
 max(∥X k ∥2 , ϵ) · max ∥X
anomaly-free samples. In comparison, HOG features are more K
 X
robust to variations in lighting and are capable of capturing L cos
 rec = L cos
 k (16)
edge and shape information within the image. While both k=1
pixel color and HOG features ensure detail preservation at where ϵ is a small value to avoid division by zero and k is
larger scales, the deep features of different sizes predominantly the target features number.
contain different levels of semantic information, which is crit- We follow DRAEM [1] training a segmentation head guided
ical for subsequent segmentation tasks. Therefore, to handle by additional supervision to discriminate the fusion features
the features discriminability varies across different levels of appropriately. By concurrently inputting the reconstructed
abstraction, we proposed the features alignment module to results and the original image into the head, employing the
better integrate features between input X and reconstructed X b
 mask as the supervise for training the anomaly map as follows:
as described in Fig. 4. Each lateral connection fuses the input
 seg = ℓ1 M, M
 L dis
 
features and reconstructed features of the same spatial size and c (17)
type form and computes the corresponding reconstruction loss
 where M and M c are the ground-truth binary masks generated
L krec . These merged features are then resized and concatenated
 from noise and the output anomaly segmentation masks from
into the aligned features used for subsequent segmentation
 the head, respectively. Since defects usually make up only
heads.
 a small portion of the image, only a minority of pixels
 Through element-wise multiplication, the paired features are
 are considered foreground for the segmentation task. Focal
merged without change in dimension. We also investigate alterloss [66] allows the model to focus more on hard samples
native ways to compute the aligned features in Section IV-F.
 and helps to solve the problem of background and foreground
Among the multiple feature targets, pixel color and HOG
 imbalance
have the same size as the original image, while deep features
 γ
include multiple scales. We uniformly scaled all the features L focal
 seg = −(1 − p) log( p) (18)
into 1/4th of the input size, the same size as the largest feature c + (1 − M) 1 − M
 
 p = MM c (19)
map in deep features. While this scale results in loss of detail
to some extent, oversizing exponentially increases the amount where γ is the focusing parameter.
of computation and memory usage, which is critical for Along with the reconstruction loss and the segmentation
real-time applications. losses mentioned above, the total objective of our network is
 formulated as follows:

 rec + L seg + L seg .
 L = L cos dis focal
E. Objective (20)
 As mentioned earlier, our feature space varies in type and Specifically, we normalize each loss term by dividing it by its
dimensions. We follow [7] of using cosine distance for knowl- maximum value across the training dataset. This normalization
edge transferring to more accurately capture the relationship ensures that no single loss term dominates the others, allowing
between high- and low-dimensional information [65]. At each for a more stable and effective training process.
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON IN I MAGE -W ISE AUROC AND P IXEL -W ISE AUROC W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT W ORKS ON THE
 MVT EC AD DATASET (I-AUROC/P-AUROC). W E D ENOTE THE B EST R ESULTS BY B OLD

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON IN P IXEL -W ISE AP AND R EGION -W ISE AUPRO W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT W ORKS ON THE
 MVT EC AD DATASET (AP/AUPRO). W E D ENOTE THE B EST R ESULTS BY B OLD

 IV. E XPERIMENTS VisA datasets exhibited a range of defects, including surface
 imperfections like scratches, dents, colored spots, or cracks,
A. Dataset as well as structural issues such as misplacement or missing
 We conducted our experiments on the most recent challeng- components. The dataset was also divided into normal images
ing MVTec AD dataset [12] and the popular VisA dataset [13], in the training set and labeled normal and abnormal images
as the standard benchmarks for evaluating unsupervised sur- in the testing set, making it suitable for unsupervised AD
face AD and localization. The MVTec AD dataset consisted of approaches.
five texture and ten object categories stemming from manufacturing, with 3629 training images and 1725 test images. The
 B. Evaluation Metrics
image size ranged from 700 × 700 to 1024 × 1024 pixels.
The training split was composed of normal images, and the In prior works, the area under the receiver operating curve
testing split contained both normal and anomaly images with (AUROC) was utilized to evaluate image-wise AD and pixelvarious types of defects. It also provided detailed pixel-wise wise anomaly localization. While only a minority of pixels
mask annotations for defective test images. The VisA AD were attributed to abnormal, the AUROC did not reveal
dataset [13] was a challenging collection of images designed the accuracy of localization under heavily imbalanced condifor evaluating machine-learning models’ performance in iden- tions [67]. For pixel-wise evaluation, we additionally reported
tifying anomalies. It consisted of 10 821 images in total, with the average precision (AP) [68] and area under per-region-
9621 normal images and 1200 abnormal images. The dataset overlap (AUPRO) [69], which expressed the performance for
was organized into 12 subsets, each representing a distinct anomaly localization more effectively. The AUPRO assigned
class of objects. Abnormal images within the MVTec and equal weight to connected components of different sizes in
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON IN I MAGE -W ISE AUROC AND P IXEL -W ISE AUROC W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT W ORKS
 ON THE V IS A DATASET (I-AUROC/P-AUROC). W E D ENOTE THE B EST R ESULTS BY B OLD

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON IN P IXEL -W ISE AP AND R EGION -W ISE AUPRO W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT W ORKS ON THE V IS A
 DATASET (AP/AUPRO). W E D ENOTE THE B EST R ESULTS BY B OLD

the ground truth (GT) and repeatedly computed the overlap
between the prediction and the GT for the FP rate within 30%.
C. Implementation Details
 Our implementation was based on the PyTorch framework.
We used ResNet-18 [54] as our encoder and a symmetric
reverse ResNet-18 architecture with upsampling instead of
downsampling in all residual blocks as our decoder. Note that
the encoder was pretrained on the ImageNet [61] dataset, while
the decoder utilized the Kaiming initialization [70]. For the
segmentation head, we adopted the widely used ASPP [71]
structure. The learning rate was set to 0.001 on the SGD optimizer with a momentum of 0.9 and a weight decay of 0.001.
We trained the denoising autoencoder for 4000 iterations and
the segmentation head for 16 000 iterations with a batch size
of 8. We uniformly resized the images to 256 × 256 pixels, Fig. 5. AD performance versus FPS on the MVTec AD dataset, where our
applied a random rotation of up to 5◦ for nonaligned targets FeatDAE outperforms all previous methods on both accuracy and efficiency
(cable, wood, and zipper), and another random rotation within by a significant margin.
360◦ for rotation-invariant textures (carpet, grid, leather, and
tile) and objects (bottle, hazelnut, and screw). All images were
normalized using the mean and standard deviation of ImageNet dataset under the AUROC metric. For the image-level AD
before feeding them into the model. task, FeatDAE achieved a perfect I-AUROC score in 7 out of
 15 classes.
D. Quantitative Results Table II further reported the pixel-wise AP and AUPRO
 1) Accuracy: Table I quantitatively compared FeatDAE for the pixel-level anomaly localization task, in addition to
with recent state-of-the-art approaches on the MVTec AD the P-AUROC metric. Overall, our FeatDAE also achieved
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

Fig. 6. Case of ambiguous anomalies on the MVTec AD dataset. From left
to right: sampled image, GT, and anomaly map.

the best average results across these metrics. Our FeatDAE
significantly outperformed all previous best-performing AD
methods by a large margin. On average, our method surpassed
the cutting-edge methods by 5.7% points in terms of pixel-wise
AP. Our method achieved optimal performance in the majority
of categories, demonstrating its applicability and robustness
across various scenarios.
 We also conducted experiments on the popular VisA dataset,
which is a comprehensive benchmark for AD. We used the Fig. 7. Qualitative comparison on the MVTec AD dataset. Input image,
same metrics as the MVTec AD dataset to evaluate the anomaly map, and GT are shown.
performance across image-wise AUROC, pixel-wise AUROC,
pixel-wise AP, and region-wise AUPRO. These metrics pro- 3) Ambiguity: Upon meticulous examination, it was disvided a holistic view of the model’s ability to detect anomalies cerned that a portion of the detection inaccuracies could be
at different levels of granularity. Notably, our FeatDAE utilized ascribed to imprecise GT labels in cases of equivocal anoma-
ResNet-18 [54] as the backbone, while previous methods [7], lies. This phenomenon was exemplified in Fig. 6, wherein
[24], [25] employed WideResNet-50 [72]. Therefore, our the GT contained only the deformed sections of the capsule,
method could be more readily deployed on edge devices with yet it comprehensively included every aspect of the pill. Our
suboptimal performance in actual industrial pipelines. method delineated the entire deformed area of the capsule and
 As can be seen in Table III, the image-wise AUROC and the accurately segmented the yellow spots on the pill. However,
pixel-wise AUROC were strong, indicating high accuracy in discrepancies with the actual GT led to cumulative errors in
distinguishing between normal and anomalous images with the the localization metrics. Despite this, we believed our approach
lightweight ResNet-18 backbone. Table IV reports the pixel- remained viable in such scenarios.
wise AP and AUPRO on the VisA dataset. In pixel-wise AP,
FeatDAE also performed well, achieving an average score E. Qualitative Results
of 47.1%, ranking it among the top methods. Notably, our We also compared the qualitative results of different models
method ranked second in terms of region-wise AUPRO, with on the MVTec AD dataset, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Test set
an average score of 93.3%. While the GLAD method [64] images are displayed to demonstrate each model’s perforachieves high accuracy, it suffers from inefficiency due to mance on previously unseen anomalous samples. Accompathe step-by-step generation process of diffusion models. The nying these images are prediction anomaly maps, where red
superior performance in these metrics underscored the excep- signifies high detection confidence and blue indicates low
tional capability of our method in accurately pinpointing confidence. GT masks delineate the actual anomaly regions,
anomalous. Our FeatDAE precisely localized the regions of enabling a direct comparison between predicted and true defect
interest, making it a powerful tool for applications requiring locations.
fine-grained AD. From the results, it is evident that our method achieves
 2) Efficiency: Anomaly detector is commonly employed precise localization of all anomalies compared to alternative
in industrial production lines, where the system must be approaches. For smaller anomaly regions, such as those in the
lightweight to meet real-time processing demands. As illus- capsule and screw categories, RD [7] tends to overestimate
trated in Fig. 5, we evaluate the model’s capability in the size of the mask region, while DRAEM [1] introduces
accurately localizing defects using the AUPRO metric, and its FPs. In contrast, our method produces sharp and accurate
operational efficiency is assessed by the frames per second boundaries. In cases of irregularly shaped defects, like those
(FPS). The figure demonstrates that our proposed method found in the hazelnut and transistor categories, other methods
attains a balance between precision and speed, achieving either underestimate the defect area or exhibit other inacoptimal performance on both metrics. curacies. Our method, however, aligns closely with the true
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 8. Visualization examples of our method on the MVTec AD dataset. Sampled images, GTs, and anomaly maps are shown.

Fig. 9. Visualization examples of our method on the VisA dataset. Sampled images, GTs, and anomaly maps are shown.

contours of the anomalies and exhibits higher confidence in and the anomaly maps generated by our approach. These
its predictions. When dealing with multiple anomaly regions visualizations served as a testament to the robustness and
within a single sample, such as in the pill and wood cate- accuracy of our AD method across diverse object categories
gories, SimpleNet [24] suffers from overdetection, whereas and anomaly types.
DRAEM [1] experiences underdetection. Moreover, the localization of anomaly areas by other methods can be imprecise. F. Ablation Studies
Our approach, on the other hand, accurately predicts the 1) Architecture: The ablation studies presented in Table V
number of defects present and provides precise localization, provide insights into the contributions of our proposed FRT,
thereby demonstrating consistent accuracy in detecting anoma- FOI, and the selection of reconstruction targets, including
lies across different types of objects and defect patterns. pixel color, HOG features, and deep features, to the overall
 We further provided visualization examples showcasing the performance of our model. In an ablation study examining
performance of our method on the MVTec AD dataset and the contributions of our main design elements, we observe
the VisA dataset in Figs. 8 and 9, respectively. In each figure, significant impacts on detection (reported in AUROC) and
we displayed a selection of images alongside their GT labels localization (reported in AP) performances. Notably, when
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

 TABLE V TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDIES ON O UR M AIN D ESIGNS . D ETECTION (D ET.) A BLATION S TUDIES ON THE T YPE OF THE N OISE IN I NPUT
 R ESULTS A RE R EPORTED IN AUROC AND L OCALIZATION (L OC .) S PACE . T HE D EFAULT E NTRY I S M ARKED AS G RAY
 R ESULTS A RE R EPORTED IN AP. T HE D EFAULT E NTRY
 I S M ARKED AS G RAY

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON F EATURE -L EVEL N OISE S CALE .
 T HE D EFAULT E NTRY I S M ARKED AS G RAY

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON F EATURES A LIGNMENT M ODULE
 I MPLEMENTATION . T HE D EFAULT E NTRY I S M ARKED AS G RAY
 knowledge or overly comprehensive information might lead to
 suboptimal network performance.
 3) Input Space Noise Type: Table VII presents an ablation
 study on the impact of different types of noise added to the
 input space on detection performance. Rectangle simulates
 anomaly regions by adding rectangular masks to the input
FRT is absent but feature-level omnidirectional injection (FOI) images. Masks of MAE are generated by splitting the image
is applied (Experiment 2), the model achieves a high detection into a grid of rectangular regions. For Gaussian noise and
score of 99.3% and a localization score of 80.9%, indicating Perlin noise, a threshold of 0.5 is applied to the noise before
that FOI alone significantly enhances the model’s robustness. generating the final mask.
Conversely, Experiment 3, where FRT is present without FOI, The Perlin noise achieves the highest detection and localizashows slightly lower performance metrics, suggesting that tion accuracy, outperforming other noise types. This suggests
while beneficial, its impact does not match that of FOI in this that Perlin noise, which generates more complex and varied
context. Further insights are gained from Experiments 4 to 6, patterns, better mimics real-world anomalies, allowing the
which omit pixel, HOG, and deep feature reconstructions, model to learn more realistic and diverse defect patterns.
respectively. The importance of these features for maintain- 4) Latent Space Noise Scale: Table VIII revealed the effect
ing high localization accuracy is evident, with the absence of σ on AD. The minuscule σ signified that the features
of HOG features (Experiment 4) leading to a decrease in after passing through the encoder had not been endowed with
localization performance from the optimal baseline of 81.5% sufficient noise, resulting in the denoising autoencoder as a
down to 79.9% and excluding deep features (Experiment 6) whole failing to capture the intrinsic feature distribution of
resulting in a detection score of 98.7% and a localization the samples.
score of 73.6%. This underscores the essential roles of HOG Consequently, its performance during testing was subpar.
features in capturing texture and edge information and deep However, an excessively large σ altered the original distribufeatures in conveying higher level semantic details critical tion of the extracted features, leading to inconsistent learning
for precise anomaly localization. The default setup (Experi- within the network, thus causing ambiguous decision-making.
ment 7), incorporating all design elements—FRT, FOI, and As can be seen from Table VIII, with the gradual increase
comprehensive feature reconstruction—achieves the highest in σ , the final detection and segmentation results exhibited
detection AUROC of 99.4% and localization AP of 81.5%. a trend of first rising and then declining. Hence, we opted
This highlights the synergistic benefits of integrating all pro- for sampling σ within the range of (0.01, 0.04) and adding
posed strategies, optimizing both detection and localization feature-level Gaussian noise in this manner, as experiments
capabilities. demonstrated it yielded optimal results.
 2) Operator in Feature Alignment Module: Table VI 5) Loss: In Table IX, we investigated the influence of
presents the results of experiments conducted using different different loss functions. Utilizing traditional ℓ1 or ℓ2 distance
fusion operations including addition, subtraction, multiplica- functions led to a significant decrease in results, mainly due
tion, and concatenation on the input features and reconstructed to our FeatDAE aggregating multiple feature reconstruction
features illustrated in Fig. 4. The subtraction operation exhib- results for the final segmentation. The cosine distance funcited superior performance compared to addition in localization, tion was better equipped to handle high-dimensional features,
as it simulated the calculation of the reconstruction loss and as our experiments validated the soundness of this choice.
introduced more prior knowledge. The concatenation operator Table X demonstrated the impact of different losses on the
achieved higher results due to retaining complete information segmentation task. Given that defects typically occupied only
from both the input features and the reconstruction features. a small portion of the sample, we employed focal loss [66] to
However, these operators were all inferior to the multiplication balance positive and negative samples. Although in the case of
operator, indicating its suitability for our task. Excessive prior using only a single type of loss, ℓ2 yielded relatively favorable
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IX to distinguish between simulated and real anomalous after just
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON THE R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS . a few training epochs. This result underscores the limitations
 T HE D EFAULT E NTRY I S M ARKED AS G RAY
 of existing simulation techniques in capturing the complexity
 and variability of real-world anomalous, leading to models
 that perform well on synthetic data but fail to generalize
 to practical applications, thereby compromising their utility.
 However, by transforming the feature in the latent space,
 we can develop more realistic training data, enhancing the
 TABLE X
 simulation’s ability to replicate the intrinsic characteristics of
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON THE S EGMENTATION L OSS . T HE
 D EFAULT E NTRY I S MARKED AS G RAY
 actual anomalies. Our approach not only increases the diversity
 of the simulated data but also leads to a more robust and
 reliable AD model.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 A novel denoising autoencoder with features is tailored
 TABLE XI for industrial AD tasks. Recent methods of AD that rely on
C OMPARISON IN P IXEL -W ISE AP, F1-M AX AND I TS C ORRESPONDING reconstruction, often falter in the face of genuine anoma-
 P RECISION AND R ECALL W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT W ORKS ON THE lies during the testing phase, attributed to the scarcity of
 MVT EC AD DATASET. W E D ENOTE THE B EST R ESULTS BY BOLD authentic defect samples throughout the training stage of
 the task. By ingeniously incorporating noise at the latent
 space, with a diverse array of reconstruction targets and a
 unique feature alignment module, our FeatDAE adeptly overcomes the prevalent overgeneralization and overfitting issues
 in reconstruction-based models. The experiments conducted on
 the surface AD benchmarks reveal that each of our proposed
 TABLE XII components markedly enhances the performance. Our results
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT A NOMALY outperform the previous state-of-the-art methods by 5.7%
 S IMULATION M ETHODS , ACC R EPRESENTS THE P ROBABILITY OF THE pixel-wise AP on the MVTec AD dataset and 3.8% pixel-wise
 G ENERATED S AMPLES B EING C ORRECTLY D ISTINGUISHED AP on the VisA dataset, with an extremely high inference
 F ROM R EAL S AMPLES
 speed. At present, the localization capability of our model
 exhibits variability when confronted with different classes.
 By taking into account disparities in size, texture, and labeling,
 we leave achieving uniform performance across the spectrum
 of anomalous and emerges as a paramount objective for future
 work.
results, its combination with focal loss performed suboptimally
compared to our default entry. Thanks to ℓ1’s supervision of
 R EFERENCES
defect edges and focal loss’s balance of small defects, the
accuracy of our method was greatly improved in the AD task. [1] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Draem—A discriminatively
 trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Jun. 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
 [2] Q. Wan, Y. Cao, L. Gao, X. Li, and Y. Gao, “Deep feature contrasting for
G. Other Discussions industrial image anomaly segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 1) False Detection: To further validate the efficacy of vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
 [3] X. Li, J. Jing, J. Bao, P. Lu, Y. Xie, and Y. An, “OTB-AAE: Semiour proposed method in significantly reducing FPs and FNs, supervised anomaly detection on industrial images based on adversarial
we conducted a thorough evaluation of the MVTec AD autoencoder with output-turn-back structure,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
dataset. As shown in Table XI, our method outperforms Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023.
other approaches across all four key metrics. The F1-score, [4] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
 Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
being the harmonic mean of precision and recall, reflects 14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2019, pp. 622–637.
a balanced enhancement in both these metrics. Specifically, [5] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Skip-GANomaly:
our method attains an F1-score of 71.8%, surpassing the Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder–decoder anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
nearest competitor’s score of 66.7%. With a precision of
 [6] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
71.3%, our approach ensures that a high proportion of detected for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
anomalies are genuine, thereby significantly reducing FP rates. Art. no. 107706.
Simultaneously, a recall of 72.7% indicates that our method [7] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
successfully identifies a larger fraction of actual anomalies, Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
drastically lowering FN rates. [8] H. He et al., “A diffusion-based framework for multi-class anomaly
 2) Domain Gap: To highlight the significant gap between detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38, no. 8,
 pp. 8472–8480.
current anomaly simulation methods and real-world anoma-
 [9] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improvlous, we conducted an experiment using a simple classification ing unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity
network. As shown in Table XII, this classifier rapidly learned to autoencoders,” 2018, arXiv:1807.02011.
ZHOU et al.: FeatDAE: INTRODUCING FEATURES WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER FOR AD 2529914

[10] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg: [32] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
 Segmentation guided denoising student–teacher for anomaly detection,” unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional norin Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), malizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923. (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
[11] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method [33] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
 for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,” convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835. Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
[12] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec pp. 1088–1097.
 AD—A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly [34] M. Tailanian, Á. Pardo, and P. Musé, “U-flow: A U-shaped normaldetection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. izing flow for anomaly detection with unsupervised threshold,” 2022,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592. arXiv:2211.12353.
[13] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “SPot- [35] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, “Extracting
 the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proc.
 segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Jan. 2022, pp. 392–408. 25th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2008, pp. 1096–1103.
[14] M. Sakurada and T. Yairi, “Anomaly detection using autoencoders with [36] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, P.-A. Manzagol, and
 nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. MLSDA 2nd Workshop L. Bottou, “Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representa-
 Mach. Learn. Sensory Data Anal., Dec. 2014, pp. 4–11. tions in a deep network with a local denoising criterion,” J. Mach. Learn.
[15] Y. He, H. Yang, and Z. Yin, “Adaptive context-aware distillation Res., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 3371–3408, 2010.
 for industrial image anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., [37] D. Pathak, P. Krähenbühl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A. Efros,
 vol. 73, pp. 1–15, 2024. “Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
[16] J. Zhu, P. Yan, J. Jiang, Y. Cui, and X. Xu, “Asymmetric teacher–student Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2536–2544.
 feature pyramid matching for industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. [38] R. A. Yeh, C. Chen, T. Y. Lim, A. G. Schwing, M. Hasegawa-Johnson,
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13, 2024. and M. N. Do, “Semantic image inpainting with deep generative
[17] H. Yao et al., “Scalable industrial visual anomaly detection with partial models,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017,
 semantics aggregation vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., pp. 5485–5493.
 vol. 73, pp. 1–17, 2024. [39] J. Yu, Z. Lin, J. Yang, X. Shen, X. Lu, and T. Huang, “Free-form
[18] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt- image inpainting with gated convolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 4471–4480.
 generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44, [40] O. Henaff, “Data-efficient image recognition with contrastive predictive
 May 2019. coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (PMLR), 2020, pp. 4182–4192.
[19] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM: [41] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
 simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog- arXiv:1810.04805.
 nit., Jun. 2022, pp. 650–656. [42] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
[20] A.-S. Collin and C. De Vleeschouwer, “Improved anomaly detection by approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
 training an autoencoder with skip connections on images corrupted with [43] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
 stain-shaped noise,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), NIPS, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
 Jan. 2021, pp. 7915–7922. [44] M. Chen et al., “Generative pretraining from pixels,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[21] A. Kascenas, N. Pugeault, and A. Q. O’Neil, “Denoising autoencoders Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1691–1703.
 for unsupervised anomaly detection in brain MRI,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [45] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 Med. Imag. Deep Learn., 2022, pp. 653–664. for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[22] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DSR—A dual subspace re- [46] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of
 projection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. image transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254.
 Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 539–554. [47] A. Ramesh et al., “Zero-shot text-to-image generation,” in Proc. Int.
[23] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2021, pp. 8821–8831.
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. [48] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 pp. 9664–9674. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[24] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network [49] Z. Xie et al., “SimMIM: A simple framework for masked image
 for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. modeling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9653–9663.
[25] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and [50] D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland, Parallel Distributed Processing:
 P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, vol. 1. Cambridge, MA,
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, USA: MIT Press, 1986.
 pp. 14318–14328. [51] G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, and S. D. Wang, “Transforming auto-
[26] J. Jang, E. Hwang, and S.-H. Park, “N-pad: Neighboring pixel-based encoders,” in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. Artif. Neural Netw.
 industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Mach. Learn. (ICANN), Espoo, Finland, Jun. 2011, pp. 44–51.
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 4364–4373. [52] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,”
[27] Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Z. Wen, and H. Luo, “Unsupervised image anomaly in Proc. ICML Workshop Unsupervised Transf. Learn., 2012, pp. 37–49.
 detection and localization in industry based on self-updated memory and [53] D. Bank, N. Koenigstein, and R. Giryes, “Autoencoders,” in Machine
 center clustering,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023. Learning for Data Science Handbook: Data Mining and Knowledge
[28] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for Discovery Handbook. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023, pp. 353–374.
 detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” in Proc. [54] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2018, pp. 7167–7177. image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[29] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc. [55] D. Hendrycks and T. Dietterich, “Benchmarking neural network
 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733. robustness to common corruptions and perturbations,” 2019,
[30] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch arXiv:1903.12261.
 distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localiza- [56] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 tion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489. 2021, pp. 1–21.
[31] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and [57] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human
 localization via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111. detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 07677. Recognit. (CVPR), San Diego, CA, USA, Jun. 2005, pp. 886–893.
2529914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[58] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, and C. Schmid, “Human detection using oriented Jichun Wang received the B.E. degree in
 histograms of flow and appearance,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. mechanical engineering from Zhejiang University,
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2006, pp. 428–441. Hangzhou, China, in 2019, where he is currently
[59] C. Wei, H. Fan, S. Xie, C.-Y. Wu, A. Yuille, and C. Feichtenhofer, pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of
 “Masked feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training,” Mechanical Engineering.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), His research interests include robotic vision, image
 Jun. 2022, pp. 14668–14678. understanding, and human–robot interaction.
[60] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[61] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
 A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[62] A. Mousakhan, T. Brox, and J. Tayyub, “Anomaly detection with
 conditioned denoising diffusion models,” 2023, arXiv:2305.15956. Zian Yu received the B.E. degree from the College
[63] T. D. Tien et al., “Revisiting reverse distillation for anomaly detection,” of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Beijing
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China,
 Jun. 2023, pp. 24511–24520. in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
[64] H. Yao, M. Liu, Z. Yin, Z. Yan, X. Hong, and W. Zuo, “GLAD: Towards with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Zhebetter reconstruction with global and local adaptive diffusion models jiang University, Hangzhou, China.
 for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. His research interests include industrial defect
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2024, pp. 1–17. detection and computer vision.
[65] F. Tung and G. Mori, “Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 pp. 1365–1374.
[66] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988. Zili Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[67] T. Saito and M. Rehmsmeier, “The precision-recall plot is more informa- degree from the School of Mechanical Engineering,
 tive than the ROC plot when evaluating binary classifiers on imbalanced Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2018.
 datasets,” PLoS ONE, vol. 10, no. 3, Mar. 2015, Art. no. e0118432. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
[68] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and School of Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang Uni-
 A. Zisserman, “The Pascal visual object classes (VOC) challenge,” Int. versity. His research interests include intelligent
 J. Comput. Vis., vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303–338, 2010. manufacturing, computer-aided design, and com-
[69] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed puter graphics.
 students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192.
[70] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
 Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification,” in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
 Xiaojian Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
[71] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille, School of Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang Uni-
 “DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, versity, Hangzhou, China, in 2011.
 atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern He is currently an Associate Professor at the
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2017. School of Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang Uni-
[72] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016, versity. His research interests include intelligent
 arXiv:1605.07146. manufacturing, computer-aided design and computer
[73] T. Hu et al., “AnomalyDiffusion: Few-shot anomaly image gener- vision.
 ation with diffusion model,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 38, Mar. 2024,
 pp. 8526–8534.
[74] X. Zhang, M. Xu, and X. Zhou, “RealNet: A feature selection network with realistic synthetic anomaly for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 pp. 16699–16708.
 Lemiao Qiu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the School of Mechanical Engineering,
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2008.
 He is currently a Professor with the School of
 Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang University. His
 research interests include production informatization, computer graphics, and computer vision.

 Zheyuan Zhou (Student Member, IEEE) received Shuyou Zhang is currently a Distinguished Prothe B.E. degree in computer science from Zhe- fessor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School
 jiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China, of Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang University,
 in 2020, and the M.S. degree in computer science Hangzhou, China. His research interests include
 from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 2023. computer graphics, computer vision, and product
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the digital design.
 School of Mechanical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou.
 His research interests include intelligent manufacturing, computer vision, and deep learning.