IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025 4215

FeCo: Boosting Intrusion Detection Capability in IoT
 Networks via Contrastive Learning
 Ning Wang , Member, IEEE, Shanghao Shi , Student Member, IEEE, Yimin Chen , Member, IEEE,
 Wenjing Lou , Fellow, IEEE, and Y. Thomas Hou , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Over the last decade, Internet of Things (IoT) has devices with embedded computational capability and Internet
permeated our daily life with a broad range of applications. connectivity can automatically work with minimal human inter-
However, a lack of adequate security in IoT devices renders IoT vention. Due to low cost and versatility, IoT devices are being
systems vulnerable to various network-based cyberattacks, potentially causing severe damage. Recent works have explored using used in almost all sectors: healthcare, smart cities, agriculture,
machine learning to build anomaly detection models for defending and transportation, to name a few [2], [3], [4].
against such attacks. In this paper, we propose FeCo, a federated- However, such pervasiveness also increases the risk of data
contrastive-learning framework that coordinates in-network IoT breaches and cyberattacks. In the past decade, we have seen
devices to jointly learn intrusion detection models. FeCo utilizes increased attacks involving IoT devices and IoT systems. Many
federated learning to alleviate users’ privacy concerns as participating devices only submit their model parameters rather than IoT devices have limited on-device resources such as computing
raw local data. Compared to previous works, we develop a novel power and memory, which limits the amount and types of serepresentation learning method based on contrastive learning that curity mechanisms that can be implemented in them. Many IoT
is able to learn a more accurate model for the benign class. FeCo manufacturers are not security-savvy. In a rush to roll out new
significantly improves the intrusion detection accuracy compared products, very often only minimal security features are included,
to previous works. In addition, we implement a two-step feature
selection scheme to avoid overfitting and reduce computation time. not to mention providing ongoing support or software security
Through extensive experiments on the NSL-KDD dataset and the updates. The default configuration of an IoT device usually
BaIoT dataset, we demonstrate that FeCo achieves as high as remains in place if no one makes an effort to change it [5]. One
8% accuracy improvement compared to the state-of-the-art and notable attack on IoT is Mirai [6], which overwhelmed several
is robust to non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) high-profile targets with massive distributed denial-of-service
data. Our implementation of FeCo on a Raspberry Pi device further
confirms the applicability of FeCo for resource-constrained IoT (DDoS) attacks in late 2016. More than half a million devices
devices. were infected in a few months. Security patching is one possible
 remedy to security issues. However, many devices lack appro-
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection system, Internet of Things,
contrastive learning.
 priate facilities for automated security updates, or there may
 be significant delays until device manufacturers provide them.
 I. INTRODUCTION Considering that IoT devices typically connect to the Internet
 through a local gateway, a more practical and effective idea
 HE last decade has seen an exponential growth of the
T Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Having achieved the
milestone of 12 billion connected devices in 2020, it is estimated
 to secure IoT devices and systems is to implement an IDS in
 the local gateway. An IDS continuously monitors incoming and
 outgoing data streams generated by diverse sources and analyzes
that by 2025 there will be more than 30.9 billion IoT devices in them to detect cyber threats.
the market.1 IoT starts a new paradigm where billions of smart Ideally, a network IDS device should be placed at a data
 concentration point in the network for best performance. For
 Received 7 May 2022; revised 14 April 2023; accepted 11 February 2025. Date instance, most often an IDS device is deployed behind the
of publication 20 February 2025; date of current version 11 July 2025. This work
was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-24-1- firewall at the gateway of an edge network. For an IDS in an IoT
2730 and Grant N00014-19-1-2621, in part by the National Science Foundation network, there are two main placement strategies: distributed and
under Grant 2312447, Grant 2247560, Grant 2154929, Grant 2332675, Grant centralized. In a distributed placement [7], [8], a local gateway
2331936, and Grant 2235232, and in part by Virginia Commonwealth Cyber
Initiative (CCI). (Corresponding author: Ning Wang.) or edge router independently manages its own IDS for the local
 Ning Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, network. Due to the scarcity of local data, distributed IDS may
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: ning18@vt.edu). suffer low accuracy. On the other hand, the rising concern of
 Y. Thomas Hou is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail: thou@vt.edu). privacy poses great challenges to a centralized placement [9],
 Shanghao Shi and Wenjing Lou are with the Department of Computer Sci- [10]. Legal restrictions (e.g., HIPAA2 ) actually prohibit collectence, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail: shanghaos@vt.edu; ing and storing certain types of user data to a central server. In
wjlou@vt.edu).
 Yimin Chen is with the Department of Computer Science, University of our pursuit to design an efficient, accurate, yet privacy-conscious
Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA 01854 USA (e-mail: ian_chen@uml.edu). IDS for IoT network, we resort to the Federated Learning
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3544106
 1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1101442/iot-number-of-connecteddevices-worldwide/ 2 https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

(FL) framework [11], [12], [13]. FL enables local gateways where the benign representations lie in a small cluster while
to cooperatively contribute to the training of a global model attack representations stay far from the benign cluster so that the
by providing their local model parameter to a central server. differentiation of the two can be made easier. By minimizing the
Through an iterative learning process, the global model achieves volume of a hyper-sphere that encloses the representations of the
good generalization by learning knowledge from a large number normal data, we can train an ANN model that is able to extract
of IoT devices. However, due to device heterogeneity (in terms the common properties of benign variations more precisely,
of communication protocols and co-existing technologies), the which leads to improved robustness of the normal profile and
pattern of normal network traffic varies dramatically among significantly reduced FPR. Furthermore, in order to reduce the
different types of IoT devices. Learning a universal model across computation overhead, we build a lightweight ANN with only
all different device types may render the IDS useless. To address two hidden layers for resource-constrained IoT devices.
this problem, we choose the device-type-specific design [5] that Finally, we build FeCo, a Federated-Contrastive-learning
builds an IDS model for each type of IoT devices, which tends framework, by incorporating FL into the contrastive-learningto provide more accurate models. based IDS to achieve accurate detection and preserve data pri-
 In general, there exist two main approaches for intrusion vacy simultaneously. In the FeCo design, each local gateway
detection: anomaly-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and manages a local IDS model and all gateways cooperatively
signature-based IDS [14], [15], [16], [17]. An anomaly-based work with a central server to boost local detection perfor-
IDS learns a model that represents the normal behavior and mance. To avoid the overfitting of an IDS model to irrelevant
generates an alarm when the deviation of an incoming instance features, we propose a two-step feature selection scheme for
from the normal behavior surpasses a security threshold. A pre-processing the input data. We remove less significant feasignature-based IDS detects intrusions by comparing incoming tures and only retain essential information for detection. We
traffic with the saved signatures in a database of known attacks. extensively evaluate FeCo using a network traffic dataset (i.e.,
Due to the nature of their design, signature-based IDSs are not NSL-KDD dataset [23]) to demonstrate the effectiveness of
able to detect zero-day attacks. We focus on anomaly-based IDS FeCo in detecting intrusions. Our contributions are summarized
in this paper due to its superior capability of detecting novel as follows:
attacks. With the great success of machine learning in pattern r We propose a novel method for building the “norm” in
recognition, utilizing machine learning in anomaly-based IDSs an anomaly-based IDS by learning new representations
is a significant trend in the last two decades. for network traffic based on contrastive learning. With
 While being able to detect novel attacks, the machine- the proposed new method, the learned representations of
learning-based IDSs also suffer from the high false-positive rate benign inputs lie only in a small cluster, enabling FeCo
(FPR) compared to the signature-based IDSs. Pajouh et al. [18] to extract a stable template for benign inputs. Extensive
proposed to use the Naive Bayes classifier to identify anomalous evaluation results show that representation learning in
behavior. Then a K-Nearest Neighbor model is used to further FeCo significantly boosts its detection accuracy compared
detect anomalies from those instances that are classified as to previous works.
normal by the Naive Bayes model in order to reduce false r We propose a two-step feature selection scheme to reduce
negatives. Wang et al. [19] combined multi-layer perceptron the risk of overfitting. Our feature selection scheme exploits
(MLP) and manifold learning to improve the detection rates. feature correlation and importance and extracts only the es-
Most current machine-learning-based IDS primarily focus on sential information for intrusion detection. Such a scheme
improving the distinguishing capability of classification models also helps reduce computation complexity as a result of
over the original data, which achieves limited improvement smaller input dimensionality, making FeCo more suitable
when benign data is not easily separable from malicious data for resource-constrained IoT devices.
in the original feature space. To reduce false positives, we r We extensively evaluate FeCo using the NSL-KDD dataset
propose to learn new representations by utilizing a contrastive- and the BaIoT dataset. By comparing FeCo with 11 baselearning-based mechanism, rather than solely focusing on the lines, we demonstrate the effectiveness of contrastiveclassification algorithm. During representation learning, we can learning-based IDS. On the NSL-KDD dataset, FeCo
actively increase the distance between the benign records and achieves an 8% accuracy improvement over the stateintrusion classes in the embedding space, which significantly of-the-art. For zero-day attacks (i.e., attacks unseen by
improves subsequent detection performance. the training dataset), FeCo achieves a recall 8% to 42%
 Base on the intuition that contrastive learning [20], [21], [22] higher than other baselines. FeCo is robust to non-IID
can actively learn a consistent representation for a group of (Independent and Identically Distributed) data by showing
images with similar foreground but different backgrounds (e.g., a consistent accuracy in different data distributions. We also
bunch of cat images with different backgrounds) in the computer investigate FeCo on the convergence performance, scalvision field, we propose to use contrastive learning to learn the ability, and overhead to show that it is suitable for IoT
essential characteristics of benign network events while ignoring systems.
the variance caused by other factors, e.g., device usage pattern. r We implement FeCo on a Raspberry Pi device to demon-
Specifically, we build a feed-forward artificial neural network strate its applicability in resource-constrained IoT devices.
(ANN) that takes an original traffic instance as input and outputs We perform model optimization using model weights
a new representation. Our goal is to learn a new feature space quantization technique in order to save memory and storage
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4217

 space. The optimized light-weight model achieves compa- Besides the mechanisms discussed above, some other IDSs
 rable accuracy with a standard FeCo model. directly learn a binary or multi-class classifier for detecting
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We intrusions. Yan et al. [47] applied SVM to detect botnets using
introduce the related work in Section II. In Section III, we the high-level features extracted from the command and control
describe the system model and threat model. The detailed design channel. Pajouh et al. [18] proposed TDTC that utilizes two
of FeCo, including feature selection and detection algorithm, tires of classification to improve detect rate. TDTC first uses the
is depicted in Section IV. Section V presents the evaluation Naive Bayes classifier to identify anomalous behavior. Then a
results using two real-world network traffic datasets. In Section K-Nearest Neighbor model is used to further detect anomalies
VI, we implement FeCo on a Raspberry Pi to demonstrate its from those instances that are classified as normal by the Naive
applicability. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. Bayes model in order to reduce false negatives. Wang et al. [19]
 employed multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and manifold learning
 to detect evasive intrusions. Rathore et al. [25] proposed ESFCM
 II. RELATED WORK that integrates a Fuzzy C-Means with the Extreme Learning
 We focus on anomaly-based IDSs in this paper. The key Machine (ELM) classifier to achieve efficient attack detection
component of a general anomaly-based IDS is a model that can in IoT. Wang et al. [48] proposed a graphic model that stores
represent the legitimate traffic. In what follows, we review the known traffic patterns as a relational graph between patterns
anomaly-based IDSs with a focus on the IDSs in the domain of and their labels (malicious or normal) to detect DDoS attacks in
IoT. the cloud computing scenario.
 IDS placement is an important design choice in IoT systems Most of anomaly-based IDS suffers from a high false-positive
compared to computer networks. There exist three IDS place- rate (FPR) compared to the signature-based IDS. We propose a
ment strategies: distributed IDS placement [7], [8], centralized method, namely the contrastive-learning-based anomaly detec-
IDS placement [9], and hybrid IDS placement [10]. Recently, tion method, to address this problem. Similar to the traditional
with the advances of Federated Learning (FL) [11], FL-based anomaly-based IDS, the proposed method also aims to learn
IDSs [5], [42], [43] are becoming increasingly popular. FL the pattern of benign traffic. The critical difference is that we
allows a distributed placement to have a better generalization maximized the distance from the normal pattern to the intrusion
performance as it takes advantage of diverse sets of training traffic and minimized the distance among normal instances durdata from a large number of IoT devices FL also provides ing the pattern learning phase. It then detects network traffic that
better privacy-preservation in IDSs compared to centralized deviates from the pattern as an intrusion. Our methods can reduce
placement. Nguyen et al. [5] are the first to employ FL in the FPR and maintain the capability to detect novel attacks.
anomaly-based IDSs. In their design, a local gateway uses its We also summarize representative papers on machinelocal data to train the model and submits the model parameters learning-based (ML-based) IDS for IoT system in Table I.
to the cloud server. The cloud server then aggregates these We present the ML mechanisms, datasets for evaluation, and
local models into a global model. Since then, multiple works security threats that IDS targets. We categorize the detection
(e.g., [42], [43]) have explored the use of FL framework to enable mechanisms into four different types:
decentralized edge devices to learn an anomaly detection model r Type 1 mechanisms learn the pattern of the benign traffic
using only on-device data at each edge device. and reject network traffic that deviates from the learned
 In the area of anomaly-based IDSs, machine learning mecha- pattern. Only benign traffic is used for learning.
nisms have been extensively researched in the literature. The r Type 2 mechanisms learn a binary classifier between the
most popular strategy for detecting attacks is to monitor a benign traffic and intrusion traffic. Both benign data and
network’s activity and report potential abnormal events: devia- intrusion data are used for learning.
tions from profiles of normality previously learned from benign r Type 3 mechanisms measures the distance (or local density)
traffic [5], [24], [44], [45]. Du et al. [45] proposed DeepLog of a data point to the rest of the data (or the neighbors) to
that utilizes Long Short-Term Memory to model a system log detect potential outliers.
as a natural language sequence. DeepLog automatically learns r Type 4 mechanisms learn the pattern of the benign traffic.
log patterns from normal execution and detects anomalies when During the pattern learning, it try to extract the key fealog patterns deviate from the learned pattern. Mirsky et al. [24] tures that make normal pattern as distinguishable from the
proposed to utilize an ensemble of multiple autoencoders to dif- intrusion traffic data as possible. This type of detection then
ferentiate between normal and abnormal traffic patterns. The au- detects intrusions by measuring network traffic’s deviation
toencoder reconstructs an input and computes the reconstruction from the normal pattern. Both benign data and intrusion
error in terms of root mean squared errors (RMSE). An alarm data are used for learning.
is generated when RMSE value exceeds a threshold. The work We have summarized both traditional ML methods (e.g., naive
in [46] exploited a non-parametric density estimation method Bayes, decision tree, and random forest) and deep neural netto learn and predict legitimate access pattern. Nguyen et al. [5] works (e.g., gated recurrent unit, autoencoder, and convolutional
modeled network packets as symbols in a language enabling the neural network) for IDS. As shown in the table, the evaluation
use of Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)) for anomaly detection. datasets include both self-generated data using IoT devices or
Specifically, the GRU model estimates a probability of the next emulation platforms and well-published datasets. We hope the
symbol, and an alarm is raised if the occurrence probabilities of list of the published datasets will encourage more research on
a sufficient number of packets fall below a detection threshold. IDS. Due to space limitations, not all the reviewed related papers
4218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
 REVIEW OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED (ML-BASED) INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR IOT SYSTEM

 capability, which results in two operation modes: learning mode
 and consumer mode. G in learning mode is a client of the FL
 system, while G in consumer mode only request an IDS model
 from a central server. In the rest of the paper, the default mode
 for G is learning mode. G is also responsible for identifying the
 type of devices when a new IoT device joins the local network.
 Such device-type-identification techniques were well studied in
 [51], [52], [53]. We assume G to have access to the network
 traffic of the IoT devices in the local network, which is the same
 as [5], [24].
 A model aggregator/Server S is responsible for aggregating
 the parameter updates of an IDS model from Gs and sending
Fig. 1. The system design of our device-type-specific IDS–FeCo. Local gateways cooperatively train an IDS model for each type of IoT devices through FL. the up-to-date IDS model to Gs. Typically, S would be run by a
The detail of the IDS shown as a blue icon in this figure is depicted in Fig. 3. service provider such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, etc.
 A single aggregator S is responsible for training an IDS
are shown in the table. Please refer to survey papers [49], [50] model for one type of IoT device. The learning process between
to get connected to ML-based IDSs. aggregator S and G can be described as follows. Initially, S
 randomly initializes a global model Θ. An FL iteration starts
 with participant selection at S. S chooses a subset of local
 III. SYSTEM MODEL AND THREAT MODEL gateways Gs that maintain an IDS model for the targeted type
 We assume an IoT network with multiple types of IoT devices of IoT device and distributes the current global model Θ to the
(e.g., IP camera, smart light) connected via a local gateway. As selected Gs to initialize their local IDS models. Each selected
shown in Fig. 1, we focus on the device-type-specific IDS design. local gateway G proceeds to train its IDS model using data
For each type of device, a number of gateways cooperatively generated by local IoT devices. After several local training
learn an IDS model through an FL framework. An FL system epochs, the local gateways Gs upload their model weights θi
involves two main components: local gateways (i.e., clients) and to S. S updates the global model Θ using the received model
a model aggregator, which we describe below. weights according to an aggregation rule such as FedSGD or
 A local gateway G is a client of the FL system and manages FedAvg [11], completing one FL iteration. After multiple FL
IDSs for detecting compromised IoT devices in the local net- iterations, S can obtain a well-generalized model that can be
work. G may manage multiple IDSs if there are multiple device used for intrusion detection at local Gs.
types present in the local network. G can choose whether or not Threat Model: IoT devices are easy targets of many networkto participate in the learning process based on its computation based intrusions, such as unauthorized access, address spoofing,
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4219

Fig. 2. The workflow of one learning iteration of FeCo. The core of FeCo (i.e., Step 4) is further illustrated in Fig. 3.

 TABLE II
 CLASSES OF INTRUSIONS AND SUB-CLASSES IN THE NSL-KDD DATASET

false data injection, disruption of network connectivity. Once TABLE III
 SYMBOL DEFINITION
compromised, they tend to be exploited to launch attacks to
other network components or services. In this paper, our goal is
to detect malicious network traffic for either purposes.

 IV. FECO DESIGN
A. Workflow of IDS
 The workflow of the proposed FeCo is illustrated in Fig. 2,
which offers an overview of its operations. When joining the
learning system, a local gateway G requests initial IDS model
parameters based on the types of IoT devices and initializes
its IDS model with the received parameters. During a learning
iteration, G ( 1 ) collects raw network traffic data and ( 2 )
 B. Feature Selection
extracts significant features from the raw data. Next, ( 3 ) the
extracted features are fed into the IDS model. G then ( 4 ) trains In FeCo, We choose to perform feature selection to remove
the local IDS model using the contrastive learning algorithm features that are explicitly demonstrated irrelevant to intrusion
and the preprocessed data, and ( 5 ) uploads the model parameter detection. We propose a two-step feature selection scheme to seupdate to model aggregator S. S ( 6 ) aggregates received model lect essential features for IDS. By removing redundant features,
parameter updates from multiple local gateways and uses them we simplify the model architecture and reduce the training time
to update the global model. ( 7 ) The updated global model as well.
is distributed to local gateways for another learning iteration. 1) Redundant Feature Removal: Not all the statistical at-
Steps  1 – 7 repeat until the global model converges. We can tributes contain unique information of an individual traffic flow.
see from Fig. 2 that there are three important components in For example, a feature with zero variance exhibits a constant
FeCo including Feature Selection, Contrastive Learning, and value in the dataset, and thus it contains no useful information for
Federated Aggregation. We will introduce the three components intrusion detection. Therefore, we first remove the zero-variance
in detail respectively in the rest of this section. The symbols used features. Furthermore, a feature vector may contain redundant
in the description and their meanings are listed in Table III. information if there exist multiple highly correlated features. If
4220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

we use all the highly correlated features for model training, it of the same data point, denoted as x̃i and x˜j . These two generated
is likely to cause overfitting because there exists an implicit views form a positive pair. 2) Base Encoder: Utilize a neural
emphasis on these correlated features. To reduce the risk of network f as the base encoder to transform the augmented
overfitting, we use the Spearman rank correlation coefficient [54] data into new representation vectors: hi = f (x̃i ), and hi ∈ Rd
to quantify the correlations among the numerical features and where d denotes the dimension of new representation vectors.
then keep only one feature for each set of highly correlated 3) Projection Head: Employ a small neural network, namely a
features. projection head g, to map the extracted representation hi to a new
 2) Feature Importance Ranking: In FeCo, we propose fea- space z where the contrastive loss is calculated. The mapping
ture importance ranking to rank the importance of features. from hi to zi can be represented as zi = g(hi ). 4) Contrastive
We employ different methods to measure the importance of Learning Objective: The goal is to learn a similar representation
categorical features (e.g., the protocol type and service type) and for each positive pair. Assuming there are N positive pairs (i.e.,
numerical features (e.g., source bytes) since they contribute to 2N data points), the contrastive loss for any positive pair x̃i , x˜j
the final prediction differently. Specifically, we utilize mutual can be defined as:
information (MI) between a feature and the output label to
 exp (sim (zi , zj ) /τ )
measure the importance of a categorical feature. A zero MI lij = 2N , (1)
implies that the output label is independent of the target feature. k=1 1[k = i]) exp (sim (zi zk ) /τ )
The MI ranges from zero to one, and a higher MI means a higher
 zT z
significance. For numerical features, we employ analysis of where sim(zi , zj ) = ziizjj  denotes the cosine similarity, 1[]
variance (ANOVA) to evaluate feature importance. In ANOVA, represents the indicator function, and τ is a hyperparameter. The
the observed values of a feature are divided into two groups that final loss is computed across all positive pairs. SimCLR iteraare attributable to different values of the label. ANOVA measures tively minimizes the loss to learn an encoder f that can produce
whether or not the target feature is statistically different in these nearly identical representation vectors for two augmented views
two groups. In practice, the ANOVA score is the ratio of the originating from the same data points. Our algorithm extends
variance between the two groups to the variance within the same the idea of SimCLR by leveraging labeled data to define a new
group. A larger ANOVA score means higher importance. loss function.
 The analysis of the proposed feature selection methods and 2) Proposed Algorithm: We assume each record in the trainthe impact of such data preprocessing on the performance of ing dataset consists of two fields: input feature vector xi ∈ Rd
FeCo are evaluated and reported in Section V-C. and output label yi ∈ {0, 1} where 0 indicates a normal traffic
 flow and 1 indicates an intrusion. The goal of the contrastive
 learning algorithm is to learn a new representation (rather than a
C. Contrastive-Learning-Based IDS
 label) for each input instance. Specifically, contrastive learning
 Contrastive-learning-based IDS is the building block of FeCo. trains an ANN model that takes xi ∈ Rd as input and outputs
It is deployed for the training process at each G. Contrastive a new representation zi ∈ Ro . The ANN model can be reprelearning is first proposed to improve recognition accuracy in the sented by a function fθ : Rd → Ro where θ denotes the model
computer vision field. Our goal of deploying contrastive learning parameters. The ANN model of FeCo consists of four layers:
is to trains a model that produces similar representations for all the input layer, two hidden layers, and finally the output layer.
normal traffic instances and make the intrusion representations The corresponding size of each layer is d, 128, 256, and o,
far from normal representations. In the following, we first in- respectively. The default value for o is 128.
troduce the basics of contrastive learning. Then we depicts the For convenience, we use vi = fθ (xi ) to denote the output of
proposed contrastive-learning-based binary IDS. a benign input xi and ui = fθ (xi ) to denote the output of an
 1) Basics of Contrastive Learning: Conventional contrastive intrusion input xi . We assume the dataset contains N normal
learning is a type of self-supervised machine learning that traffic flows and M intrusion traffic flows. For each pair of noracquires feature representations for datasets without rquiring mal inputs, we can obtain representation vi and representation
labeled data. In essence, contrastive learning trains a model vj . Our goal is to maximize the similarity between vi and vj and
to recognize similarities and differences in data by guiding it minimize the similarity between vi and um |m∈[M ] (we define
to generate similar representations for similar data points and [M ] := {1, 2, . . ., M }). The likelihood that vi is closest to vj
distinct representations for different data points. This learning compared to um is represented by
approach allows model to extract high-level representations  
from raw data, which can then be utilized to various down- exp viT vj /τ
 lij =     T , (2)
stream tasks, such as classification and segmentation. Recently, exp viT vj /τ + M m=1 exp vi um /τ
contrastive learning has seen significant success, as evidenced
by [55], [56], [57]. We use the popular SimCLR [55] as an where 0 < τ < 1 denotes the temperature coefficient, and such
example to introduce the concept formally. τ makes the likelihood distribution more peaked and narrow
 SimCLR learns representations by enhancing the agreement compared to the version without temperature coefficient (i.e.,
between differently augmented views of the same example, us- τ = 1). It helps the algorithm to capture the similarity more
ing a contrastive loss in the latent space. The learning framework efficiently, and it is a hyper-parameter to be tuned. We then define
consists of four steps: 1) Data Augmentation: Create two views a loss function Lij as the negative logarithm of the likelihood
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4221

Fig. 3. The training process and testing process of the contrastive-learning-based IDS.

function. we select the p-th percentile of S as the threshold ρ. In FeCo,
 we first calculated the index r of the score to select:
 Lij = −log (lij ) (3)  p
Similarly, we can obtain Lji . The overall loss function of the r= ∗N , (7)
 100
pair vi and vj is the summation of Lij and Lji . We then sum
up the loss functions for all pairs of normal vectors and obtain where . denotes the round down function, and 0 ≤ p ≤ 100
a loss function L: represents a percentage number. We obtain ρ = Sr which is the
 r-th entry of S. We can manually select a value for p. We should
 1 N  N
 select a small value for p (e.g., p = 5) as a larger p leads to a
 L= Lij + Lji . (4)
 N (N − 1) i=1 j=i+1 higher FPR. The final decision ŷj is made by
    
We use a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer to mini- ŷj = 1 S xtest
 j <ρ . (8)
mize the loss function L. By minimizing the loss function, we
can achieve the goal of maximizing the similarity among normal An input instance is predicted as an intrusion if its similarity
representations and minimizing the similarity between normal score is smaller than threshold ρ.
representations and intrusion representations.
 We intuitively interpret the learning process in Fig. 3 as well. D. Federated Aggregation
We can see that the normal zs (i.e., vi ) attracts each other while We build FeCo by incorporating the contrastive-learningthey repel intrusion zs (i.e., uj ) in the training process. After based IDS into the federated learning framework. In that case,
several iterations, we can learn a model fθ that outputs a new each client participates in the FL process by providing its model
representation for each input instance. In the new feature space, parameter update. We utilize the FedAVG [11] algorithm to
the representations of benign traffic flows are expected to fall aggregate the updates from multiple clients. In time step t, the
into a compact cluster, while those of intrusion traffic flows model aggregator S computes the global model parameter Θt
are far from such a cluster. In the testing phase, we collect the by:
representations of benign traffic flows and use the average value 
of the normalized representations as the normal template z̄: Θt = Θt−1 + ci ∗ (θi − Θt−1 ) , (9)
 1  fθ (xi )
  i
 z̄ =  1(yi = 0) , (5)
 i 1(yi = 0) i fθ (xi )2 where θi is the local model parameters at client i and ci is a
 weight coefficient. In our paper, ci based on the size of local
where 1(.) is the indicator function, and 1(yi = 0) equals 1 if training dataset at client i. Particularly, we define ci as the ratio
 (xi )
yi = 0, .2 denotes the L2 -norm function and ffθθ(x i )2
 repre- of the size of the local training dataset at client i to the number
sents a normalized representation. After obtaining the normal of total training samples at all selected clients.
template z̄, we utilize the cosine similarity estimator to measure
the similarity S(xtest
 j ) between an upcoming traffic flow xtest j V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
and the normal template:
   A. Datasets and Experiment Settings
  test  z̄ T fθ xtest
 S xj = j
  . (6) We implement FeCo in the PyTorch platform [58]. We ran
 z̄ × fθ xtestj 
 all the experiments on a server equipped with an Intel Core
The similarity score S(xtest j ) ranges from 0 to 1. We need a i7-8700 K CPU 3.70 GHz×12, a GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU,
threshold score 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 for determining whether xtest j is an and Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS. We experiment with FeCo using two
anomaly or not. In our paper, we obtain the threshold ρ by network traffic datasets including the NSL-KDD dataset and
calculating the statistics of the scores of benign training data. BaIoT dataset. The NSL-KDD dataset is a network traffic dataset
Particularly, we first sort the scores of benign data in ascending that is widely used for IoT scenarios [18], [25], [49]. We evaluate
order and obtain the sorted sequence S = [S1 , S2 , . . ., SN ]. Then FeCo on the NSL-KDD dataset in order to provide comparisons
4222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

with other IDSs [18], [25], [49]. The BaIoT dataset that is B. Evaluation Metrics
dedicated to IoT devices.
 For a binary detection problem, there are four important terms:
 The NSL-KDD dataset [23] includes benign traffic and four True Positive (TP) means correctly detected as an intrusion;
categories of intrusions, i.e., DoS, Probing, Remote-to-Local
 False Positive (FP) means incorrectly detected as an intrusion;
(R2L), and User-to-Root (U2R). Each category of intrusion
 True Negative (TN) means correctly detected as benign; False
contains several sub-classes as shown in Table II. The whole Negative (FN) means incorrectly detected as benign. We use N∗
dataset includes a training set and a testing set, and the training
 to represent the number of ∗ ∈ {TP, TN, FP, FN}. We compute
set contains 125,973 records while the test set 22,544 records. NT P +NT N
 five evaluation metrics: accuracy A = NT P +N F P +NT N +NF N
 ,
Note that some intrusion sub-classes exist only in the testing set,
i.e., they are unseen in the training set (e.g., mscan, sqlattack), recall R = NT P +NF N , precision P = NT P +NF P , F1 score F =
 NT P NT P

 2×P ×R
 P +R , and False Positive Rate (FPR) f pr = NF P +NT N . We
 NF P
which makes it possible to evaluate FeCo against zero-day
attacks. Each record consists of 41 attributes extracted from a also provide the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve
traffic flow and a label indicating its category (i.e., Normal, DoS, by plotting R against FPR at various threshold settings. The
Probing, R2L, or U2R). In practice, it is easy to extract attributes AUC score is defined as the area under the ROC curve.
from network packets by using existing packet analyzers (e.g.,
WireShark3 ). C. Feature Selection
 The BaIoT dataset [41] contains the traffic data gathered from Here we show the process of our two-step feature selection
9 commercial IoT devices authentically infected by Mirai and scheme using NSL-KDD as an example.
BASHLITE. Benign traffic collected at normal running phase We first remove the zero-variance feature (i.e., ‘num_
is also included. Both Mirai and BASHLITE is composed of outbound_cmds’) from the dataset. Then we evaluate the feature
five sub-class attacks: ‘scan’, ‘ack’, ‘syn’, ‘udp’ and ‘udpplain’ correlation and show the heat map of the correlation matrix
for Mirai; and ‘scan’, ‘junk’, ‘udp’, ‘tcp’, and ‘combo’ for in Fig. 4(a). We further perform hierarchy clustering on the
BASHLITE. The whole dataset contains 6,506,674 malicious computed correlations among features, shown in Fig. 4(b).
records and 556,932 benign records, and each record contains Focusing on the height at which any two objects are joined
115 attributes. The dataset is available from https://archive.ics. together, we can see the height of the link that joins ‘feature 0’
uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00442/ and ‘feature 23’ is the smallest, indicating that the two features
 Some papers [59], [60] reported detection accuracy as high as are the most correlated. We can further obtain the second most
99% on the NSL-KDD dataset. However, these works introduce correlated feature pair and the third most correlated feature
a new splitting on the dataset. They either combine the training pair. We randomly remove one feature from the three feature
set and testing set into one then randomly split it into two sets pairs as removing these features does not degrade the detection
for training and testing, or directly split the training set into two performance.
sets. Such arrangements can only demonstrate the effectiveness Second, we evaluate importance scores for all features. We
of IDS models in detecting known intrusions but not unseen show the ranking of MI scores and ANOVA scores in Fig. 4(c).
intrusions. In this paper, we train our IDS model with the training The MI score of Feature 32, 33, 36 (i.e., ‘land’, ‘root_shell’,
set and evaluate it using the testing set to explicitly show its ‘is_host_login’) is zero, implying that they are irrelevant to
performance in detecting unseen intrusions. intrusion detection. Therefore, we remove the three features.
 Other default settings of FeCo are shown as follows. In order Note that the ANOVA scores are shown on a logarithmic scale
to better simulate the distributed characteristics of a real FL as the scores vary dramatically among different features. Unlike
system, we choose 50 clients which is relatively larger than MI scores, ANOVA scores have no zero entries. We start with
10 and 15 used in [5], [42]. We generate data for clients by removing the features with the lowest ANOVA score. We vary
splitting the whole dataset. Therefore, the number of clients and the number K of features to remove. Intuitively, useful inforthe size of local data would be inversely proportional to each mation may be discarded if K is too large, while redundant
other. By using different splitting strategies, we obtain both information may result in overfitting if K is too small. We
IID data and non-IID data (See Section V-D2 for detail). For tune K ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} to show the impact of K on detection
data preprocessing, we first use our feature selection scheme accuracy. Fig. 5(a) shows the performance of FeCo with different
to remove 10 attributes from the 41 attributes. Then we use K. We can see that both accuracy and the F1 score increase with
the one-hot encoding method to map the remaining 31 attributes K ≤ 3, implying that removing features with low significance
into 112 input features. The size of the input layer and the output could boost the detection performance. We select K = 3 as the
layer of the ANN model in FeCo are d = 112 and o = 128, re- accuracy peaks at K = 3.
spectively. The machine learning baselines used for comparison
are imported from scikit-learn [61]. In FeCo, each client uses an
SGD optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 for local training. D. FeCo Performance on NSL-KDD
The clients perform four epochs of local training before sending 1) Centralized Setting: We first investigate the performance
its model parameters to S in each FL round. We set the number of FeCo under the centralized setting to focus on evaluating
of total FL rounds as 15. our contrastive-learning-based IDS. We evaluate the impacts of
 global aggregation of FL in next part. We compare the perfor-
 3 https://www.wireshark.org/ mance of FeCo to both state-of-the-art IDSs [18], [25], [29] and
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4223

Fig. 4. (a) The heat map of the Spearman correlations. (b) The dendrogram of the correlation clustering. (c) The ranking of MI scores and ANOVA scores for
categorical features and numerical features, respectively.

Fig. 5. FeCo performance under the centralized setting. (a) The accuracy and F1 scores of FeCo with different number of removed features K. (b) Accuracy, F1
score, recall, and FPR of FeCo with different percentage value p. (c) ROC curves of FeCo, VAE, and IsoForest. (d) Accuracy of FeCo with training data containing
only one attack (DoS, Probe, R2L, or U2R).

some other widely-used machine learning baselines including TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE (%) OF FECO IN CENTRALIZED SETTING
support vector machine (SVM), variational autoencoder (VAE),
isolation forest (IsoForest), multilayer perceptron (MLP), logistic regression (LGR), Bernoulli naive Bayes (BNB), K-nearest
neighbors (KNN), and decision tree classifier (DTC).
 As shown in Section IV-C, the threshold for intrusion detection is computed by manually selecting the quantile number p.
Fig. 5(b) shows the performance of FeCo with different p value.
We can see that the recall increases with p and the FPR also
increases as expected. The accuracy and F1 score first increase
dramatically with the increase of p then decrease slowly. Given
such results, it is intuitive that one can select the value for p based
on the desired FPR. We should select a small p if we desire
a low FPR. Ideally, FPR should be very close to the value of
 TABLE V
p/100 if the learned model generalized well on the testing set. In RECALL (%) OF FECO FOR NOVEL TESTING ATTACKS
practice, we set p = 5, and get F P R = 6.8% in the testing set.
This discrepancy may be due to novel attacks in the testing set.
However, we believe that the small gap between F P R = 6.8%
and 5/100 confirms that FPR would approximate the value of
p/100.
 We show the detection performance of FeCo and other base- zero-day attacks, we split the testing attacks into known attacks
lines in Table IV. We set p = 5 to obtain these results. FeCo and novel attacks (i.e., attacks unseen in the training data). We
achieves detection accuracy as high as 89.55%. From Table IV present the recall of FeCo for novel testing attacks in Table V.
we can see that FeCo outperforms other methods by achieving We can see FeCo achieves a recall 8% to 42% higher than
both the highest recall and the highest accuracy. Note that some other machine learning baselines. SVM, BNB, KNN, DTC, and
entries of Table IV are missing because they were not provided MLP achieve less than 50% recall, which indicates they are not
in the references. To demonstrate FeCo’s capability in detecting suitable for detecting zero-attacks.
4224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 TABLE VI
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE (%) IN CENTRALIZED SETTING

 Among all the methods shown in Table IV, FeCo, IsoForest,
and VAE share a similar detection strategy that detects intrusions by learning a model to characterized benign traffic. These
methods compute a score for inputs using the learned model. Fig. 6. Ablation study on FeCo to investigate the performance gain obtained
The output labels are predicted by comparing the scores to a by the three major components—Fea, Rep, and Detect.
threshold. Consequently, a different threshold would lead to
different detection accuracy. We plot the ROC curves of the three or two components from FeCo, and denote them as Fea(×)-
methods in Fig. 5(c). Each point in one curve corresponds to the Rep()-Detect(), Fea(×)-Rep(×)-Detect(), and Fea()-
recall and FPR under one specific threshold. We can see that Rep(×)-Detect(). In Fig. 6, we show the recall of FeCo and
FeCo achieves the highest recall under the same FPR compare the other three baselines with respect to various FPRs. The
to IsoForest and VAE. Obviously, FeCo outperforms the other superior recall value of Fea(×)-Rep()-Detect() and Fea()-
two methods in terms of AUC score as well. Rep()-Detect() compared to the other two baselines indicate
 To better understand the performance of FeCo, we further that the contrastive-based representation learning contributes the
look into the recall of FeCo for each category of intrusion attacks most to the final accuracy. Moreover, the nearly identical recall
(i.e., DoS, Probing, R2L, and U2R). Intuitively, for one attack of Fea(×)-Rep()-Detect() and Fea()-Rep()-Detect()
category, the recall means the proportion of records detected as implies that our feature reduction does not negatively impact the
intrusions, i.e., labelled with ‘1’. Formally, the recall of each model detection performance.
attack category i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} (1 for ‘DoS’, 2 for ‘Probe’, 3 for To investigate the impact of data distribution, we evaluate
‘U2R’, and 4 for ‘R2L’) is defined as FeCo under the scenario when we only have partial data drawn
   
 j 1 ŷj = 1 & yj =i
 multi from the whole data distribution. In particular, we sample the
 R(i) = , (10) data belonging to one attack category (e.g., ‘DoS’) and the
 yjmulti = i
 normal data (i.e., ‘Normal’). In other words, each FeCo model
where ŷj denotes the prediction of FeCo on the j-th data record, in these experiments is trained from records of only one attack
and it takes a value of either 0 or 1 as FeCo is a binary IDS. Note category and ‘Normal’ class. As a result, the detection perforthat we have true labels of whether a testing record is ‘Normal’ mance of such FeCo models is expected to be lower than that
or ‘Intrusion’ (i.e., yj ∈ {0, 1}) and whether a testing record of FeCo models trained from the whole NSL-KDD dataset. We
is ‘Normal’, ‘DoS’, ‘Probe’, ‘U2R’, or ‘R2L’ (i.e., yjmulti ∈ evaluate the detection accuracy with the same testing dataset of
{0, 1, 2, 3, 4}). NSL-KDD and show the results in Fig. 5(d). We can see the
 In Table VI, we show the confusion matrix including the detection accuracy with partial data is lower than that with the
attack-specific recall. Here we omit the recall of ‘Normal’ as whole NSL-KDD dataset, which is as expected. The accuracy
normal traffic is not an attack. From Table VI, we can see that of the FeCo model trained with only ‘R2L’ and ‘Normal’ is as
FeCo achieves higher recall on both DoS attack and Probe attack, low as 50.8%. This observation indicates that self-learning may
while the detection rate on R2L is as low as 0.51. To the best result in extremely low detection accuracy as the local data may
of our knowledge, all works with evaluations on the NSL-KDD not exhibit the overall data distribution.
dataset show a low detection performance on R2L as well [18], 2) Federated Setting: Here we focus on the performance of
[29]. There are two possible reasons behind the low detection FeCo in the federated setting. To present a thorough comparison,
rate on R2L: 1) the number of training instances belonging to we have three different learning frameworks: FL, self-learning,
R2L attack is as small as 995, and 2) there are many new attacks and centralized learning. In self-learning, the training process is
in the testing set that do not exist in the training set as shown in done at the local device using the local data. Centralized learning
Table II. refers to FeCo investigated in Section V-D1. Further more,
 We added an ablation study to analyze the effectiveness of data distribution is one of the biggest factors that impact FL
each module of FeCo, including the feature selection module performance. Therefore, we propose to explore three different
denoted by Fea, the contrastive-based representation learning data distributions, including one IID data distribution and two
module denoted by Rep, and the similarity-based anomaly de- non-IID data distributions. For the IID data distribution, we rantection module denoted by Detect. FeCo includes all the three domly select a subset of each class in the whole training dataset
components and is represented by Fea()-Rep()-Detect(). as the local data of one client. In non-IID-1, we assume that each
We build three baseline learning mechanisms by dropping one client only has n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} out of the total four intrusion
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4225

 TABLE VII
 PERFORMANCE (%) OF FECO IN FL, SELF-LEARNING, AND CENTRALIZED LEARNING FRAMEWORKS

Fig. 7. Evaluations of FeCo. (a) Accuracy distribution of FeCo in self-learning mode. (b) Convergence performance of FeCo in FL mode. (c) Accuracy of FeCo
with different number of clients. The size of per-client data get smaller when the number of clients increases since the size of total data is the same; (d) Per-client
running time and total running time of all clients.

attack categories. In non-IID-2, each client has n = 1 intrusion contain a relatively large number of attack sub-classes (i.e., 20)
category. For both non-IID-1 and non-IID-2, we assume all users within the small local dataset. Therefore, it becomes difficult
have benign data, i.e., data from ‘Normal’ class. non-IID-2 is to learn a stable representation of benign instances when cona special case of non-IID-1 and training on non-IID-2 is more trastive learning iteratively pushes benign representations away
challenging than other settings due to fewer attack categories for from so many different attacks. On the contrary, in the non-IID-1
training. Meanwhile, we use the same testing data in all settings setting, each client possesses only a subset of attack classes thus
for fair comparison. a smaller number of attack sub-classes. Therefore, it is easier to
 We show the detection performance of FeCo with combina- learn a stable normal template. The performance of non-IID-2 is
tions of the three learning types and three data distributions in worse than IID possibly because overfitting occurs as the attack
Table VII. In self-learning, the value of evaluation metrics is categories in the local data are too limited.
shown as an averaged value over all clients. Compared with We study the convergence performance of FeCo by plotting
self-learning, FL achieves higher accuracy, recall, and precision the value of loss through the training process. As shown in
regardless of the data distribution. Furthermore, FL achieves Fig. 7(b), the loss drops sharply at the beginning of the training
similar detection performance under the three data distributions, process, decreases slowly after certain epochs, and finally stays
implying that FeCo is able to obtain stable learning performance stable. We can see that the loss of FeCo reaches the stable
with different data distributions. Unlike FL, the performance state fast under the three data distributions, implying that FeCo
of self-learning heavily depends on the data distribution. We converges after a small number of learning rounds.
can see that self-learning achieves as low as 67.66% average We also explore the scalability of FeCo by varying the numaccuracy under non-IID-2 data distribution. One noticeable re- ber of clients. We show the accuracy of FeCo with different
sult is that the detection accuracy of FL is still lower than the number of clients in Fig. 7(c). We can see that the accuracy of
centralized learning. In practice, centralized learning is difficult self-learning decreases monotonically with the increase of the
to deploy due to privacy concerns. We further show the box-plot number of clients. This is because that the size of the local data
of self-learning accuracy of 50 clients in Fig. 7(a) to further also decreases with the increase of the number of clients as they
accommodate Table VII (Table VII only shows the average are inversely proportional to each other. However, the accuracy
accuracy among clients). We can see that the variance of the of FL does not show a decreasing trend. This observation indiaccuracy of non-IID-2 is much larger than those of IID and cates that FeCo scales well with the number of clients in the FL
non-IID-1. mode.
 We have another observation when comparing the perfor- We show the overhead of FeCo in Fig. 7(d). Specifically, we
mance of FeCo with different data distributions but the same present the per-client running time and the total running time of
learning framework. In the FL setting, the accuracy of FeCo on all clients for one FL round. Note that a FL round means that
non-IID-1 is 86.23% which is higher than the 85.65% accuracy the selected clients finish training their local models and upload
achieved on IID data. Similar phenomena occur in self-learning the model parameters for one time. We evaluate the running
as well. The possible reason behind this is that: the IID data time with the number of clients ranging from 10 to 60. Note
4226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 TABLE VIII
 PERFORMANCE OF FECO ON THE BAIOT DATASET

that a larger number of clients means a smaller dataset at the We further explore how FeCo detects intrusions. As discussed
local client as discussed above. We can see that the per-client in Section IV-C, FeCo computes the cosine similarity of an input
running time decreases with the increase of the number of clients with the normal template and flags the input as intrusion if the
while the total running time stays approximately the same. The calculated similarity score is less than a pre-defined threshold.
per-client running time is as low as 1.878 seconds when the We show the histogram of the similarity scores of test data points
local data contains 2000 records, indicating that FeCo requires in Fig. 8. To give a clear view of the similarity score distribution,
relatively little computation resource. We plan to implement we analyze the scores of intrusion records and scores of benign
FeCo in a gateway device in our future work to demonstrate that records separately. As shown in Fig. 8(a), two sub-figures are
FeCo is affordable even in a local gateway with low computation given: the top sub-figure showing the similarity score distribucapacity. tion of the intrusion traffic and the bottom sub-figure showing
 the similarity score distribution of benign traffic. We can see that
 similarity scores of intrusion traffic are distributed from -0.56 to
E. FeCo Performance on BaIoT Dataset
 0.88 and has two peaks at around -0.4 and 0.88. The instances
 We further evaluate FeCo using a real-world IoT dataset. The that form the left peak and its vicinity represent the Mirai attack,
BaIoT dataset includes nine commercial IoT devices as shown and the instances form the right peak represents the BASHLITE
in Table VIII. We train a model for each IoT device and evaluate attack. For benign traffic, the similarity score gathers at a very
the performance separately. narrow range that is very close to the value of 1.00. The gap
 In order to test the capability of FeCo to detect zero-day between the largest score of intrusion traffic and the smallest
attacks, we design our data split method as follows. The BaIoT value of benign score demonstrates FeCo’s capability to detect
dataset is composed of ten classes of malicious data: five classes intrusions. The similarity score distribution of the other eight
from the Mirai attack family and five classes from the BASH- devices is shown in Fig. 8(b) to (i). Refer to Table VIII for
LITE attack family. We randomly select three from the five Mirai mapping a device number in the caption of Fig. 8 to a real device.
attacks as the training data. The remaining two Mirai attacks and We can also see only one peak in the similarity score distribution
all the five BASHLITE attacks are used for testing. There are of the intrusion traffic in Device 2 and Device 9. The observation
no Mirai attack records for two of the nine devices (the Ennio is because the two devices are only infected by the BASHLITE
doorbell and the SamSung SNH 1011 N webcam). Therefore, attack but not the Mirai attack.
we randomly select three from the five BASHLITE attacks as
the training data, and the remaining two BASHLITE attacks are VI. COMPUTATION OPTIMIZATION
used for testing. The benign traffic data is split into 70% for
 We further optimize FeCo to make it compatible with computraining and 30% for testing.
 tational constrained IoT devices. In this section, we optimize the
 We show the performance of FeCo on the BaIoT dataset
 FeCo by reducing the size of the neural network model used by
in Table VIII. The BaIoT data is imbalanced: the number of
 FeCo. We instrument the optimized FeCo system to a Raspberry
malicious data records (6,506,674) is about ten times of benign
 Pi to demonstrate its applicability in computation-constrained
data records (556,932). Therefore, we present recall and FPR
 IoT devices.
in addition to detection accuracy to better exhibit the detection
performance. FeCo achieves recall as high as 99.99% with a
small FPR of 0.16%. Table VIII demonstrates that FeCo is A. Model Weights Quantization
effective in detecting malicious traffic for various types of IoT In order to reduce the model size, we perform model weights
devices. Furthermore, the high overall recall indicates that the quantization. With a smaller model size, we can achieve the
IDS model trained on partial intrusion attacks effectively detects following advantages. A smaller model will occupy less storage
unseen attacks. Other baselines in [41] achieve similar recall but space on an IoT device. In this way, an IoT device can save
higher FPR. The FPR of Autoencoder, isolation forest, SVM, more storage space for its original operation data. Second,
and FeCo is shown in Fig. 9. We can see IsolationForest is a smaller model will use less RAM in the run-time, which
unstable in detecting intrusions among different types of IoT saves more memory for other applications of an IoT device.
devices as it results in a large FPR on Device 4 and Device Moreover, quantization will also simplify the calculations in-
5. FeCo outperforms all the evaluated baselines by achieving a volved in the inference, resulting in decreasing the amount of
much smaller FPR. time of a single inference operation (i.e., latency). However,
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4227

Fig. 8. Cosine similarity of network traffic with the learned template of benign network traffic.

 r Float-16 quantization: The 32-bit float weights of a trained
 model are quantized to 16-bit float. The model size is
 expected to be 2 times smaller.
 We perform model quantization on an open-source framework, i.e., the TensorFlow Lite.4 Model quantization in our paper
 is a post-training process, meaning that the model training stays
 the same as what is depicted in Section IV. The operational
 flow is: first, training a model on a local gateway; optimizing
 the trained model to a smaller size by weights quantization;
 implementing the optimized model to a Raspberry Pi device.
 The first two steps can be completed by either a local gateway
 or a server. We will focus on the third step as we aim to
 analyze the performance of FeCo when it is implemented on
Fig. 9. FPR when the value of Recall is fixed to 0.9998.
 resource-constrained devices (i.e., most IoT devices).

model weights quantization also potentially sacrifices the model B. Implementation and Evaluation
accuracy. There exists a trade-off between model accuracy and
 We prototype our computation-optimized FeCo on a Raspmodel size. We employ post-training quantization that quantizes
 berry Pi 4 equipped with 1.5 GHz quad-core A72 64-bit ARMV8
the model parameters after a model is trained. There are two
 CPU, 4 GB RAM, 32 GB SIM card memory, and Raspbian OS.
weights quantization methods:
 r Int-8 quantization: The 32-bit float weights of a trained This experiment aims to check the feasibility of deploying FeCo
 model are quantized to 8-bit integer. The model size will
 be 4 times smaller. 4 https://www.tensorflow.org/lite
4228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

 TABLE IX
MODEL SIZE, INFERENCE TIME (PER TEST DATA POINT), AND INFERENCE ACCURACY ON ECOBEE THERMOSTAT TESTING DATASET WHEN FECO IS IMPLEMENTED
 ON A RASPBERRY PI DEVICE

on resource-constrained IoT devices. The metrics we evaluate the number of device types. Within each IDS model, the gateway
include the testing phase performance and the inference latency can manage the training overhead by adjusting the amount of
of various quantized models. data used for training based on its computation capacity. Ad-
 Table IX demonstrates the performance of FeCo on a Rasp- ditionally, inference computation should not pose a significant
berry Pi. In the table, we compare the performance among three problem, as it is generally lighter than training computation.
model optimization methods: No quantization (Float-32), Float- Regarding the cloud server, the communication and computation
16 quantization, and Int8 quantization. We witness a significant overhead is determined by the number of participating local
reduction in the model storage size with model quantization gateways. In accordance with federated learning (FL) design
methods. Compared to No quantization, the model storage space principles, the cloud server can control the number of local
is reduced by about half when applying Float-16 quantization. gateways involved in each learning iteration. Consequently, even
And the storage space is reduced by about 3/4 when applying if a large number of local gateways volunteer to participate in
Int-8 quantization. Further, the inference time is also reduced by FL, the cloud server can still select a small portion of them
applying model quantization. Int-8 quantization saves 0.016 ms in each learning iteration, ensuring the task remains within its
for inference on one data record compared to No quantization, communication and computation capabilities.
which speeds up the inference by 11%. Float-16 quantization
has nearly the same inference time as No quantization. This is VIII. CONCLUSION
because the ARM processor does not support 16-bit computation, and the model converted to 16-bit will be upsampled to float In this paper, we propose FeCo, a machine-learning-based
32 before the inference. Most importantly, the Int-8 quantization IDS for IoT networks. FeCo incorporates contrastive learning
and Float-16 quantization suffer from no decay in detection per- into the federated learning framework to support distributed
formance compared to the Non-quantized model. Therefore, we intrusion detection while preserving user data privacy. More
recommend Int-8 quantization on the CPU-based platform (e.g., importantly, FeCo features a novel detection method based
the ARM processor). And both Int-8 quantization and Float-16 on network traffic representation learning through contrastive
quantization will be good choices for GPU-based platform as learning. While learning for the network traffic representation,
GPU support both 8-bit computation and 16-bit computation. FeCo tries to maximize the distance between benign and ma-
In sum, Table IX demonstrates the optimized model can save licious samples and minimize the distance among benign samstorage space and speed up the inference without degrading the ples. This effectively enables FeCo to achieve better detection
detection performance. accuracy than other baselines as FeCo obtains a more stable
 normal profile of network traffic. In order to avoid overfitting, we
 further propose a two-step feature selection scheme to remove
 VII. DISCUSSIONS
 redundant features before learning. The feature selection scheme
 Device type identification is challenging and critical for man- also decreases computation complexity, making FeCo more
aging IoT networks [51], [52], [53], and it is also a significant suitable for resource-constrained IoT devices. We demonstrate
part of FeCo design. The goal of device type identification in this the high effectiveness of contrastive learning in IDS through
work is to cluster IoT devices together based on their security extensive evaluations with the NSL-KDD dataset and BaIoT
requirements and vulnerability. It is demonstrated that devices dataset. We perform model optimization by leveraging the model
from a given manufacturer running the same version of firmware weight quantization method. We implement and evaluate the
will have the same vulnerabilities [51]. We borrow their idea to optimized FeCo model for a low-end device (i.e., Raspberry Pi)
map devices to an abstract device type for which the system has to demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of FeCo in IoT
learned a specific set of policies. In the proposed FeCo system, devices.
we assume IDS service providers (i.e., the IDS learner on the
cloud side) will initialize an IDS model in a cloud server only if
 REFERENCES
they identify a type of device on the market. The service provider
then shares the policy set with local gateways. Local gateways [1] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting intrusion
 detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,” in Proc.
perform device type identification with the knowledge shared IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2022, pp. 1409–1418.
by the cloud server. [2] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A sur-
 System scalability is another crucial issue, and here we discuss vey on Internet of Things: Architecture, enabling technologies, security
 and privacy, and applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 5,
the scalability at both local gateways and the cloud server. At pp. 1125–1142, Oct. 2017.
the local gateway level, the computation overhead is associated [3] T. Song, R. Li, B. Mei, J. Yu, X. Xing, and X. Cheng, “A privacy
with the number of devices and device types. The number of IDS preserving communication protocol for IoT applications in smart homes,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1844–1852, Dec. 2017.
models maintained by a local gateway will increase linearly with
WANG et al.: FECO: BOOSTING INTRUSION DETECTION CAPABILITY IN IOT NETWORKS VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4229

 [4] B. Omoniwa, R. Hussain, M. A. Javed, S. H. Bouk, and S. A. Malik, [28] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 “Fog/edge computing-based IoT (FECIoT): Architecture, applications, network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 and research issues,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4118–4149, Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Jun. 2019. [29] H. H. Pajouh, G. Dastghaibyfard, and S. Hashemi, “Two-tier network
 [5] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan, and anomaly detection model: A machine learning approach,” J. Intell. Inf.
 A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection system Syst., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 61–74, 2017.
 for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., 2019, [30] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion depp. 756–767. tection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for protecting
 [6] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the mirai botNet,” in Proc. 26th network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3,
 {USENIX} Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1093–1110. pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019.
 [7] D. Oh, D. Kim, and W. W. Ro, “A malicious pattern detection engine for [31] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
 embedded security systems in the Internet of Things,” Sensors, vol. 14, identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?,”
 no. 12, pp. 24188–24211, 2014. Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
 [8] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Generative adversarial networks for distributed [32] S. Rezvy, Y. Luo, M. Petridis, A. Lasebae, and T. Zebin, “An efficient
 intrusion detection in the Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Com- deep learning model for intrusion classification and prediction in 5G and
 mun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6. IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 53rd Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., 2019,
 [9] S. Raza, L. Wallgren, and T. Voigt, “SVELTE: Real-time intrusion detec- pp. 1–6.
 tion in the Internet of Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 2661–2674, [33] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and S. Gritzalis, “Intrusion de-
 2013. tection in 802.11 networks: Empirical evaluation of threats and a public
[10] J. P. Amaral, L. M. Oliveira, J. J. Rodrigues, G. Han, and L. Shu, dataset,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 184–208, First
 “Policy and network-based intrusion detection system for IPv6-enabled Quarter 2016.
 wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2014, [34] Y. Zhang et al., “Efficient and intelligent attack detection in software
 pp. 1796–1801. defined IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Softw. Syst.,
[11] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, 2020, pp. 1–9.
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized [35] R. R. Fontes, S. Afzal, S. H. Brito, M. A. Santos, and C. E. Rothenberg,
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. “Mininet-WiFi: Emulating software-defined wireless networks,” in Proc.
[12] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,” 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Serv. Manage., 2015, pp. 384–389.
 Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–210, 2021. [36] Y. Fan, Y. Li, M. Zhan, H. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “IoTDefender: A federated
[13] N. H. Tran, W. Bao, A. Zomaya, M. N. Nguyen, and C. S. Hong, “Federated transfer learning intrusion detection framework for 5G IoT,” in Proc. IEEE
 learning over wireless networks: Optimization model design and analysis,” 14th Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng., 2020, pp. 88–95.
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1387–1395. [37] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
[14] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
 IDS: An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, [38] H. Kang, D. H. Ahn, G. M. Lee, J. D. Yoo, K. H. Park, and H. K. Kim, “IoT
 Aug. 2020. network intrusion dataset,” IEEE Dataport, 2019. [Online]. Available:
[15] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and E. Vázquez, https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/q70p-q449
 “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and [39] N. Ravi and S. M. Shalinie, “Semisupervised-learning-based security to
 challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, no. 1–2, pp. 18–28, 2009. detect and mitigate intrusions in IoT network,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
[16] V. Jyothsna, R. Prasad, and K. M. Prasad, “A review of anomaly based vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 11041–11052, Nov. 2020.
 intrusion detection systems,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 7, [40] A. Cosson, A. K. Sikder, L. Babun, Z. B. Celik, P. McDaniel, and A. S.
 pp. 26–35, 2011. Uluagac, “Sentinel: A robust intrusion detection system for IoT networks
[17] O. Kopuklu, J. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Rigoll, “Driver anomaly detection: using kernel-level system information,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Internet–Things
 A dataset and contrastive learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Des. Implementation, 2021, pp. 53–66.
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 91–100. [41] Y. Meidan et al., “N-baIoT—network-based detection of IoT botnet at-
[18] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. tacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17, no. 3,
 Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classification model pp. 12–22, Third Quarter, 2018.
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection in IoT backbone networks,” IEEE [42] Y. Liu et al., “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in industrial
 Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 02, pp. 314–323, Second Quarter IoT: A communication-efficient on-device federated learning approach,”
 2019. IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6348–6358, Apr. 2021.
[19] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MANDA: On adversarial [43] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
 example detection for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. IEEE and G. Srivastava, “Federated learning-based anomaly detection for IoT
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10. security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
[20] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning Feb. 2022.
 via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. [44] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 3733–3742. learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
[21] Y. Tian, D. Krishnan, and P. Isola, “Contrastive multiview coding,” in Proc. Privacy, 2010, pp. 305–316.
 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Glasgow, U.K., Springer, 2020, pp. 776–794. [45] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
[22] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. 2017
 makes for good views for contrastive learning?,” 2020, arXiv:2005.10243. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[23] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis [46] Q. Yan et al., “SpecMonitor: Toward efficient passive traffic monitoring
 of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur. for cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13,
 Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6. no. 10, pp. 5893–5905, Oct. 2014.
[24] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [47] Q. Yan, Y. Zheng, T. Jiang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “PeerClean: Unveiling
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” peer-to-peer botnets through dynamic group behavior analysis,” in Proc.
 2018, arXiv:1802.09089. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2015, pp. 316–324.
[25] S. Rathore and J. H. Park, “Semi-supervised learning based distributed [48] B. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “DDoS attack protection in
 attack detection framework for IoT,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 72, the era of cloud computing and software-defined networking,” Comput.
 pp. 79–89, 2018. Netw., vol. 81, pp. 308–319, 2015.
[26] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Con- [49] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Netditional variational autoencoder for prediction and feature recovery ap- work intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
 plied to intrusion detection in IoT,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 9, 2017, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, Third Quarter
 Art. no. 1967. 2019.
[27] Y. Yang, K. Zheng, C. Wu, and Y. Yang, “Improving the classification [50] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. K. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali, and M.
 effectiveness of intrusion detection by using improved conditional vari- Guizani, “A survey of machine and deep learning methods for Internet
 ational autoencoder and deep neural network,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 11, of Things (IoT) security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3,
 2019, Art. no. 2528. pp. 1646–1685, Third Quarter, 2020.
4230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

[51] S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, T. D. Nguyen, A.-R. Sadeghi, and N. Asokan, Yimin Chen (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 “AuDi: Toward autonomous IoT device-type identification using peri- in electrical engineering from Peking University, in
 odic communication,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 6, 2010, and the PhD degree from Arizona State Unipp. 1402–1412, Jun. 2019. versity, in 2018 with a focus on security and privacy
[52] R. Perdisci, T. Papastergiou, O. Alrawi, and M. Antonakakis, “IoTFinder: in mobile computing. After completing postdoctoral
 Efficient large-scale identification of IoT devices via passive DNS traffic research with Virginia Tech, he joined the Miner
 analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 474–489. School of Computer and Information Sciences, Uni-
[53] L. Yu, B. Luo, J. Ma, Z. Zhou, and Q. Liu, “You are what you broadcast: versity of Massachusetts Lowell (UMASS Lowell)
 Identification of mobile and IoT devices from (public) WiFi,” in Proc. 29th as an assistant professor. Currently, his work focuses
 {USENIX} Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 55–72. on the understanding and development of secure and
[54] C. Spearman, The Proof and Measurement of Association Between Two privacy-aware machine learning models.
 Things. Norwalk, CT, USA: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1961.
[55] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[56] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, K. Swersky, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “Big
 self-supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners,” in Proc. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 22243–22255.
[57] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for Wenjing Lou (Fellow, IEEE) is the W. C. english
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. endowed professor of computer science with Virginia
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. Tech and a fellow of the ACM. Her research interests
[58] A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance cover many topics in the cybersecurity field, with
 deep learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, her current research focusing on wireless network
 pp. 8026–8037. security, trustworthy AI, blockchain, and security
[59] V. Hajisalem and S. Babaie, “A hybrid intrusion detection system based on and privacy problems in the Internet of Things (IoT)
 ABC-AFS algorithm for misuse and anomaly detection,” Comput. Netw., systems. She is a highly cited researcher by the Web
 vol. 136, pp. 37–50, 2018. of Science Group. She received the Virginia Tech
[60] O. Al-Jarrah, A. Siddiqui, M. Elsalamouny, P. D. Yoo, S. Muhaidat, and Alumni Award for Research Excellence, in 2018. She
 K. Kim, “Machine-learning-based feature selection techniques for large- received the INFOCOM Test-of-Time paper award, in
 scale network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Conf. Distrib. 2020. She was the TPC chair for IEEE INFOCOM 2019 and ACM WiSec 2020.
 Comput. Syst. Workshops, 2014, pp. 177–181. She was the Steering Committee Chair for IEEE CNS conference from 2013 to
[61] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach. 2020. She is currently the vice chair of IEEE INFOCOM steering committee.
 Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. She served as a program director with the US National Science Foundation
 (NSF) from 2014 to 2017.

 Ning Wang (Member, IEEE) received the BE degree
 in communication engineering and the MS degree in
 electronics and communication engineering from the
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
 Beijing, China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively, and
 the PhD degree in computer engineering from Vir- Y. Thomas Hou (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD deginia Tech, in 2023. She is an assistant professor with gree from the NYU Tandon School of Engineering, in
 the Department of Computer Science and Engineer, 1998. He is currently Bradley distinguished professor
 University of South Florida. Her current research in- of electrical and computer engineering with Virginia
 terests include federated learning, anomaly detection, Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA, which he joined in 2002.
 adversarial machine learning, differential privacy, and He was a member of Research Staff with the Fujitsu
 LLM applications in cybersecurity. Laboratories of America in Sunnyvale, CA from 1997
 to 2002. His current research focuses on developing real-time optimal solutions to complex science
 and engineering problems arising from wireless and
 mobile networks. He is also interested in wireless
 Shanghao Shi (Student Member, IEEE) received the security. He has published more than 350 papers in IEEE/ACM journals and
 BS degree in telecommunication engineering from conferences. His papers were recognized by 12 best paper awards from IEEE
 the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica- and ACM, including an IEEE INFOCOM Test of Time Paper Award in 2023. He
 tions. He is currently working toward the PhD degree holds six U.S. patents. He authored/co-authored two graduate textbooks. Prof.
 in computer science with Virginia Tech, supervised Hou was named an IEEE fellow for contributions to modeling and optimization
 by Prof. Wenjing Lou and Prof. Yi Shi. His research of wireless networks. He was/is on the editorial boards of a number of IEEE
 interests lie in wireless network security, CPS secu- and ACM transactions and journals. He was Steering committee chair of IEEE
 rity, and machine learning security and privacy. INFOCOM conference and was a member of the IEEE Communications Society
 Board of Governors. He was also a distinguished lecturer of the IEEE Communications Society.