2266 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 FeCoGraph: Label-Aware Federated Graph
 Contrastive Learning for Few-Shot Network
 Intrusion Detection
 Qinghua Mao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xi Lin , Member, IEEE,
 Wenchao Xu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yuxin Qi , Student Member, IEEE, Xiu Su , Member, IEEE,
 Gaolei Li , Member, IEEE, and Jianhua Li , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With increasing cyber attacks over the Internet, I. I NTRODUCTION
network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) have been an
indispensable barrier to protecting network security. Taking
advantage of automatically capturing topology connections,
recent deep graph learning approaches have achieved remarkable
performance in distinguishing different types of malicious flows.
 T HE last few decades have witnessed an increasing
 number of cyberattacks towards Internet infrastructures
 around the world. Consequently, network intrusion detection
However, there remain some critical challenges. 1) previous super- systems (NIDS) have been an essential component in rapidly
vised learning methods rely heavily on abundant and high-quality detecting emerging security threats. There are two kinds of
annotated samples, while label annotation requires abundant time
and expert knowledge. 2) Centralized methods require all data methods, including signature-based [1] and anomaly-based
to be uploaded to a server for learning behavior patterns, which methods [2]. While signature-based methods suffer from low
results in high detection latency and critical privacy leakage. 3) detection rates and poor scalability, anomaly-based approaches
Diverse attack scenarios exhibit highly imbalanced distribution, have broader prospects with the potential to detect emerging
making it hard to characterize abnormal behaviors. To address and diverse attacks.
these issues, we proposed FeCoGraph, a label-aware federated
graph contrastive learning framework for intrusion detection Previous studies have introduced deep learning methods to
in few-shot scenarios. The line graph is introduced to directly solve NIDS problems. High-level discriminative features are
process flow embeddings, which are compatible with diverse extracted from statistical features for classification. Although
GNNs. Furthermore, We formulate a graph contrastive learning they have achieved excellent performance, they don’t contask to effectively leverage label information, allowing intra- sider the relation between network flows. Some advanced
class embeddings more compact than inter-class embeddings. To
improve the scalability of NIDS, we utilize federated learning attacks launched by a cluster of computers, such as distributed
to cover more attack scenarios while protecting data privacy. denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [3], can be depicted as
Experiment results show that FeCoGraph surpass E-graphSAGE host interactions. When we convert network traffic into a
with an average 8.36% accuracy on binary classification and graph, these host interactions can be captured by graph neural
6.77% accuracy on multiclass classification, demonstrating the networks (GNNs) to enhance the topology-aware expressive
efficiency of our approach.
 capabilities [4].
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, few-shot learning, The last few years have seen an increased number of GNNgraph contrastive learning, graph neural networks. based solutions for network intrusion detection. Some studies
 Received 28 May 2024; revised 14 November 2024 and 30 December 2024; proposed tailored GNN models for automatically detecting
accepted 4 February 2025. Date of publication 13 February 2025; date of malicious botnet nodes [5], [6]. However, only the structural
current version 26 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the information is used. Regarding intrusion detection as an edge
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202302 and
Grant U21B2019. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article classification problem, E-GraphSAGE [7] reformulated Graphand approving it for publication was Dr. Weizhi Meng. (Corresponding SAGE to aggregate neighboring edge features. Chang et al.
author: Xi Lin.) [8] incorporated the residual connection into E-GraphSAGE
 Qinghua Mao, Xi Lin, Yuxin Qi, Gaolei Li, and Jianhua Li are with Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information to tackle the imbalance issue. Other works are based on time-
Security, School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Insti- spatial analysis, with the time correlation-aware graph [9] or
tute of Cyber Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shang- the interaction history [10]. The above methods are used as
hai 200240, China (e-mail: mmmm2018@sjtu.edu.cn; linxi234@sjtu.edu.cn;
qiyuxin98@sjtu.edu.cn; gaolei li@sjtu.edu.cn; ljh888@sjtu.edu.cn). supervised models, requiring a huge amount of labeled data.
 Wenchao Xu is with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Poly- However, annotating numerous labels is a time-consuming and
technic University, Hong Kong, and also with Shenzhen Research Institute, labor-intensive task, hindering adaptation to unknown attacks.
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail:
wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk). Recent studies integrate self-supervised learning techniques
 Xiu Su is with the Big Data Institute, Central South University, Changsha into GNN models in the absence of labeled data. In Anomal-
410075, China, and also with the School of Computer Science, Faculty E [11], deep graph infomax objective [12] is leveraged to
of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
(e-mail: xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au). increase the amount of shared information between local and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3541890 global representation. TS-IDS [13] enhances the expressive
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2267

ability of edge embedding by predicting nodes’ properties • We conduct extensive experiments on three recently
based on the volume of traffic traversing them. Compared with released NIDS public datasets. Experimental results show
Anomal-E, TS-IDS provides an end-to-end training paradigm, that FeCoGraph surpasses E-graphSAGE and Anomal-E
which obviates the need for selecting the pooling function [14] with an average 5.30% accuracy.
and optimizing the encoder and classifier separately. The remaining sections of the paper follow this structure.
 Although these two approaches have demonstrated consid- Section II covers the review of related works. Section III
erable performance without requiring labeled data, they still introduces the system model and Section IV elaborates on
encounter three critical challenges. First, recently attack behav- the design rationale and essential components of FeCoGraph.
iors usually exhibit intricate patterns, while limited network Then Section V evaluates FeCoGraph and discusses the expertraffic samples are available. This might increase the difficulty imental results. Section VI concludes the whole paper.
of malicious network flow detection with restricted samples. Secondly, cyber attacks usually demonstrate imbalanced
 II. R ELATED W ORK
distribution and vague boundaries between different attack
scenarios, making it hard to accurately characterize abnormal A. Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection
behavioral patterns. Considering long-term APT attacks as an While signature-based methods cannot easily generalize
example, the attackers can constantly adjust attack strategies to emerging attacks, anomaly-based schemes can identify
until reaching their goal of extracting critical information, unknown threats. Machine learning-based approaches have
leading to the complexity and chronicity in extracting intrinsic received much attention in anomaly-based NIDS. These
features of such an attack. Finally, existing centralized NIDS approaches include both conventional machine learning and
approach will inevitably cause heavy computation overheads deep learning approaches.
and high latency, thereby resulting in detection delay of abnor- For traditional machine learning solutions, feature engineermal behaviors and poor scalability in large-scale networks. ing is first adopted to extract features from abundant network
Since network flow data are collected from different institu- flows, along with a shallow classifier. Various machine learntions, centralized data transmission and storage also heavily ing methods have been utilized to build NIDS, including
incurs privacy concerns [15]. Given the challenges brought by K-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine (SVM),
diverse emerging attacks, limited number of available samples naive Bayes, and decision trees. The work by Wang et al.
and privacy concerns about distributed data, it is of great [16] proposed a two-stage IDS method, in which SVM and a
significance to develop an effective federated graph learning density-based clustering algorithm are used for classification.
framework towards label-scarce NIDS scenario. Gu et al. [17] implemented a naive Bayes model to process
 To address the above challenges, we propose FeCoGraph, a original data for obtaining high-quality data with obvious
novel federated graph contrastive learning framework for net- feature categories. Ding et al. [18] investigated the explainable
work intrusion detection in few-shot scenarios. We construct artificial intelligence issue by utilizing the decision tree model,
a label-aware graph contrastive learning module to efficiently thereby enhancing trust management in intrusion detection.
exploit scarce labeled samples. Intra-class similarities and The limitation of the above methods lies in feature engineerinter-class differences are extracted via a semi-supervised ing. Abundant time and domain knowledge are necessary to
learning strategy, thereby enhancing the discriminative ability select and process appropriate features.
of network flow embeddings. Furthermore, we incorporate On the contrary, deep learning (DL) methods [19] automatthe label-aware graph contrastive module into a federated ically extract flow features from raw data. Current DL-based
NIDS framework to improve detection efficiency for abnormal methods generally process network traffic in the form of packet
activities, while encouraging knowledge sharing in a privacy- sequences. For example, Vinayakumar et al. [20] extensively
preserving way. The main contribution of our work can be evaluated the performance of CNN and its variant architecsummarized as follows: tures on intrusion detection and demonstrated the capability
 • In this paper, we propose a label-aware federated graph of extracting high-level abstract features. Jiang et al. [21]
 contrastive learning framework to efficiently utilize scarce proposed a multi-channel LSTM-based detection method to
 labels and non-IID data in federated NIDS. The proposed explore the temporal correlations between network sequences.
 federated NIDS can maintain accurate and efficient per- By merging the strengths of CNN and RNN, Hasson et
 formance even with few-shot labels. al. [22] suggested a hybrid model to extract meaningful
 • We propose a label-aware graph contrastive learning local features and retain long-term dependencies among them.
 strategy. With the proposed method, both inter-view Some researchers address network anomaly detection with
 and intra-class similarities are extracted from network unsupervised methods such as Deep Belief Network (DBN)
 flows by minimizing label-aware positive pairs’ distances, [23] or various iterations of Auto Encoder (AE) [24]. Other
 thereby obtaining robust and discriminative flow embed- works exploited advanced deep learning techniques, including
 dings. meta-learning [25], reinforcement learning [26], to realize
 • Additionally, a personalized FL algorithm is employed to improved detection performance. Nevertheless, current deep
 allow collaborative training between distributed devices learning-based techniques primarily concentrate on extracting
 in a privacy-preserving manner. The bi-level optimization statistical features from network flows in isolation, leading
 strategy can alleviate data heterogeneity of different sce- to a deficiency in modeling intricate topology patterns within
 narios and boost detection capability of distributed NIDS. multiple types of traffic flows.
2268 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF GNN-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS

B. GNN-Based Network Intrusion Detection Recent works have investigated how to build effective
 Network traffic can be naturally formed as a graph, GNN-based NIDS given few-shot labeled samples. Hu et al.
where entities (computers, routers) represent nodes and their [29] proposed to extract flow graph features using subgraph
interaction denotes edges. Since intrusion behaviors usually topology from a small number of initial interactive packets,
manifest as suspicious patterns underlying the interactions achieving fast and accurate intrusion detection. Anomal-E [11]
between network entities, complex structure patterns are adapts E-graphSAGE to self-supervised learning with Deep
essential for identifying specific attack types, such as Graph Infomax (DGI) [12]. TS-IDS proposed by Nguyen et al.
advanced persistent threats (APT), whose signals are too [13] incorporates a predictive-based self-supervised learning
weak to effectively detect [27]. module to enrich the node embedding by categorizing endpoint
 With the ubiquitous application of graph neural networks nodes based on the volume of traversing traffic. Unlike the
(GNN), the last few years have witnessed an increasing previous Graph-based network intrusion detection methods,
number of graph-based NIDS approaches. Zhou et al. [5] we suggest a label-aware graph contrastive learning framework
propose a tailored GNN to automatically detect botnets by to tackle the challenges of few-shot learning and imbalanced
capturing the intrinsic properties of botnet structure. Similarly, data in NIDS.
XG-BoT [6] integrates a reversible residual connection into FeCoGraph differs from existing methods in three aspects.
a graph isomorphism network for detecting malicious botnet Firstly, compared with supervised GNN approaches [7], [8]
nodes in large-scale networks. Automatic network forensics is and spatial-temporal GNN methods [9], [10], we consider a
performed with a GNNExplainer to help identify abnormal more generic and realistic scenario, e.g., few-shot network
subgraphs and corresponding botnet nodes. However, only intrusion detection based on static attack flow graph analysis.
the topological structure is considered, leaving node or edge Our method is built on semi-supervised learning scenario
attributes unused. with only a few labeled samples. Secondly, compared with
 GCN-TC [28] is One of the initial studies to integrate both self-supervised GNN methods [11], [13], the proposed labelflow statistical features and graph structure simultaneously aware graph contrastive learning strategy could learn robust
in the network traffic classification. It can enhance classifi- and discriminative flow embeddings by exploiting inter-class
cation performance even with a limited amount of labeled differences and intra-class similarities. Our method facilitates
data. The work by Lo et al. [7] proposed E-graphSAGE, the effective utilization of both labeled and unlabeled data.
which formulates NIDS into an edge classification problem. Finally, we particularly investigate the impact of graph-specific
In E-graphSAGE, node representations are acquired by aggre- non-IIDness in federated learning and propose an effectively
gating edge attributes from the sampled neighborhood nodes. personalized federated learning strategy. A comprehensive
Although topology information and network flow features are comparison of GNN-based intrusion detection methods is
utilized simultaneously, the processing of mapping the original shown in Table I.
source IP into random IP addresses would inevitably disturb
the spatial distribution of network flows. Chang et al. [8] C. Contrastive Learning on Graphs
proposed to incorporate residual learning into the original Contrastive learning is a self-supervised learning approach
E-graphSAGE architecture, to retain the original graph feature that focuses on acquiring discriminative representations. It
and improve the performance on minority class samples. achieves this by reducing the embedding distance between
Meeting the challenge of limited labeled data in large-scale positive pairs while increasing the embedding distance from
IoT networks, some recent studies have leveraged the temporal negative samples. Augmentation techniques to generate negcorrelation between network flows. Deng et al. [9] constructed ative samples and contrastive learning objectives have been
an interval-constrained traffic graph and enhanced statistical extensively studied in the vision domain [30], [31], [32],
and structural features through a topology adaptive GCN. [33], while there are a relatively limited number of researches
Duan et al. [10] proposed a dynamic line graph neural network, on graph contrastive learning. Deep Graph Infomax (DGI)
which is utilized to extract structural information from spatial- [12] focused on maximizing the mutual information between
temporal graphs and the interaction history of IP addresses local node-level embedding and global graph-level embedding.
from successive snapshots. However, the above supervised GRACE [34] performed node-level contrastive learning on
learning approaches require extensive labeled data, which lim- augmented graphs by randomly dropping edges and masking
its their ability to detect unfamiliar attacks and scale effectively node attributes. Based on GRACE, GCA [35] further explored
in large-scale IoT environments. adaptive augmentation schemes to preserve important edges
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2269

and feature dimensions. GraphCL [36] performs data augmentation by subgraph sampling, randomly disturbing nodes or
edges, and feature masking. Apart from contrasting positive
and negative pairs without any label information, some recent
studies used labels to improve self-supervised learning performance. Inspired by supervised contrastive learning, Wan et al.
[37] contrasted the output of GCN and hierarchy GCN through
a combination of supervised contrastive loss and generative
loss. Akkas et al. [38] proposed a joint contrastive learning
strategy to exploit the benefits of both unlabeled data and
limited labeled data.

D. Federated Learning Over Graphs
 The integration of federated learning and graph neural
networks has received unprecedented attention in recent years,
with an extensive courage including recommender systems
[39], [40], molecular graphs [41] and fraud detection [42].
Existing literature can be divided into two categories, i.e.,
intra-graph FL where each client owns a set of graphs and
intra-graph FL where each client owns a subgraph from an Fig. 1. The overview of threat model. A central server aggregates NIDS
entire graph. Data heterogeneity is a critical challenge in models and develop traffic blocking rules. Each local gateway manages IDS
 for collecting network flows and detecting abnormal IoT devices.
FL, while graph-specific data heterogeneity is less explored.
Fedgraphnn [43] and Spreadgnn [41] simulate graph-level
non-IIDness in distributing graph datasets to multiple clients. interval constitutes a network flow, which is characterized by
GraphFL [44] addresses the issue of graph-level non-IIDness the source IP address, source port, destination IP address,
and novel domain occurrence with model-agnostic meta- destination port, and other statistical features, such as the
learning. FedStar [45] enables the structural information incoming number of bytes. Most network flows cannot be
sharing in FL via feature-structure disentanglement. In the directly transmitted from the source IP to the destination IP.
NIDS scenario, related works have been proposed to enable There are usually multiple forwarding devices on the path.
intelligent intrusion detection via federated graph learning. All the network flows that pass through them are captured by
Given the distributed and heterogeneous nature of network forwarding devices, whether to be allowed or dropped depends
data and the need for privacy protection, it is reasonable to on the flow table.
model the distributed network environment using subgraph The NIDS is usually achieved by the collaboration between
federated learning. Zhang et al. [46] propose a GNN-based edge servers and gateway routers. The workflow of NIDS
CAN bus NIDS to simultaneously detect multiple CAN is composed of three main steps, including data collection,
attacks, where a two-stage classification is deployed to handle intrusion detection, and alarm response:
high skewed data. Additionally, federated learning is utilized to
cover diverse driving scenarios while protecting privacy. Krish- • Data collection: numerous network packets are captured
nan et al. [47] propose a federated GNN-based framework to by data collectors deployed on gateway routers. Then
facilitate low probability of detection in the wireless network. network packets are transformed into network flows and
FedADSN [48] builds up a decentralized FL framework for subsequently uploaded into an edge-level database. Note
anomaly detection in social networks. However, none of pre- that each edge device is served as a local client in federvious works consider effective federated GNN countermeasure ated learning, which has the ability to continuously collect
against the realistic but challenging few-shot scenario. network flows from interactions with other devices. Network flows owned by different devices are heterogeneous
 and class imbalanced.
 III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND T HREAT M ODEL
 • Intrusion detection: In federated learning scenario, each
A. System Model edge device keeps local network flows private and only
 We consider a typical IoT environment consisting of ter- uploads model parameters to the edge server. The edge
minal devices, edge servers, and gateway routers. The edge server aggregates those local parameters to construct a
servers are responsible for real-time data storage and intrusion global GNN model for network flow classification and
model construction, alleviating the computational overload intrusion detection. In this way, edge server can conduct
on cloud servers. Gateway routers play a crucial role in comprehensive intrusion threat analysis with sufficient
connecting heterogeneous devices, data forwarding, and pro- data in a privacy-preserving manner.
tocol conversion. Each IoT device is capable of transforming • Alarm Response: The edge server generates flow tables
sensory data into network traffic packets, which will be trans- on prediction results with global GNN model. Then flow
mitted via wireless communication protocols. A sequence of tables are distributed to edge devices and installed on
packets between a source and a destination node during an gateway routers to determine whether to allow or discard
2270 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. The NIDS framework of label-aware federated graph contrastive learning. A label-aware graph contrastive learning module is incorporated into a
personalized FL process.

 network flows. When a traffic flow is flagged as abnormal, • Graph Construction. The initial traffic graph is converted
 its source host is marked as malicious. Subsequently, all into its line graph structure for generating node-level
 traffic flows originating from this host are blocked by flow embeddings. Network flows in the original traffic
 the flow tables. Consequently, these gateway routers will graph are transformed into nodes in the line graph, while
 discard traffic flows sent by a malicious device. an edge is correspondingly created between two nodes
 in the line graph if two flows share a common host
B. Threat Model IP address.
 We consider threat model in a typical IoT environment. Both • Model Architecture. The backbone model is divided
the edge server and IoT devices are semi-honest and non- into two branches for supervised classification and concolluded. They are honest in adhering to agreements. Although trastive learning, respectively. Three parts are included
they are curious about the private data of other entities, they in the overall architecture Encoder, projector, and clascannot infer private data from the specific individuals. The sifier. The encoder is shared by both branches, each of
primary threats come from external sources, such as hackers which extracts node-level representations from line graph
who target the IoT network. The objective of an attacker is data. The projector then maps these representations to
to gain access to sensitive data or inflict significant damage a space where the contrastive loss is calculated. The
towards local devices or the whole network, thereby compro- classifier is used to discriminate benign and malicious
mising data integrity and service availability. The capabilities flows.
of attackers include sending manipulated flows or launching a • Adaptive Graph Augmentation. Graph augmentation is a
series of malicious activities, such as sniffing, DoS, backdoor, critical step in learning robust representations that are
and brute-force attacks. The hostile operations are conducted invariant to perturbations. We adopt an adaptive augmento take control of benign nodes, and the infected nodes will tation strategy to obtain two graph views, which consider
send a larger amount of malicious flows to the remaining the impact of nodes and edges and encourage the model
normal nodes, ultimately leading to the disorders and collapse to learn intrinsic patterns underneath the input graph.
of the entire network system. • Label-aware Graph Contrastive Learning. To reduce the
 distance between embeddings from the same class, con-
 IV. L ABEL -AWARE F EDERATED G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE trastive pairs are formulated based on sample selection
 L EARNING and corresponding labels. Positive pairs are sampled with
 data from the same class, while data from different classes
 We propose a novel federated graph contrastive learning
 are regarded as negative pairs. We propose to optimize
method to tackle the challenges of label deficiency and
 the model with a joint learning strategy, where the loss
imbalance in NIDS. Informative self-supervised signals and
 function consists of cross-entropy loss and label-aware
discriminative class label-aware signals are collaboratively
 contrastive loss function.
extracted from the clients’ network, under a federated learning
 • Federated Learning. We utilize personalized federated
framework. This section systematically presents FeCoGraph,
 learning to enable collaborative knowledge sharing in
the proposed method.
 a privacy-preserving manner. Each local client owns a
 subgraph consisting of network flows, which usually
A. An Overview of FeCoGraph follow not independent and identically distributed (non-
 An overview of the proposed federated NIDS framework is IID) distribution. Each local client first learns a local
shown in Fig. 2. The framework is composed of the following model with its local traffic graph and only uploads the
key components: local models to the server for parameter aggregation.
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2271

B. The Workflow of Federated Graph Contrastive-Based edge centrality values. We take the logarithm of edge centrality
NIDS to mitigate the issue caused by nodes with extremely dense
 1) Graph Construction: Network flows can be converted connections, i.e., seuv = log weuv . The drop probability of edge
into a global traffic graph to model the interactions between (u, v) can be obtained with a normalization step
different hosts. The source and destination IP are identified  e
 smax − seuv
 
as nodes and network flows are constructed as edges, with puv = min
 e
 · pe , pτ , (2)
 semax − µes
edge attributes containing statistical fields like protocol type,
incoming number of bytes, etc. In this way, we formulate where pe is a scaling hyper-parameter that controls the scale
network intrusion detection as an edge classification problem. of the probability of removing edges, semax and µes denotes the
 However, while graph convolution layers have shown excel- maximum and average of seuv , pτ < 1 is a cut-off probability.
lent capabilities in generating node embeddings, they cannot For attribute-level augmentation, node attributes are perdirectly extract sufficient edge features for network intrusion turbed with a random mask vector m̃ ∈ {0, 1}F
detection. Motivated by the line graph structure in graph
theory, we convert the original graph into the corresponding X̃ = [x1 ◦ m̃; x2 ◦ m̃; . . . ; xN ◦ m̃], (3)
line graph structure. To be specific, each edge in the original
graph G corresponds to a node in the line graph L(G); for where F is the feature dimension. Each dimension of the mask
every two edges sharing a common host IP, an edge is created vector is independently drawn from a Bernoulli distribution as
between the corresponding two nodes in the line graph L(G). m̃i ∼ Bern(1 − pif ).
 Compared to the original graph G, line graph structure Similar to topology-level augmentation, the mask proba-
L(G) offers several advantages. First, every single node vi bility pif is designed to gauge the significance of the i-th
corresponds to di (di − 1)/2 links in the line graph L(G), which dimension of node features. Our assumption is that crucial feasuggests that the line graph will pay more attention to the ture dimensions tend to be more prevalent in influential nodes.
nodes frequently communicating with others. The increased It is reasonable because each dimension of node features
connection density encourages graph convolution to aggregate corresponds to a statistical feature of each network flow. Then,
more information from neighbors. Additionally, the line graph statistical features that occur frequently in influential network
reduces the quantity of large eigenvalues in the Laplacian flows should be regarded as important features. Specifically,
matrix of L(G) with a redundant spectrum, which enhances for any node u with continuous features and the corresponding
the numerical stability of the graph convolution process. feature dimension i, the dimension weights can be written as
 2) Adaptive Graph Augmentation: To preserve the input X
graph’s inherent topological patterns and node attributes, we wif = |xui | · ϕc (u), (4)
adopt an adaptive graph augmentation strategy to generate u∈V
corrupted graph views. Previous graph augmentation schemes
 where ϕc (u) is a node centrality value. Next, we calculate
usually suffered from not capturing the impact of influential
 the probability of masking dimension i based on the feature
nodes and edges. The behavior patterns extracted from infludimension weights. First, we take the logarithm of feature
ential flows are conducive to analysis.
 dimension weight to mitigate the overflow issue caused by
 To generate positive and negative samples for contrastive
 nodes with extremely dense connections. Then, the feature
learning, we generate two different but correlated graph
 mask probability is obtained by performing normalization on
views with stochastic augmentation function G˘1 = t1 (G) and
 the weights sif
G˘2 = t2 (G), where t1 and t2 are sampled from augmentation
function set T . In the GCA model, augmentation schemes f
 !
 f smax − sif
are designed to preserve influential attributes and structures, pi = min f
 · p f , pτ , (5)
while perturbing less important edges or features. Specifically, smax − µ sf
the probabilities of dropping edges and masking features are
higher for less important feature dimensions and edges, and where sif = log wif , p f is a hyper-parameter that controls
 f
lower for important counterparts. the scale of the mask probability, smax and µ sf denotes the
 f
 For topology-level perturbation, the augmented edge set is maximum and average of si , pτ < 1 is a cut-off probability.
formulated with probability 3) Model Architecture: We propose a label-aware graph
 contrastive module with two branches to enhance the capa-
 P{(u, v) ∈ Ẽ} = 1 − peuv , (1)
 bility to discriminate benign and malicious flows. One branch
where (u, v) ∈ E and peuv is the probability of removing (u, v) of the model is used for classification via cross-entropy loss,
and Ẽ is the augmented edge set. We leverage widely-used while another branch of the model is used for contrastive
node centrality metrics to connect peuv with the importance of learning via supervised contrastive loss. Since a line graph
the edge (u, v). Specifically, edge centrality is defined based on has transformed network flows into nodes, the node-level
the centrality of two correlated nodes.To simplify, this can be graph neural networks, e.g. GCN, can be adapted as backbone
expressed as the average centrality value between two nodes in models. This eliminates the need for complex neighbor aggrean undirected graph. weuv = (ϕc (u) + ϕc (v))/2, or the centrality gation on edge features. The model comprises an encoder, a
of the destination node on a directed graph as weuv = ϕc (v). projector, and a classifier. Here is a detailed description of
Then we calculate the probabilities of dropping edges based on each component:
2272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 1) Encoder. The encoder is leveraged to learn node samples for anchor embedding zi . The optimization of superrepresentations by aggregating information from neigh- vised contrastive loss shortens the distance of embeddings
 borhood nodes. The aggregation process at the k-th layer from the same class and enlarges the distance of embeddings
 can be expressed as from other classes. The most computationally intensive part is
 to calculate the loss function based on cosine similarity scores
 u , ∀u ∈ N (v)),
 hkN (v) = AGGk (hk−1 (6)
 of positive and negative pairs. The computation complexity of
 v , hN (v) )),
 hkv = (Wk · CONCAT (hk−1 k
 (7) contrastive loss is O(N · M), where N is the batch size and M
 is the number of negative samples per positive sample. The
 where hN (v) is the l-layer representation of node v, and
 computation complexity of cosine similarity is O(D), where
 h0v = xv is the node feature. N (v) denotes neighbors of
 D is the dimension of the feature vectors. Consequently, the
 node v, AGG(·) denotes the aggregation function which
 overall computation complexity is O(N · M · D).
 can vary for different GNN models and Wk denote learn-
 For another branch, the cross-entropy loss is deployed for
 able weights at the k-th layer. Given the raw node feature
 flow representation classification, which is defined as:
 X ∈ Rd , the node embedding generated by encoder
 layers can be formulated as h = Encoder(X) ∈ Rh . ŷ = f (x) = so f tmax(W · Enc(x) + b), (10)
 Then node representations are subsequently shared by Xn X c
 projection layers and classification layers. Lce = − yi j log(ŷi j ). (11)
 2) Projector. The role of projection layers is to map embed- i=1 j=1
 ding into a representation space with fixed dimension.
 Note n and c denote the number of training samples and
 The projector is implemented as a two-layer multilayer
 classes, y and ŷ denote true labels and predictions. The final
 perceptron (MLP), thereby enhancing the quality of
 loss is a combination of supervised cross-entropy loss and
 representations generated by the encoder. The output
 supervised contrastive loss, which simultaneously encourages
 embeddings of projection layers are further normalized
 correctly classifying the labeled network flows and obtaining
 to be situated on the unit hypersphere, which allows us
 a more discriminative representation:
 to measure the distance by employing a dot product in
 the projection space. Note that the projector is expected L = (1 − λce ) · L supcon + λce · Lce . (12)
 to be discarded during the inference phase
 3) Classifier. The classifier is implemented with a multi- 5) Federated Learning: In this paper, we adopt two classic
 layer fully connected neural network, which makes the federated learning schemes, i.e., FedAvg [49] and Ditto [50],
 prediction probabilities of network flows corresponding which represent general FL and personalized FL approaches.
 to each category. The final prediction probabilities are The model update process of FedAvg is described as follows.
 utilized to classify the attack type of test samples. Each participant owns his private local dataset, which cannot
 be shared with other participants. The overall training process
 4) Label-Aware Graph Contrastive Learning Task: Existing
 can be achieved between the cloud server and clients for a
contrastive learning approaches have improved the generalnumber of communication rounds. In each communication
ization of graph representation learning in a self-supervised
 round, local training and parameter aggregation are executed
manner, but they lack the exploitation of limited but valualternately. Each client Ck first trains a local GNN model Wk
able label information. Considering the challenges of obvious
 with the client’s private network traffic graph Gk . Specifically,
class imbalance and ambiguous network flow features in an
 the derived loss, denoted as f (Wk , Gk ), is computed following
ever-changing network environment, label-aware contrastive
 the supervised contrastive loss function in Eq 12. During the
learning is adopted to further condense intra-class traffic samlocal model update stage, the mini-batch gradient Gτ (Wk ) at
ples in the embedding space and further clarify the decision
 each local iteration τ can be derived with the partial derivatives
boundary between normal and abnormal flows.
 of f (Wk ; Gk ). Then, the local model parameter of the i-th client
 Motivated by visual supervised contrastive learning [33],
 would be updated as follows:
suppose the original graph contains N points, there are 2N
sample points in two augmented views. Given an anchor [Wk ]τ+1 ← [Wk ]τ − ηGτ (Wk ), (13)
embedding zi , more than one samples are known to belong to
the same class. Samples from the same class in two views are where η represents the learning rate. All the local participants
considered as positive samples, while samples from different will upload their updated local models to the cloud server for
classes in two graph views constitute negative samples. The parameter aggregation:
label-aware graph contrastive loss can be defined as: N
 1 X t
 2N Wkt+1 = Wk . (14)
 1 X supcon N
 L supcon = Li , (8) k=1
 2N
 i=1 where Wkt+1 is the globally learned model, which will be
 2N
 1 X −1 X e(zi ·z p /τ) distributed to clients as the initial model in round t+1.
 Lisupcon = log P2N . (9) While FedAvg provides a vanilla formulation of federated
 2N |P(i)| (zi ·za /τ)
 i=1 i=1 1[k , i]e
 p∈P(i)
 learning, it may significantly suffer from client drift caused by
Note that P(i) denotes the set of positive samples which belong non-IID data distribution. Since network flow statistics of varto the same class and |P(i)| denotes the number of positive ious clients follow non-IID distribution, FedAvg aggregation
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2273

could degrade global-level and client-level performance due to the global objective to encourage sharing more fundamental
the issue of client drift. To address this limitation, we introduce network behavior patterns among clients. Simultaneously, we
Ditto, a personalized FL scheme that seeks to simultaneously leverage a supervised cross-entropy loss to capture specific
optimize a local model and a personalized model via bi-level knowledge of the local data distribution. The two objectives
problem optimization. The local model is updated to the cloud are formulated as follows respectively:
server for global model aggregation, while the personalized
 F(Wk ; Gk )
model is kept private to fit non-IID flow data distribution. The
mini-batch optimization loss function of the i-th client can be = λce · Lce (Wk ; Gk ) + (1 − λce ) · L supcon (Wk ; Gk ), (17)
modified into the following form: f (θk ; Gk )
 µ = Lce (θk ; Gk ). (18)
 min h(θk , W ∗ ; Gk ) = f (θk ; Gk ) + kθk − W ∗ k2 , (15)
 θk 2
 1 XN V. E XPERIMENTS
 s.t. W ∗ ∈ arg min F(Wk ; Gk ). (16)
 N k=1 In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to eval-
Ditto formulates a federated multi-task learning framework uate the proposed network intrusion detection methods on
to better handle flow data non-IIDness, including the global real-world NIDS datasets. First, we present the necessary
task F(Wk ; Gk ) and the local task f (θk ; Gk ), which trains a information on the experimental setup. Secondly, we report
personalized model using only local data. A regularization the experiment results attached with performance analysis.
term µ2 kθk − W ∗ k2 is introduced to encourage the personalized model as close to the aggregated model as possible. λ A. Experimental Setup
controls the trade-off between global generalization and local 1) Datasets: We adopt three widely used benchmark
personalization. When we set λ to 0, it is reduced to local datasets to evaluate our method, including NF-BoT-IoT-v2,
training. When λ increases, it is focused more on global model NF-ToN-IoT-v2, and NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 [51]. All of
generalization. these datasets are netflow datasets. Each data sample is a network traffic flow representing a series of packets between two
Algorithm 1 The Workflow of FeCoGraph
 edge devices. There are total 43 features that show information
 Input: client set I, line graph Gk for each client Ck ,
 on general flow statistics and some specific protocols. All flowcommunication rounds T, local epochs r, personalized
 based features are extracted from packet headers rather than
 epochs s, local learning rate ηl , personalized learning rate
 payload information. The detailed descriptions of each dataset
 η p , interpolation factor µ, initialized global model w0 ,
 are as follows. The v2 version is an extended version of the
 initialized personalized model {v0k }k∈[K]
 corresponding v1 dataset, which contains more samples and
 1: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
 statistical features. The detailed statistics of three datasets are
 2: Server randomly selects a subset of clients S t from I,
 shown in Table II
 and sends wt to them
 3: for client Ck ∈ S t in parallel do • NF-BoT-IoT-v2 is a netflow-based IoT dataset from a
 4: Perform attribute-level and topology-level adaptive network environment in 2018. It contains 37,763,497
 graph augmentation on Gk to get Gk1 and Gk2 . flows out of which 37,628,460(99.64%) are malicious and
 5: Calculate supervised contrastive loss Fk with Gk1 135,037(0.36%) are benign.
 and Gk2 according to Eq (17) • NF-ToN-IoT-v2 is a netflow-based IoT dataset real-
 6: t
 Set wk to wt and update wtk for r local iterations on ized in 2019. It contains 16,940,496 data flows
 Fk : out of which 10,841,027(63.99%) are malicious and
 7: wtk ← wtk − ηl ∇Fk (wtk ) 6,099,469(36.01%) are benign.
 8: Calculate cross-entropy loss fk with Gk according • NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 is a dataset collected
 to Eq (18) in 2018. It contains 18,893,708 network flows,
 9: Update θk for s personalized iterations on fk : out of which 2,258,141(11.95%) are malicious and
10: θk ← θk − η p (∇ fk (θk ) + µ(θk − wt )) 16,635,567(88.05%) are benign.
11: Send ∆tk := wtk − wt back 2) Data Preparation: We perform four pre-processing steps
12: end for before converting network flows into network graphs. For each
13: Server updatesPwt+1 as flow data, we merge the IP address and port number into one
14: w t+1
 ← wt + |S1t | ∆tk attribute by concatenating two attributes. Since Certain types
 k∈S t of attacks are associated with specific port numbers, only IP
15: end for addresses are not sufficient to distinguish them. The merged
16: return {vk }k∈[K] (personalized), wT (global) attribute are expected to more precisely capture the behavioral
 patterns associated with different attacks. Secondly, we fill the
 The detailed workflow of FeCoGraph in the personalized missing and infinite values with zero. Thirdly, we perform
FL setting is shown in Algorithm 1. According to the above target encoding to convert categorical features into numerical
equations, each client contributes to the shared global model values. The labels indicating benign/malicious and attack type
while training a personalized model locally. To accomplish are also transformed into numerical values. Finally, a standard
this, we employ the supervised contrastive loss function as scaler is adopted to obtain the normalized features.
2274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II
 ATTACK C ATEGORY S TATISTICS OF T HREE NIDS DATASETS

 3) Baselines: To provide a comprehensive evaluation, We The F1-score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision
compare our methods with two types of baselines, including and recall. It achieves a balance between two metrics in
machine learning methods and GNN methods. imbalanced datasets. Note that we use a macro version of the
 • The machine learning baseline algorithms include above metrics, which are calculated and equally averaged for
 AdaBoost, k Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree, each class. Since class distributions are generally imbalanced
 and tree-based ensemble methods (XGBoost, Random in network intrusion detection, macro values are appropriate
 Forest, Extra Trees). We directly feed network flow-based for treating each class equally.
 features into the machine learning classifier. 5) Experimental Settings: The proposed algorithm is imple-
 • We primarily compare our methods with E-graphSAGE mented with PyTorch, DGL and PyTorch Geometric. The
 [7] to showcase the improvement brought by contrastive backbone encoder is composed of a two-layer graph convolearning under few-shot scenarios. It is a supervised lutional network (GCN). The input feature dimension is 39,
 approach that adjusts the message propagation mech- which corresponds to the number of network flow features.
 anism by aggregating edge features instead of node The number of hidden units in the two layers is set to 64 and
 features. 32 respectively. The dimension of projector hidden layers in
 • Anomal-E [11] is included to demonstrate the effect tuned from the parameter set {64, 128, 256}, in which 256 is
 of label information in contrastive learning. It is built selected as the optimal value based on validation performance.
 upon an E-graphSAGE encoder, incorporates a modified Datasets were uniformly downsampled by label proportion due
 DGI (Deep Graph Infomax) objective, and integrates four to the heavy computation burden of using full dataset, with
 traditional anomaly detection algorithms. a downsampling ratio of 2%. Since the volume of network
 • we additionally compare our methods with E-ResGAT flows is relatively large, we calculate supervised contrastive
 [8]. It incorporates residual learning into the original loss in batches to avoid the issue of CUDA out of memory. All
 GAT architecture to improve the performance of minority experiments were performed on Ubuntu 22.04 OS equipped
 classes and stabilize model training. with 2 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs. Relevant software
 4) Evaluation Metrics: Four metrics are leveraged to eval- libraries include Python 3.8.8, PyTorch 1.13.0, DGL 1.2, and
uate the performance of FeCoGraph, including accuracy, PyTorch Geometric 2.3.0, etc.
precision, recall, and f1-score. These metrics have been exten- For machine learning approaches, we directly utilize algosively used in numerous previous works. These metrics are rithms to fit training samples and provide prediction results
calculated with the number of true positive (TP), false positive for test samples. For GNN-based approaches, batch gradient
(FP), true negative (TN) and false negative (FN), which can descent is leveraged with an Adam optimizer. The models
be formulated as follows: are uniformly trained in 2000 epochs with a learning rate of
 TP + TN 0.001. Following the setting in E-graphSAGE with additional
 Accuracy = , (19) simulation for few-shot NIDS, we split the overall dataset into
 T P + FP + T N + FN
 train and test graphs. 30% of the data is used for training, and
the accuracy is calculated as the ratio of correctly predicted the remaining 70% for test. Note that the anomaly detector
samples to all samples in the dataset; of Anomal-E is finetuned in an unsupervised manner, it is
 TP unfair to compare it with our method. In line with TS-IDS, we
 Precision = , (20)
 T P + FP exclusively utilize the E-graphSAGE encoder from Anomal-
Precision is defined as the ratio of all correctly predicted E to produce edge embeddings. These embeddings are then
positive samples to all samples predicted as positive.; utilized to fine-tune an XGBoost classifier.
 For FL experiments, it is a common practice in FL experi-
 TP
 Recall = , (21) ments to split a centralized dataset into multiple partitions and
 T P + FN distribute them across different clients. The whole network
Recall is defined as the ratio of all correctly predicted positive traffic graph is partitioned into 10 subgraphs based on the
samples to all actual positive samples in the dataset; Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) Strategy [52]. Specifically,
 2 × Precision × Recall we partition nodes in each class k into J shards following a
 F1 − Score = , (22) symmetric Dirichlet distribution pk ∼ Dir J (α), where client
 Precision + Recall
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2275

 TABLE III
B INARY AND M ULTICLASS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A LGORITHMS . (NF-B OT-I OT- V 2 I S A BBREVIATED AS B OT,
 NF-T O N-I OT-V2 I S A BBREVIATED AS T O N, NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2 I S A BBREVIATED AS IDS2018)

j will be assigned with a shard of pk, j proportion. The total Furthermore, our method exhibits commendable results when
nodes of client j are obtained by gathering each corresponding compared with graph-based methods, which demonstrate the
pk, j partition of class k. Then subgraphs are generated by potential utility of supervised contrastive loss to learn comrecovering the original links between some of nodes. For pact intra-class representations. Finally, tree-based ensemble
the consideration of few-shot detection, we subsequently keep learning methods obtain competitive results on all datasets,
30% of the entire nodes labeled. We uniformly set the number which indicates that ensemble learning has led to significant
of communication rounds and local epochs as 100 and 5, performance improvement than individual classifiers alone.
respectively. Evaluation metrics of each individual client are 2) Multiclass Classification Performance:
averaged in FL scenarios. We use best mean testing accuracy a) Comparison with State-of-the-Art Algorithms: To
(BMTA) [53] as the primary evaluation metric. evaluate the ability to accurately discriminate various attack
 categories, the multiclass classification experiment is con-
B. Result Analysis ducted with 30% proportions of labeled samples, the same
 In this part, we first provide binary classification results to setting as in binary classification. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDSvalidate the ability of FeCoGraph to differentiate benign flows 2018v2 dataset, our method achieves the best accuracy of
from malicious flows. Secondly, the multiclass classification 99.52% and the best F1-score of 81.38%. Moreover, the
results are presented to demonstrate FeCoGraph’s capability F1-score achieved by our methods is substantially ahead of
to identify different attack types. We also investigate the other methods, surpassing XGBoost and obtaining secondimpact of label proportion, supervised contrastive loss, and best results by 6.61%. Results on both datasets suggest our
key hyperparameters. Finally, we illustrate the convergence method has advanced capabilities to detect genuine threats
performance of FeCoGraph under the non-IID data scenario. while minimizing the risk of false alarms. Similarly, On NF-
 1) Binary Classification Performance: To evaluate the abil- BoT-IoT-v2 dataset, our method outperforms other methods
ity of our method to discriminate malicious flows from benign across four metrics. On NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset, our method
flows, we conduct the binary classification experiment under achieves the best detection performance, with an accuracy of
the 30% proportion of labeled samples. The results compared 94.32% and a F1-score of 73.31%.
with other representative GNN-based methods are reported An interesting phenomenon is that tree-based ensemble
in Table III, including accuracy, precision, recall and F1- learning methods have showcased a universally high perscore. As shown in the table, our solution performs well on formance on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset for both binary and
three datasets. On the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset, our multiclass classification, in contrast to the performance on
method achieves the best F1 score and accuracy. On NF-ToN- NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset. It can be inferred that
IoT-v2 dataset, our method obtains an accuracy of 96.9% and these methods are sufficient to capture complex patterns and
an F1-score of 96.62%. On NF-BoT-IoT dataset, our method relationships within the data. Besides, the gap between the
obtains an accuracy of 99.89% and 91.12% of F1-score, performance of our method and the best performance achieved
achieving the pinnacle of performance on these two datasets. by the Random Forest algorithm is smaller than that in
2276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 3. F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-BoT-IoT-v2 dataset. Fig. 5. F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2
 dataset.

 Fig. 4. F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset.

a binary classification task, showing the superiority of our
methods in distinguishing different network flows via line Fig. 6. Visualization of reduction (a) raw edge features from NF-CSEgraph construction. CIC2018-v2 test set. (b) edge embeddings generated by FeCoGraph encoder.
 b) Detection Performance on Attack Categories: With
the presence of numerous emerging and complicated cyber
attacks, it’s critical to differentiate between malicious flows malicious code into data streams to alter the execution path,
and benign flows and further distinguish different types of Cross-site Scripting (XSS) is also a type of injection operabnormal behaviors. Moreover, different types of malicious ated in web applications. DDoS is a distributed DoS attack
flows exhibit a skewed distribution, where certain types of launched by many hosts, attackers can lower the attack rate of
attacks occur more frequently than others. We compare our DoS to evade detection. Compared with E-graphSAGE, our
method with E-graphSAGE, one of the state-of-the-art GNN- method introduces a supervised contrastive objective along
based approaches, in terms of F1-score values for each with a refined graph convolution process via line graph concategory on NF-BoT-IoT-V2, NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and NF-CSE- struction. After these operations, the F1-score against DDoS
CIC-IDS2018-v2. The proportion of labeled samples is set to attacks has improved from 59.37% to 87.96%. The F1-score
30% on both datasets. against Injection attack has improved from 48.36% to 76.36%.
 Figure 3 provides the results on NF-BoT-IoT-v2. It includes The F1 score against XSS attack has increased from 73.56%
4 attack scenarios: Reconnaissance, DDoS, DoS, and Theft. to 92.57%. Note that E-graphSAGE performs better than our
As shown in the Table, our approach consistently outperforms methods against Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) and ransomware
E-graphSAGE for all attack scenarios. Especially, E- attacks, which are two extremely rare attack scenarios.
graphSAGE cannot effectively identify Theft attacks due to The NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset covers 6 attack scescarce samples, while our approach achieves an F1-score of narios, including BruteForce, bot, DoS, DDoS, infiltration,
57.14%. Theft aims to obtain sensitive data via some disguised and Web Attacks. As seen in Figure 5, the F1-score of
ways, such as social engineering. The results demonstrate the E-graphSAGE against DoS and infiltration attack is only
ability of our approach to detect rare and covert attacks 34.04% and 14.59%, respectively. In addition to the difficulty
 Figure 4 provides the results on NF-ToN-IoT-v2. It includes of detecting DoS mentioned above, infiltration is another
9 attack scenarios: backdoor, DoS, DDoS, injection, MITM, type of intricate attack. Infiltration may involve insiders with
password, ransomware, scanning and XSS. As seen in the legitimate access to the system and employ stealth techniques
table, the F1-score of E-graphsage for injection, DDoS and to avoid detection. After employing a supervised contrastive
XSS is 48.36%, 59.37% and 73.56%, respectively. On the objective, the F1-score against DoS attack has improved from
one hand, the number of samples for these three scenarios 34.04% to 99.14%. Our method also brings a huge increase
is relatively small, so it’s difficult for the model to capture the to the F1-score against infiltration attack, from 14.59% to
behavior patterns of these categories of attacks. On the other 82.76%. The considerable performance improvement on two
hand, these attacks are more easily misclassified as normal datasets has demonstrated the effect of supervised contrastive
network flows. Injection involves manipulating or injecting learning on classifying different types of malicious flows.
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2277

 TABLE IV
 M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH λ

 TABLE V
 M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH τ

Fig. 7. Performance of FeCoGraph on specific categories with different
label proportions. (a) NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset; (b) NF-ToN-IoT-v2 labeled samples. It can be inferred that our method is capable
dataset. of learning discriminate flow representations to distinguish
 different attack categories with critically limited training data.
 To intuitively demonstrate the discrimination ability for As shown in Figure 7b, There is a little different tendency
different attacks, we visualize the raw edge features and edge in detection results on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset, where the f1-
embeddings generated by the GCN encoder of FeCoGraph. score against DDoS, injection, password and XSS attacks
The graph data are sampled from NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- increases with the larger proportion of labeled data. It can
v2 dataset. We apply the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor be observed that these types of attacks are harder to detect,
Embedding (t-SNE) [54] algorithm to map the high-level therefore more labeled data is required for our model to
representation into two dimensions. The result is shown in enhance the expressive ability of network flow representations
Fig. 6. In Figure 6a, a large number of malicious flows for different attack categories. Note that our method always
are mixed with dominant normal flows. Samples of DDoS almost fails to detect some particular attack categories, such
and DoS attacks cannot be easily differentiated. On the as web attacks, MITM attack and ransomware attack since
contrary, We can observe clear boundaries between different there are few samples.
attacks(e.g., Dos, DDoS) and more compact distribution(e.g., d) Detection Performance with Different λ and τ: λ
Benign) in Figure 6b. This illustrates the effect of the super- and τ are two important factors in constructing a supervised
vised contrastive objective of separating different traffic flows contrastive loss function. Consequently, we perform a sensitivin the embedding space, which in turn promotes the detection ity analysis to examine how different values affect detection
performance. performance. The values of λ include 0.03, 0.05, 0.07, 0.3,
 c) The Impact of Different Label Proportions: To further 0.5 and 0.7. The values of τ include 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7. λ
investigate the performance of our method for varied amounts weighs the significance of label-aware contrastive loss over
of training data, we conduct a series of experiments with 10%, supervised learning loss. The smaller λ is, the more weight is
30%, 50% and 70% labeled samples on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and given to minimize the distances between samples belonging
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 datasets. As seen in Figure 7a, the to the same attack category. As shown in Table IV, the four
performances achieved when label proportion is 10% and 30% metrics on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 consistently continue to increase
on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset don’t exhibit a large gap and achieve the best results when λ is 0.5. The best F1-score
compared to those achieved when utilizing 50% and 70% is achieved when λ is 0.03 on NF-BoT-IoT-v2 and 0.07 on
2278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VI
M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDY ON C ONTRASTIVE L OSS . “S UP C ON ” D ENOTES L ABEL -AWARE G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE
 L EARNING M ODULE , AND “SSLC ON ” D ENOTES S ELF -S UPERVISED G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODULE

NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2, implying that learning class-aware
compact representation is more encouraged.
 τ is associated with the temperature parameter, which
affects the sharpness of the probability distribution used in
the contrastive loss function. A higher τ (e.g., larger temperature) results in a more uniform distribution over similarities,
potentially improving generalization. On the other hand, a
lower τ (e.g., smaller temperature) sharpens the distribution,
focusing on maximizing the similarity with positive instances.
As shown in Table V, the best results are obtained when τ
 Fig. 8. The performance comparison of three FL algorithms.
is 0.3 on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and 0.1 on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-
v2, showing that supervised contrastive loss tends to impose
more penalties on hard negative examples. On the contrary,
the best results are obtained when τ is 0.7 on NF-BoT-IoT-v2,
indicating the tendency to encourage global uniformity of flow
representation.
 e) Ablation Study: Compared with self-supervised contrastive learning that seeks to reduce the distance of multi-view
embeddings, label-aware contrastive learning leverages label
information to learn compact intra-class representation, we
conduct an ablation study to compare the impact of these two
objectives in both binary and multiclass classification scenar- Fig. 9. The performance comparison between FedAvg and personalized FL
ios. As shown in Table VI, the label-aware contrastive loss under shard and dirichlet distribution.
function consistently outperforms the counterpart that incorporates self-supervised contrastive learning. On the one hand, the utilize the proposed FeCoGraph intrusion detection model
F1-score improves by 5.16% and 4.53% for binary and mul- with a supervised contrastive objective in FedAvg. 3) We
ticlass classification on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset. On the other incorporate the FeCoGraph model with supervised contrastive
hand, the F1-score improves by 9.63% and 56.78% for binary objective into a personalized FL framework. As shown in
and multiclass classification on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 Figure, our model with supervised contrastive loss outperforms
dataset. The improvements indicate that supervised contrastive the counterpart without supervised contrastive loss in terms
learning enables more effective use of unlabeled data, thereby of detection accuracy, which exhibits similar trends as nonmore accurately distinguishing different attacks. federated experiments. The green curve shows Personalized FL
 3) The Convergence Performance of FeCoGraph: As dis- converges faster and achieves better convergence performance
cussed before, federated learning is an effective strategy for compared with other FL settings, demonstrating the capability
building distributed intrusion detection systems. To this end, of supervised contrasting along with personalization strategy
experiments are designed to evaluate the performance of our in non-IID federated learning scenarios.
intrusion detection model in the federated learning scenario. We further investigate the impact of non-IID factors, includ-
The NetFlow data owned by each client follows non-IID ing subgraph partition strategy and imbalance level of the
distribution for different attack categories. The traffic data Dirichlet distribution. As shown in Figure 9, the personalare then converted into a line graph following the paradigm ized FL method (abbreviated as perFL) exhibits a marginal
in Section IV-B1. During training, each client trains a local improvement compared with FedAvg. It implies a bi-level
GNN model with a supervised contrastive learning objective. optimization strategy can effectively avoid model degradation
The local parameters are subsequently uploaded into a central caused by the issue of client drift. Moreover, the increase in
server for weight aggregation (e.g., weight-averaging rule). accuracy is more pronounced with the shard partition strategy
 To ensure a fair evaluation, We compare the performance (12.41% vs 3.52%). Since perFL aims to maintain local data
of three federated learning algorithms. 1) we adopt a vanilla distribution, it benefits more when training and test data
GCN-based FL method to detect malicious flows. 2) we share a consistent class label distribution. Moreover, Fig 10
MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 2279

 [10] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
 2023.
 [11] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
 networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
 [12] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
 R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341.
 [13] H. Nguyen and R. Kashef, “TS-IDS: Traffic-aware self-supervised learning for IoT network intrusion detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 279,
 Nov. 2023, Art. no. 110966.
 [14] Q. Sun et al., “SUGAR: Subgraph neural network with reinforcement
Fig. 10. The performance comparison under different α of the dirichlet pooling and self-supervised mutual information mechanism,” in Proc.
distribution. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 2081–2091.
 [15] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
demonstrates a decreased tendency of model performance fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
when the Dirichlet distribution tends to be more balanced, [16] W. Sheng and J. Zhigang, “IDS classification algorithm based on fuzzy
where the best result is achieved under the most imbalanced SVM model,” Appl. Res. Comput., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 187–190, 2018.
setting. It demonstrates that personalized FL is more compat- [17] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using SVM
 with naı̈ve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. & Secur., vol. 103, Apr.
ible with federated NIDS on heterogeneous networks. 2021, Art. no. 102158.
 [18] B. Mahbooba, M. Timilsina, R. Sahal, and M. Serrano, “Explainable
 artificial intelligence (XAI) to enhance trust management in intrusion
 VI. C ONCLUSION detection systems using decision tree model,” Complexity, vol. 2021,
 pp. 1–11, Jan. 2021.
 In this paper, we propose FeCoGraph, a label-aware fed- [19] P. Wu and H. Guo, “LuNet: A deep neural network for network intrusion
erated graph contrastive learning framework for few-shot detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Dec. 2019,
intrusion detection. FeCoGraph constructs a label-aware graph pp. 617–624.
 [20] R. Vinayakumar, K. P. Soman, and P. Poornachandran, “Applying
contrastive module, promoting the discriminative and expres- convolutional neural network for network intrusion detection,” in Proc.
sive capabilities of network flow representations. Furthermore, Int. Conf. Adv. Comput., Commun. Informat. (ICACCI), Sep. 2017,
We incorporate graph contrastive learning module into a pp. 1222–1228.
 [21] F. Jiang et al., “Deep learning based multi-channel intelligent attack
personalized FL algorithm to support distributed IDS in edge detection for data security,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 5, no. 2,
IoT. Experiment Results on three public datasets show the pp. 204–212, Apr. 2020.
superiority of FeCoGraph with an average accuracy of 98.27% [22] M. M. Hassan, A. Gumaei, A. Alsanad, M. Alrubaian, and G. Fortino,
on binary classification and 96.92% on multiclass classifica- “A hybrid deep learning model for efficient intrusion detection in big
 data environment,” Inf. Sci., vol. 513, pp. 386–396, Mar. 2020.
tion. In particular, our methods can effectively identify rare [23] N. Gao, L. Gao, Q. Gao, and H. Wang, “An intrusion detection model
and stealthy types of attacks, including DDoS, injection, and based on deep belief networks,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big
infiltration attacks. Data, Nov. 2014, pp. 247–252.
 [24] A. Z. Alalmaie, P. Nanda, and X. He, “Zero trust-NIDS: Extended multiview approach for network trace anonymization and auto-encoder CNN
 R EFERENCES for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
 Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 449–456.
 [1] V. Kumar and O. P. Sangwan, “Signature based intrusion detection [25] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 system using SNORT,” Int. J. Comput. Appl. Inf. Technol., vol. 1, no. 3, detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forenpp. 35–41, Nov. 2012. sics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 [2] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS: [26] R. Heartfield, G. Loukas, A. Bezemskij, and E. Panaousis, “Self-
 An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge configurable cyber-physical intrusion detection for smart homes using
 devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug. reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 2020. pp. 1720–1735, 2020.
 [3] Y. Qing, X. Liu, and Y. Du, “Mitigating data imbalance to improve the [27] C. Do Xuan, M. H. Dao, and H. D. Nguyen, “APT attack detection based
 generalizability in IoT DDoS detection tasks,” J. Supercomput., vol. 80, on flow network analysis techniques using deep learning,” J. Intell. Fuzzy
 no. 7, pp. 9935–9960, May 2024. Syst., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 4785–4801, Oct. 2020.
 [4] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection [28] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [5] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. M. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating botnet detection [29] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 with graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06344. and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 [6] W. W. Lo, G. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
 “XG-BoT: An explainable deep graph neural network for botnet detec- [30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 tion and forensics,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 100747. for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
 [7] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E- Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, H. D. III and A. Singh, Eds., Jul. 2020,
 GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system pp. 1597–1607.
 for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Budapest, [31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9. unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 [8] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Graph-based solutions with residuals for intru- Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
 sion detection: The modified E-GraphSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms,” [32] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information
 2021, arXiv:2111.13597. estimation and maximization,” 2018, arXiv:1808.06670.
 [9] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow [33] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020,
 topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection pp. 18661–18673.
 in label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., [34] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph
 vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023. contrastive representation learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04131.
2280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[35] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive Xi Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, from the School of Precision Instrument and Optopp. 2069–2080. electronics Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
[36] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in cyber
 contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, security from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shangpp. 5812–5823. hai, China, in 2021. He is currently an Assistant
[37] S. Wan, S. Pan, J. Yang, and C. Gong, “Contrastive and generative graph Professor with the School of Electronic Informaconvolutional networks for graph-based semi-supervised learning,” in tion and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 11, 2021, pp. 10049–10057. University. His research interests include blockchain,
[38] S. Akkas and A. Azad, “JGCL: Joint self-supervised and supervised multi-access edge computing, and the Internet of
 graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. Companion Web Conf., Apr. 2022, Things.
 pp. 1099–1105.
[39] Z. Liu, L. Yang, Z. Fan, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Federated social
 recommendation with graph neural network,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Wenchao Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Technol., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1–24, Aug. 2022. B.E. and M.E. degrees from Zhejiang University,
[40] C. Wu, F. Wu, Y. Cao, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “FedGNN: Federated Hangzhou, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively,
 graph neural network for privacy-preserving recommendation,” 2021, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of WaterarXiv:2102.04925. loo, Canada, in 2018. He is currently a Research
[41] C. He, E. Ceyani, K. Balasubramanian, M. Annavaram, and S. Aves- Assistant Professor with The Hong Kong Polytechtimehr, “SpreadGNN: Decentralized multi-task federated learning for nic University. In 2011, he joined Alcatel Lucent
 graph neural networks on molecular data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Shanghai Bell Company Ltd., where he was a Soft-
 Intell., vol. 36, Jun. 2022, pp. 6865–6873. ware Engineer for telecom virtualization. He has
[42] T. Suzumura et al., “Towards federated graph learning for collaborative been an Assistant Professor with the School of Comfinancial crimes detection,” 2019, arXiv:1909.12946. puting and Information Sciences, Caritas Institute
[43] C. He et al., “FedGraphNN: A federated learning system and benchmark of Higher Education, Hong Kong. His research interests include wireless
 for graph neural networks,” 2021, arXiv:2104.07145. communication, the Internet of Things, distributed computing, and AI enabled
[44] B. Wang, A. Li, M. Pang, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “GraphFL: A federated networking.
 learning framework for semi-supervised node classification on graphs,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022, pp. 498–507. Yuxin Qi (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
[45] Y. Tan, Y. Liu, G. Long, J. Jiang, Q. Lu, and C. Zhang, “Federated degree from the College of Computer Science and
 learning on non-IID graphs via structural knowledge sharing,” in Proc. Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China, in
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 9953–9961. 2020. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
[46] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for with the School of Electronic Information and Elecfast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. trical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
 Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023. Shanghai, China. Her research interests are focusing
[47] S. Krishnan, J. Park, S. Sagar, G. Sherman, B. Campbell, and J. Choi, on intelligent network and security.
 “Federated graph learning for low probability of detection in wireless
 ad-hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE Stat. Signal Process. Workshop (SSP),
 Jul. 2023, pp. 66–70.
[48] Y. Chen, L. Liang, and W. Gao, “FedADSN: Anomaly detection for Xiu Su (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and
 social networks under decentralized federated learning,” in Proc. Int. master’s degrees from Tianjin University and the
 Conf. Commun., Comput., Cybersecurity, Informat. (CCCI), Oct. 2022, Ph.D. degree in computer science from The Unipp. 111–117. versity of Sydney. Currently, he is a Professor with
[49] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, the Big Data Institute, Central South University. His
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized research interests include pattern recognition and
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, A. Singh machine learning fundamentals, with a focus on
 and J.Zhu., Eds., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. neural architecture search, channel number search,
[50] T. Li, S. Hu, A. Beirami, and V. Smith, “Ditto: Fair and robust federated detection, and transformer.
 learning through personalization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 2021, pp. 6357–6368.
[51] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
 set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl., Gaolei Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022. in electronic information engineering from Sichuan
[52] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y. Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y. Khazaeni, University, Chengdu, China, and the Ph.D. degree
 “Federated learning with matched averaging,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. in cyber security from Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-
 Represent., 2020, pp. 1–23. versity, Shanghai, China. From October 2018 to
[53] Y. Huang et al., “Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-IID September 2019, he visited the Muroran Institution
 data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 7865–7873. of Technology, Muroran, Japan, supported by China
[54] L. v. d. Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” Scholarship Council Program. He is currently an
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008. Associate Professor with the School of Electronic
 Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai
 Jiao Tong University. His research interests include
 network security, adversarial machine learning, and privacy computing.

 Jianhua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Shanghai Jiao
 Qinghua Mao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1986, 1991,
 received the B.S. degree in information security and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Professor
 from the School of Electronic Information and Elec- and the Dean of the School of Cyber Security,
 trical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He is also the
 Shanghai, China, where he is currently pursuing the Director of the National Engineering Laboratory
 Ph.D. degree in cyber security. His current research for Information Content Analysis Technology, Engiinterests include federated learning, graph neural neering Research Center for Network Information
 networks, trustworthy machine learning, and cyber Security Management and Service of Chinese Minsecurity. istry of Education, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of
 Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, China.