IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025 8453

Fed-IoMT-Block: A Privacy-Preserving Framework
for Secure Federated Learning in Consumer-Centric
 Internet of Medical Things
 Arfat Ahmad Khan , Rakesh Kumar Mahendran, Fasee Ullah , Farman Ali , Norah Saleh Alghamdi ,
 Ahmad Ali AlZubi , and Daehan Kwak , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The rapid proliferation of the Internet of Medical create secure, scalable, and privacy-preserving IoMT systems for
Things (IoMT) has enabled sophisticated, timely, and remote consumer healthcare.
healthcare monitoring by leveraging advanced networking technologies. However, despite ongoing research, the IoMT paradigm Index Terms—Blockchain, federated learning, homomorphic
still faces significant security and privacy challenges. To address encryption, Internet of Medical Things (IoMT), intrusion detecthese, this study introduces Fed-IoMT-Block, an end-to-end tion systems (IDS), quantum authentication, risk assessment.
framework for securing IoMT devices. The framework first
authenticates IoMT entities using the Quantum Authentication
Protocol (QAP), which identifies communicating entities and
secures their exchange using unique quantum particles, pro-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
viding stronger protection than conventional protocols. Once
 HE INTERNET of Things (IoT) is an emerging techauthenticated, entities share data through federated learning,
leveraging the Attention Capsule Network (Att-CapsNet) and a
homomorphic algorithm. Network monitoring is then handled
 T nology used for real-time monitoring, data transmission,
 and various applications across sectors such as emergency
by a machine learning agent, the Vulnerability Analysis Agent
(VAA), which inspects external traffic and classifies it using services, traffic congestion, industrial control, logistics, retail,
the Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM). The associated and smart cities [1], [2], [3]. Due to the significance of IoT,
risk is mathematically quantified based on multiple parameters. its feasibility in medical applications for health monitoring has
Finally, role-based access control is enforced via a Flexible Neuro- led to a new intelligent paradigm in Healthcare 4.0, referred
Fuzzy Inference System (FNFIS) to prevent unauthorized access. to as the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) [4], [5], [6], [7].
The proposed framework demonstrates notable improvements in
packet delivery, security, and scalability compared to existing IoMT utilizes IoT-based smart medical devices or sensors
methods. These improvements include a 26% reduction in mali- for continuous health monitoring of patients across various
cious traffic, 84.88% accuracy in disease severity detection, 12% rankings and gradings.
lower latency, and a high packet throughput ratio. This study The patient health monitoring process in IoMT typically
highlights the potential of federated learning and blockchain to consists of three methods [8]: (1) On-body medical sensors,
 Received 28 January 2025; revised 22 March 2025 and 17 May 2025; deployed on the patient’s body to monitor parameters such as
accepted 1 June 2025. Date of publication 24 June 2025; date of current heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature. (2) In-body sensors,
version 7 November 2025. This research was supported in part by the installed inside the body to monitor internal organs such as
Researchers Supporting Projects (PNURSP2025R40) at Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in part by the Ongoing the liver, kidneys, and heart using wireless endoscopy sensors.
Research Funding program (ORF-2025-395), King Saud University, Riyadh, (3) Off-body sensors, placed around the patient to monitor
Saudi Arabia, and in part by the Regional Innovation System & Education physical activities such as postural movements or improper
(RISE) through the Seoul RISE Center, funded by the Ministry of Education
(MOE) and the Seoul Metropolitan Government (2025-RISE-01-018-01). seating positions on a sofa. Due to these diverse monitoring
(Corresponding authors: Farman Ali; Daehan Kwak.) applications, the proportion of IoT devices is projected to
 Arfat Ahmad Khan is with the Department of Computer Science, College increase by 50% by 2030, marking a 150% rise over current
of Computing, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand (e-mail:
arfatkhan@kku.ac.th). levels [2], [9].
 Rakesh Kumar Mahendran is with the Department of Computer Science and The key advantages of IoMT include cost reduction,
Engineering, Saveetha Engineering College, Chennai 602105, India (e-mail: improved quality of life, and enhanced user experirakeshkumarmahendran@gmail.com).
 Fasee Ullah is with the Department of Computing, Universiti Teknologi ence [10], [11]. However, a major concern is its security and
PETRONAS, Seri Iskandar 32610, Malaysia (e-mail: fasee.ullah@utp. privacy [12]. Communication among IoMT devices occurs
edu.my). in a wireless environment, making them attractive targets
 Farman Ali is with the Department of Applied AI, School of Convergence,
College of Computing and Informatics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul for attackers aiming to perform malicious actions that may
03063, South Korea (e-mail: farman0977@skku.edu). endanger human lives [13], [14]. Common threats include
 Norah Saleh Alghamdi is with the Department of Computer Sciences, eavesdropping, intentional delays in device detection capa-
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: nosalghamdi@pnu.edu.sa). bilities, and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.
 Ahmad Ali AlZubi is with the Department of Computer Science, King Saud A DDoS attack is one of the widespread attacks that tends
University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: aalzubi@ksu.edu.sa). to flood a legitimate server to prevent access by legitimate
 Daehan Kwak is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Kean University, Union, NJ 07083 USA (e-mail: dkwak@kean.edu). users by consuming the entire bandwidth. By sending flooding
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3582794 messages to the server, it appears that the server is not showing
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
8454 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

online availability to legitimate users, and in this way, the • The adoption of the Quantum Authentication Protocol
server’s services are hijacked. (QAP), supported by blockchain, enhances IoMT security
 According to a report by the International Medical and privacy beyond conventional cryptographic protocols.
Cybersecurity Council (IMCC), nearly 70% of smart medical • The integration of AI and homomorphic encryption
devices are highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks due to the with federated learning offers additional privacy for data
lack of effective authorization and authentication mech- auditing and integrity without requiring decryption or
anisms [15], [16], [17]. Additionally, IoMT systems face cloud-side access to raw data.
challenges related to scalability and storage limitations, under- • Performance evaluations show that the proposed Fedscoring the need for extensive research in IoMT cybersecurity. IoMT-Block framework achieves high accuracy in
 Authentication and authorization have been identified as malicious device and attack detection, improved disthe primary security approaches in the literature to counter ease severity classification, and reduced latency with
cyber threats [18], [19]. Current research largely relies on higher packet throughput. The framework also effectively
cryptographic algorithms such as Elliptic Curve Cryptography defends against Man-in-the-Middle, DDoS, insider, and
(ECC) and the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA). However, poisoning attacks.
these algorithms are often unsuitable for compact IoMT The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
devices due to their limited computational, storage, and Section II presents a review of related work. Section III
processing capacities, which ultimately compromises secu- describes the system model and prerequisites. Section IV
rity [20]. Although technologies such as Artificial Intelligence details the proposed processes with supporting pseudocode,
(AI) and blockchain have shown promise, their application
 diagrams, and equations. Section V discusses the experiin Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS) for mental setup, comparative analysis, and security evaluation.
IoMT remains limited due to their high computational and
 Section VI concludes the paper.
resource demands [21]. Moreover, AI models are susceptible
to insider threats, poisoning attacks, and fake malicious traffic.
 To address scalability, flexibility, and security concerns,
 II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
cloud-based on-demand services have been adopted alongside
blockchain to ensure data integrity, tamper resistance, con- This section reviews key shortcomings in state-of-the-art
fidentiality, and immutability [22], [23]. However, their use efforts to secure the IoMT environment. It is organized into
in IoMT environments has not been adequately explored for three subsections to highlight existing gaps in the literature.
comprehensive end-to-end authentication, authorization, model
protection, privacy, and network security. To bridge this gap, we A. Blockchain Approaches for IoMT Security
propose an end-to-end security strategy for IoMT applications
using Federated Learning (FL) and blockchain technologies. Several studies have explored blockchain technology to
 The major security challenges addressed in state-of-the-art enhance IoMT device security. The edge computing and
research [2], [4], [7], [10], [13], [15], [22], [23], [24], [25] are blockchain approach by [26] reduces computation and latency
outlined below: in data transmission using distributed edge servers, IoMT
 • Inadequate Smart Medical Device Validation: The authen- devices, smart contract-based blockchains, and IPFS storage.
 ticity and legitimacy of smart IoMT devices are typically Data execution and offloading are managed via mobile devices
 verified using IDs, passwords, and biometrics. However, and Patient IDs. However, the involvement of multiple entithese methods fail to ensure full legitimacy, leaving ties with different authentication and authorization processes
 devices vulnerable to spoofing attacks. makes it unsuitable for resource-constrained devices.
 • Lack of Risk Assessment: Security and privacy- The bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and
 preserving strategies are weakened when risk assessment smart contract-based blockchain method in [27] detects misbeis not performed, negatively affecting Quality of Service havior in IoMT pancreas devices but does not account for the
 (QoS) and network credibility. computational burden on lightweight devices. Reference [28]
 • Significant Security Loopholes: Most existing work used blockchain to ensure secure communication and synchroemphasizes securing medical data via encryption and nization in critical medical infrastructure. A blockchain-based
 federated learning to guard against external threats, but access control method in [29] stores device data in digital
 offers limited analysis of malware targeting smart IoMT wallets using decentralized identity devices, later analyzed
 devices. in the fog layer. However, reliance on manual authentica-
Motivated by the above challenges, the proposed study aims tion based on credentials, roles, and attributes introduces
to enhance security and privacy in the IoMT environment by vulnerabilities.
designing a secure and private framework leveraging advanced The blockchain-based Covichain framework in [30] secures
technologies. The novel contributions of this study are as IoMT data transfers for COVID-19 patients but incurs high
follows: computation, processing, and storage costs due to IPFS.
 • This research study uses a federated machine learning Reference [31] addressed centralized storage limitations by
 model to develop a novel security and privacy paradigm using distributed storage with ring-assisted access control
 for the heterogeneous IoMT devices environment by for authenticating patients, doctors, and nurses. However, the
 incorporating communication and network security mea- study did not address cost concerns in the IoMT setting.
 sures including Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Reference [32] proposed a context-aware attribute-based
 risk assessment. encryption scheme for secure IoMT data. However, its reliance
KHAN et al.: Fed-IoMT-Block: A PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR SECURE FL 8455

on cloud and fog servers, combined with blockchain and preserves patient privacy by avoiding disclosure of original
biomedical sensors, results in high resource consumption. identities, while blockchain ensures transparency, integrity,
 and immutability within the IoMT environment. The frame-
B. Federated Learning Approaches for IoMT Security work comprises three layers: IoMT Sensor Layer, Cloud
 Federated Learning (FL) has been integrated into healthcare Layer, and Application Layer. The IoMT Sensor Layer
using blockchain, as demonstrated in [33]. A similar approach includes temperature sensors, heartbeat sensors, smart ECG
in [34] incorporated enhanced secret sharing with FL. Here, user machines, and biosensors for continuous health moniauthentication is handled via a dynamic hash function, with keys toring. The Cloud Layer features a Trusted Authority
shared using Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)–also applied (TA), Vulnerability Analysis Agent (VAA), and Secure
in [35]. A dual-phase method combining privacy-preserving Aggregator (SA) to authenticate devices, users, and doctors,
techniques and FL blocks was proposed to address insider and to detect suspicious network activity. The Application
and denial-of-service attacks. However, reliance on centralized Layer consists of end users, doctors, and medical assisservers contradicts the decentralized nature of FL. Another tants who access patient data through an access control
architecture with smart IoT devices, fog servers, and gateways mechanism.
for encryption was presented in [36], demonstrating lower
communication costs than SPPDA and EHDA. A. Assumptions
 Blockchain has also been applied for data preprocessing [37]. The following assumptions are made in the proposed model:
A fraud detection model combining FL and blockchain was • Malicious insiders: Suspicious digital sources offer varintroduced in [38], incorporating application and fog layers. ious incentives to medical doctors, healthcare assistants,
Reference [39] proposed a masking scheme using homomorphic and authenticators (TA, VAA, SA) to update components
encryption in FL, applying a weighted average algorithm to of the existing system. These updates can be exploited,
boost resiliency. Similarly, [40] employed two FL algorithms, potentially leading to system breaches caused by insider
S-LMI and C-GMI, for data auditing and verification to threats and malicious attacks.
defend against poisoning attacks. Both use homomorphic hash • The TA authenticates IoMT devices, users, and doctors.
functions to download data from individual IoMT devices. The VAA monitors suspicious network behavior. The SA
However, the scheme does not quantify cost complexity or manages global model aggregation in FL and handles
preemptively detect such attacks. A fuzzy ensemble-based blockchain transactions and storage.
federated learning model was also introduced using temporal • Centralized cloud architecture does not hinder scalability,
convolutional networks (TCN), Long Short-Term Memory as patient enrollment (i.e., IoMT devices) is limited based
(LSTM), and gated recurrent units (GRU) [41]. While cyber- on capacity.
security and cost concerns are addressed, a hybrid FL-based • The blockchain is assumed resistant to 51% attacks due
quantization framework was later proposed [42], [43], [44] to to the low number of malicious insiders.
improve protection against data leakage during transmission,
though cost complexity remains unaddressed. However, none of B. Design Goals
these schemes fully exploit FL due to the high computational,
processing, and storage demands of IoMT devices. The proposed model aims to achieve the following:
 • Security and Correctness: A secure TA ensures authenticity without compromising data integrity.
C. Other Security Approaches for IoMT Security
 • Scalability: User interaction with the cloud is limited to
 The two-phase Secure-IoMT framework using multimodal maintain scalability.
sensory signals was proposed in [45], comprising pre- • Privacy and Transparency: Blockchain integration ensures
processing, clustering, feature extraction, and classification. data privacy while supporting transparency.
However, it does not consider cost complexity. An AI-enabled • Integrity: Federated learning preserves the integrity of
lightweight communication scheme using IPv6, ZigBee, BLE, sensed data against theft or tampering.
Z-Wave, and NFC was introduced in [46], but it lacks active
misbehavior detection.
 IV. F ED -I O MT-B LOCK M ODEL
 A secure data aggregation scheme with an authentication
framework was proposed in [47], employing the HMAC The proposed Fed-IoMT-Block model consists of four
protocol for end-to-end authentication and using a fuzzy- sequential steps: (1) Multi-Credential Quantum-based
based delimiter for better resource use. Fuzzy-based Trust Authenticity Verification, (2) Federated Learning-based
Management (FTM) in [48] enhances device trustworthi- Sensed Data Sharing, (3) Machine Learning-Entrenched
ness by identifying Sybil attacks and untrusted nodes. Attack Detection & Risk Analysis, and (4) Adaptive Fuzzy
Reference [49] applied Bayesian optimization and deep learn- Role-based Access Control.
ing to reduce malicious access in IoMT environments.
 A. Multi-Credential Quantum-Based Authenticity Verification
 III. S YSTEM M ODEL The proposed Quantum Authentication Protocol (QAP) is
 This section outlines the proposed IoMT security frame- based on the Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger (GHZ) quantum
work, which integrates blockchain and federated learning state, a fundamental concept in quantum communication thetechnologies, as shown in Figure 1. Federated learning ory. The protocol involves three major entities: cloud-based
8456 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of the proposed Fed-IoMT block.

 ⎧
blockchain as a conventional participant, TA, and clients (i.e., ⎪
 ⎪ ZTA0 = {ZTA01 , ZTA02 , . . . , ZTA0R }
 ⎨
 ZD1 = {ZD11 , ZD12 , . . . , ZD1N }
IoMT devices, doctors, and healthcare assistants). The TA B← (1)
and clients possess quantum capabilities enabling trustworthy ⎪ doc2 = {Zdoc21 , Zdoc22 , . . . , Zdoc2N }
 ⎪ Z
 ⎩
authentication. Zha3 = {Zha31 , Zha32 , . . . , Zha3N }
 The blockchain is considered an honest entity, while the where, ZD1j , Zdoc2j , and Zha3j ∈ {0, 1} for (j = 1, 2, . . . , N),
TA and clients are classified as partially honest. The primary and ZTA0j ∈ {0, 1} for (j = 1, 2, . . . , R). The secret credential
advantage of QAP is its zero-loss, noise-free authentication Z consists of its ID, password, biometrics, and assigned roles.
process, ensuring high security. The proposed QAP consists Step 2: Upon successful registration, an authentication token
of two phases, outlined below: is issued to the TA and clients. The representation of Step 2
 Phase 1: Enrollment is as follows:
 Step 1: In the initial phase, the TA, clients Cl, including
IoMT devices Dn = {D1 , D2 , . . . , Dn }, doctors docn = B → ATok [D, doc, ha] (2)
{doc1 , doc2 , . . . , docn }, and healthcare assistants han =
{ha1 , ha2 , . . . , han }, are registered with their secret credentials where ATok denotes the authenticity token, serving as
(Z) onto the blockchain B. The representation of Z within the a credential for clients to initiate the authentication
blockchain is formulated as follows: process.
KHAN et al.: Fed-IoMT-Block: A PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR SECURE FL 8457

 Phase 2: Authenticity Verification acquire a global model from the cloud server, train and encrypt
 Step 3: The clients initiate authentication by submitting their local models, compute decryption dividends, and perform
ATok to the TA. Upon receiving the clients’ ATok tokens, the secure aggregation. This process is repeated until convergence
TA generates random quantum sequences of R(N + 1) GHZ is achieved. A detailed explanation of the proposed FL-based
quantum states, formulated as follows: data-sharing process is provided below.
 ⎧  First, the server initializes the public key parameters for
 ⎪ |G
 ⎪   = √1 |STA SD . . . SD 
 ⎪
 1
 2  01 11  n1   each IoMT device based on its authenticity d(∀, δ, ϒ, η, ),
 ⎪
 ⎪ +| S ⊕ S ⊕ . . . SDn1 ⊕ 1 
 ⎪
 ⎪ TA01  1 D 11 1 where  is a random vector,  ← U(T∀D ), ϒ and η represent
 ⎨ |G  = √1 |S
 2 TA Sdoc12 . . . Sdocn2  the error distribution over T, δ denotes the key distribution
  2  02     (3)
 ⎪
 ⎪ +| STA02 ⊕ 1 Sdoc12 ⊕ 1 . . . Sdocn2 ⊕ 1  parameter, and ∀ is the modulus of ciphertext. Based on the
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪ |G3  = √1 |STA03 Sha21 . . . SDn3  public key parameters, each IoMT device Dj generates a secret
 ⎪
 ⎩  2     
 +| STA03 ⊕ 1 Sha21 ⊕ 1 . . . Shan3 ⊕ 1  key seckj ← δ, from which the public key is computed as
 Pkj = −seckj ·  + ej (mod ∀). Using this, all authenticated
where TA0n , D1n , doc2n , ha3n represent the (N + 1) quantum IoMT devices compute the collaborative public key as follows:
particles of the nth GHZ state.
 Step 4: After generating the random quantum sequences, n n n
  
the TA splits the GHZ sequences into ordered sequences: Pk = Pkj = − seckj ·  + ej (mod ∀) (8)
STA0 , SD1 , Sdoc2 , Sha3 . The TA then generates quantum j=1 j=1 j=1
decoy photons {|0, |1, |+, |−} and inserts them into
the ordered sequences. The TA retains STA0 and provides Once the collaborative public key is computed, for each
SD1 , Sdoc2 , Sha3 to the clients. round r, every IoMT device Dj downloads the current weights
 Step 5: Upon receiving the ordered sequences Seq = of the global model wet from the cloud server. Using these
{SD1 , Sdoc2 , Sha3 }, the clients perform quantum operations, weights, each device generates a local model by employing
specifically GNZ and XOR operations, on the quantum decoy the Att-CapsNet algorithm. The integration of a squeezephotons. This process is formulated as follows: and-excitation block into a conventional CapsNet serves as
    an attention mechanism that enhances the learning of global
 Seq = GNZ SD1 ⊕ GNZ Sdoc2 ⊕ GNZ Sha3 (4) feature representations. This incorporation addresses dimen-
 
 Cl Seq → TA (5) sionality challenges, resulting in improved channel weight
 estimation.
 Step 6: Upon receiving Seq from the clients, the TA Local Model Generation: Initially, the sensed data from
performs the same operations as in Step 5 to retrieve the the IoMT devices are fed into the convolutional layers of the
original sequences. The correctness of the sequences is verified Att-CapsNet. In these layers, local features are extracted using
by computing the error between the original sequences held convolutional kernels of size 3 × 3 with a stride of one.
by the TA and those received from the clients. The error The extracted feature maps are then passed to the squeezecomputation is formulated as follows: excitation layer. The squeeze-excitation network consists of
 Err = Seq − Seq (6) two key operations: squeeze and excitation, which extract
 global features.
In the above equation, a threshold value (Th) is set by the The squeeze operation extracts features to generate the
blockchain to verify client authenticity. If the computed error feature map, while the excitation operation determines the
is greater than or equal to the threshold, the client is considered channel weights based on the computed feature maps. The
malicious; otherwise, the client is considered legitimate. The formulation of the squeeze-excitation operation is as follows:
formulation for authenticity verification is expressed as:
 H W
 Discarded, if Err ≥ Th  
 TA = (7) Qc = Seq ℵp = H×W
 1
 ℵp (j, i) (9)
 Authenticated, otherwise
 j=1 i=1
Similarly, clients compute the error for the TA and publish the Sc = Exi(Q, W) = (A(Q, W)) = (W2 ϕ(W1 Q)) (10)
results to the blockchain.  
 yp = scale ℵp , Scp = Scp · ℵp (11)
 Step 7: The blockchain determines the final decision regarding whether the communication between the clients and the
 From equations (9)–(11), ℵp represents the pth feature map,
TA is legitimate or malicious. The results are securely stored
 W2 and W1 denote the dimensionality weights, Sc represents
as blocks within the blockchain.
 the channel weight, and Qc denotes the statistical representation of the channel. The generated feature maps from the
B. Federated Learning-Based Sensed Data Sharing squeeze-excitation layer are then passed to the primary capsule
 Only authenticated IoMT devices are allowed to partici- layer, where they are transformed into primary capsules. The
pate in the IoMT environment, specifically the authenticated capsules store a large amount of information in vector format.
patients’ IoMT devices for sensing. To enhance user pri- These vector-formatted capsules are subsequently provided as
vacy, the proposed framework employs federated learning and inputs to the digit capsule layer, which produces the final
homomorphic encryption. For each round r, IoMT devices output.
8458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 The digit capsule layer incorporates a squashing function to Algorithm 1 FL-Based Data Sharing
facilitate vector-directed routing. The routing process between Input: Authenticated IoMT devices Di
 Output: Aggregated Sensed Model with new model weight wet+1
the jth and ith capsules is formulated as follows: 1: Initialize collaborative Pk (8)
 2: for every round r → Dj do
 ℵi|j = Wji ℵj (12) 3: Every Dj [get(wet )] from the cloud server
 // Local Model Generation //
 Sci = ∂ji ℵi|j (13) 4: Sensed results → AttCapsNet[Conv(3 × 3)]
 j 5: AttCapsNet[Conv(3 × 3)] extracts local features Lfea
 2 6: Lfea → Seq(.)Exi(.) for Scp · ℵp (9)–(11)
 oi = 1+ScSci 2 · Sci
 Sci (14) 7: ℵp → primary capsules for vector format conversion
 i
 8: OP (primary capsules) → Digit capsules (12)–(14))
 From Equations (12)–(14), Wji represents the matrix weight 9: Assign weight for every IoMT local model wet
 j

emphasizing the relationship between the jth and ith capsules, // Encrypt Local Model Weights //
 j
∂ji denotes the connection coefficient, and Oi refers to the 10: Represent wet to plaintext form fj ∈ T
 11: With public-key parameters compute CpTDi (15) to cloud server
output squashing function that provides the sensed results // Perform Homomorphic Operation //
of individual patients. Once the local model is derived after 12: Apply HE CpTsum on CpTDi (16)
several epochs, IoMT devices provide the weights of each 13: CpTsum → Di for computing decryption dividends (17)
 j // Secure Global Aggregation //
individual local model as wet , j ∈ 1, 2, . . . , n. 14: Decryption dividends → Cloud server
 Encrypting the Local Model Weights: The plaintext input 15: Perform secure local model aggregation (18)
 j
for wet is represented as fj ∈ T. Let  = [0] and Pk = 16: Assign a new global model weight wet+1 (19)
 17: Run until max r met
Pk[0]. The samples from the public key parameters are given 18: end for
as ϑ Di ← δ, and eD Di
 0 , e1 ← ϒ. The ciphertext for the local
 i

model is computed as follows:
  
 CpTDi = ϑ Di · Pk + fj + eD0
 i
 , ϑ Di
 ·  + eDi
 1 (mod ∀) (15)
 secure aggregation to obtain the plaintext. The formulation for
 secure aggregation is as follows:
From the above equation, each IoMT device shares the N N
encrypted local model CpTDi = (CpTD Di
 0 , CpT1 ) with the
 i
 fj ≈ CpTsum0 + Di (mod ∀) (18)
cloud server.
 i=1 i=1
 Perform Homomorphic Operation: Homomorphic ver- 
ification protects cloud-stored data from cyberattacks and From the above equation, the cloud server decrypts Ni=1 fj to
enables data auditing without downloading the entire compute the average local weights and obtain the new global
encrypted dataset. To improve verification, homomorphic ver- model weight wet+1 for further rounds.
ification incorporates non-malleability and Context Binding. N
Non-malleability protects legitimate ciphertext from gener- wet+1 = N1
 j
 wet (19)
ation or modification by attackers, while Context Binding j=1
prevents fake data auditing at the cloud server. Once the server
receives the encrypted local model weights from all IoMT The communication rounds continue until the desired converdevices, it performs homomorphic encryption operations by gence is met. The pseudocode for Federated Learning-based
summing all the weights. The formulation of the homomorphic data sharing is given in Algorithm 1.
operation on the local model weights is as follows:
 ⎛ ⎞ C. Machine Learning-Entrenched Attack Detection and Risk
 N N N
 CpTsum = =⎝ CpTD CpTD i⎠ Analysis
 0 ,
 Di i
 CpT 1
 j=1 j=1 j=1 The Vulnerability Analysis Agent (VAA) in the cloud server
    monitors the communication between IoMT devices and the
 = CpTsum0 , CpTsum1 (mod ∀) (16) cloud server. Continuous monitoring is enabled by observing
where CpTsum is the sum of homomorphic operations of the behaviors of IoMT devices and network traffic to the cloud
ciphertexts. server. Specifically, the behavior of IoMT devices is captured
 Decryption Dividends Computation: The homomorphi- by computing both direct and indirect trust measures. Network
cally encrypted ciphertext sum is distributed to all IoMT flows are analyzed by examining flow and packet features.
devices to compute the decryption dividends, which are then 1) Behavioral Analysis: For each IoMT device Dj in each
sent back to the cloud server. The formulation for decryption communication round r, the VAA computes direct and indirect
dividends is as follows: trust (dirtru ) and (indirtru ), respectively. dirtru is computed by
 analyzing the past behaviors of a particular IoMT device. The
 Di = secki · CpTsum1 + e∗j = formulation of dirtru is as follows:
 N   
 seckj · ϑi ·  + eD i
 + e∗1 (mod ∀) (17) dirtru Dj = Z · y (20)
 1
 j=1
 where Z represents the past behavior of device Dj , and y
 Secure Global Aggregation: Upon receiving all decryption denotes the current behavior monitored by the VAA. Indirect
dividends from IoMT devices, the cloud server performs trust, indirtru , is computed as follows:
KHAN et al.: Fed-IoMT-Block: A PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR SECURE FL 8459

Algorithm 2 Packet Flow Analysis Algorithm 3 LGBM-Based Device Classification
1: BEGIN Input: Tr(Dj ), Ntrm
 // Extracting source and destination port details // Output: Classification Result (Normal or Malicious)
2: SRC_Port ← Packet.Header.Source_Port 1: for all Dj do
3: DEST_Port ← Packet.Header.Destination_Port 2: Set training samples: {(a1 , b1 ), (a2 , b2 ), L, (an , bn )}
 // Identifying transport layer protocol // 3: Perform Loss Minimization: F(a)  (23)
4: Protocol ← Packet.Header.Transport_Protocol 4: Determine Iterative Function (24)
 // Extracting IP addresses // 5: Provide Final Classification: FU (a) (25)
5: SRC_IP ← Packet.Header.Source_IP 6: Provide results: ωu (a) (26)
6: DEST_IP ← Packet.Header.Destination_IP 7: end for
 // Monitoring packet exchange statistics // 8: for all Malicious Dj do
7: CNT ← Compute_Byte_Packet_Count(Packet) 9: Analyze Risk(Dj ) (27)
 // Calculating inter-packet arrival time // 10: Formulate Risk Impact: Imp(Dj ) (28)
8: IPkt ← Compute_Inter_Packet_Time(Cloud_Server, Device) 11: Formulate Risk Likelihood: lik(Dj ) (29)
9: END 12: Calculate: Overall Risk ← Imp(Dj ) × lik(Dj )
 13: if Risk score > 90 then
 14: Critical Impact
 15: else if Risk score ≥ 70 and < 90 then
 n
  16: High Impact
 indirtru Dj = nr
 1
 Fe[Di ] → Dj (21) 17: else if Risk score ≥ 60 and < 70 then
 i=1 18: Moderate Impact
 19: else if Risk score ≥ 20 and < 60 then
 20: Low Impact
where nr denotes the number of feedbacks obtained about the 21: else
behavior of device Dj , and Fe[Di ] represents the feedback from 22: Negligible Impact
device Di regarding device Dj . Finally, the overall trust value 23: end if
 24: end for
is computed by summing dirtru and indirtru as follows:
  
 Tr = dirtru Dj + indirtru Dj (22)
 The loss can be minimized using F(a), which is formulated
 2) Network Traffic Analysis: Simultaneously, the flows as follows:
from IoMT devices Dj , as well as external malicious devices,  = arg min εa,b [L(b, F(a))]
 F(a) (23)
are analyzed by considering several features. The features F
extracted in the proposed work are listed below and also From the above equation, the iterative function of the LGBM
described in Algorithm 2: can be used to minimize the loss function as follows:
 • SRC_Port: The source port extracted from the packet
 header; used by the sending peer. Fu (a) = Fu−1 (a) + αu u (a) (24)
 • DEST_Port: The destination port from the packet header;
 used by the receiving peer.
 where u defines the number of iterations,  u (a) denotes the
 decision tree base, and αu = arg minα ni=1 L(bi , Fu−1 (ai ) +
 • Protocol Used: Specifies the transport layer protocol in
 α u (ai )). From this equation, the final classification model for
 use (e.g., UDP, TCP). the LGBM is obtained by combining the weights as follows:
 • DES_IP: The destination IP address of the receiving peer.
 U
 • SRC_IP: The source IP address of the transmitting peer. FU (a) = αu u (a) (25)
 • CNT: Represents the number of bytes or packets u=1
 exchanged during a defined time interval. The maximized iteration number is denoted by U, and the
 • IPkt: The inter-packet arrival time, indicating the time final classification from the base decision tree u (a) can be
 between packets during flow exchange between the cloud formulated as follows:
 server and devices. Normal Dj if condition
 By obtaining these features, the analysis is performed u (a) = (26)
 Malicious Dj otherwise
using several feature aggregation techniques, such as packet
and byte counts over a particular second, standard deviation From the classifier results, normal Dj values are accepted,
computation for flow, bytes, and packets, and standard devi- while malicious Dj values are subjected to risk analysis.
ation measures among byte-to-duration counts. The analyzed The pseudocode defining the operation of the LGBM device
network traffic for all devices is represented as Ntrm = classification and risk analysis is shown in Algorithm 3.
{Ntr1 , Ntr2 , . . . , Ntrm }. To analyze the risk of any IoMT device Dj , the formulation
 3) LGBM-Based Risk Analysis and Prevention: The is defined as follows:
LGBM is a powerful machine-learning classifier for com-      
 Risk Dj = Imp Dj × lik Dj (27)
plex decision-making situations. The proposed method
trains the classifier using trust and traffic analysis results where Imp(Dj ) defines the impact of risk and lik(Dj ) defines
from the devices. The training set is represented as the likelihood of the risk. The impact of risk is determined
{(a1 , b1 ), (a2 , b2 ), L, (an , bn )}, where the given data samples based on metrics such as device security, considering whether
are represented as a, and the labels for classification are an attack compromises confidentiality, integrity, or availability,
represented as b. The goal of the Light Gradient Boosting the type of protocol used, the network type, and the number
Machine is to minimize the loss function during classification. of heterogeneous IoMT devices involved.
8460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
 S ECURITY R ISK A NALYSIS FOR I O MT D EVICES

         
 Imp Dj = sec Dj + CIA Dj + Pro Dj Algorithm 4 Role-Based Access Control
     Input: Client Roles {Ro(Dn ), Ro(docn ), Ro(han )}
 + NT Dj + Het Dj /5 (28) Output: FNFIS Access Rules 1 or 0
 1: Initialize the Roles and Authenticity of Cl
where sec(Dj ), CIA(Dj ), Pro(Dj ), NT(Dj ), and Het(Dj ) denote 2: Pass Ro(Cl) → fuzzification layer (30)
the security, CIA, protocol used, network type, and number 3: Set the FNFIS Gaussian Function f (x) (31)
 4: OpiI → Inference Layer to determine weights (32)
of heterogeneous devices, respectively. The likelihood of risk 5: Normalize Wei in the normalization layer (33)
can be formulated as follows: 6: Defuzzify the normalized weights in the de-fuzzification layer (34)
            7: Obtain overall output OpiV (35)
 lik Dj = RF Dj + His Dj + Sec Dj + Lay Dj /4 (29) 8: Generate Fuzzy Rules from OpiV
 9: if Ro(Cl) = Ac(res) then
where RF(Dj ) represents the risk factor, His(Dj ) denotes 10: Allowed = 1
 11: else
the history of attacks encountered by the IoMT device, 12: Denied = 0
Sec(Dj ) refers to the sector type, and Lay(Dj ) represents the 13: end if
proposed IoMT layer, which is more prone to cyber-attacks.
Accordingly, the risk level is classified into five categories:
critical impact, high impact, moderate impact, low impact, and From the above equation, the weight of a neuron is denoted
negligible impact. Table I presents the risk impact analysis of by Wei . The weights from the inference layer are normalized
the IoMT devices in the proposed environment, with a detailed in the normalization layer, which is formulated as follows:
description available in Algorithm 3.
 Wei
 OpiIII = Wei =  , ∀i = 1, 2, 3 (33)
D. Adaptive Fuzzy Role-Based Access Control i Wei

 Access control is provided for IoMT users, doctors, and From the above equation, the normalized weight is denoted by
healthcare assistants in cloud applications using the Flexible Wei . The normalized weights are defuzzified in the defuzzifi-
Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (FNFIS), based on the roles cation layer, formulated as follows:
assigned during the authentication stage. For instance, doctors
interpret and provide results for IoMT users, IoMT users OpiIV = Wei fi = Wei · (Pi x + Qi y + Si z) (34)
view the final results provided by doctors, and healthcare
assistants manage IoMT users’ requests without compromising where P, Q, and S denote the subsequent fuzzy parameters
their privacy. Entities that comply with role-based policies are that provide the defuzzified output. The overall output from
granted access; otherwise, access is denied. the output layer is formulated as follows:
 The roles of the entities are input to the FNFIS, which 
 Wei fi
consists of five layers: fuzzification, inference, normalization, OpV = f (x, y, z) =
 i
 Wei fi = i (35)
 i
defuzzification, and output. The entity roles are represented i Wei
as Ro = {Ro(Dn ), Ro(docn ), Ro(han )}. The output of the The final output from the output layer provides access rules
fuzzification layer is expressed as follows: for clients based on their designated roles in Boolean format.
 ⎧ The formulation of the access rules is as follows:
 ⎨ Ai (x), ∀i = 1, 2
 OpiI = Bi−2 (x), ∀i = 3, 4 (30) 1, if Ro(Cl) = Ac(res)
 ⎩ RULE(FNFIS) = (36)
 Ci−4 (x), ∀i = 5, 6 0, if Ro(Cl) = Ac(res)
From the above equation, the fuzzy membership function is where 1 denotes access granted and 0 denotes access denied.
denoted by , and the linguistic variables are denoted by Ai , Specifically, if the client roles and their access requests Ac(res)
Bi , and Ci . The proposed FNFIS uses a Gaussian function, match, access is granted (1); otherwise, it is denied (0). The
formulated as follows: pseudocode for the FNFIS-assisted role-based access control
  
 (x − B)2 is provided in Algorithm 4.
 f (x) = A · exp − (31)
 2C2
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
where A, B, and C denote the membership parameters of the
FNFIS. These parameters are provided to the inference layer, This section presents the experimental and implementation
which produces the output as follows: analyses of the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block framework, offering
 both quantitative and qualitative insights. It consists of three
 OpiII = Wei = Ai (x) · Bi (x) · Bi (x), ∀i = 1, 2, 3 (32) supplementary sections, each described in detail below:
KHAN et al.: Fed-IoMT-Block: A PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR SECURE FL 8461

 TABLE II
 S IMULATION S ETTINGS

 Fig. 2. Number of IoMT devices vs malicious traffic.

 TABLE III
 M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC R ATE ( BPS ) FOR I O MT D EVICES
A. Simulation Setup
 The simulation setup for the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block
framework is detailed in this section. The framework was
implemented using Python 3.8.2 on Windows 11, with 8GB
of RAM, 500GB HDD storage, and an AMD Ryzen 5 5600H
microprocessor with Radeon Graphics at 3.30 GHz. Table II
lists the simulation parameters of the proposed method.
 The heterogeneous nature of IoMT devices includes on- In contrast, existing methods such as the Fortified Chain,
body, in-body, and off-body sensing devices, which are used Fed-IoMT, and ASCP-IoMT either rely on conventional
to monitor respiratory rate, heart rate, blood pressure, temper- cryptography-based authentication or lack efficient authenature, internal organs such as the kidneys, and the physical tication mechanisms, resulting in higher malicious traffic
postural movements of the patient, respectively. The sensory rates. The quantitative analysis in Figure 2 shows that as the
data generated by these devices require different transmission number of IoMT devices increases to a maximum of 100, the
speeds and bandwidths to be periodically sent to medical proposed Fed-IoMT-Block achieves a lower malicious traffic
doctors. rate of 38 bps. In comparison, the existing solutions, including Fortified Chain, Fed-IoMT, and ASCP-IoMT, experience
B. Comparative Analysis higher rates of 41 bps, 45 bps, and 48 bps, respectively.
 Similarly, when the number of IoMT devices is at a minimum
 This section focuses on the comparative analysis of
 of 10, the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block records 13 bps, while
the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block with existing frameworks,
 Fortified Chain, Fed-IoMT, and ASCP-IoMT record 15 bps,
including the Fortified Chain [31], Fed-IoMT [38], and ASCP-
 18 bps, and 20 bps, respectively. Table III presents the detailed
IoMT [46]. The performance metrics used for quantitative
 comparison.
analysis include Malicious Traffic (bps), Detection Accuracy
 2) Detection Accuracy Analysis: Detection accuracy is the
(%), Attack Detection Accuracy (%), and Throughput (Mbps).
 proportion of true positives to the sum of true positives and
A detailed explanation of the comparative metrics is provided
 true negatives. In our work, we define detection accuracy as
below.
 the correct identification of disease by heterogeneous IoMT
 1) Malicious Traffic Analysis: Malicious traffic is defined devices, as follows.
as traffic initiated or imposed by malicious users/entities in
 TP
the IoMT environment, attempting to take over legitimate DetAcc = × 100 (37)
resources in an untrusted environment. Figure 2 compares TP + TN
malicious traffic in the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block frame- Figure 3 shows detection accuracy in relation to disease severwork with existing methods based on the number of IoMT ity. The graphical analysis indicates that detection accuracy
devices. It is observed that the malicious traffic generated increases as disease severity increases.
by attackers is lower in the proposed framework than in The proposed Fed-IoMT-Block achieves improved detection
existing solutions. The primary reason for this reduction accuracy by utilizing an advanced AI model for disease
is that the proposed framework filters such traffic early detection called Att-CapsNet. This model outperforms the
by performing authentication using the QAP protocol. The conventional CNN algorithm and ensures higher detection
QAP utilizes multiple authentication metrics, including ID, accuracy. In contrast, existing works such as Fortified Chain,
password, biometrics, and user roles, to establish a robust Fed-IoMT, and ASCP-IoMT achieve lower detection accuauthentication policy. Additionally, quantum communication racy due to their reliance on conventional machine learning
helps prevent communication-related attacks commonly found classifiers. The numerical results show that the detection
in conventional cryptography-based authentication methods. accuracy of the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block increases to 98%
8462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 Fig. 4. Malicious IoMT devices vs attack detection accuracy.
Fig. 3. Disease severity vs detection accuracy.

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 D ETECTION ACCURACY (%) FOR I O MT D EVICES ATTACK D ETECTION ACCURACY (%) FOR I O MT D EVICES

when disease severity reaches its maximum of 100. However,
existing solutions achieve detection accuracy rates of 91%,
82%, and 72%, respectively. Similarly, when disease severity is
a minimum of 10, the detection accuracies of the proposed and
existing methods are 70%, 63%, 55%, and 40%, respectively.
Table IV provides a better representation of the detection
accuracy.
 3) Attack Detection Accuracy Analysis: Attack detection
accuracy is defined as the proportion of legitimate sample
counts in the environment to the number of malicious samples,
as described below:
 No. of Legitimate Samples
 AttDec = × 100 (38) Fig. 5. Latency vs throughput.
 No. of Malicious Samples
Figure 4 shows that the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block achieves a
higher attack detection accuracy rate than existing methods. destination in the IoMT environment. Figure 5 shows that as
The primary reason for this improved detection rate is the latency increases, throughput decreases because it is inversely
incorporation of a VAA, which continuously monitors exter- proportional to latency. The proposed framework achieves
nal attacks. In addition, the proposed framework employs a better throughput, even as latency increases. The primary
blockchain-based role-based access control method, further reason for this higher throughput rate is that the proposed
strengthening the security of the Fed-IoMT-Block model. framework incorporates federated learning technology into the
 Quantitative analysis indicates that when the number of IoMT environment, ensuring data privacy that helps resist
malicious IoMT devices increases to a maximum of 50, the communication-related attacks and protect model privacy. In
proposed Fed-IoMT-Block detects attacks at a higher rate contrast, existing solutions such as Fortified Chain, Fed-IoMT,
of 99%, whereas existing solutions achieve lower detection and ASCP-IoMT have limited data privacy measures, resulting
rates of 86%, 83%, and 79%, respectively. Similarly, when in lower throughput.
the number of malicious IoMT devices is as low as 10, Based on the numerical analysis, the proposed framework
the proposed framework achieves a higher attack detection achieves a higher throughput rate of 12 Mbps when latency
accuracy of 65%, while existing solutions achieve detection increases to a maximum of 1.6 seconds. For the same latency,
rates of 60%, 53%, and 40%, respectively. Table V shows the throughput achieved by Fortified Chain, Fed-IoMT, and
the attack detection accuracy of the proposed Fed-IoMT-Block ASCP-IoMT is 11 Mbps, 10.5 Mbps, and 10 Mbps, respecframework compared to existing state-of-the-art schemes, tively. Similarly, when latency is a minimum of 0.2 seconds,
achieving a higher attack detection accuracy. the proposed framework achieves a throughput of 23 Mbps,
 4) Throughput Analysis: Throughput is defined as the num- while existing solutions achieve 22 Mbps, 21 Mbps, and
ber of packets successfully transmitted from the source to the 20 Mbps, respectively.
KHAN et al.: Fed-IoMT-Block: A PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR SECURE FL 8463

 TABLE VI
 A LGORITHM F UNCTIONS AND C OST C OMPLEXITY IN THE P ROPOSED F ED -I O MT-B LOCK F RAMEWORK

C. Security Analysis D. Research Findings
 This section presents a security analysis of the proposed The proposed method adopts Fed-IoMT-Block by utilizing
countermeasures. Below are the cyber-attacks that were blockchain and federated learning technologies. Further, the
resisted by the proposed method: comparative results show that the proposed work outperforms
 • Man-in-the-Middle Attack (MITM): The proposed work other methods. The cost complexities of the proposed algomitigates this MITM attack by adopting quantum rithms align with the multiple QAP systems in Figure 1, as
 technology-based authentication, named QAP, which depicted in Table VI.
 overcomes the problems of conventional cryptography
 algorithms. VI. C ONCLUSION
 • DDoS Attacks: The Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
 attack floods legitimate servers to prevent access from The poor security measures and heterogeneity issues in
 legitimate users. DDoS attacks are overcome in the IoMT devices present challenges in the IoMT environment.
 proposed environment by utilizing VAA, which analyzes The proposed Fed-IoMT-Block framework addresses these
 the risk of external traffic to enable better attack detection challenges by adopting a three-layered approach, consisting
 accuracy. of an IoMT sensor layer, a cloud layer, and an application
 • Insider Attacks: The proposed architecture consists of
 layer. The authenticity of IoMT clients is validated using the
 three layers including the IoMT Sensors Layer, the QAP protocol, based on several metrics such as ID and bio-
 Cloud Layer, and the Application Layer. Each layer metrics. Only authenticated IoMT device results are securely
 includes various sensing devices and healthcare per- communicated using heterogeneous federated technology with
 sonnel. Although these layers are partially secured, homomorphic encryption through Att-CapsNet. Meanwhile,
 they remain vulnerable to compromise. Insider attacks external network traffic is analyzed using the LGBM algorithm
 may exploit vulnerabilities through phishing, malware, based on several metrics.
 DoS, and DDoS attacks, leading to the deletion or The implemented algorithm classifies traffic into normal
 corruption of sensory data stored on local machines. and malicious categories. Based on these classifications, a risk
 These incidents are often attributed to human error assessment is performed using various mathematical analyor hardware/software failures. Any TA, VAA, or SA ses. Finally, role-based access control is implemented based
 can be compromised by such attacks and may exhibit on the roles registered during the registration phase in the
 Byzantine failures to conceal the loss or corruption of application layer. This role-based access control mechanism
 data from medical professionals. Furthermore, insider prevents malicious unauthorized access and ensures end-tothreats may also involve reassigning stored data to a new end security. The performance results demonstrate that the
 user’s storage location, effectively removing the original proposed model outperforms existing models. This work will
 data. To address these challenges, the proposed work be further enhanced by introducing a stronger encryption
 adopts role-based access control using FNFIS, which algorithm, protection mechanisms against potential cyberrestricts privileged access and effectively mitigates insider attacks, energy consumption considerations, and real-world
 threats. testing.
 • Model Poisoning Attacks: Model poisoning attacks are
 common in federated learning environments, manipulat- R EFERENCES
 ing the federated learning model to bypass the global [1] L. D. Xu, Y. Lu, and L. Li, “Embedding blockchain technology into
 model. The proposed work resists model poisoning IoT for security: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 13,
 attacks by adopting homomorphic encryption, which pp. 10452–10473, Jul. 2021.
 [2] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and
 successfully prevents such attacks. H. V. Poor, “Federated learning for Internet of Things: A comprehensive
 • Cryptographic Attacks: In conventional IoMT environ- survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1622–1658,
 ments, systems are highly vulnerable to cryptographic 3rd Quart., 2021.
 [3] F. Ali et al., “Type-2 fuzzy ontology–aided recommendation systems
 attacks, where conventional cryptographic methods are for IoT-based healthcare,” Comput. Commun., vol. 119, pp. 138–155,
 easily spoofed. The proposed work addresses this issue Apr. 2018.
 by adopting a quantum-based authentication method that [4] A. Aslam and E. Curry, “A survey on object detection for the Internet
 of Multimedia Things (IoMT) using deep learning and event-based
 resists both conventional and recent cryptographic attacks middleware: Approaches, challenges, and future directions,” Image Vis.
 to a greater extent. Comput., vol. 106, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 104095.
8464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 [5] V. Malamas et al., “Risk assessment methodologies for the Internet of [28] Y. Liu, G. Shan, Y. Liu, A. Alghamdi, I. Alam, and S. Biswas,
 Medical Things: A survey and comparative appraisal,” IEEE Access, “Blockchain bridges critical national infrastructures: E-healthcare data
 vol. 9, pp. 40049–40075, 2021. migration perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 28509–28519, 2022.
 [6] W. Cai et al., “Hierarchical domain adaptation projective dictionary pair [29] H. Saidi, N. Labraoui, A. A. A. Ari, L. A. Maglaras, and J. H. M. Emati,
 learning model for EEG classification in IoMT systems,” IEEE Trans. “DSMAC: Privacy-aware decentralized self-management of data access
 Comput. Social Syst., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1559–1567, Aug. 2023. control based on blockchain for health data,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
 [7] T. Zhu, L. Kuang, J. Daniels, P. Herrero, K. Li, and P. Georgiou, “IoMT- pp. 101011–101028, 2022.
 enabled real-time blood glucose prediction with deep learning and edge [30] S. L. T. Vangipuram, S. P. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, “CoviChain:
 computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3706–3719, A blockchain based framework for nonrepudiable contact tracing in
 Mar. 2023. healthcare cyber-physical systems during pandemic outbreaks,” SN
 [8] J. Liu, F. Miao, L. Yin, Z. Pang, and Y. Li, “A noncontact Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 5, p. 346, Jun. 2021.
 ballistocardiography-based IoMT system for cardiopulmonary health [31] B. S. Egala, A. K. Pradhan, V. Badarla, and S. P. Mohanty, “Fortifiedmonitoring of discharged COVID-19 patients,” IEEE Internet Things J., chain: A blockchain-based framework for security and privacy-assured
 vol. 8, no. 21, pp. 15807–15817, Nov. 2021. Internet of Medical Things with effective access control,” IEEE Internet
 [9] P. V. Paul and R. Saraswathi, “The Internet of Things—A comprehensive Things J., vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11717–11731, Jul. 2021.
 survey,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Power Energy Inf. Commun. [32] B. Annane, A. Alti, and A. Lakehal, “Blockchain based context-aware
 (ICCPEIC), Mar. 2017, pp. 1–7. CP-ABE schema for Internet of Medical Things security,” Array, vol. 14,
[10] S. Bharati, P. Podder, M. R. H. Mondal, and P. K. Paul, Applications Jul. 2022, Art. no. 100150.
 and Challenges of Cloud Integrated IoMT. Cham, Switzerland: Springer [33] A. Rehman, S. Abbas, M. Khan, T. M. Ghazal, K. M. Adnan, and
 Int., Oct. 2020, pp. 67–85. A. Mosavi, “A secure healthcare 5.0 system based on blockchain
[11] R. Dwivedi, D. Mehrotra, and S. Chandra, “Potential of Internet of technology entangled with federated learning technique,” Comput. Biol.
 Medical Things (IoMT) applications in building a smart healthcare Med., vol. 150, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 106019.
 system: A systematic review,” J. Oral Biol. Craniofacial Res., vol. 12, [34] W. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Han, J. Cao, H. Cui, and D. Zheng, “Secure and
 no. 2, pp. 302–318, Mar. 2022. efficient smart healthcare system based on federated learning,” Int. J.
[12] P. Singh, K. J. Devi, H. K. Thakkar, M. Bilal, A. Nayyar, and D. Kwak, Intell. Syst., vol. 2023, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023.
 “Robust and secure medical image watermarking for edge-enabled [35] B. D. Deebak and S. O. Hwang, “Federated learning-based lightweight
 e-Healthcare,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 135831–135845, 2023. two-factor authentication framework with privacy preservation for
[13] R. Hireche, H. Mansouri, and A.-S. K. Pathan, “Security and privacy mobile sink in the social IoMT,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 5, p. 1250,
 management in Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): A synthesis,” J. Mar. 2023.
 Cybersecurity Privacy, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 640–661, Aug. 2022. [36] P. K. Bhansali, D. Hiran, and K. Gulati, “Secure data collection and
[14] S. Tarikere, I. Donner, and D. Woods, “Diagnosing a healthcare transmission for IoMT architecture integrated with federated learning,”
 cybersecurity crisis: The impact of IoMT advancements and 5G,” Bus. Int. J. Pervasive Comput. Commun., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 564–577,
 Horizons, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 799–807, Nov. 2021. May 2022.
 [37] T. Hai, J. Zhou, S. R. Srividhya, S. K. Jain, P. Young, and S. Agrawal,
[15] S. Razdan and S. Sharma, “Internet of Medical Things (IoMT):
 “BVFLEMR: An integrated federated learning and blockchain technol-
 Overview, emerging technologies, and case studies,” IETE Tech. Rev.,
 ogy for cloud-based medical records recommendation system,” J. Cloud
 vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 775–788, May 2021.
 Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, p. 22, Jul. 2022.
[16] R. K. Mahendran and P. Velusamy, “A secure fuzzy extractor based bio-
 [38] A. Lakhan et al., “Federated-learning based privacy preservation and
 metric key authentication scheme for body sensor network in Internet of
 fraud-enabled blockchain IoMT system for Healthcare,” IEEE J. Biomed.
 Medical Things,” Comput. Commun., vol. 153, pp. 545–552, Mar. 2020.
 Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 664–672, Feb. 2023.
[17] T. S. Enamamu, Intelligent Authentication Framework for Internet
 [39] L. Zhang, J. Xu, P. Vijayakumar, P. K. Sharma, and U. Ghosh,
 of Medical Things (IoMT). Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2022,
 “Homomorphic encryption-based privacy-preserving federated learning
 pp. 97–121.
 in IoT-enabled healthcare system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10,
[18] N. Naren et al., “IoMT and DNN-enabled drone-assisted COVID-19 no. 5, pp. 2864–2880, Sep. 2023.
 screening and detection framework for rural areas,” IEEE Internet Things [40] S. Niu, X. Zhou, N. Wang, W. Kong, and L. Chen, “Secure and verifiable
 Mag., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 4–9, Jun. 2021. federated learning against poisoning attacks in IoMT,” Comput. Elect.
[19] Z. Ghaffar, W.-C. Kuo, K. Mahmood, T. Tariq, A. K. Bashir, and Eng., vol. 122, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 109900.
 M. Omar, “A machine learning attack resilient and low-latency authen- [41] W. Jiang et al., “Fuzzy ensemble-based federated learning for EEGtication scheme for AI-driven patient health monitoring system,” IEEE based emotion recognition in Internet of Medical Things,” J. Ind. Inf.
 Commun. Stand. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 36–42, Sep. 2024. Integr., vol. 44, 2025, Art. no. 100789.
[20] S. Yu and K. Park, “SALS-TMIS: Secure, anonymous, and lightweight [42] M. Narula, J. Meena, and D. K. Vishwakarma, “Federated workloadprivacy-preserving scheme for IoMT-enabled TMIS environments,” aware quantized framework for secure learning in data-sensitive
 IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 60534–60549, 2022. applications,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 168, Jul. 2025,
[21] S. Y. Siddiqui et al., “IoMT cloud-based intelligent prediction of breast Art. no. 10777.
 cancer stages empowered with deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, [43] M. Kumar, S. K. Singh, and S. Kim, “Hybrid deep learningpp. 146478–146491, 2021. based cyberthreat detection and IoMT data authentication model in
[22] J. Almalki et al., “Enabling blockchain with IoMT devices for smart healthcare,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 166, Mar. 2025,
 Healthcare,” Information, vol. 13, no. 10, p. 448, Sep. 2022. Art. no. 107711.
[23] K. K. Kamarajugadda, P. Movva, M. N. Raju, S. A. Kant, and [44] A. Hussain et al., “Ensuring zero trust IoT data privacy: Differential
 S. Thatavarti, IoMT With Cloud-Based Disease Diagnosis Healthcare privacy in blockchain using federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Framework for Heart Disease Prediction Using Simulated Annealing Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1167–1179, Feb. 2025.
 With SVM. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2021, pp. 115–126. [45] S. A. Wagan et al., “A fuzzy-based duo-secure multi-modal framework
[24] Q. Pan, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, J. Li, W. Yang, and Y. D. Al-Otaibi, for IoMT anomaly detection,” J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci.,
 “Joint protection of energy security and information privacy for energy vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 131–144, Jan. 2023.
 harvesting: An incentive federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [46] M. Wazid et al., “ASCP-IoMT: AI-enabled lightweight secure commu-
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3473–3483, May 2022. nication protocol for Internet of Medical Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
[25] A. D. Aguru et al., “Reliable-RPL: A reliability-aware RPL protocol pp. 57990–58004, 2022.
 using trust-based blockchain system for Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. [47] M. Azeem et al., “FoG-oriented secure and lightweight data aggregation
 Rel., early access, Dec. 16, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TR.2024.3508652. in IoMT,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 111072–111082, 2021.
[26] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, [48] A. Almogren, I. Mohiuddin, I. U. Din, H. Almajed, and N. Guizani,
 “BEdgeHealth: A decentralized architecture for edge-based IoMT “FTM-IoMT: Fuzzy-based trust management for preventing Sybil
 networks using blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 14, attacks in Internet of Medical Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8,
 pp. 11743–11757, Jul. 2021. no. 6, pp. 4485–4497, Mar. 2021.
[27] S. Rahmadika, P. V. Astillo, G. Choudhary, D. G. Duguma, V. Sharma, [49] J. Nayak, S. K. Meher, A. Souri, B. Naik, and S. Vimal, “Extreme
 and I. You, “Blockchain-based privacy preservation scheme for misbe- learning machine and Bayesian optimization-driven intelligent framehavior detection in lightweight IoMT devices,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health work for IoMT cyber-attack detection,” J. Supercomput., vol. 78, no. 13,
 Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 710–721, Feb. 2023. pp. 14866–14891, Apr. 2022.