1262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fed-UGI: Federated Undersampling Learning
 Framework With Gini Impurity for Imbalanced
 Network Intrusion Detection
 Ming Zheng , Member, IEEE, Xiaowen Hu , Ying Hu , Xiaoyao Zheng , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Yonglong Luo

 Abstract—In the modern interconnected world, the popular- Index Terms—Federated learning, imbalanced data, network
ization of networks and the rapid development of information intrusion detection, undersampling.
technology led to the increasing security risks and threats in
network systems. The existing intrusion detection system is
constantly challenged by various malicious intrusion attacks. I. I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning algorithms have been widely used in intrusion
detection. However, the model training requires the support of
a sufficient high-quality samples, especially attack traffic data.
Network intrusion detection datasets may not be shared between
organizations due to data security and some privacy policy con-
 W ITH the further internationalization, openness and personalization of the Internet, the network makes our
 lives more convenient, but it also makes the threat of network
cerns. The federated learning framework is an optimal approach security quite common in our daily lives. Criminals can take
to address this issue, in which organizations collaborate to train advantage of security loopholes in the network to carry out
a global model shared by multiple parties while keeping the data malicious activities such as illegal invasion, destruction, theft
local to the client, guaranteeing the data privacy and security of and tampering of target systems [1]. Illegal access to personal
all parties. However, there is a problem of class imbalance in the
network traffic data owned by the organizations, which seriously information, online fraud, network intrusion, cyber theft and
affects the detection performance of the model and leads to a other activities may lead to personal financial losses, privacy
high consumption of model training time. Therefore, this study leakage, system paralysis, seriously affecting social production
proposed a novel federated undersampling learning framework and life, and harming national interests. Network security is
with Gini impurity, namely Fed-UGI. The framework is based related to personal security, enterprise security, but also related
on the hash-based block undersampling method to rebalance
the client, which can solve the influence of imbalanced training to national security. In this case, further research is needed
data on the model detection performance and improve the model to establish a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS)
training efficiency. Moreover, the client weighted aggregation that can effectively detect attacks to ensure a secure network
strategy based on Local Gini impurity can further optimize environment [2].
the effect of global model aggregation and reduce the impact In the past decade, various network intrusion detection
of the dispersion degree and information difference in client
data on model aggregation. In addition, extensive experiments methods based on machine learning have been proposed [3].
on intrusion detection datasets show that compared to SOTA Learning complex patterns from the high-dimensional data
methods, the proposed Fed-UGI method has a good detection of deep learning makes it a suitable solution for detecting
effect on the three metrics of F1-score, G-mean and AUC, network intrusion. Building detection models using machine
the training time of the model is reduced by 51.76%-92.58%, learning or deep learning algorithms has been widely used in
especially in highly class imbalance situation.
 NIDS [4]. Although previous research has shown that they
 can achieve significant performance compared to traditional
 Received 30 January 2024; revised 18 September 2024 and 21 Octo- methods [5], their better performance usually requires large
ber 2024; accepted 3 December 2024. Date of publication 12 December 2024;
date of current version 17 January 2025. This work was supported in part by amounts of attack instance data to support. However, in the
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62306009 and real world, there are not many high-quality samples of attack
Grant 62272006, in part by the Major Project of Natural Science Research in network traffic available to organizations, and most network
Colleges and Universities of Anhui Province under Grant KJ2021ZD0007,
in part by Wuhu Science and Technology Bureau Project under Grant traffic datasets suffer from serious class imbalance. These
2022jc11, in part by the Major Natural Science Research Project for Anhui problems also exist in the widespread use of real datasets
Universities under Grant 2023AH040026, and in part by the Key Research UNSW-NB15 [6], CSE-CIC-IDS2018 [7] and CICIDS’17 [7].
and Development Project for Wuhu City under Grant 2022yf55. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication Specifically, the data belonging to the normal network traffic
was Dr. Weizhi Meng. (Corresponding author: Yonglong Luo.) of majority class accounts for a large proportion in the dataset
 Ming Zheng, Ying Hu, Xiaoyao Zheng, and Yonglong Luo are with samples, while the data belonging to the attack network traffic
the School of Computer and Information, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu
241002, China, and also with the Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of of minority class accounts for a small proportion compared
Industrial Intelligence Data Security, Anhui Normal Unviersity, Wuhu, Anhui to the normal network traffic data of majority class. The class
241002, China (e-mail: mzheng@ahnu.edu.cn; ylluo@ustc.edu.cn). imbalance problem may degrade the detection performance in
 Xiaowen Hu is with the School of Computer and Information, Anhui
Normal University, Wuhu 241002, China (e-mail: xwhu@ahnu.edu.cn). recognizing the attack network traffic data of minority class,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3516547 leading to a large number of false positives [8].
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1263

 and attack network traffic data is not the same in the local
 datasets of different clients. The clients of different sizes may
 have different amounts of data in their network traffic datasets.
 In addition, due to the differences in local data distribution
 among clients, from a global perspective, the overall data
 distribution obtained by aggregating all client datasets is often
 imbalanced [14]. That is, attack network traffic data accounts
 for a small proportion in the whole global dataset, and most
 of the data is normal network traffic data. In this study, the
 imbalance problem in FL is summarized into three categories:
 1) local imbalance, the local network traffic data distribution
 of each client is imbalanced. That is, compared with normal
 network traffic, the proportion of attack network traffic in
 the client dataset is much smaller, and the local imbalance
Fig. 1. An application example of federated learning, the server and various is relative imbalance; 2) global imbalance, from a global
organizations collaborate to train the global model. perspective, the collection of network traffic data from all
 clients is imbalanced; 3) size imbalance, the number of the
 network traffic data owned by each client is uneven. The
 The intrusion detection model constructed based on a lim- main goal of FL is to protect the data privacy of all clients
ited number of imbalanced network traffic data and deep participating in federated training and collaborate with all
learning methods have limitations such as insufficient ability parties to train a shared global model with better performance
to detect network intrusion [9]. An effective solution is to [15]. However, previous studies have shown that the problem
collect network traffic data from different organizations into of imbalance across clients can hinder the goal and prolong
a data center and train deep learning models based on data the training time, and the class imbalance leads to lower
samples from the data center. Each organization contains a classification accuracy for the attack network traffic data of
certain amount of network traffic data that exists in the form minority class [16].
of silos. However, it is a fact that attack network traffic To solve the above problems, we propose Fed-UGI, which
data is private and confidential, which involves the security takes into account the data privacy protection of each organizaof governments, enterprises, research institutes, and even the tion and applies it to the learning and detection of imbalanced
countries. In addition, there are data protection regulations and network traffic data. The contribution of this study can be
privacy policies such as GDPR and CCPA, and organizations summarized as follows:
are not allowed to share network traffic datasets. Therefore, the • The proposed Fed-UGI can preprocess imbalanced
Federated Learning (FL) framework is needed to address this datasets to construct balanced training data blocks for
issue [10]. In the FL framework, the demand for sufficient local models that trained with different data blocks in each
training data can be addressed while keeping the data local local epoch, while keeping the data local to the client for
to the client, and a multi-party shared global model can be privacy.
collaboratively trained while ensuring client data privacy and • This study proposed a new client weighted aggregation
security, as shown in Fig. 1. However, currently FL is mostly strategy based on Local Gini impurity (LG), which takes
used in the field of image data, and few studies have applied into account the differences among different client data
it to the field of tabular data for network intrusion detection and can reduce the impact of local models that perform
[11], [12]. Another challenge is that the distribution of network poorly during training process on global model.
traffic data owned by each organization is imbalanced. That is, • Extensive experiments are conducted on real datasets, and
the normal network traffic data accounts for a large proportion the experimental results demonstrate that the Fed-UGI
in the dataset, and the attack network traffic data is much can achieve better performance of the network intrusion
less than the normal network traffic data. This makes the detection model with the advantage of reducing the trainmodel tend to learn more from the normal network traffic data ing time of the model by 51.76%-92.58%, especially in
of majority class, while ignoring the more important attack highly class imbalance situation.
network traffic data of minority class. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
 In FL, the distribution of network traffic datasets for each we review the related research work, including the FL in
client is usually imbalanced, and the imbalance in client NIDS, imbalanced data learning and the imbalanced data
dataset is a relative imbalance. That is to say, the number challenge in FL. In Section III, the motivation is elaborated.
of attack network traffic data is not absolutely rare [13], In Section IV, the Fed-UGI method proposed in this study
but takes a small proportion in the whole dataset compared is introduced in detail. In Section V, in order to evaluate the
with the number of normal network traffic data. The number performance of Fed-UGI, sufficient experimental verification
of clients participating in FL usually involves thousands or is performed on the basis of existing datasets. In Section VI,
even millions, and the data varies greatly between different we set up ablation experiments to discuss the effectiveness of
clients due to user habits and devices used. In other words, each improvement in the Fed-UGI. In Section VII, we discuss
the degree of imbalance between normal network traffic data the limitations of our approach in this study and the solutions
1264 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

we envision to address them. The contents and experimental server and the client, regardless of local targets. PartialFed [26]
results of this study are summarized, and the future research learns aggregation policies locally to select parameters in a
work is prospected in Section VIII. global or local model. However, this choice does not accurately
 capture the required information in the global model. The
 II. R ELATED W ORK personalization aggregation process in these methods cannot
A. Federated Learning in NIDS not directly applied to most existing FL frameworks and does
 not focus on information such as data distribution and quality
 FL, a distributed machine learning framework, can realize
 of the client local dataset. These findings inspired us to further
mobile device training on the premise of data privacy and
 optimize the model aggregation process by using a new metric
security [17]. FL eliminates the need for data sharing as FL
 to analyze the quality of the client local dataset and fairly
provides collaborative learning between devices and machine
 measure the data distribution differences among clients to
learning models can be trained on data distributed across
 determine the contribution of their local model parameters in
multiple devices [18], [19]. In the FL system, server randomly
 the aggregation process.
selects a subset Kt ⊆ K of clients to participate in training
 Since researchers proposed FedAvg [21] in 2017, there is a
in each round of communication and provides them with the
 significant development on FL, leading to FL application in a
current global model [20]. Clients train the downloaded global
 variety of fields involving sensitive data. However, few studies
model on the local dataset and upload the updated models to
 have applied FL to the field of network intrusion detection.
the FL server to aggregate. Repeat the process many times,
 Some researchers have proposed the use of FL to perform
and eventually build a general and powerful machine learning
 intrusion detection work in IoT networks [27]. FedDef [28],
model. FedAvg [21] is the most basic algorithm in FL, where
 a FL-based NIDS, is an optimization-based input perturbation
the server aggregates the global model parameters according
 defense strategy with theoretical guarantees that achieves high
to the local dataset size of the client:
 X utility by minimizing the gradient distance and strong privacy
 W t+1 = θ[k]Wkt+1 (1) protection by maximizing the input distance. EEFED [29],
 k∈Kt a FL framework for collaborative development of security
where θ is the federated aggregation vector which determines intrusion detection models, effectively reduces the negative
the contribution of the received local models and Wkt+1 denotes impact of data imbalance and non-IID on FL and improves
the updated model of client k. FedAvg employs the number the stability of the model through a personalized updating
of local samples | Dk | of client k as the federated aggregation algorithm and an optimal backtracking parameter replacement
vector, with weights proportional to the size of the local strategy.
dataset: Recently, research on network intrusion detection that
 |Dk | applies FL to various scenarios mainly focuses on protecting
 θ[k] = P , ∀k ∈ Kt . (2)
 |D j | privacy and reducing communication overhead [30], [31], and
 j∈Kt few studies have paid attention to the problem of declining
 By analyzing Eq. 2, the aggregation strategy of FedAvg is to accuracy of intrusion detection due to the imbalance of netaggregate model parameters according to the size of the client work traffic data distribution [32].
local dataset. Such aggregation method implicitly implies that
models trained on more samples are better than models trained B. Imbalanced Network Traffic Data Learning
on fewer samples, thus increasing their contribution to the It is general that the data distribution is imbalanced in the
aggregation process. However, relying solely on the size of the real world. The distribution of normal traffic and attack traffic
data may not be reasonable, as the data distribution between data in the network is usually imbalanced. When there is class
clients in FL is uneven and imbalanced. This strategy ignores imbalance in the data distribution, the normal traffic samples of
other important properties of the model and data, especially the majority class account for a very large proportion of the
in terms of training convergence, which may lead to problems whole training data, while the attack samples of the minor-
[22]. Considering this situation, if a client has a large but ity class will account for a much smaller proportion. Class
severely imbalanced dataset, then the model parameters trained imbalance can seriously affect the performance of machine
on this client will differ significantly from the optimal values. learning detection algorithms [32], [33]. FedAvg is a classical
However, the traditional aggregation strategy based on dataset training method that can train models and aggregate them with
size will make the updated global model parameters tend to local datasets from collaborative clients while protecting data
the client model parameters, which will lead to the global privacy. However, it does not take into account the impact of
model performance deviation from the optimal value, and even imbalanced data distribution on model training. The distribulead to the risk of global model divergence on the imbalanced tion of local network traffic datasets on clients is relatively
dataset [23]. imbalanced, which results in poor detection performance of
 Recently, some aggregation methods have improved model the model. On the one hand, in the training process, the model
aggregation based on FedAvg, but FedAvg is the first and most will learn more from normal network traffic samples, while
widely used. MOON [24] aims to optimize model aggregation ignoring more important attack network traffic samples, which
by adding model contrast loss as a regularization term to will cause its prediction results to be biased to normal network
minimize the differences between local and global models. traffic data, thus ignoring more important attack network traffic
FedAMP [25] performs personalized aggregation on both the data. On the other hand, due to the large scale of the client
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1265

dataset, there are a large number of redundant normal network or even better communication efficiency. However, in the
traffic samples, resulting in imbalanced training data and a practical application of FL, the client available in each round
long training time for the model. As a result, FedAvg may of communication are unenforceable, so the applicability of
not perform well in imbalanced data scenarios. During FL these strategies is limited.
training, when the model encounters class imbalance, it may In addition, FedAMP [25] is based on an attentional meslead to the generation of skewed local models during training saging mechanism that enables more efficient pair-to-pair
because the model learns more from the majority class sample collaboration between FL clients with similar data distributions
and ignores the minority class sample. In general, these models without violating client data privacy. FedGR [41] proposed the
affect global model convergence and performance during the imbalanced softmax function and gravitational regularizer to
aggregation phase. Relevant studies have shown that the final deal with the imbalance of sample number within the client
quality of deep neural network models is determined by and promote cooperation among clients to solve the label
the first few training cycles. In the critical period, defects imbalance of cross-client. Ratio Loss [16] deploys a monitor
such as low quality or quantity of training data will lead to on the server or client device to monitor the training data
irreversible degradation of model performance, no matter how composition of each round. When the monitor continuously
much additional training is conducted after this period [34]. detects similar imbalanced components, the system mitigates
This phenomenon was revealed in latest work of FL [35], the impact that has occurred by applying the loss function
[36], which aroused our attention to the data quality problem Ratio Loss in FL. However, the global model has learnt the
of imbalanced training datasets for FL models. In view of imbalanced data, which has an irreversible adverse effect on
this finding, we will design a new framework based on FL to the model.
overcome the challenge of imbalanced dataset distribution in Recently, FedNoRo [42] used knowledge distillation and
FL. While ensuring data privacy and security, we will solve distance-aware aggregation functions to update the federated
the problem of imbalanced dataset distribution, reduce the size model, and introduced logical adjustment (LA) to address data
of the training dataset, and train the model on a balanced heterogeneity and class imbalance. Zhang et al. [43] designed
dataset. This will improve the detection performance of the an efficient heterogeneity sensing client sampling mechanism,
model while reducing its training time. namely Fed-CBS, based on a category imbalance measurement
 with privacy protection, which can effectively reduce the class
C. Imbalanced Data Challenge in Federated Learning imbalance of client packet datasets.
 The challenge of imbalanced data in FL and its impact
on FL training has attracted extensive interest in the field III. M OTIVATION
of machine learning research. Many approaches have been
 To show the impact of imbalanced problems in training data
proposed to address the challenge of imbalanced data in FL.
 on FL, we use the FedAvg framework to train multi-layer
From the perspective of balanced sampling, Astraea [37] introperceptron (MLP) based on imbalanced datasets. However,
duces an additional virtual component called an intermediary
 since there is no large distributed network traffic dataset,
to access the label distribution of the clients, and then performs
 the experiment constructs a distributed dataset by resampling
data rebalancing sampling and client rearrangement training.
 the UNSW-NB15 dataset [6]. The UNSW-NB15 dataset is
However, approaches similar to Astraea that require collecting
 provided by the Cybersecurity Lab at the University of New
information about the local data class distribution of clients
 South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney. The dataset simulates the
will lead to the potential risk of privacy leakage, and the
 network traffic in the real network environment and contains
introduced mediator increases the complexity of FL and incurs
 various common network attacks and normal traffic for intrumore overhead.
 sion detection research.
 Some scholars have addressed the FL with class imbalance
problem in terms of client selection. Wang et al. [38] proposed,
FedACS, an analytic-driven client selection framework, which A. Imbalanced Dataset
quantifies the category distribution heterogeneity in a FL We construct four distributed UNSW-NB15 datasets: UN1,
environment based on Hoeffding inequality, and then selects UN2, UN3, and UN4, and the detailed information is shown in
clients with low data heterogeneity to form an ideal client Table I. UN1 and UN2 are size imbalance and global balance,
pool based on Thompson sampling. Tang et al. [39] proposed the difference between them is that UN1 is local balance and
FedCor, an FL framework constructed with an active client UN2 is local imbalance. UN2 and UN3 are size imbalance
selection strategy based on correlation, which can effectively and local imbalance, the difference between them is that UN2
mitigate the accuracy degradation caused by data heterogeneity is global balance while UN3 is global imbalance. In addition,
and significantly improve the convergence of FL. CriticalFL UN4 has more than twice as much training data as UN3. Note
[40] identifies the Critical Learning Period (CLP) during that the test set is balanced, and there are no identical samples
FL training online by examining changes in the Federated between the training sets for each client.
Gradient Norm (FGN) metric, and then adaptively determines
the number of clients participating in each training round.
CriticalFL can adapt to choose more clients to participate in B. Model Architecture
training in the CLP while choosing fewer clients elsewhere, The MLP model contains two fully connected layers, in
while improving test accuracy while maintaining comparable which the connection between the input layer and the hidden
1266 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 S ETTING OF D ISTRIBUTED UNSW-NB15 DATASET

Fig. 2. F1-score, G-mean and AUC evaluated on distributed UNSW-NB15. Fig. 3. Metrics and confusion matrixes evaluated on distributed UNSW-NB15
 after 250 communication rounds.
 TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF M ETRICS ON D ISTRIBUTED UNSW-NB15 DATASET
 A FTER 250 C OMMUNICATION ROUNDS UN4 is more than twice that of UN3, it does not improve the
 performance of the classification model.
 To elucidate the impact of the class imbalance problem,
 Fig. 3 (d) and (e) show the confusion matrix of UN1 and
 UN3. Label 0 corresponds to the category of the majority class
 sample, and label 1 corresponds to the category of the minority
 class. We can find from the comparison in Fig. 3 that for the
 confusion matrix of UN3, category 1 (minority class) samples
layer uses ReLU activation function. After activating the func- are not well classified, and the training process of the model
tion, a dropout layer is created with a retention probability of is more inclined to classify the majority class samples, thus
0.5 and the hidden layer is followed by a softmax output layer. ignoring the more important minority class samples.
In addition, the loss function is classification cross entropy, The class imbalance problem in FL leads to poor perand the metrics of classification performance are F1-score, formance of the trained model, and the prediction of the
G-means and AUC, instead of accuracy or top-1 accuracy. minority class is often more difficult. More importantly, a
We will show the reasons for choosing F1-score, G-means model learning on a dataset with imbalanced distribution
and AUC as the evaluation metrics of model performance in will lead to irreversible degradation, resulting in irreversible
Section V. effects. These problems motivate us to design a method for
 balancing the training dataset that can preprocess the local
 data while protecting the client privacy, and at the same time
C. FL Setting performs more efficiently both in terms of communication and
 We adopt a similar notation as in [17] to set the FL as computation.
follows: the communication round T is 250, the total number In summary, the main challenges of network intrusion
of clients N is 20, and the fraction C of clients participating detection based on FL are the class imbalanced problems in
in the communication in each round is 0.5. For local training, local datasets of clients and the data difference across the
the local epochs E is 5 and the local batch B is 16. Each client clients, which can lead to poor performance of local models
updates the weights via the SGD optimizer, with learning rate trained by FL, and the convergence and performance of global
η = 0.1 and no weight decay. models can be affected by the aggregation of some malicious
 Fig. 2 shows the test results of F1-score, G-mean and AUC or poorly performing local models on the server. When the
on four distributed UNSW-NB15 datasets. The experimental distribution of the client dataset is imbalanced, the trained
results show that local imbalance and global imbalance will local model will tend to the normal network traffic data and
lead to the degradation of model performance. ignore the attack network traffic data, and the parameters of
 Qualitatively, for the global balance but local imbalanced the local model will deviate from the optimal value. During
dataset UN2, compared with UN1, it can be concluded from the aggregation phase, the local model parameters uploaded
Table II and Fig. 3 (a), (b) and (c) that F1-score, G-mean by these clients negatively affect the parameters updated by
and AUC decrease by 1.48%, 1.67% and 1.71%, respectively. the global model, ultimately resulting in poor performance of
Therefore, the local imbalance will lead to the degradation of the global model. However, it is not appropriate to upload or
model performance. Compared with UN2, F1-score decreased share the local data and data distribution information of client,
by 12.08%, G-mean decreased by 9.89%, and AUC decreased as it leads to the risk of client data privacy leakage. To solve
by 7.59%. For UN4, although the amount of training data of these issues, this study proposes Fed-UGI and applies it to
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1267

imbalanced network intrusion detection. The framework firstly the above imbalance problem is not taken into account. Fedsolves the impact of imbalanced data on local model training UGI framework is improved on the basis of typical FL training
by preprocessing local data at the client, and improves the to solve the shortcomings of existing FL methods in handling
effect of global model aggregation through the client weighted imbalanced data. Firstly, in order to solve the problem of local
aggregation strategy based on Local Gini impurity to further imbalance in the clients, we rebalance the training dataset of
improve the classification performance and communication the client and considers the privacy protection in FL. Secondly,
efficiency of the model. on the basis of federated undersampling learning framework,
 the aggregation strategy based on Local Gini impurity is
Algorithm 1 Training process of Fed-UGI designed to eliminate the influence of global imbalance and
Input: Total number of clients: N, total communication size imbalance on global model aggregation. Combining these
rounds: T, the fraction of participating clients: c, dataset of two approaches, Fed-UGI can achieve a better performing
client k: Dk . global model with less training time between the clients and
Output: Trained model WT on round T the server in a data privacy protected and efficient way.
 1: Clients Rebalancing Algorithm 1 shows the training process of Fed-UGI. Before
 2: for each client i = 1 to N do FL training, client re-balancing strategy is adopted to construct
 3: DUi ← Algorithm 2(Di , E);
 balanced training data blocks by using hash-based block
 4: Server Executes undersampling (HBU) method. After starting the FL training
 5: Initialize W0 ; task, the server first initializes the global model to start the
 6: Collect clients Local Gini impurity: LG; training. Subsequently, the FL server starts a new round of
 7: for round t = 1 to T do communication t and deploys the global model to all clients.
 8: K = max(c · N, 1) Next, the server randomly selects the clients to participate in
 9: Kt ← (random subset of K clients); the FL model training task, and the selected clients upload the
10: // Client Update: model update parameters after completing the local training
11: for each client k ∈ Kt parallelly do task. Finally, at the end of the communication round, FL
12: wkt+1 ← Algorithm 3(Wt , k); server collects parameters uploaded by clients participating
13: Send wkt+1 to the server; in training and weights the uploaded model parameters for
14: end for aggregation based on Local Gini impurity. The server then
15: // Server Update: updates the global model to Wt+1 and ends this round. The
16: k
 wkt+1 ← (Collect local parameters Wt+1 for k ∈ starting model for the next communication round is Wt+1 .
 Kt );
17: Wt+1 ← Algorithm 4(wkt+1 , LGK ); B. Fed-UGI Workflow
18: end for The Fed-UGI workflow includes client rebalancing, initialization, training, and aggregation, as shown in Fig. 5.
 1) Client Rebalancing: Before the initialization phase of
 IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD the FL server, the clients participating in the FL model training
 task need to rebalance the local data with class imbalance
A. Fed-UGI Framework (O),
 1 to resolve the local imbalance in the client data. The
 In order to solve the above problems in the network problem of local imbalance in the client data can lead to weight
intrusion detection based on FL, this study proposes Fed- divergence and precision loss of the model trained on this
UGI, which can rebalance the training dataset of each client dataset. Considering that the local network traffic dataset of
while ensuring the privacy of the client. At the same time, the the client is relative imbalanced, the undersampling method
aggregation process is optimized considering the data differ- can balance its categories, and reduce the training data scale
ences between different clients. Fed-UGI is able to mitigate to improve the training efficiency.
the imbalance problem in the FL process on both the model In addition, due to the data distribution between clients is
training and the parameter aggregation, and thus is efficient different, i.e., the label of minority class in the local data of
and effective in both communication and computation. different clients may be different, that is, category label c is a
 An overview of proposed Fed-UGI is shown in Fig. 4. As minority class in client A, but it is a majority class in client B.
shown from Fig. 4, Fed-UGI consists of two components: FL To solve the above imbalance problems, this study proposes
server and clients. FL server is responsible for maintaining the Algorithm 2, that is, an undersampling method that uses
the global model, deploying the global model to the clients, hash method [44] to divide majority class samples and conand aggregating the local models uploaded by the clients. The struct balanced data blocks with the same number of the local
client maintains the local model and trains the model using epoch.
its local dataset. The local data distribution of the client is The Algorithm 2 can make good use of the distribution
imbalanced, resulting in local imbalance. The data volume of characteristics of the dataset and retain more information
different clients is different, that is, there is size imbalance. of the majority class samples. The local model trained on
 In addition, from a global perspective, data collection is the balanced data block can better learn the features of the
uneven across all clients and the degree of class skew varies minority class samples, preventing the model from ignoring
from client to client. In the classical FedAvg, the influence of the minority class samples and improving the classification
1268 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 4. Fed-UGI framework overview.

 Fig. 5. Fed-UGI workflow.

performance of the model. At the same time, we also consid- where Nma j and Nmin denote the sample number of majority
ered the need to protect data privacy, achieving a balance in and minority class, respectively. Firstly, the Algorithm 2 uses
the training dataset while ensuring that the data is local to the the Iterative Quantization (ITQ) method to encode a binary
client, avoiding the risk of data leakage. The Algorithm 2 has hash for each majority class sample and divides them into
solved the local imbalance in clients and relieved the global hash subspaces based on the encoding. Samples with the same
imbalance to a certain extent. hash encoding will be divided into the same hash subspace
 Due to the mismatch in class distribution between different (lines 7-9). ITQ [44] is an unsupervised hashing method
clients, the Algorithm 2 adaptively discriminates between that preserves the similarity information between the samples
majority and minority classes in the dataset by counting the well. The ITQ method processes samples of majority class by
number of occurrences of samples from each class in the principal component analysis (PCA) to find the direction of
dataset (lines 1-3). Define the number of data blocks dividing high variance of the samples in the feature space and to get
the client dataset consistent with the local epoch (line 4), and their representations in a new orthogonal projection space. In
define the number of hash bits as [45]: this new projection space, a unit hypercube is formed centered
 3Nma j on the origin of the PCA projection space. Each vertex of
 NB = dlog2 e (3) the hypercube represents a hash code, and each vertex is
 Nmin
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1269

associated with the sample closest to it, which is assigned global imbalance at the same time, but it does not completely
the corresponding hash code. Then, a rotation operation is eliminate the global imbalance and size imbalance, because it
performed with the aim of minimizing the quantization loss is considered that the useful information of majority class may
between the hash code and the original feature vector of the be lost when constructing data blocks with too few samples
sample, denoted as: of majority class.
 2) Initialization: In the initialization phase of the FL model
 Q (B, R) = PB − VRP2 (4)
 training task, the FL server first waits for the clients particwhere B, R, V and || · || denote the hash codes of the dataset ipating in the training to join. Clients participate in training
samples, the rotation matrix, real-valued data descriptors after by sending calculated Local Gini impurity values to the server
the PCA projection, and the Frobenius norm, respectively. (O).
 2 Gini impurity [46] denotes a measure of the probability
The hash code and rotation matrix are iteratively updated that a randomly selected sample in the set of samples is
to minimize quantization loss. Finally, the optimal set of misclassified, which measures the degree of disorder in the set.
hash codes and the optimal rotation matrix of the sample are Given that the set D contains M categories and the probability
obtained. of sample points belonging to category m is pm , then Gini
 impurity is defined as:
Algorithm 2 The HBU for rebalancing client datasets
 M
Input: Client training dataset: D = {(xi , yi )}, i = 1, . . ., p; Gini(D) = 1 −
 X
 p2m (6)
yi ∈{0,1}, local epoch E. m=1
Output: Processed dataset: DU .
Clients: The larger the Gini impurity value, the more chaotic the set
 is, the greater the uncertainty, and the greater the amount of
 1: Calculate the size of class 0 and class 1: C0 , C1 ;
 information. On the contrary, the smaller the Gini impurity
 2: Identify the majority and minority class: Dma j , Dmin ;
 value, the more ordered the set is, the smaller the uncertainty,
 3: Identify the size of Dma j and Dmin : Nma j , Nmin ;
 and the smaller the amount of information. We consider the
 4: Identify the number of data block: Nd ← E;
 case that the network traffic dataset has two categories in
 5: Calculate the number of hash bits N B by Equation (3);
 this study, i.e., normal traffic data and attack traffic data. The
 6: Calculate the number of hash subspaces: n = 2NB ;
 sample set Dk of client k can be divided into two subsets C0
 7: Perform hash code on each sample in Dma j by using ITQ;
 and C1 , and the Local Gini impurity of client k is defined as:
 8: Assign each sample in Dma j to n hash subspaces;
 9: for i = 1 to Nd do 1  2
 X |Ci |
10: Weighted all samples in Dma j by Equation (5); LG(k) = 1 − (7)
 |Dk |
11: Select Nmin samples in Dma j according to weight i=0

 distribution to form D∗ ; where | Dk | and | Ci | denote the size of dataset Dk and the
12: Obtain balanced data block di ← D∗ ∪ Dmin ; size of each subset Ci . It has been analyzed that the larger the
13: Append di to DU ; LG(k) value of the local dataset Dk of client k, the higher the
14: end for value of Gini impurity is, indicating that the dataset is more
15: return DU discrete, more random and more informative. Once the clients
 participating in federated training are identified, the FL server
 Next, the Algorithm 2 constructs balanced training data initializes the weights and optimizers of the global model and
blocks. Each training data block consists of all samples in the collects LG uploaded by all clients.
minority class and the same number of samples in the majority 3) Training: In other FL frameworks, the local models of
class as the minority class. The majority class samples are clients are trained with the same training datasets in each
divided into hash subspaces by assigned hash codes. First, local epoch, while the proposed Fed-UGI training the local
each sample i is weighted, and the sampling weight based on model with different data blocks in each local epoch. And
Hamming distance is defined as [45]: each training block is perfectly balanced.
 8 At the beginning of each communication round, the Server
 <1, di = 0 sends the current global model to all clients (O)
 3 and randomly
 wiH = 1 (5) selects fraction C clients to participate in FL training. The
 : , di , 0
 n · di detailed process of client training is shown in Algorithm 3.
where n and di denote the number of the hash subspaces and The client involved in the training first downloads the global
the Hamming distance between the hash codes corresponding model from the server. Each client performs rounds E of local
to sample i and each hash subspace. After that, according training during the local training process. In each epoch, the
to the weight distribution wH i, Nmin samples are sampled model is trained on the balanced data block De using the minifrom majority class to form a majority class subset D∗ , and a batch SGD algorithm (O): 4
balance training data block is obtained by combining D∗ and
 w0 = w − η∇1(w; De ) (8)
minority class Dmin (line 10-12). Finally, the local dataset of
client is preprocessed, and a new dataset DU for client model Training under this framework can make the model better learn
training is constructed. The Algorithm 2 solves the influence the features and distinctions between different categories and
of local imbalance in the training dataset and reduces the avoid the bias of sample categories. All participating clients
1270 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 3 The process of ClientUpdate TABLE III
Input: Global model Wt on round t, local epochs: E, client k E XPERIMENTAL N OTATIONS
rebalanced dataset: DUk .
Output: Trained model wkt+1 on clients k.
 1: Download global model from server wt ← Wt ;
 2: for each Local Epoch e = 1 to E do
 3: De ← (extract balanced data block from DU
 k .);
 4: wkt+1 ← wt - η∇`(wt ; De );
 5: end for
 6: return wkt+1 to Server

Algorithm 4 The AggregateLG for Server update
 K
Input: The uploaded parameters of clients: wt+1 , the Local
 K TABLE IV
Gini impurity of clients: LG .
 DATASET I NFORMATION
Output: Updated model Wt+1 .
Server:
 1: for Each Client k ∈ Kt do
 2: Calculate the federated aggregation vector θ[k] by
 Equation (9);
 3: end for
 4: Aggregate local models to Wt+1 by Equation (10);
 5: return Wt+1

 TABLE V
 PARAMETER S ETTINGS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS
send updates of the model to the FL server after completing
the local training (O).
 5
 4) Aggregation: Since the data of each client are independently, the distribution quantity and probability of each
category sample in the local dataset of different clients will
vary greatly. So, a new client weighted aggregation strategy is
proposed, which takes into account the dispersion degree and
information difference of the original data from each client, V. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
and based on this, measures the contribution degree of local In this section, we evaluate the performance of Fed-UGI
model parameters of each client in the aggregation process. We through experiments. First of all, the detailed settings during
weight the local parameters collected by FL Server based on the experiment are given, including the introduction of the
the Local Gini impurity uploaded by the clients for weighted datasets, the SOTA FL methods, the FL parameter settings and
aggregation (O),
 6 with weights proportional to the Local Gini the evaluation criteria. Then, the performance of the proposed
impurity value, and define the LG-based federated aggregation Fed-UGI for network intrusion detection is compared with
vector as: some SOTA methods. The symbols used in the experiment
 LG(k) are listed in Table III.
 θ[k] = P , ∀k ∈ Kt. (9)
 LG( j)
 j∈Kt
 A. Experimental Settings
Finally, FL server aggregates all the local parameters and 1) Datasets: Three widely used network intrusion detection
updates the global model to: datasets are used for experiments, namely UNSW-NB15 [6],
 CSE-CIC-IDS2018 [7] and CICIDS’17 [7]. For the exper-
 X
 Wt+1 = θ[k]wkt+1 (10) iments conducted on each dataset, our method and other
 k∈Kt comparison methods all adopt 10-fold cross-validation, taking
 the average value of ten results as a comprehensive evaluation
 The global model parameter updating process of FL server of model performance to reduce random errors. The detailed
is shown in Algorithm 4, which mainly includes two steps. information of the dataset used in this study, such as the
First, the server calculates federated aggregation vector to number of features, label attributes, number of samples in each
determine the weights of local parameter aggregation accord- class and imbalance ratio (IR), are shown in Table IV.
ing to the Local Gini impurity of participating training clients. 2) Environmental Setup: In the Fed-UGI method, we use
Next, the global parameters are calculated according to Eq. 10 cross entropy as a loss function and set the number of
to obtain the global model Wt+1 for the next communication communication rounds R to 250, SGD with a learning rate η
round. to 0.1 as the optimizer for all optimization processes, and test
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1271

 TABLE VI of attack traffic as normal traffic. Therefore, in order to
 C ONFUSION M ATRIX reasonably evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we used
 three evaluation metrics commonly used in imbalanced data
 classification study, F1-score, G-mean and the area under curve
 (AUC) measure model performance based on the receiver
 operating characteristic (ROC) curve [48], [49]. In addition,
 we compare the training time of all methods from the start of
 FL training to the end of the final communication. The results
 of the evaluation metrics are calculated through the confusion
 matrix shown in Table VI:
 TP TP
 2 · T P+FN · T P+FP
 F1 − score = TP TP
 (11)
 T P+FN + T P+FP
 r
 TP TN
 G − mean = · (12)
 T P + FN T N + FP
 The shaded area under the ROC curve in Fig. 6 is the value
 of AUC. and the x- and y-axes represent the false positive
 Fig. 6. ROC curve and AUC diagram.
 rate and true positive rate, respectively. The larger the value
 of AUC, the higher the performance of the model.
 5) Statistical Tests: To further discuss and evaluate the
batch size to 512. For local training, the local epoch and local
 effectiveness of Fed-UGI objectively, we used statistical tests
batch size are set to 5 and 16, respectively. For heterogeneous
 to determine whether there are significant differences in model
data distribution among clients, Dirichlet distribution is used
 performance across all methods on different network intrusion
to divide the data. In this study, MLP is used as global model
 detection datasets. The statistical test has been used in a
and local model, each of which has two fully connected layers,
 number of empirical studies in machine learning and other
where the connection between the input layer and the hidden
 fields [50], [51]. The statistical tests process consists of three
layer uses a ReLU activation function. The structure of the
 steps. First, on each dataset, all methods are ranked from best
model is adjusted for different datasets with different settings
 to worst according to the test performance of each method, and
for the number of hidden layer neurons, but the same structure
 the order values 1, 2, . . ., the best method order value is 1; if
is maintained between the comparison methods. The MLP
 the test performance of any of the methods is the same, the
model is implemented in PyTorch [47]. And we implement the
 order value is equally divided. The Friedman test is then used
proposed Fed-UGI based on the PyTorch federated framework
 to determine whether these methods all perform identically. If
[21]. The settings of client-related parameters for each dataset
 not, then the hypothesis that all methods perform identically
and the number of neurons in the hidden layer of the MLP
 is rejected, indicating that the performance of the methods
model setup are shown in Table V. The total number of clients
 is significantly different. A post-hoc test is needed to further
N is divided according to the size of the three datasets, and
 distinguish the methods. Finally, Nemenyi post-hoc test is used
the value of Dirichlet parameter αd is set to 1.0 to simulate
 to follow up to check whether there is a significant difference
the scenario of imbalanced client data distribution in FL. The
 between any two methods. Nemenyi post-hoc test determines
fraction c sets 10 clients to participate in each training round
 the gap between the two methods according to the critical
for each dataset. The number of neurons in the hidden layer
 range. If the difference between the average order values of
in the MLP model is set differently depending on the number
 the two methods exceeds the critical range, the hypothesis
of features in the data set but all models use the same MLP
 that the two methods have the same performance is rejected
on the same data set to ensure fairness.
 with the corresponding confidence level. Therefore, the test
 3) Baseline and Comparison Methods: We compare our results concludes that the performance of the two methods
proposed Fed-UGI with the other five SOTA baseline methods is significantly different. In this study, the confidence level
including Ratio Loss [16], FedCor [39], FedNoRo [42] and α = 0.05.
CriticalFL [40], FedDef [28]. In addition, we have added
an experiment on the model performance of all data owners
trained on local datasets without the FL framework. B. Experimental Results
 4) Performance Evaluation Metrics: accuracy is not a suit- In this section, we experiment with Fed-UGI and five SOTA
able criterion for evaluating model performance in imbalanced baseline methods on the UNSW-NB15, CICIDS’17 and CSEdata classification problems. For example, in a network traffic CIC-IDS2018 datasets. In addition, the statistical test results
dataset, the ratio of normal traffic data to attack traffic data is of all methods are given.
99:1. The model tends to predict that all data is normal, then 1) Performance Comparison Results: As shown in
the classification accuracy of normal traffic will reach 99%. Table VII, we give the results under the evaluation metrics of
However, the classification accuracy of attack traffic will be F1-score, G-mean and AUC, and the training time required
0, which is not meaningful in practical applications, and it is for all methods to complete 250 communication rounds,
likely to cause immeasurable losses due to misidentification respectively. The results show that Fed-UGI achieves the best
1272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF M ODEL P ERFORMANCE FOR E ACH M ETHOD

results on all metrics. On the UNSW-NB15 dataset, compared distribution of the highly imbalanced local dataset on the
with Ratio Loss that performs best in the baseline methods, client, and obtains the balanced dataset to train the local model,
our method increases by 1.13%, 1.61% and 1.27% in F1- while reducing the dataset size and training time. However,
score, G-mean and AUC, respectively, and more importantly, the local model of other baseline methods is trained directly
the training time is reduced by about 67.73%. On the CSE- on the highly imbalanced dataset, and the obtained model
CIC-IDS2018 dataset, compared with the optimal Ratio Loss, parameters will seriously deviate from the optimal value.
Fed-UGI further improves by 3.43%, 7.42% and 1.8%, respec- Although these baselines will later improve model perfortively. Compared with other baseline methods, the training mance through loss functions and knowledge distillation, the
time is reduced by approximately 51.76% to 80.38%. On the impact of highly imbalanced data on the model is irreversible,
CICIDS’17 dataset, the results of all the baseline methods and in the aggregation stage, these deviated model parameters
are poor, which indicates that none of these methods can will exacerbate the divergence of global model parameters,
effectively identify attack traffic samples of minority classes leading to poor performance of baseline methods. In addition,
in the network traffic data, or even ignore the attack traffic LG-based weighted aggregate strategy proposed in Fed-UGI
samples altogether in the highly imbalanced situation. can further optimize the effect of model parameter aggregation.
 The model obtained from Fed-UGI training can achieve As a result, our Fed-UGI has the best performance over other
the best detection results in terms of F1-score, G-mean and baseline methods on F1-score, G-mean and AUC, and shows
AUC, which can effectively solve the adverse effect of highly a definite advantage in training time.
imbalanced data on model training and reduce the training In Fig. 7, the detection performance of models trained by
time by 83.02%-92.86% compared with other methods. Based all data owners on their local datasets is shown. As shown
on this, it can be seen from the experimental results that in Fig. 7 (a), on the UNSWNB15 dataset, the dotted lines
our method achieves the optimal detection effect and can in the figure represent the performance results of our Fedeffectively detect normal and attack network traffic data in UGI method. It can be found that without FL framework, the
imbalanced network traffic data, especially in highly class performance of 100 data owners on F1 score, G-mean, and
imbalance situation. Meanwhile, the training time required is AUC metrics is poor. In Fig. 7 (b) and (c), for the CSE-CICdrastically reduced to improve the training efficiency of the IDS2018 and CICIDS ’17 datasets, the values of F1-score
model. and G-mean for the model trained by all data owners on
 In the experimental results on the UNSW-NB15, CICIDS imbalanced local datasets are 0, and the values of AUC are
’17 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets, the Fed-UGI method 0.5, indicating that the model cannot identify attack network
performed better in detection performance on the UNSW- traffic samples. All samples are predicted as normal network
NB15 and CICIDS’ 17 datasets. It is considered that the traffic samples, and the model tends to predict randomly.
three datasets are different in terms of data scale, degree Fed-UGI is based on a FL framework that collaborates
of imbalance in data distribution and number of features. with various clients for training which can learn sufficient
Our Fed-UGI first uses HBU method to balance the data attack network traffic data and normal network traffic data.
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1273

 TABLE VIII
 O RDER VALUE OF M ETHODS C OMPARISON ON E ACH M ETRIC

 Fig. 7. Without FL framework result.

 performance for each method on all datasets. In terms of
 evaluation metrics F1-score, G-mean, AUC and training time,
 the results of Friedman test TF are calculated to be 1.962,
 1.865, 3.676, 9.250, respectively, and the critical value of F
 test when confidence α = 0.05 is 3.326. In metrics F1-score
 and G-mean, the results of Friedman test TF are all smaller
 than the critical value of F test, so the hypothesis that the
 performance of all algorithms on F1-score and G-mean is the
 same cannot be rejected.
 Fig. 8. Results of Nemenyi post-hoc test. On both metric AUC and training time, the Friedman test
 results TF are greater than the critical value of F test, so the
 hypothesis that the performance of all algorithms is the same
In addition, Fed-UGI solves the problem of imbalanced data is rejected, indicating that the performance of all methods is
distribution and avoids the skew of the model on imbalanced significantly different on AUC and training time. The Nemenyi
datasets. post-hoc test is then used to further distinguish the methods
 2) Statistical Test Results: We used statistical test to fur- in metrics AUC and training time. Nemenyi post-hoc test
ther validate the significance of the difference in detection calculated that the critical range CD is 3.353. We mainly
performance between our method and SOTA methods. For analyzed the gap between Fed-UGI and other methods, and
each evaluation metric, the test performance of each method the test results can be visually displayed in Fig. 8, where
on each dataset is ranked from best to worst. Table VIII the vertical axis shows each method, the horizontal axis is
shows the order value and average order value of the test the average orderh value. For each method, a dot is used
1274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE IX
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

to display its average order value, and the horizontal line parameter aggregation strategy is added, (3) compared with
centered on the dot represents the size of the critical range. (1), the training time is reduced by 55.63%; (4) Compared
As shown in Fig. 8 (a), in evaluation metric AUC, Fed- with (2), the training time decreased by 55.47%. (4) Contains
UGI performs better than other methods and is significantly HBU and LGW aggregate strategy, its performance is the best
better than FedCor and FedDef method. For metric training compared to (1), (2), and (3).
time shown in Fig. 8 (b), Fed-UGI outperforms other meth- The results of four groups of experiments on the dataset
ods and significantly outperforms the CriticalFL and FedDef CSE-CIC-IDS2018 are analyzed as follows. (2) Compared
methods. with (1), LGW aggregate strategy can increase F1-score, G-
 In conclusion, the proposed Fed-UGI can greatly reduce mean and AUC by 4.52%, 7.55% and 1.61%, respectively.
the training time consumption of FL model while improving (3) Compared with (1), HBU method can increase F1-score,
the performance of network intrusion detection model. Mean- G-mean and AUC by 7.55%, 13.29% and 3.14% respectively.
while, the Fed-UGI outperforms and significantly outperforms Containing HBU and LGW aggregate strategy in (4), the
the FedCor method, the CriticalFL method and FedDef method model performs best with the least training time.
in the statistical tests of the evaluation metrics AUC and the The imbalance ratio of dataset CICIDS’17 is as high as
training time. 38.54, and the client local data after Dirichlet partition is also
 high imbalanced. Combination (1), that is, FedAvg method
 VI. D ISCUSSION in the case of highly class imbalance situation, the values
 In this section, we further used the UNSW-NB15, of F1-score and G-mean are 0, and the value of AUC is
CICIDS’17 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets for ablation 0.5, indicating that the model cannot identify attack samples
experiments to verify the effectiveness of each improvement of minority class, and all samples are predicted as normal
in Fed-UGI. The component AVG in the experiment refers to traffic, which means that the model tends to random prediction.
the aggregation strategy in FedAvg, and LGW represents the The results of (2) and (3) show that both HBU method
LG-based weighted aggregate strategy proposed in Fed-UGI. and LGW aggregate strategy can solve the problem that the
 Table IX shows a comparison of combining the HBU model cannot identify attack samples of minority class due
method and the LGW aggregate strategy with only one of the to highly class imbalance in the local data of the client.
improved combinations on the three experimental datasets. We (4) Compared with (2), under the same parameter aggregation
also implemented the FedAvg method and compared it to Fed- strategy, combined with HBU method, G-mean and AUC can
UGI. The combination (1) of each dataset indicates that there be increased by 5.34% and 5.00% respectively, and the training
is no improved component, that is, the underlying FedAvg time can be reduced by 87.22%. (4) Compared with (3),
method. Combination (2) contains only LGW improvement, LGW improvement is further added while HBU method is
combination (3) contains only HBU improvement, and com- also adopted, which further improves the performance of the
bination (4) contains all improvements at the same time. model.
 The results of four groups of experiments on the dataset The reason why the performance of the model can be
UNSW-NB15 are analyzed as follows. Compared with (1), improved while the training time can be reduced is that the
after adding only the LGW aggregate strategy in (2), F1- HBU method can construct balanced training data blocks to
score, G-mean and AUC increase by about 0.29%, 1.97% support the model training on the premise of retaining the
and 0.89%, respectively. (3) Compared with (1), which adds information of important samples of majority class, and at the
the HBU method, F1-score, G-mean and AUC increase by same time reduce the scale of training data, thus reducing the
about 2.33%, 2.46% and 1.88%, respectively. When the same training time. All improvements are included in (4), resulting
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1275

in the best value. According to the results of ablation exper- important attack network traffic data of minority class. By
iments, the components in Fed-UGI can effectively improve rebalancing the local training data of each client, the local
the performance of the final model detection results. Based model can be trained on different balanced data blocks in
on this, we can see that every improvement in Fed-UGI is each local epoch, which improves the detection performance
useful. The HBU method in Fed-UGI mainly solves the local of attack network traffic data and maintains stable performance
imbalance in the client, so that the local model can be trained in highly class imbalance situations. Finally, based on the
on the balanced data and the data scale can be reduced at the federated undersampling learning framework, we propose a
same time. However, there are still differences in the degree new client weighted aggregation strategy, which measures the
of data dispersion and the amount of information between the dispersion degree and information difference of the client data
clients. Therefore, it is important to combine the two strategies. through the Local Gini impurity, to measure the contribution
After the local model training is completed, we adopted a new of local model parameters to the global model and further
parameter weighted aggregation strategy to further optimize improve the detection performance of the global model. In
the effect of parameter aggregation, so as to achieve the addition, experimental results show that Fed-UGI can achieve
goal of improving the performance of the federated model higher detection performance with less training time compared
and shortening the training time. Compared with the FedAvg to baseline methods. Finally, the ablation experiments verified
method, the training time is reduced by 55.65%-87.20%. that the improvements of the components in Fed-UGI are
 effective. It is worth noting that we provide a FL framework
 VII. L IMITATION that is not limited by any detection model, that is, the imbalanced treatment of client rebalancing in this framework can
 This study focuses on the binary problem of network
 support for any more advanced intrusion detection model, and
intrusion detection. The model detects normal network traffic
 the client weighted aggregation strategy is also generic.
and attack network traffic, without considering to distinguish In the future, we will make the framework more flexible
specific types of attacks. Each client dataset typically focuses and versatile to be applied in more critical areas. Consider that
on detecting some type of attack. In other words, the types
 there is less data in some organizations, while there are also
of attacks in different client networks may not be the same.
 local imbalance, global imbalance, and size imbalance in FL.
When a client uses the global model to detect attacks on
 In addition, there is also the problem of multi-classification in
its network, how to make the global model effectively detect
 FL based network intrusion detection, and the global model
specific attacks on the client network is worth further research. needs to detect specific attack types on the clients. In future
At present, we propose two solutions to solve this problem. studies, we aim to further improve the performance of the
One is to use a new detection method to further identify
 model on the basis of solving these problems without violating
the attack types of all attack network traffic data based on
 privacy protection requirements.
the binary classification of network intrusion we have done.
The other is to take this problem as a multi-classification
problem of network intrusion detection, and identify various R EFERENCES
types of attack categories by improving the detection model. [1] V. Kumar and D. Sinha, “Synthetic attack data generation model apply-
In addition, this study is to analyze historical network traffic ing generative adversarial network for intrusion detection,” Comput.
data. For real time applications, we have not yet tried to study Secur., vol. 125, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103054.
 [2] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning
real-time network traffic data and we believe that the Fed-UGI for network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE
can be implemented based on Apache Flink to solve this issue. Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 1st Quart., 2023.
 [3] H. Jmila and M. I. Khedher, “Adversarial machine learning for network
 intrusion detection: A comparative study,” Comput. Netw., vol. 214, Sep.
 VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK 2022, Art. no. 109073.
 [4] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
 Due to the continuous opening of the Internet, the security “MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network intrusion
risks and threats it faces are increasing, and the effective detection system,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Comput., vol. 20, no. 2,
 pp. 1139–1153, Mar. 2023.
detection of network intrusion to maintain a secure network
 [5] T. Zebin, S. Rezvy, and Y. Luo, “An explainable AI-based intrusion
environment is becoming more and more important. This study detection system for DNS over HTTPS (DoH) attacks,” IEEE Trans.
proposes a novel federated undersampling learning framework Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2339–2349, 2022.
with Gini impurity, namely Fed-UGI. First of all, since the [6] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
application of machine learning algorithms to network intru- in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
sion detection requires a large number of high-quality data [7] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
to support model training, but all parties cannot share data a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, Jan. 2018, pp. 108–116.
in the security and privacy requirements of network traffic [8] A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and
data. Therefore, it is proposed to coordinate multi-participant J. Scarlett, “A theoretical analysis of the learning dynamics under
collaborative training in FL framework to adequately train class imbalance,” in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2023,
 pp. 10285–10322.
the global model shared by multiple parties while satisfying [9] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough:
privacy protection and data security. Secondly, we design a Challenges in labeling network traffic,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, Sep.
federated undersampling learning framework, which avoids 2022, Art. no. 102810.
 [10] X. Hao, C. Lin, W. Dong, X. Huang, and H. Xiong, “Robust and secure
training on network traffic data with class imbalance to federated learning against hybrid attacks: A generic architecture,” IEEE
produce biased models and prevents models from ignoring Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 1576–1588, 2024.
1276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[11] D. Wagner et al., “United we stand: Collaborative detection and miti- [34] S. Jastrzebski et al., “Catastrophic Fisher explosion: Early phase Fisher
 gation of amplification DDoS attacks at scale,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC matrix impacts generalization,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 970–987. Jul. 2021, pp. 4772–4784.
[12] E. M. Campos et al., “Evaluating federated learning for intrusion [35] G. Yan, H. Wang, and J. Li, “Seizing critical learning periods in federdetection in Internet of Things: Review and challenges,” Comput. Netw., ated learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8788–8796.
 vol. 203, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108661. [36] G. Yan, H. Wang, X. Yuan, and J. Li, “DeFL: Defending against
[13] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. model poisoning attacks in federated learning via critical learning
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009. periods awareness,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2023,
[14] Z. Shen, J. Cervino, H. Hassani, and A. Ribeiro, “An agnostic approach pp. 10711–10719.
 to federated learning with class imbalance,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. [37] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Chen, R. Liu, Y. Tan, and L. Liang, “Self-balancing
 Learn. Represent., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–12. federated learning with global imbalanced data in mobile systems,” IEEE
[15] F. Lai, X. Zhu, H. V. Madhyastha, and M. Chowdhury, “Oort: Efficient Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 59–71, Jan. 2021.
 federated learning via guided participant selection,” in Proc. 15th [38] Z. Wang, Y. Zhu, D. Wang, and Z. Han, “FedACS: Federated skew-
 USENIX Symp. Operating Syst. Des. Implement. (OSDI), Jul. 2021, ness analytics in heterogeneous decentralized data environments,” in
 pp. 19–35. Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQOS), Jun. 2021,
[16] L. Wang, S. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Addressing class imbalance pp. 1–10.
 in federated learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021, [39] M. Tang et al., “FedCor: Correlation-based active client selection stratpp. 10165–10173. egy for heterogeneous federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 10102–10111.
[17] Q. Li et al., “A survey on federated learning systems: Vision, hype and
 [40] G. Yan, H. Wang, X. Yuan, and J. Li, “CriticalFL: A critical learning
 reality for data privacy and protection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 periods augmented client selection framework for efficient federated
 vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3347–3366, Apr. 2023.
 learning,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
[18] Z. Pan, L. Hu, W. Tang, J. Li, Y. He, and Z. Liu, “Privacy- Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 2898–2907.
 preserving multi-granular federated neural architecture search—A [41] S. Guo et al., “FedGR: Federated learning with gravitation regulation
 general framework,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, for double imbalance distribution,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Database Syst.
 pp. 2975–2986, Mar. 2023. Adv. Appl., Apr. 2023, pp. 703–718.
[19] W. Huang, J. Liu, T. Li, T. Huang, S. Ji, and J. Wan, “FedDSR: [42] N. Wu, L. Yu, X. Jiang, K.-T. Cheng, and Z. Yan, “FedNoRo: Towards
 Daily schedule recommendation in a federated deep reinforcement noise-robust federated learning by addressing class imbalance and label
 learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, noise heterogeneity,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
 pp. 3912–3924, Apr. 2023. 2023, pp. 4424–4432.
[20] H. Zhou, G. Yang, H. Dai, and G. Liu, “PFLF: Privacy-preserving [43] J. Zhang et al., “Fed-CBS: A heterogeneity-aware client sampling
 federated learning framework for edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. mechanism for federated learning via class-imbalance reduction,” in
 Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1905–1918, 2022. Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2023, pp. 41354–41381.
[21] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, [44] Y. Gong, S. Lazebnik, A. Gordo, and F. Perronnin, “Iterative quantiza-
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentral- tion: A procrustean approach to learning binary codes for large-scale
 ized data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., Apr. 2017, image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35,
 pp. 1273–1282. no. 12, pp. 2916–2929, Dec. 2013.
[22] U. Michieli and M. Ozay, “Are all users treated fairly in federated [45] W. W. Y. Ng, S. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Tian, T. Rong, and S. Kwong,
 learning systems?,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern “Hashing-based undersampling ensemble for imbalanced pattern classi-
 Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 2318–2322. fication problems,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 1269–1279,
[23] G. Wang, C. X. Dang, and Z. Zhou, “Measure contribution of partic- Feb. 2022.
 ipants in federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big [46] S. Nembrini, I. R. König, and M. N. Wright, “The revival of the
 Data), Dec. 2019, pp. 2597–2604. Gini importance?,” Bioinformatics, vol. 34, no. 21, pp. 3711–3718, Nov.
[24] Q. Li, B. He, and D. Song, “Model-contrastive federated learning,” in 2018.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. [47] A. Paszke et al., “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch,” in Proc. Adv.
 2021, pp. 10713–10722. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Workshop Autodiff Decis. Program
[25] Y. Huang et al., “Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non- Chairs, 2017, pp. 1–4.
 IID data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., May., May 2021, [48] Y. Yan, Y. Zhu, R. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Spatial
 pp. 7865–7873. distribution-based imbalanced undersampling,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
[26] B. Sun, H. Huo, Y. Yang, and B. Bai, “PartialFed: Cross-domain Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 6376–6391, Jun. 2023.
 personalized federated learning via partial initialization,” in Proc. Adv. [49] T. Zhu, X. Liu, and E. Zhu, “Oversampling with reliably expanding
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2021, pp. 23309–23320. minority class regions for imbalanced data learning,” IEEE Trans.
[27] P. Tian, Z. Chen, W. Yu, and W. Liao, “Towards asynchronous federated Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 6167–6181, Jun. 2023.
 learning based threat detection: A DC-Adam approach,” Comput. Secur., [50] J. M. Leski, R. Czabanski, M. Jezewski, and J. Jezewski, “Fuzzy
 vol. 108, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102344. ordered c-means clustering and least angle regression for fuzzy rulebased classifier: Study for imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
[28] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense against
 vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 2799–2813, Nov. 2020.
 gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intrusion detection
 [51] L. Li, H. He, and J. Li, “Entropy-based sampling approaches for multisystems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4561–4576,
 class imbalanced problems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32,
 2023.
 no. 11, pp. 2159–2170, Nov. 2020.
[29] X. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Lai, B. Mao, and H. Lyu, “EEFED: Personalized
 federated learning of execution & evaluation dual network for CPS intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 41–56,
 2023.
[30] J. Gao et al., “Secure aggregation is insecure: Category inference attack
 on federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Comput., vol. 20,
 no. 1, pp. 147–160, Jan. 2023.
[31] J. Zhou et al., “A differentially private federated learning model against Ming Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 poisoning attacks in edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Com- degree from the School of Information Science and
 put., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1941–1958, Jun. 2023. Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China, in
[32] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN: 2020. He is currently a Lecturer with the School of
 Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for net- Computer and Information, Anhui Normal Univerwork intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, sity. His research interests include imbalanced data
 pp. 1156–1167, 2024. mining, federated learning, and privacy protection.
[33] A. Ito, K. Saito, R. Ueno, and N. Homma, “Imbalanced data problems in
 deep learning-based side-channel attacks: Analysis and solution,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3790–3802, 2021.
ZHENG et al.: Fed-UGI: FEDERATED UNDERSAMPLING LEARNING FRAMEWORK WITH GINI IMPURITY 1277

 Xiaowen Hu received the B.E. degree in com- Xiaoyao Zheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 puter science and technology from Anhui Normal the M.S. degree in computer science from the School
 University, Wuhu, China, in 2022, where she is of Computer Science, Hefei University of Technolcurrently pursuing the M.E. degree with the School ogy, Hefei, China, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in
 of Computer and Information. Her current research human geography from Anhui Normal University,
 interests include federated learning, data mining, and Wuhu, China, in 2018. Since 2021, he has been a
 privacy protection. Professor with the School of Computer and Information, Anhui Normal University. His research interests
 include data mining, information security, and big
 data analysis.

 Ying Hu received the Ph.D. degree from the School Yonglong Luo received the Ph.D. degree in comof Information and Control Engineering, China Uni- puter science from the School of Computer Science
 versity of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China, and Technology, University of Science and Techin 2022. Her research interests include feature nology of China, Hefei, China, in 2005. He is
 selection, federated learning, and multi objective currently a Professor with the School of Computer
 optimization. and Information, Anhui Normal University, Hefei.
 He is also the Director of Anhui Provincial Key
 Laboratory of Industrial Intelligence Data Security.
 His research interests include information security,
 privacy protection, and data mining.