6340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Federated-Boosting: A Distributed and Dynamic
 Boosting-Powered Cyber-Attack Detection Scheme
 for Security and Privacy of Consumer IoT
 Izhar Ahmed Khan , Member, IEEE, Dechang Pi , Shaharyar Kamal , Mohammed Alsuhaibani ,
 and Bandar Mzel Alshammari

 Abstract—Consumer Internet of Things (CIoT) is an emerging 500 billion USD in the next few years [1]. Traditionally, CEs
technology that took the traditional consumer electronics to next products are standalone which rarely connect to other devices
level with smarter devices and higher connectivity. However, the or Internet. However, the next generation CEs market has been
rapid boom of this technology has captured a great deal of
hacker’s attention in the past decade. Due to resource restricted based products that have higher connectivity and enhanced
nature of CIoT devices and limited computational abilities, intelligence as compared to traditional CE products. Hence,
security professionals are unable to strengthen the security Consumer IoT emerged as a next level technology in the CEs
and privacy measures. Since the existing security methods field and studies [1] shows dramatic increase of IoT devices
suffers from data imbalance and overfitting issues, this paper usage in different fields of CE products such as smart homes,
proposes a distributed and dynamic weighted boosting method
named Federated-Boosting for the accurate and timely detection healthcare, fintech, etc.
of cyber-attacks in CIoT. Specifically, a weighting strategy is
designed to overcome the data imbalance issue by dynamically B. Consumer IoT in Healthcare
adjusting the weights of weaker class samples. Additionally, a
regularized loss function is designed that helps in controlling The urge to upgrade the conventional healthcare network
the overfitting of the model and provide enhance performance (HCN) in to smart one is inevitable. Even though the concept
and generalization. Finally, a time-based and performance- of smart healthcare system has been talked about for decades,
based dynamic aggregation scheme is designed using distributed
training model that keeps the privacy of the CIoT devices intact to
 the existing HCN is faced with significant challenges, such as
the local server. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets medical errors, lack of medical workers, and high cost [2].
validates the superior performance of Federated-Boosting model Taking Europe and USA as example, where 10% and 20% of
against state-of-the-art detection models. GDP is devoted to healthcare domain, respectively [3], which,
 Index Terms—Security and privacy, cyber-attacks, consumer yet, unable to avoid errors in medical decisions. In addition, it
IoT, intrusion detection. is projected that by 2030, the shortage of healthcare workers
 will reach to 18 million [3]. To overcome these challenges,
 I. I NTRODUCTION the traditional CEs-based HCN are augmented and equipped
 with the IoT and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)-based
A. Consumer Electronics devices to enable enhanced communication characteristics
 HE WORLD has witnessed significant advancements in
T the Consumer Electronics (CEs) products by adopting
revolutionary technologies and tools, such as Internet-ofand provide better healthcare services. This incorporation has
 revolutionized the typical CEs into the next-generation devices
 having sophisticated intelligence with enhanced connectivity
Things (IoT), cloud computing, Machine Learning (ML), etc. measures. Thereby improving the automatic control and avail-
With this emergence and adaption, the U.S. Consumer Tech ability of data in the CE system through the connectivity
Industry reports that CEs revenues are expected to exceed of devices such as sensors, actuators, and other different
 consumer devices [2]. Nonetheless, these next generation CE
 Received 2 July 2024; revised 15 August 2024 and 2 October 2024;
accepted 13 November 2024. Date of publication 14 November 2024; devices are capable to be remotely accessed and controlled at
date of current version 14 August 2025. This work was supported by any time, and from anywhere in the world.
National Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021ZD0113103.
(Corresponding author: Izhar Ahmed Khan.)
 Izhar Ahmed Khan and Dechang Pi are with the College of Computer C. Threat Significance
Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing 210016, China (e-mail: izhar@nuaa.edu.cn; dc.pi@nuaa.edu.cn). The market of CEs devices has remarkably progressed
 Shaharyar Kamal is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, over the past decade. A study report shows that the user
University of Chile, Santiago 8330111, Chile (e-mail: skamal@ing.uchile.cl). domain of CEs sector will reach up to 2, 873.1 million by
 Mohammed Alsuhaibani is with the Department of Computer Science,
College of Computer, Qassim University, Buraydah 52571, Saudi Arabia 2025 with average revenue up to 317.10 billion USD [4].
(e-mail: m.suhibani@qu.edu.sa). Nowadays, each equipment or appliance may generate and
 Bandar Mzel Alshammari is with the Department of Information communicate data online, leading to the expansion of CEs
Systems, Jouf University, Sakakah 72388, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
bmalshammari@tcc-ict.com). devices. The typical complex architecture of Internet con-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3499942 nectivity faces challenges to acclimate to these modern-day
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING 6341

Consumer Internet of Things (CIoT) devices and networks due security model deep learning-based method to detect common
to their dynamic nature. Thus, resulting in ineffective usage security threats like DoS1 and port-based attacks. The authors
of resources, and ultimately exposing the network to diverse reported high accuracy rates, however their proposed model
kinds of cyber-attacks [5]. Moreover, it is evident from the is computationally expensive to be applied in restricted IoT
literature (please see Table I for example cyber-attacks) that networks. Similarly, the authors of [17] designed a Stacked
CIoT-based smart systems are subject to numerous attacks, Deep learning model that uses bio-inspired Spider Monkey
such as DoS, brute force, and botnets etc. [4]. optimization method. The model is capable of detecting
 various kinds of attacks such as DoS, probe, R2L2 and
D. Contribution U2R3 attacks with high accuracy. However, they evaluate their
 Federated learning (FL) concepts has emerged and shown model with an outdated (NSL-KDD) dataset that does not
advantageous provisions for delivering better security and represent the complex attack vectors in the contemporary IoT
privacy of intelligent medical systems [10], [11]. FL overcome framework.
the shortcomings of traditional centralized learning by offering To detect DDoS4 attacks in IoT environments, the writers
distributed training models without accessing data of partic- of [18] developed a benchmarking of several ML classifiers.
ipating clients. Consequently, mitigating the privacy risks of Although they used both new and old datasets to evaluate
sensitive user information and improves the learning process their model, but they neglected the applicability of their model
through shared computational resources, which might not be in real-world IoT networks. The authors of [19] developed a
conceivable through centralized learning model. An intrusion blockchain-based deep model for the security and privacy of
detection system (IDS) could serve as the security backbone for IoMT networks. Specifically, they used autoencoder for the
the next-generation CIoT network, since it can easily detect the privacy and LSTM for security purpose. However, the use of
presence of malicious activities and attacks [8]. However, due blockchain technology makes it not feasible for CIoT-based
to the specific requirements of CIoT networks (i.e., mobility, healthcare networks because of obvious drawbacks such as
limited power and memory, and low) for real-time threat high consumption and lack of clarity regarding the ownership
detection, the existing IDS faces significant design challenges. of data. Similarly, the authors of [20] also developed a threat
Additionally, the attack surface of threats is increasing day-by- detection model using blockchain and deep learning for the
day, which is why contemporary IDSs are incapable to identify security of industrial IoT networks. However, they did not
unseen or zero-day attacks. Hence, a dynamic and adaptable consider the limitations of IoT devices in their developed
security solution is needed for timely and accurate detection model.
against evolving cyber-attacks in CIoT systems. In view of federated learning [21], the literature also
 Therefore, this research work proposes a distributed reported distributed learning methods for security of medical
boosting-based intrusion detection method for the security and networks. For example, the authors of [22] developed a method
privacy of CIoT. In summary, the proposed method improve named SecFedNIDS using federated learning to guard IoT
the security domain in following ways: against poisoning attacks. However, their method required a
 • We design and develop an efficient Federated-Boosting
 lot of human effort in the application stage. Similarly, the
 model for security and privacy of CIoT networks that is authors of [23] also proposed federated learning-based model
 capable of detecting zero-day attacks. for security enhancement of IoMT networks. In an effort to
 • We design an adaptive weighted boosting mechanism to
 enhance privacy of the IoMT systems, the authors of [24]
 accurately identify complex attack vectors that assign developed a model named FL-BETS to preserve the privacy
 dynamic weights to overcome data imbalance issue. and detect data frauds at local fog level nodes and remote
 • We design loss function regularization to eliminate the
 cloud nodes. However, the detection of unknown attacks were
 issue of over-fitting. not considered during the development phase which makes it
 • We design a distributed IDS model using dynamic aggreinapplicable to detect zero-day attacks.
 gation strategy to preserve the privacy of participating
 CIoT clients. B. Research Gap and Motivation
 The remaining sections of this work are organized in It is evident from the literature review that most of the
following manner. The related work and research gap is existing methods focuses on security aspect and neglected the
presented in Section II. The details of proposed design is privacy issue. Similarly, the performance and access control
outlined in III. The experimental evaluations and results are are the key driven factors of existing methods; hence, they lack
presented in Section IV, while conclusion is presented in deploy ability in CIoT environments. Additionally, the threat
Section V. of maleficent clients in the aggregation mechanism posed a
 significant danger to the security and privacy of critical CIoT
 II. R ELATED W ORK networks. Also, a tailored security mechanism is required to
A. Literature Review cope with the challenges raised by the heterogeneous devices
 The literature has reported a plethora of research work 1 Denial-of-Service.
contributed towards the security of CIoT networks against 2 Remote-to-Local.
a disseminated range of insider and outsider threats [12], 3 User-to-Root.
[13], [14], [15]. For example, the authors of [16] developed a 4 Distributed Denial-of-Service.
6342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE I
 C YBER -ATTACK I NCIDENTS R EPORTED IN D IFFERENT C OUNTRIES

Fig. 1. General overview of proposed Federated-Boosting IDS model for CIoTs.

in the modern CIoT. To address these gaps, this paper put powerful detection/defensive system against evolving cyberforward an end-to-end security design that does not only attacks. On the other hand, federated architecture provides a
offer robust security and privacy scheme but also provide global perspective of the entire network with unified controla dynamic aggregation system for malicious clients in the ling abilities, making distributed network flow obtainability
distributed architecture of CIoT environments. To the best of easier. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed model has a comour knowledge, there is no such study that offer cyber-attack bination of central global server having several local servers
detection mechanism for security and privacy of CIoT using where each local server represents a distinct CIoT network.
federated architecture. The global server manages the weight and parameter updates,
 We applied federated learning because of its distinct benefits dynamic client list, aggregation mechanism and distribution
such as: it allows the model training with multiple data sources of global models. The proposed model is placed on the
while protecting data privacy; it decreases the need for large- global server for significant reasons such as: i) changing
scale data transfers between clients and servers, which is functionality and improved adaptability. ii) flexibility between
essential in bandwidth-constrained environments for example the linked local servers and CIoT devices. and iii) governing
IoT/CIoT; it doesn’t incur a large computation overhead capability to control the entire network as a sole an intelligent
compared to training a model in a conventional way which decision engine. This global view of entire distributed network
increases performance factor; and It offers scalability by and devices provides a combination of security and privacy
handling large number of devices or entities. and thus develop an efficient cyber-attack detection system
 to defend against malicious actions. The Federated-Boosting
 model is flexible to fit more devices by simply updating the
 III. P ROPOSED F EDERATED -B OOSTING D ESIGN parameters to the global server.
A. Model Overview
 In traditional or central networks, only the local state of B. Preprocessing
a network can be perceived through central learning. Thus, Preprocessing is an important stage in Machine Learning
it is challenging to create an overall design of a distributed as the data quality and the extracted meaningful information
structure and even harder for an IDS method to design a can directly affects the capability of a learning model; hence,
KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING 6343

it is very important to preprocess the input data before it is where σ denotes the denotes standard deviation, and the mean
feed to the detection model. The Federated-Boosting model values of m for a particular feature (id(j) (j ∈ 1, 2, . . . , m)) is
comprises the following preprocessing techniques: shown by μ.
 1) Feature Reduction: This step is applied since CIoT
devices generates high-dimensional and heterogeneous data. C. Weighted Boosting Method
The aim of this application is to remove noisy and less relevant
 Boosting is an ensemble training strategy in which the
features from the input data as it can effectively helps in
 outcomes of several training models (aka base models) is
reducing the size and computational cost of the detection
 integrated to predict a cyber threat. In this work, two modified
model. Since we intend to design a lightweight model for
 functions are applied to the boosting strategy, i.e., weight funcrestricted CIoT network, it is vital to reduce the feature set
 tion (WF) and regularized learning objective or regularized
to achieve several advantages like faster training time, low
 loss function RLF). The WF helps in rectification of gradient
memory consumption, and less computational requirements.
 deviation problem while the RLF term assists in avoiding
The Federated-Boosting model incorporates ICA5 technique
 the over-fitting issue by smoothing the final learnt weights
to reduce the feature set, which is defined below by:
 and assist in the process of detecting zero-day attacks. This
 id = N c + m (1) is done through the addition of penalty/regularization term
 to the usual loss function that demoralizes complex training
where the k-dimensional feature of the input data denoted by methods having heavy weights. This is achieved through the
id, the m-dimensional independent components are denoted regularization parameter in the training process in order to
by c, the matrix for mixing constant k × m with k ≥ m and m discourage the model for being too complex and therefore
shows noise, is denoted by the N . Suppose the medical data avoiding over-fitting issue. Additionally, this method enhances
is generated and labeled in noise-free environment, then the the generalization ability of the proposed model when executed
ICA method is shown below by: on test data.
 id = N c (2) This weighting strategy effectively treat the data imbalanced
 problem by appropriately assigning large weights to minority
and or weak labels to bring out the best of classification results.
 Similarly, the over-fitting issue is addressed through the RLF
 c = U id (3)
 strategy that tries to reduce the complexity of the model unlike
where the matrix for un-mixing is represented by U , to project other algorithms such as KNN,6 RF,7 NN,8 etc. However, to
id to c. strongly learn every feature the model comprises of a large
 These independently shown components are reflected as the number of regression trees since the training data is skewed
best feature space as it can provide higher estimates N and c in nature. Let N denotes the tree count, and M denotes the
having id with non-Gaussian data (which is standard practice records in training set, then the prediction outcome of pm and
in existing CIoT networks) optimizing constraint. Ultimately, N th tree for input data record is given by:
the optimizing constraint of non-Gaussian data to decrease the
 m = pm
 pN + ntN (bm ) tn ∈ T
 N−1
 (6)
shared information (SI) between m variables (cj , where j =
1, 2, . . . , m), is represented below to solve Eq. (4). where pmN−1 represents the outcome of previous tree, which is
    added to tn (bm ) that represents the newly constructed tree and
 SI(c1 , c2 , v3 , . . . , ck ) = E cj − E(ce ) (4)
 produce the pN m prediction result, m denotes the learning rate,
 j
 and T represents the collection of probable trees. Here we
where E shows the differential entropy. We chose ICA over can optimize the objective function to minimize the prediction
other methods because it can support to isolate mixed signals error as shown below:
into their original independent components, making it easier
 
 M
   1
to comprehend the underlying dynamics of data. Additionally, OF N = L xm , pN
 m + γ trc + λwe
 2
 (7)
this method is selected because the CIoT devices generates 2
 m=1
non-Gaussian structure data and the devices and networks are
assumed to be independent. where OF N represents the objective function, the correct value
 2) Feature Normalization: Since the proposed model is for mth sample class is denoted by xm , λ and γ represents
dependent on trees and weights, the high range of feature val- the parameters of regularization that are employed to control
ues can induce a bias in the learning system which eventually the tree pruning and complexity, respectively, trc denotes the
may cause some feature weights to update faster as compared number of terminal nodes, and we represents weight of each
to other features. Hence, it is important to address this issue leaf in tree. The boosting model utilized in this work try to
by utilizing a statistical normalization method such as, the optimize OF N via second-order estimates for the gradients of
Z-score technique, as given below: loss function to accurately learn about attack-related samples.
 However, the proposed method could estimate wrong gradients
 id(j) − μ
 ZS (j) = (5)
 σ 6 k-nearest neighbors.
 7 Random forest.
 5 Independent Component Analysis. 8 Neural network.
6344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

if the intrusions are inserted by hacker/invader at the rare nodes D. Dynamic Federation and Aggregation Strategy
resulting in imbalance issue. Therefore, a WF is designed that The distributed and collaborative client-based architecture
allocates the CW class-weights to the corresponding classes, of federated learning design makes it perfect fit for use in
as shown by: CIoT/IoMT networks since they contain private and sensitive
   data. The learning process is done both at the local client side
 Rtn
 CW = 2 × (8) and global server side. Each client then shares their model
 Rc
 updates with the server though an aggregation mechanism
where Rc denotes the total number of training records and (for example, federated averaging) after which the server
Rtn denotes each class records. In this was the training error generates the global model and distribute it to the local clients.
is minimized by assigning large weight to minority class and This aggregation and updation process is repeated through
less weight to majority class. Then the updated OF N with iterations/communication rounds until a threshold performance
CW is computed as: is achieved. A brief explanation of this federated process is
 summarized as follows:
 M 
     • Initialize and distribute the global model (if exist) as
 OF N = CW m L xm , pm
 N−1
 + tn (bm )
 GM0I .
 m=1
 • If it does not exist, then initialize the training process at
 1
 +γ trc + λcw2 (9) the server and distribute the global model as GMcr I .
 2 • The local server receives the global model GMI and
 cr

Then, to further optimize the OF N the second-order Taylor swap it with the local model (if exist) denoted as LMcr n
estimation is calculated as: where n represents local server/client and cr represents
 the communication round. The local server trains its
 M  
 1 own model using its local data and tries to optimize via
 OF = N
 CW m grm tn (bm ) + hm tn (bm )
 2
 2 reducing the loss function represented as LL(LMcr n ). The
 m=1
 optimized weights and parameters are sent as updates to
 1
 +γ trc + λcw2 (10) the global server for aggregation purposes. The loss is
 2 calculated as:
 δ 2 L(xm ,pN−1
 m )
    
where h denotes the hessian (hm ) = δ 2 pm
 , and gr LL LMcr n = arg mincr LL LMn
 cr
 (13)
 LMn
 δ L(xm ,pN−1
 m )
denotes the gradients grm = δpm . Using these equations
 1 
 kn
an efficient and strong tree splitting strategy can be applied for  
 LL LMcr
 n = (ti − f (ri ))2 (14)
enhanced training of each feature and CW weights allocated kn
 i=1
to each link. Initially, since every tree is a leaf, therefore T =
 where the number of training records is represented by
t(b) = CW s(b) denotes a leaf-node record. If the records of
 kn , the specific training record is shown by ri and its label
this leaf-node is denoted as Ji = r | s (br ) = i via substituting
 is shown as ti , and the final output of LMcr n model is
to Equation (10), we attain the following:
 shown by f (ri ).
 tr 
   • The global server generates a list of dynamic participating
 1
 OF N ∼
 = CW m Gi cwi + (Hi + λ) cw2i + γ trc (11) clients for aggregation procedure. This dynamic aggrega-
 2
 i=1 tion client list is dependent on two factors; accuracy and
 time. The model results of only those local servers/clients
where Hi = r∈Ji hm and Gi = r∈Ji grm . Suppose a will be aggregated which meets the aggregation strategy
fixed size tree structure, then the optimum weight value can
 (such as achieved threshold accuracy performance and
be calculated via OF N to 0, and the cw value denoted as
 reply with updated parameter weights in certain amount
cw = − HGi +λ
 i
 . To explore all appropriate splits, alternatively
 of time). After receiving the updates, the global server
we employed greedy algorithm to pick the most valuable split
 generates the global model as GMcr+1 I by training and
in each tree for the generation of weighted quantiles which
 loss minimization and optimization. This (global loss
are most applied in multi-trees splitting. Initially for each
 GL(GMcr I )) process is shown as:
tree, the gain (G) is calculated, then a quantile is selected
based on maximum value of G since it represent the best split.   1
 K
  
Ultimately, the value of G is calculated for every tree using GL GMcr
 I = LL LMcr
 n (15)
 K
its right (Rb) and left (Lb) branch as below: j

 1 GLb
 2 GRb
 2
 (GLb + GRb )2 • The global server update the global model GMI(cr+1)
 G= + − − γ (12) from the participating client lists as:
 2 HLb + λ HRb + λ HLb + HRb + λ
 (cr+1)
 GMI(m) = GMcr
 I(m)
 Throughout the training step this whole process is repeated 
 s
 1
for all existing sub-trees until all the hyper parameters and + |DS n |LMcr
OF N are optimized to develop an effective IDS model that LMcr |DS n | n(m)
 n(m)  =0 n=1
precisely distinguish between normal and malicious labels. (16)
KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING 6345

 TABLE II TABLE III
 D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS N UMERICAL R ESULTS OF F EDERATED -B OOSTING M ETHOD
 U SING B OTH DATASETS

 where the total number of dataset records at client n is 2) ToN_IoT Dataset: This dataset was generated through
 represented by |DS n |, the total participating clients is mimic testbed architecture of IoT and IIoT systems [26].
 denoted by s, and the count of non zero gradients trans- This dataset contains data from heterogeneous types of CIoT
 ferred by the clients is denoted by LMcr =0 |DS n |. devices (such as Fridge, GPS, Motion Light, Thermostat, etc.)
 n(m)
 All these above-mentioned steps are executed through com- to collect telemetry data of IoT services, network traffic and
munication rounds until the global model converge and attain different attack scenarios were implemented such as DoS,
desirable accuracy. Ransomware, and Backdoor etc. This dataset consists of 22
 features and 156, 119 abnormal records and 245, 000 normal
 records.
 IV. E VALUATION AND R ESULTS
A. Experimental Settings
 C. Detection Results
 The performance evaluation of Federated-Boosting model is
 This work employed well known metrics for the
done through extensive experiments conducted on a workstaperformance evaluation of proposed model such as Precision,
tion (details of which are specified in Table II). The booster
 F-Score, Recall, and Accuracy. The experiments were conis set as gbtree, the importance_type is set as gain, the
 ducted by dividing the dataset into training and testing sets
learning rate is 1, with maximum depth is set as 10, with
 where the training data contained 80% records and testing
max_delta_step as 0, subsample ratio of the training instances
 set contained 20% records. The numerical results of the
is set as 0.5, refresh_leaf as 1, num_parallel_tree is 1, and
 experiments are presented in Table III, which shows that
sampling_method is set as gradient_based.
 the Federated-Boosting model achieved 99.749% Precision,
 99.741% F-Score, 99.516% Recall, 99.742% AUC/ROC and
B. Datasets 99.745% Accuracy for the EHMS dataset and 99.563%
 The proposed model is primarily evaluated using two Precision, 99.546% F-Score, 99.156% Recall, 99.549%
datasets from different CIoT domain to assess its performance AUC/ROC and 99.554% Accuracy for the ToN_IoT dataset.
and generalizability. The basic motivation for applying these These results also indicates the learning ability and robustness
datasets are: They are created from real-world CIoT-based of the proposed model against zero-day attacks by proficiently
networks; and They realistically represent medical data and identifying numerous types of complex attack vectors in
the operations of consumer IoT (since there is a deficiency an imbalanced datasets. Even though the ToN_IoT dataset
of realistic CIoMT datasets to evaluate machine learning contain a large number of complex cyber-attacks, the proposed
algorithms for cyber security purposes). boosting model is able to learn the underlying patterns in the
 1) EHMS-2020 Dataset: The EHMS9 dataset was gen- CIoT data by successfully distinguishing them.
erated through a real-time medical system testbed [25] by Furthermore, we conducted additional experiments using
collecting both patient’s biometrics and the network flow data. CIC-IDS-2018 [4] and WUSTL-IIOT-2021 [12] datasets to
The total number of features in this dataset are 44 out of assess the performance of proposed model via traditional
which 8 are related to biometrics of patients and 35 are CEs data. It is worth mentioning that our model managed to
related to network flow. Data were collected for different CIoT achieved 99.291% and 99.434% accuracy for CIC-IDS-2018
sensors such as Electrocardiogram, Blood Oxygen Saturation, and WUSTL-IIOT-2021 datasets, respectively.
temperature, and blood pressure sensors. The total number
of records in this dataset are 16, 318 out of which 14, 272 D. Comparative Analysis and Discussion
(87.5%) are normal records and 2, 046 (12.5%) are abnormal
records and hence this ratio represents imbalance nature of this We conducted extensive experiments (in terms of accuracy
dataset. The abnormal records were generated using various metric) to compare the performance of Federated-Boosting
attack vectors such as data injection, spoofing, and man-in- model with the SOTA methods.10 The parameter settings of
the-middle attacks. these methods are taken from their respective papers and the
 9 Enhanced Healthcare Monitoring System. 10 State-of-the-art.
6346 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 2. Comparison of AUC performance on all four datasets.

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF SOTA AND F EDERATED -B OOSTING M ETHOD U SING The aggregation mechanism is designed by dynamically select-
 ACCURACY M ETRIC ON B OTH DATASETS ing contributing clients in the federation strategy to deal
 with malicious clients. The proposed model is tested with
 two publically available datasets and proved to have good
 performance (accuracy = 99.74% for EHMS dataset, 99.54%
 for ToN_IoT dataset) using imbalanced data. This security
 design can serve as a starting point for security professionals
 and critical organizations to secure their infrastructure against
 cyber-attacks.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] C. K. Wu, C.-T. Cheng, Y. Uwate, G. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and K. F. Tsang,
 “State-of-the-art and research opportunities for next-generation consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4,
numerical outcomes are shown in Table IV. It is observed pp. 937–948, Nov. 2023.
from this comparison that the Federated-Boosting model out- [2] H. Zhu et al., “Smart healthcare in the era of Internet-of-Things,” IEEE
 Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 26–30, Sep. 2019.
performed all the other detection methods by achieving high [3] H. R. Chi, M. de Fátima Domingues, H. Zhu, C. Li, K. Kojima, and
accuracy rate using both datasets. The proposed Federated- A. Radwan, “Healthcare 5.0: In the perspective of consumer Internet-
Boosting model shows an average improvement of 5.686% and of-Things-based fog/cloud computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 745–755, Nov. 2023.
6.151% as compare to other methods on EHMS dataset and [4] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
ToN_IoT dataset, respectively. These results reflect the advan- “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
tage of dynamic aggregation strategy design to adapt to the network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
 Nov. 2023.
dynamic behaviors of the contemporary CIoT networks. The
 [5] M. Yamauchi, Y. Ohsita, M. Murata, K. Ueda, and Y. Kato, “Anomaly
use of weighted boosting design also significantly improves detection in smart home operation from user behaviors and home
the detection performance as compare to other SOTA methods. conditions,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 183–192,
The reason for enhanced performance of proposed model is May 2020.
 [6] S. T. Argaw et al., “Cybersecurity of hospitals: Discussing the challenges
that it is based on dynamic ensembles and boosting mechanism and working towards mitigating the risks,” BMC Med. Informat. Decis.
which assists in dealing and smoothing with the “bias- Mak., vol. 20, pp. 1–10, Dec. 2020.
variance” trade-off. The proposed model has the potential to fit [7] T. B. Slayton, “Ransomware: The virus attacking the healthcare industry,” J. Legal Med., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 287–311, 2018.
in small-scale platforms such as CIoT because of light-weight [8] S. Steffen, Hackers Hold German Hospital Data Hostage, Deutsche
architecture and less computational requirements. Welle, Bonn, Germany, 2016.
 To summarize, the Federated-Boosting model is a [9] S. Aymé et al., “Benefits and risks of using health data for research,”
 Ph.D. dissertation, Paris Brain Inst.-ICM, Paris, France, Sorbonne Univ.,
lightweight and reliable security system for CIoT platforms. Paris, France, 2023.
However, it entails a high volume data to achieve desired [10] I. A. Khan, D. Pi, M. Z. Abbas, U. Zia, Y. Hussain, and H. Soliman,
performance. In future, we plan to integrate few-shot training “Federated-SRUs: A federated-simple-recurrent-units-based IDS for
mechanism in the proposed model with incremental learning accurate detection of cyber attacks against IoT-augmented industrial control systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8467–8476,
approach to overcome this limitation. May 2023.
 [11] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, Y. Hussain, and N. A. Khan, “DFF-
 SC4N: A deep federated defence framework for protecting supply chain
 V. C ONCLUSION 4.0 networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3300–3309,
 Existing cyber-attacks detection and defensive methods are Mar. 2023.
proven to be ineffective against the complex and evolving [12] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola,
 and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in
nature of threats. This paper proposes an effective intrusion consumer-centric Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
detection method for efficient detection of cyber-attacks in vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, Feb. 2024.
CIoT networks. The proposed model is developed using [13] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted
 distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
dynamic and adaptive boosting design in a privacy preserved vehicle protection,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
manner by keeping intact the local data on the client side. pp. 854–862, Feb. 2024.
KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING 6347

[14] A. Alzahrani and M. Z. Asghar, “Maintaining user security in consumer Dechang Pi received the B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees
 electronics-based online recommender systems using federated learn- and the Ph.D. degree in mechatronic engineering
 ing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2657–2665, from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
 Feb. 2024. Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 1994, 1997, and
[15] M. Zubair Islam, Shahzad, R. Ali, A. Haider, and H. Kim, 2002, respectively, where he is currently a Professor
 “IoTactileSim: A virtual testbed for tactile Industrial Internet of Things and a Ph.D. Supervisor. He has authored over
 services,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 24, p. 8363, 2021. 100 journals and conference papers. His research
[16] X.-H. Nguyen, X.-D. Nguyen, H.-H. Huynh, and K.-H. Le, “Realguard: interests include data mining and privacy, intel-
 A lightweight network intrusion detection system for IoT gate- ligent optimization methods, and security issues
 ways,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 432, 2022. about moving objects. He presided over 30 research
[17] Y. Otoum, D. Liu, and A. Nayak, “DL-IDS: A deep learning–based intru- projects of the National Natural Science Foundation
 sion detection framework for securing IoT,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. of China, the National 863 Program, the National Technical Foundation, the
 Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, 2022, Art. no. e3803. Civil Aerospace Foundation, and the Aviation Science Foundation.
[18] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “A comprehensive deep learning benchmark for IoT IDS,” Comput. Secur., vol. 114,
 Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102588.
[19] M. A. Almaiah, A. Ali, F. Hajjej, M. F. Pasha, and M. A. Alohali, “A
 lightweight hybrid deep learning privacy preserving model for FC-based
 Industrial Internet of Medical Things,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 6, p. 2112,
 2022.
[20] P. Kumar, R. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, R. Tripathi, and G. Srivastava, “P2tif:
 A blockchain and deep learning framework for privacy-preserved threat
 intelligence in Industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 9, Shaharyar Kamal received the M.S. degree in
 pp. 6358–6367, Sep. 2022. computer engineering from Mid Sweden University,
[21] R. Ali, Y. B. Zikria, S. Garg, A. K. Bashir, M. S. Obaidat, and H. S. Kim, Sweden, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department
 “A federated reinforcement learning framework for incumbent technolo- of Radio and Electronics Engineering, Kyung Hee
 gies in beyond 5G networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 152–159, University, Republic of Korea. He is an Assistant
 Jul./Aug. 2021. Professor with the Department of Electrical
[22] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, L. Yao, and Z. Li, “SecFedNIDS: Robust Engineering, University of Chile. His research
 defense for poisoning attack against federated learning-based network interests includes B5G, IoT, and mmWave radar for
 intrusion detection system,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 134, human activity recognition. He has been rewarded
 pp. 154–169, Sep. 2022. as a Pakistani Scientist ranked among the world’s
[23] M. N. Hossen, V. Panneerselvam, D. Koundal, K. Ahmed, F. M. Bui, two percent according to the Stanford list published
 and S. M. Ibrahim, “Federated machine learning for detection of in 2020.
 skin diseases and enhancement of Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
 security,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 835–841,
 Feb. 2023.
[24] A. Lakhan et al., “Federated-learning based privacy preservation and
 fraud-enabled blockchain IoMT system for healthcare,” IEEE J. Biomed.
 Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 664–672, Feb. 2023.
[25] A. A. Hady, A. Ghubaish, T. Salman, D. Unal, and R. Jain, “Intrusion
 detection system for healthcare systems using medical and network data:
 A comparison study,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 106576–106584, 2020.
[26] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
 Mohammed Alsuhaibani received the degree in
 “TON_IoT telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and
 advance computer science and the Ph.D. degree in
 IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 computer science from The University of Liverpool,
 pp. 165130–165150, 2020.
 U.K. He is currently an Associate Professor and
[27] P. Radoglou-Grammatikis et al., “Modeling, detecting, and mitigating
 the Head of the Department of Computer Science,
 threats against industrial healthcare systems: A combined software
 College of Computer, Qassim University, Saudi
 defined networking and reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 Arabia. His research interests include artificial intel-
 Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2041–2052, Mar. 2022.
 ligence, machine learning, computational linguistics,
[28] P. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “An ensemble learning and fogand natural language processing fields.
 cloud architecture-driven cyber-attack detection framework for IoMT
 networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 166, pp. 110–124, Jan. 2021.
[29] O. Samuel et al., “IoMT: A COVID-19 healthcare system driven by
 federated learning and blockchain,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
 vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 823–834, Feb. 2023.
[30] S. Manimurugan, S. Al-Mutairi, M. M. Aborokbah, N. Chilamkurti,
 S. Ganesan, and R. Patan, “Effective attack detection in Internet
 of Medical Things smart environment using a deep belief neural
 network,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 77396–77404, 2020.

 Bandar Mzel Alshammari received the B.S.
 degree from the School of Information Technology,
 Izhar Ahmed Khan (Member, IEEE) received the University of Canberra, Australia, and the master’s
 B.Sc. degree from the University of Engineering degree in computer and communications engineering
 and Technology, Pakistan, the master’s degree in and the Ph.D. degree in software security engineercomputer science from Mid Sweden University, ing from the Queensland University of Technology,
 Sweden, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science Australia, in 2012. He is an Associate Professor
 from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and of Software Engineering with the Department of
 Astronautics (NUAA), China. He was a Postdoctoral Information Systems, Jouf University, Saudi Arabia.
 Research Fellow with NUAA, where he is cur- Before his current affiliations, he served in several
 rently working as Faculty Member with the College positions, including the Vice President for academic
 of Computer Science and Technology. His current affairs, the acting Vice President for graduate studies and research, and the
 research interests include machine learning, cyber Dean of Admission and Registration with the University of Aljouf. He has
security, IoT, and intrusion/anomaly detection systems. published several papers in the area of software security and AI security.