4574 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Federated Edge Intelligence for Enhanced Security
in Consumer Intermittent Healthcare Devices Using
 Adversarial Examples
Farhan Ullah , Leonardo Mostarda , Diletta Cacciagrano , Mohammed J. F. Alenazi , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Chien-Ming Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Saru Kumari , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Modern consumer electronics that integrate the care and outcomes. The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT),
concept of connected personal medical devices are known as which consists of a vast network of interconnected medical
Smart Healthcare Systems (SHS). The SHS utilized healthcare devices, has substantially revolutionized healthcare delivery.
devices and edge computing for data capture, transmission via
smart devices, analysis, and the delivery of healthcare services. These devices have a variety of applications, including elec-
Cyberattacks on consumer medical devices in the healthcare tronic health record management, medicine administration
sector are becoming increasingly common. Technological frame- systems, diagnostics, and patient monitoring. However, the
works like edge computing can act as an intermediary layer interconnection of these devices poses significant security
between the cloud and SHS, reducing the burden and enhancing
data security and privacy. In this study, we proposed a novel edge
 and privacy concerns. The potential implications of security
intelligence approach for improving medical device security that flaws in healthcare devices are severe, including unauthoemploys Federated Learning (FL) and network traffic adversarial rized access to personal patient information and tampering
examples. First, we generated a distinctive dataset using image- with life-threatening medical equipment. Furthermore, the
based features extracted from network traffic bytes. Secondly, increasing sophistication of cyberattacks makes it harder to
due to the intermittent behavior of clients, the dataset received
from each client may be imbalanced, which can negatively
 maintain the integrity and confidentiality of healthcare data.
affect performance. Third, adversarial examples are generated to Medical devices can be vulnerable to various attacks, including
assess the robustness of datasets, utilizing four distinct types of ransomware, which encrypts data and demands payment to
adversarial attack methods that introduce perturbations into the decrypt it. Unauthorized access occurs when hackers acquire
input data. Finally, the cooperative FL architecture ensured data control, modify settings, or steal data. Data theft refers to
security, privacy, and edge intelligence. The proposed method
is analyzed using two standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and getting sensitive patient information. Additional risks include
Edge-IIoT, achieving 97.45% and 96.7% detection accuracy, exploiting software or firmware flaws and changing features
respectively. to cause harm or malfunction. Denial of service (DoS) attacks
 Index Terms—Consumer healthcare devices, security and pri- interrupt device functionality. Furthermore, adversaries can
vacy, edge computing, federated learning, adversarial attacks, physically manipulate devices, access manufacturing processes
network traffic. (also known as supply chain assaults), and monitor communication using man-in-the-middle attacks. Social engineering
 I. I NTRODUCTION tactics can be used to trick individuals into granting unauthorized access or distributing malware [1], [2], [3]. The need
 HE HEALTHCARE industry is undergoing a paradigm
T shift due to integrating modern consumer electronics
and technologies with medical devices to enhance patient
 to analyze enormous volumes of data collected daily to form
 inferences has led to several advances in machine learning and
 deep learning. Nonetheless, due to the immense value of this
 Received 26 June 2024; revised 23 August 2024, 8 October 2024, 16 information, it is vital to safeguard the privacy and security
October 2024, and 2 December 2024; accepted 2 December 2024. Date of pub- of the examined data. In certain circumstances, regulatory
lication 4 December 2024; date of current version 14 August 2025. This work
was supported by the Researcher Supporting Project, King Saud University, compliance demands adopting protections to protect sensitive
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Grant RSPD2024R582. (Corresponding author: information, such as the General Data Protection Regulation
Saru Kumari.) (GDPR) [1].
 Farhan Ullah and Diletta Cacciagrano are with the Division of
Computer Science, University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy (e-mail: Figure 1 depicts the purpose of an adversarial attack, which
farhan.ullah@unicam.it; diletta.cacciagrano@unicam.it). is to disrupt or destroy a system, obtain unauthorized access,
 Leonardo Mostarda is with the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, University of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy
 or defeat security measures by leveraging vulnerabilities. The
(e-mail: leonardo.mostarda@unipg.it). model training and prediction generation process requires
 Mohammed J. F. Alenazi is with the Department of Computer Engineering, transmitting individual client data to a centralized server. The
College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh resulting models are then distributed to each client. The fun-
11451, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: mjalenazi@ksu.edu.sa).
 Chien-Ming Chen is with the School of Artificial Intelligence (School damental risk associated with this technique is the insufficient
of Future Technology), Nanjing University of Information Science and security of confidential data. The interception of data transfers
Technology, Nanjing 211544, China (e-mail: chienmingchen@ieee.org). between consumers and the central server is a potential
 Saru Kumari is with the Department of Mathematics, Chaudhary Charan
Singh University, Meerut 250004, India (e-mail: saryusiirohi@gmail.com). vulnerability. Furthermore, keeping massive amounts of data
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3511615 requires high-bandwidth, low-latency communication to make
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4575

 3) We present a cooperative FL framework for detecting
 adversarial attacks on healthcare devices and demonstrate intelligent edge data processing. Through the
 utilization of shared data, our approach enhances security by preventing sensitive information from being
 disclosed.
 4) Client numbers can vary dynamically, affecting classification accuracy. Despite the use of decentralized
 data, intermittent clients, and adversarial examples, the
 proposed strategy is more robust than centralized solutions.
 The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows:
 Section II explains the related work, and Section III describes
 the proposed method. Section IV presents the experimental
Fig. 1. Adversarial attacks on conventional model training process.
 results, and Section V concludes the work.

accurate forecasts. One possible solution to these concerns II. R ELATED W ORK
would be to centrally train the machine learning model by
 Intrusion detection in healthcare devices gradually shifts
combining initial data from multiple clients. The trained model
 from traditional machine learning-based methods to edgeis then replicated and disseminated to each client, removing the
 based FL approaches [2], [7]. In this section, we discuss
need to transmit data for periodic updates. This methodology
 several methods involving machines and FL that detect and
has two significant advantages over the traditional approach.
 classify attacks on healthcare devices.
First, minimizing network dependencies and latency enables
clients to make predictions locally. Furthermore, it lowers
communication overhead. This method requires initial data A. Machine Learning
transfer from clients to the central server during training, Newaz et al. [8] demonstrated the susceptibility of personal
which may jeopardize sensitive information. Furthermore, data medical device communications to several cyber threats. An
privacy concerns may deteriorate due to large data transfers in adversary with malicious intent can intercept sensitive health
scenarios such as IoT or Edge computing with low network data and execute denial-of-service, man-in-the-middle, replay,
quality [4]. and fraudulent data injection attacks. Moreover, they intro-
 FL is gaining popularity because it stores data on each local duced HEKA, which functions as an intrusion detection system
server, which is important for healthcare applications. It tack- (IDS). HEKA uses an n-gram-based technique and machine
les privacy problems with distributed data analysis by storing learning technologies to track and detect aberrant traffic trends
confidential patient data on local computers and only exchang- in portable medical device interactions. HEKA achieves an
ing updated models, not raw data. This decentralized strategy F1-score of 98% and a detection accuracy of 98.4% when
decreases the probability of adversarial attacks by removing examined on eight publicly available devices. Fan et al. [9]
a central repository that attackers can target. FL improves explored the difficulty of constructing transferable adversarial
resilience by securely combining model weights from various scenarios for closed mode assaults without relying on the
sources, reducing the impact of adverse changes [5], [6]. replacement model. This method used data-modal conversion
The use of iterative model updates with aggregated weights to combine image-to-graph conversion, graph perturbation,
improves predictive model dependability and accuracy while and graph-to-image inversion. The solution outperforms the
maintaining data confidentiality. This makes FL an effective three baseline approaches in experiments and applies to realstrategy for dealing with hostile threats and protecting health- world scenarios because it does not require prior knowledge
care data and devices. The following are the main contributions of the victim model.
of this study. Zhang et al. [10] developed the DroidSIFT approach,
 1) Image-based features are particularly useful for captur- which identifies malicious Android apps using relationship
 ing structural data types such as storage, processes, and graphs and semantic information. The major goal of this
 headers. We generated a dataset by crawling large-scale system is to detect and prevent evolution attacks, emerging
 network traffic bytes. Following this, we developed an threats, and harmful variants. After evaluating 13,500 benign
 algorithm for converting network data into greyscale samples and 2,200 hazardous samples, DroidSIFT detected
 images. threats with an amazing 93% accuracy. Gao et al. [11]
 2) To address overfitting and misclassification, we applied designed apps that use APIs for triggering connections and
 data augmentation techniques to balance images within activities. These apps build a graph, which is then used in
 each class. To enhance our dataset against adversarial a network to produce embeddings for app categorization.
 attacks, we used strategies such as FGSM, IGSM, PGD, GDroid employed graph neural networks to detect fraudulent
 and a hybrid strategy that combined IGSM and PGD. apps as a security solution. The system accurately identified
 This comprehensive approach increases the potential of 98.99% of Android malware instances with a false positive rate
 the dataset to detect and protect against such threats below 1%. An efficient method for finding neural networks
 while also improving data security. designed for Multi-Target Classification (MTC) was proposed
4576 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 2. Federated-based edge intelligence for healthcare devices using adversarial network traffic patterns.

by Zhang et al. [12]. This method determined the optimal users. The architecture trained a Deep Neural Network (DNN)
model topologies by analyzing real-world Android network model by training local models on two clients and then
traffic. This method takes a distinctive search space and combining their updates. The DNN model demonstrated an
discrete design components into account to solve the problem accuracy of 80.09% following three validations conducted
as a limited optimization problem. This approach found by each client. This result suggested that the model can
appropriate MTC classification models by using the USTC- detect side-channel attacks accurately. Wang et al. [17] used
TFC2016 dataset. certificate-less signatures in FL to hide where parameter
 updates come from to protect medical devices from source
 inference attacks (SIAs). The proposed strategy incorporated
B. Federated Learning Analysis an enhanced batch verification technique, which reduced the
 Several research studies [13], [14] used FL approaches server’s workload. Experimental results confirmed the efficacy
in the healthcare domain. Schneble and Thamilarasu [15] of the suggested approach in lowering SIA success rates
described a massively distributed, machine learning-based IDS and accelerating signature verification. Mothukuri et al. [18]
for Medical Cyber-Physical Systems (MCPS). It explored FL used an FL-based anomaly detection approach that uses data
to reduce communication and compute costs in machine learn- from individual devices to detect intrusions in IoT networks
ing. Real patient data and security risks like DoS are used to proactively. It maintains local data, uses federated training
test. The results showed a decrease in network communication cycles with GRUs, and only communicates learned weights
costs and a 99.0% accuracy. The system used mobile device to the central server. The empirical findings indicate that
resources to achieve scalability and manage anomalous data decentralized systems exhibit better results in terms of privacy
distribution. Rehman et al. [16] described an FL framework preservation and accuracy.
for detecting side-channel threats on confidential medical data. The main challenges in developing an FL technique are
Data was acquired from ten Android smartphone soft keyboard intermittent clients and imbalanced datasets. The primary
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4577

 Algorithm 1: Generating Images From Network Traffic
 Input: FPCAP : Folder containing PCAP files
 Output: Images representing byte streams
 Function GenerateImages(FPCAP ):
 for each PCAP file pcap_file ∈ FPCAP do
Fig. 3. Image extraction from healthcare network traffic.
 Open pcap_file;
 Initialize accumulated_bytes ← {};
focus of this research is the intermittent connectivity of clients Initialize total_bytes ← 65536;
to a variety of cybersecurity organizations. Furthermore, for Initialize packet_count ← 0;
local training, each client may have access to imbalanced for each packet pi in pcap_file do
malware datasets. We developed a deep CNN-based FL byte stream: bytestreami ;
approach to address the challenges of intermittent clients and Accumulate
 n byte streams
imbalanced datasets. j=1 |bytestream j | ≥ total_bytes;
 if
 k
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : F EDERATED E DGE j=1 |accumulated_bytesj | + |bytestreami | ≥
 I NTELLIGENCE FOR H EALTHCARE S ECURITY total_bytes then
 Append bytestreami to
A. Visual Features Extraction From Network Patterns accumulated_bytes;
 Figure 2 shows the architectural framework of the proposed remaining_bytes ←
approach. total_bytes − kj=1 |accumulated_bytesj |;
 PCAP files are critical to improving network security and Truncate bytestreami to fit remaining
speed. They give detailed logs of network packets, which aid space;
in detecting irregularities and threats. These files are useful for Create image accumulated_bytes;
investigating events by tracing breaches or network difficulties. Save image;
They also support protocol analysis, which aids in the detec- Increment packet_count;
tion of errors and unauthorized use. Performance evaluation Clear accumulated_bytes;
is enhanced by analyzing packet data to discover bottlenecks Append bytestreami to
and latency concerns. Additionally, PCAP files provide an accumulated_bytes;
audit record for regulatory compliance and security policy
enforcement. They help with threat detection by highlighting Save images to corresponding directories;
unusual behaviors and significant security threats. Moreover,
PCAP is useful for debugging network issues because it provides specific data flows. Considering the continual upgrading
of network traffic to avoid static and dynamic classification, when identifying adverse network traffic on healthcare equipwe investigated the usefulness of visual features in detecting ment [20]. It involves transforming and modifying the training
malicious traffic. This method uses image processing to trans- dataset D to increase diversity and allow machine learning
form network traffic patterns into textural properties. It works models to learn from diverse network traffic patterns. To
without involving reverse engineering or traffic signatures. illustrate how data transmission and packet structure can
This solution successfully reduces the impact of anti-detection vary, alternative orientations and sizes of network traffic
strategies including signature modification and dynamic fea- images can be simulated using random rotations (θ ), flips,
ture extraction evasion [19]. By examining the PCAP, a and scaling (resize(x, y)). The following mathematical expresbyte stream about each malicious variation is obtained. We sions describe these transformations using equations (1)-(2). -
designed a bytes-to-image translation technique for extracting Rotating an image I by angle θ :
images from byte streams. Greyscale images are produced
by processing 8-bit vectors retrieved from network-based Irotated = rotate(I, θ ). (1)
byte streams. Following that, each image is set to 256x256
 - Resizing an image I to dimensions x × y:
pixels. Figure 3 depicts an example of 256x256 network traffic
images for spoofing, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Iresized = resize(I, x, y). (2)
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), and DoS.
Smaller image sizes have been found to result in a significant Additionally, adding random noise () with mean μ and
reduction in network traffic. For instance, the picture converts standard deviation σ improves the model’s capacity to detect
megabytes of PCAP data into kilobytes. This has the potential fragile network traffic anomalies. This noise enhancement is
to reduce computational power. especially useful for medical devices since it mimics actual
 changes and makes the model more resistant to chaotic
B. Data Augmentation network conditions. Adding noise to an image I can be
 mathematically expressed using equation (3).
 Data augmentation improves model performance and
addresses data imbalance in real-world datasets, especially Inoisy = I + ,  ∼ N (μ, σ ). (3)
4578 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 4. Overview of evasion attacks using abnormal network traffic flows.

 Additionally, the dataset is made more diverse by methods The one-step simplicity of FGSM makes it excellent at
like color jittering and cropping (crop(x, y)), which help producing adversarial samples rapidly, but it is typically
the model acquire invariant properties across various spatial ineffective against well-defended systems.
layouts and color distributions. The following can be used to 2) Iterative Gradient Sign Method (IGSM): IGSM, which
crop an image I to dimensions x × y using equation (4). stands for Basic Iterative Method (BIM), is an extension of
 FGSM that uses iterative applications to achieve a cumulative
 Icropped = crop(I, x, y). (4) effect with fewer perturbations at each stage. The following is
 Color jittering, which alters brightness, contrast, saturation, how the technique improves the adverse effects after several
and hue, can be represented using equation (5). iterations k using equations (7) and (8).
   x
 (0)
 = x. (7)
 Ijittered = jitter I, δbrightness , δcontrast , δsaturation , δhue . (5)   
  (k+1)  (k)  (k)
 x = clipx, x + α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (8)
 Data augmentation enhances machine learning models by
adding diverse transformations, helping them learn robust The step size is denoted by α, and perturbations are
features for better and more reliable detection of malicious guaranteed to be kept within a -ball surrounding the initial
activity in healthcare devices [21]. To boost the performance input x.
of our malware detection model, we applied data augmentation 3) Projected Gradient Descent (PGD): PGD is an iterative
techniques such as rotation, jitter, noise addition, cropping, approach that functions as a resilient complement to IGSM.
and resizing. These strategies are critical in increasing the PGD employs FGSM at each iteration, then performs an
diversity and variability of the training dataset, improving estimating step to guarantee perturbations stay within a defined
its robustness and generalization. By simulating numerous p norm ball. Here is the sequence of iterations using
real-world characteristics such as evolving image orientation, equations (9) and (10)
position, and noise levels, these augmentations enabled our (0)
 x = x. (9)
model to handle a broader range of scenarios and reduce   
  (k+1)  (k)  (k)
overfitting. This method is particularly helpful given the x = x+Bp () x + α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (10)
limited data available and the necessity for the model to work
effectively in changing scenarios. The projection onto the norm ball of radius  around x
 is represented by x+Bp () . It confirms that the adversarial
C. Crafting Adversarial Examples instances work as expected and remain within a reasonable
 perturbation bound.
 We used and evaluated four adversarial attack techniques: 4) Hybrid Approach of PGD and IGSM): The hybrid
PGD, FGSM, IGSM, and a novel hybrid strategy that com- methodology leverages the distinctive features of both PGD
bined PGD and IGSM [22], [23]. As shown in Figure 4, we and IGSM. We utilize IGSM to generate adversarial instances
aim to assess how well these strategies generate adversarial and initiate the attack in this method. Then, it is imperative
examples that mislead a target model with few perturbations. to optimize these examples further using PGD to ensure that
 1) Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM): The FGSM algo- they are within the intended perturbation limits and to enhance
rithm perturbs input data x in the direction of the gradient of their efficacy. The process can be described as follows using
the loss function J(θ, x, y). It is simple and computationally equations (11), (12) and (13).
efficient. The strength of the threat is regulated by the variable • IGSM Initialization:
, which scales the perturbation. The following is the process
for generating the adversarial example, x using equation (6). x
 (0)
 = x. (11)
   
  (k+1)  (k) (k)
 x = clipx, x + α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (12)
 x = x +  · sign(∇x J(θ, x, y)). (6)
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4579

 • PGD Refinement: clients, represented by healthcare devices, sharing the
    same CNN framework and loss functions. Each device
 (k+1) (k) (k)
 x = x+Bp () x + α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (13)
 retrieves global model weights and computes a gradient
 This hybrid strategy combines the robust estimation of update after multiple SGD iterations, ensuring data
PGD with the continuous refining of IGSM, leveraging the confidentiality. CNN, widely used for detection tasks,
strengths of both techniques [24], [25]. The adversarial attack extracts information for deep training and potential gains
generation technique that combines PGD and IGSM surpasses in model capacity. Our deep CNN framework processes
distinct methods such as FGSM, IGSM, and PGD. The ability images on healthcare devices to produce LMU. It
of PGD to undertake significant gradient-based optimization, includes three convolutional layers with filter sizes of
along with the iterative improvement of IGSM, improves 64, 128, 256, and 512, respectively, followed by pooling
the precision and effectiveness of adversarial instances. PGD layers, dropout layers, a fully connected layer, and
provides a strong starting estimation, and IGSM refines these a softmax layer. Batch normalization ensures training
estimates to improve robustness and accuracy. Performance is stability, reducing overfitting risk [29], [30].
greatly enhanced by this synergy, which guarantees that the 2) Global Training Process: Several causes can contribute
adversarial examples generated are both extremely effective to intermittent behavior among remote customers in FL,
and resilient within the given limitations. including dropped connections, delayed data delivery,
 and system failures. Existing methods often fail to
 account for this intermittency, resulting in a loss in
D. Federated-Based Edge Computing: Adversarial Attacks
 model accuracy. To solve this issue, we present a FL
Detection and Classification
 system capable of detecting adversarial attacks on a
 FL provides edge intelligence by processing data locally on variety of healthcare devices. It is critical to properly
each client device, reducing latency and enhancing privacy. manage clients’ inconsistent behavior, including their
This is particularly helpful as it allows for real-time detection decision to engage in or withdraw from training. The
and classification of adversarial attacks directly on healthcare inclusion of a new client and the removal of an existing
devices without sending sensitive data to a central server [26]. one may have an impact on the dataset balance. To
This research aims to leverage secure FL settings for detecting accommodate irregular clients and unbalanced datasets,
and classifying adversarial attacks on healthcare devices we suggest storing and using weights from paused
within the context of cybersecurity. McMahan et al. [27] clients for further aggregations, or ignoring weights from
introduced the FL approach for data-driven system design using departed clients in subsequent iterations. The best course
distributed data without relying on a centralized data center. of action is context-dependent; variables such as dataset
This collaborative learning framework, which requires only the imbalance and client engagement influence the relative
sharing of model updates, can significantly enhance security advantages of the two strategies.
and privacy, particularly for healthcare devices more susceptible In FL, the global server handles dynamic client behavior
to cyberattacks. A timely and comprehensive understanding of caused by network issues and delays by employing asyncyberattacks, such as spoofing, intrusion, anomaly, and Denial chronous aggregation, which allows it to incorporate updates
of Service (DoS), is crucial for developing and improving from clients at various times. It properly schedules clients,
cyber defense models and methods. Consequently, FL has uses robust aggregation methods to handle delays and lost
tremendous potential to secure cyberspace at device and network updates, and adjusts learning rates based on client behavlevels. ior. Furthermore, despite fluctuations in client connectivity
 1) Localized Training Process: In a FL scenario, a soft and availability, the training process is made durable and
 federation of distinct entities or machines, referred to as successful by employing appropriate communication protoclients, is coordinated to train a model. In our case, these cols and fault recovery methods. To assess our method, we
 clients could be various medical institutions or devices conducted extensive experiments with intermittent clients and
 using adversarial network images generated on medical varied adversarial attack image sizes. These studies give
 devices [28]. Each client maintains local training data, information on the efficacy of various ways for minimizing
 known as Local Model Update (LMU), which updates the effects of intermittent client behavior on FL systems.
 the current global model. Therefore, client data is never The heterogeneity in network data samples often leads to
 transmitted to the global server; only the latest model a lack of generalization. Consequently, a model with high
 update is shared. Mathematically, the update process for performance in one network may be inefficient at detecting
 the global model w at time t can be expressed using attacks in another. This is due to each organizational network
 equation (14) having its own Standard Operating Environments (SOEs) [31]
 wt+1 = wt − η · ∇f (wt ). (14) and various potential attacks. The conditional distribution
 of the used data reflects these threats. Machine learning
 where η is the learning rate, ∇f (wt ) is the gradient of models heavily rely on mining useful features to differentiate
 the loss function concerning the model parameters w, between benign and malicious samples. Therefore, training
 computed based on the local data of each client. The a threat detection model necessitates a broad range of data
 healthcare devices, acting as clients, conduct mini-batch samples. In ML-based attack detection, data scarcity and
 Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on locally collected heterogeneity are critical considerations in each ML scenario
 images using deep CNN. Our method employs sporadic [32], [33].
4580 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
A. Dataset Preparation
 We evaluated the proposed approach with two standard and realistic datasets, such as CICIoMT20241 [34],
and Edge-IIoT2 [35]. The CICIoMT2024 dataset includes
healthcare equipment attack vectors. The dataset evaluates
IoMT security by analyzing attacks on 40 devices (25 real
and 15 simulated) using healthcare protocols such as Wi-
Fi, Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), and Bluetooth.
There have been five identified attacks: DDoS, DoS, recon,
MQTT, and spoofing. A network tap created a security
and profiling dataset by replaying real-time packets between Fig. 5. Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 2 clients.
the switch and Wi-Fi/MQTT-capable IoMT devices. Edge-
IIoT, the second dataset, was developed using an IoT/IIoT
 of the proposed system. The proposed method is tested with
testbed, which included devices, sensors, protocols, and
 clients numbered 2, 3, 10, and 15. It is determined that
edge configurations. This compilation comprises data from
 expanding the number of clients yields the best improvements.
over 10 IoT devices, including low-cost digital tempera-
 Having more FL clients boosts performance due to the diverture and humidity sensors. There are 14 attacks on IoT
 sity of datasets, parallel processing, integrated knowledge,
and IIoT communication protocols, including DoS/DDoS,
 confidentiality, and reliability. Figure 5 illustrates the two
information gathering, man-in-the-middle, Injection, and
 clients’ local and global accuracy curves. The green and
Malware. Alarms, system resources, logs, and network traforange colors represent the clients, while the blue represents
fic datasets have 61 significantly related features from
 the global averaged accuracy values. Both clients start at
1176.
 around 63% accuracy, but the global server starts at 58%.
 After a few epochs, client 1 has worse performance than client
B. Performance Indicators 2. Client 1 has 70% accuracy, whereas client 2 has 92%
 We selected various network traffic-based images and sev- on the 22nd epoch. Furthermore, the global accuracy curve
eral clients to evaluate the proposed method comprehensively. performs similarly depending on client 2. Overall, client 1
The proposed method is evaluated using two publicly available performs poorly because it frequently loses precision. Figure 6
standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and Edge-IIoT. We measured illustrates three clients’ local and global accuracy values.
performance using precision, recall, F-measure, Kappa, and When compared to each other, their dynamic values vary
accuracy. These metrics are calculated from True Positives greatly. Client 1 has the lowest performance, client 3 has
(TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False the highest, and client 2 is somewhat in the middle. The
Negatives (FN) counts. The performance measures are pro- global accuracy curve also performs roughly in the middle.
vided by Equations (15)-(19). For instance, on epoch 20, client 1 has 65% accuracy, client 3
 TP has 99%, client 2 has 87%, and global accuracy is 77%.
 Precision = . (15) After the 30th epoch, the three clients and the global server
 (TP + FP)
 are behaving similarly. Figure 7 depicts the local and global
 FP
 Recall = . (16) accuracy curves for ten clients. It demonstrates significant
 (FP + TN) variances in client performance, although the global server
 (2 ∗ TP)
 F-measure = . (17) performs better after the 23rd epoch. Our key goal is for the
 (2TP + FP + FN) global server to perform better by averaging client weights and
 (TP + TN) leveraging varied datasets. Similarly, 8 illustrates the dynamic
 Accuracy = . (18)
 (TP + TN + FP + FN) local and global accuracy curves with 15 clients. Overall, the
 (observedacc − expectedacc global server improves after the 28th epoch.
 Kappa = . (19)
 (1 − expectedacc ) Figures 9-12 depict the dynamic local and global loss
where, total = TP + TN + FP + FN, observedacc = (TP + values. Figure 9 analyzes two clients with a global server. The
TN)/total, a = (TP + FN) ∗ (TP + FP)/total, b = (FP + TN) ∗ major purpose is to obtain the declining trend for each epoch.
(FN + TN)/total, and expectedacc = (a + b)/total. For instance, client 1, client 2, and the global server begin
 with a 70% loss and steadily reduce. Client 1 displays slightly
 larger loss values than client 2 and the global server. At the
C. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
 38th epoch, client 1 has a 10% loss, whereas client 2 has
 The proposed method is tested on various clients to exam- 2%. Figure 10 illustrates three clients’ local and global loss
ine intermittent behavior. Figures 5-8 illustrate the local and values. Client 1 has the biggest loss of over 100% on the 24th
global accuracy curves used to study the dynamic behavior epoch, while client 3 has the lowest loss of 2%. Client 2 and
 1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iomt-dataset-2024.html the global server both show slightly higher second-best losses.
 2 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohamedamineferrag/edgeiiotset-cyber- Figures 11 and 12 demonstrate loss values for ten and fifteen
security-dataset-of-iot-iiot/code clients, respectively. It can be observed that the global server
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4581

Fig. 6. Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 3 clients. Fig. 9. Dynamic local and global loss curves using 2 clients.

Fig. 7. Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 10 clients. Fig. 10. Dynamic local and global loss curves using 3 clients.

 Fig. 11. Dynamic local and global loss curves using 10 clients.
Fig. 8. Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 15 clients.
 TABLE I
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS
 D ETECTION U SING CICI O MT2024
always performs better with a larger number of clients after
a few epochs, which is the primary purpose of the proposed
approach. Table I compares the performance of several forms
of adversarial attack detection on the CICIOMT2024 dataset.
The FGSM attack is identified with reduced performance,
whereas the hybrid is detected with maximum performance.
Although the hybrid attack is the most powerful feature attack
due to the combination of IGSM and PGD. The proposed
method remains the most effective. For instance, the FGSM
attack has precision, recall, and f1-score, with accuracy of
93.2%, 97.2%, 95.6%, and 95.2%. The performance measures instance, the PGD has precision, recall, f1-score, and accuracy
for hybrid attacks are 98.3%, 100%, 99%, and 99.34%. The of 98.3%, 100%, 99%, and 99.34%, respectively.
PGD attack is detected more than the other two approaches Table II compares the performance of several attack detec-
(FGSM and IGSM), but less than the hybrid strategy. For tion methods using the Edge-IIoT dataset. Similar to Table I,
4582 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS
 C LASSIFICATION U SING CICI O MT2024

Fig. 12. Dynamic local and global loss curves using 15 clients.

 TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS D ETECTION
 U SING E DGE -II OT SET

hybrid attacks are identified more effectively than other methods. For the hybrid attack, the precision, recall, f1 score,
and accuracy are 98.9%, 100%, 98.8%, and 99.2%. Similarly,
the same performance measurements are lowest for FGSM,
but PGD is superior. Table III presents performance metrics,
including precision, recall, and f1 score for classifying adversarial attacks on the CICIOMT2024 dataset. There are five
classes: DDoS, DoS, MQTT, Recon, and Spoofing. As can
be observed, hybrid adversarial attacks are accurately divided
into five distinct attacks. For instance, DDoS (94.7%, 96%, Fig. 13. FGSM-based Adversarial attacks detection using CICIoMT2024
96.1%), DoS (97.6%, 98.1%, 97.6%), MQTT (95.8%, 98.7%, dataset.
98.3%), Recon (98.2%, 94%, 95.9%), and Spoofing (100%,
100%, 100%). Table IV shows the performance classification the confusion matrix for FGSM-based adversarial attack clasof several adversarial attacks on the Edge-IIoT dataset. We sification on the CICIoMT2024 dataset. DDoS, DoS, MQTT,
presented adversarial examples for FGSM and hybrid to Recon, and Spoofing are correctly characterized at 92%. 83%,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The 91%, 92%, and 100%. Figure 17 illustrates the confusion
Edge-IIoT dataset has 14 categories, and the suggested strat- matrix for hybrid adversarial attack classification. DDoS, DoS,
egy is more accurate in classifying hybrid-based adversarial MQTT, Recon, and Spoofing are accurately identified at 96%.
attacks. Table V presents classification accuracy utilizing four 98%, 99%, 94%, and 100%. Figure 18 presents the confusion
adversarial attacks for the suggested technique. The hybrid matrix for adversarial attack classification using the Edgetechnique achieves the greatest classification rate of 97.45% IIoTset dataset.
utilizing the CICIoMT2024 dataset and 96.7% with the Edge- Table VI presents a performance comparison with related
IIoTset dataset. studies. Fan et al. [9] introduced a method for generating
 To provide deeper analysis, the confusion matrix can adaptable adversarial instances without a replacement model,
show the correct and incorrect classification rates for each achieving a 95.16% success rate. Their approach involves
class in the dataset. Figure 13 presents the confusion image-to-graph transformation, perturbation on the graph, and
matrix for FGSM-based adversarial attack detection with the graph-to-image inversion. Guduri et al. [14] developed FedKC,
CICIoMT2024 dataset. The benign and attack are successfully a personalized FL algorithm for resisting model poisoning
identified at 92% and 97%, respectively. Figure 14 depicts the in the consumer health metaverse. FedKC provides tailored
confusion matrix for hybrid-based adversarial attack detection medical treatments for new users and demonstrated 91.1%
using the CICIoMT2024 dataset. The benign and attack accuracy in mitigating attacks and enhancing client customizaare appropriately identified at 98% and 100% respectively. tion in experimental tests. Mothukuri et al. [18] developed
Figure 15 depicts the confusion matrix for the hybrid adversar- a method for detecting FL anomalies in IoT networks using
ial approach with the Edge-IIoTset dataset. Figure 16 shows GRUs and decentralized on-device data, sending only learned
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4583

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS C LASSIFICATION U SING E DGE -II OT SET

Fig. 14. Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks detection using CICIoMT2024 Fig. 15. Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks detection using Edge-IIoTset
dataset. dataset.

weights to the FL server. This approach improves global ML TABLE V
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY U SING CICI O MT2024 AND E DGE -II OT SET
model accuracy and offers superior privacy protection and
attack detection, achieving 95.6% accuracy. Zhang et al. [36]
used GANs to study poisoning threats in FL, where attackers
simulate participants to generate poisoned updates from copied
samples. Their method can produce samples with over 80%
accuracy for both poisoning and main activities. The proposed
approach provides better performance, i.e., 97.45% as compared to the related works.

 V. C ONCLUSION computing and medical equipment. However, the possibility of
 SHS is a contemporary consumer electronics concept that cyberattacks increased as a result of this interconnectedness,
emerged from the integration of networked personal medical especially in vital industries like healthcare, where attacks
devices. These systems collected data, sent it to smart devices on consumer medical equipment were common. Massive
for analysis, and delivered healthcare services using edge volumes of data from medical devices also offered significant
4584 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ECENT AND R ELATED W ORKS

 solve these issues and enhance the security of medical devices
 in SHS. On standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and Edge-
 IIoT detect and mitigate adversarial attacks with 97.45% and
 96.7% accuracy, respectively. This emphasizes the crucial need
 for creative solutions that improve healthcare data security
Fig. 16. FGSM-based Adversarial attacks classification using CICIoMT2024
 while assuring the continued delivery of essential healthcare
dataset. services. Our work protects sensitive healthcare data and
 strengthens SHSs against cyber-attacks, hence improving the
 security of existing healthcare technology. FL protects medical
 data by storing it on local devices and delivering only model
 updates instead of raw data. Security and privacy can be
 enhanced by the use of blockchain technology, homomorphic
 encryption, safe aggregation, and differential privacy. While
 homomorphic encryption allows computations on encrypted
 data, secure aggregation uses cryptographic algorithms to
 protect updates, and blockchain ensures apparent process
 recording, differential privacy adds noise to model updates.
 Data privacy is further enhanced by regular security audits and
 regulatory compliance.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, N. A. Alrajeh, and F. Alsolami, “Adversarial
Fig. 17. Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks classification using CICIoMT2024 examples—Security threats to COVID-19 deep learning systems in meddataset. ical IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9603–9610,
 Jun. 2021.
 [2] H. R. Chi, M. de Fátima Domingues, H. Zhu, C. Li, K. Kojima, and
 A. Radwan, “Healthcare 5.0: In the perspective of consumer Internetof-Things-based fog/cloud computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 745–755, Nov. 2023.
 [3] T. Yaqoob, H. Abbas, and M. Atiquzzaman, “Security vulnerabilities, attacks, countermeasures, and regulations of networked medical
 devices—A review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 4,
 pp. 3723–3768, 4th Quart., 2019.
 [4] D. Li, Q. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Xu, “A framework for enhancing deep neural
 networks against adversarial malware,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
 vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 736–750, Jan.–Mar. 2021.
 [5] L. Lyu et al., “Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks
 and defenses,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7,
 pp. 8726–8746, Jul. 2024.
 [6] F. Ullah, G. Srivastava, S. Ullah, and L. Mostarda, “Privacy-preserving
 federated learning approach for distributed Malware attacks with
 intermittent clients and image representation,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4585–4596, Feb. 2024.
 [7] A. I. Newaz, A. K. Sikder, M. A. Rahman, and A. S. Uluagac, “A survey
 on security and privacy issues in modern healthcare systems: Attacks
 and defenses,” ACM Trans. Comput. Healthc., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–44,
Fig. 18. Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks classification using Edge-IIoTset 2021.
dataset. [8] A. I. Newaz, A. K. Sikder, L. Babun, and A. S. Uluagac, “HEKA:
 A novel intrusion detection system for attacks to personal medical
 devices,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2020,
challenges in terms of storage and security. Utilizing edge pp. 1–9.
 [9] X. Fan et al., “GCSA: A new adversarial example-generating scheme
computing as a layer between the cloud and SHS is crucial to toward black-box adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
overcoming these challenges. The proposed method enhanced vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2038–2048, Feb. 2024.
security and privacy while simplifying the processing of large [10] M. Zhang, Y. Duan, H. Yin, and Z. Zhao, “Semantics-aware android
 malware classification using weighted contextual API dependency
volumes of data. We used an edge intelligence approach that graphs,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014,
included suspicious examples of network traffic and FL to pp. 1105–1116.
ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY 4585

[11] H. Gao, S. Cheng, and W. J. C. Zhang, “GDroid: Android malware [23] Y. Shi, Y. Han, Q. Hu, Y. Yang, and Q. Tian, “Query-efficient black-box
 detection and classification with graph convolutional network,” Comput. adversarial attack with customized iteration and sampling,” IEEE Trans.
 Secur., vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102264. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2226–2245, Feb. 2023.
[12] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari, [24] Y. Zhao, K. Xu, H. Wang, B. Li, M. Qiao, and H. Shi, “MEC-enabled
 “An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for hierarchical emotion recognition and perturbation-aware defense in
 secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5, smart cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 23, pp. 16933–16945,
 pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024. Dec. 2021.
[13] R. Kumari, D. K. Sah, S. Gupta, K. Cengiz, and N. Ivković, “Advancing [25] F. Chen et al., “Frequency constraint-based adversarial attack on deep
 medical recommendations with federated learning on Decentralized neural networks for medical image classification,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
 data: A roadmap for implementation,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 164, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 107248.
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2666–2674, Feb. 2024. [26] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
[14] M. Guduri, C. Chakraborty, U. Maheswari, and M. Margala, “Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
 “Blockchain-based federated learning technique for privacy preservation detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 and security of smart electronic health records,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2608–2617, Feb. 2024. [27] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
[15] W. Schneble and G. Thamilarasu, “Attack detection using federated “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 learning in medical cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
 Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), vol. 29, 2019, pp. 1–8. [28] N. Rieke et al., “The future of digital health with federated learn-
[16] A. Rehman, I. Razzak, and G. Xu, “Federated learning for privacy ing,” NPJ Digit. Med., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
 preservation of healthcare data from smartphone-based side-channel [29] A. Y. A. Amer, J.-M. Aerts, B. Vanrumste, and S. Luca, “A localized
 attacks,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 684–690, learning approach applied to human activity recognition,” IEEE Intell.
 Feb. 2023. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 58–71, May/Jun. 2020.
[17] W. Wang, X. Li, X. Qiu, X. Zhang, V. Brusic, and J. Zhao, [30] R. Zuech, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and R. Wald, “Intrusion detection and big
 “A privacy preserving framework for federated learning in smart heterogeneous data: A survey,” J. Big Data, vol. 2, pp. 1–41, Feb. 2015.
 healthcare systems,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 60, no. 1, 2023, [31] T. R. Peltier, Information Security Policies, Procedures, and Standards:
 Art. no. 103167. Guidelines for Effective Information Security Management. Boca Raton,
[18] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2016.
 and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT [32] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
 security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
 Feb. 2022. 2020, pp. 2938–2948.
[19] S. Ni, Q. Qian, and R. Zhang, “Malware identification using visualiza- [33] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
 tion images and deep learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 77, pp. 871–885, and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated learn-
 Aug. 2018. ing,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Feb. 2021.
[20] P. Chlap, H. Min, N. Vandenberg, J. Dowling, L. Holloway, and [34] S. E. A. Dadkhah, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare devices-
 A. Haworth, “A review of medical image data augmentation techniques a multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,” Internet
 for deep learning applications,” J. Med. Imag. Radiat. Oncol., vol. 65, Things, vol. 28, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 101351.
 no. 5, pp. 545–563, 2021. [35] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
[21] E. Lashgari, D. Liang, and U. Maoz, “Data augmentation for deep- “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
 learning-based electroencephalography,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 346, IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
 Dec. 2020, Art. no. 108885. Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[22] A. Mustafa, S. Khan, M. Hayat, R. Goecke, J. Shen, and L. Shao, [36] J. Zhang, J. Chen, D. Wu, B. Chen, and S. Yu, “Poisoning attack in
 “Adversarial defense by restricting the hidden space of deep neu- federated learning using generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 18th IEEE
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun., 13th IEEE Int.
 pp. 3385–3394. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng. (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2019, pp. 374–380.