822 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 Federated Learning Under Attack: Exposing
 Vulnerabilities Through Data Poisoning
 Attacks in Computer Networks
 Ehsan Nowroozi , Senior Member, IEEE, Imran Haider, Member, IEEE,
 Rahim Taheri , Senior Member, IEEE, and Mauro Conti , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Federated Learning is an approach that enables Index Terms—Federated learning, causative attacks, adversarmultiple devices to collectively train a shared model without ial machine learning, corrupted training sets, cybersecurity, datasharing raw data, thereby preserving data privacy. However, fed- poisoning.
erated learning systems are vulnerable to data-poisoning attacks
during the training and updating stages. Three data-poisoning
attacks—label flipping, feature poisoning, and VagueGAN—are
tested on FL models across one out of ten clients using the CIC I. I NTRODUCTION
and UNSW datasets. For label flipping, we randomly modify N THIS modern era of technology, in which other scientific
labels of benign data; for feature poisoning, we alter highly
influential features identified by the Random Forest technique;
and for VagueGAN, we generate adversarial examples using
 I disciplines are advancing swiftly, Federated learning (FL)
 is also keeping pace and progressing rapidly. FL is a form of
Generative Adversarial Networks. Adversarial samples constitute machine learning (ML) that enables the training of a model
a small portion of each dataset. In this study, we vary the using data from data sources without centralizing the data.
percentages by which adversaries can modify datasets to observe Unlike conventional methods, which involve relaying data to
their impact on the Client and Server sides. Experimental
findings indicate that label flipping and VagueGAN attacks a central server, FL performs the learning process directly on
do not significantly affect server accuracy, as they are easily each device individually. Local data is employed to update the
detectable by the Server. In contrast, feature poisoning attacks local models, and these updates are then combined to create a
subtly undermine model performance while maintaining high unified global model on the server. This decentralized method
accuracy and attack success rates, highlighting their subtlety and not only maintains data confidentiality but also facilitates the
effectiveness. Therefore, feature poisoning attacks manipulate the
server without causing a significant decrease in model accuracy, interaction and sharing of information across devices. FL has
underscoring the vulnerability of federated learning systems the potential to be highly effective in areas such as mobile and
to such sophisticated attacks. To mitigate these vulnerabilities, IoT devices, where data privacy is vital [1], [2].
we explore a recent defensive approach known as Random FL has demonstrated significant potential in Intrusion
Deep Feature Selection, which randomizes server features with Detection Systems (IDSs). Within this framework, participatvarying sizes (e.g., 50 and 400) during training. This strategy has
proven highly effective in minimizing the impact of such attacks, ing devices, including phones and desktop computers, pool
particularly on feature poisoning. their individual intrusion detection models to construct a
 global model while simultaneously ensuring the confidentiality
 of their sensitive data [3], [4], [5]. By facilitating interactive
 model training while maintaining data decentralization and
 security on individual devices, FL-based IDS presents a
 desirable framework [6], [7]. Nevertheless, similar to other
 ML models, FL-based IDS models are vulnerable to adver-
 Received 13 July 2024; accepted 11 October 2024. Date of publication
3 January 2025; date of current version 14 March 2025. The associate editor sarial attacks, such as poisoning attacks, in which malevolent
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was data is injected during training to influence the behavior of
K. Xue. (Corresponding author: Ehsan Nowroozi.) the model. These attacks have the potential to compromise
 Ehsan Nowroozi is with the Centre for Sustainable Cyber Security
(CS2), University of Greenwich, SE10 9LS London, U.K. (e-mail: the detection systems and bring significant security risks.
e.nowroozi@greenwich.ac.uk). Consequently, it is essential to provide defense systems against
 Imran Haider is with the Department of Natural Engineering and such attacks [8], [9], [10].
Sciences, Bahcesehir University, 34349 Istanbul, Türkiye (e-mail:
imran.haider@bahcesehir.edu.tr). The objective of this study is to investigate the effectiveness
 Rahim Taheri is with the School of Computing, Faculty of Technology, of data poisoning attacks in the computer network realm, as
University of Portsmouth, PO1 2UP Portsmouth, U.K. (e-mail: they are simple to set up, yet challenging to detect. Label fliprahim.taheri@port.ac.uk).
 Mauro Conti is with the Department of Mathematics, Security and Privacy ping (LF), feature poisoning (FP), and a novel attack technique
Research Group, University of Padua, 35121 Padua, Italy, and also with against FL called VagueGAN, and use a unique technique to
the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, apply them. In LF, we randomly altered the labels of benign
Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
mauro.conti@unipd.it). data before training the model on the altered data. For FP,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3525554 we randomly altered the highly contributing features identified
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
NOWROOZI et al.: FL UNDER ATTACK: EXPOSING VULNERABILITIES THROUGH DATA POISONING ATTACKS 823

using the Random Forest method. For VagueGAN, an adver- at different percentages, revealing their impact on the
sary simply executes a data-poisoning attack by employing a accuracy of the server. Moreover, recording losses for
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). This study used com- clients under different poisoning scenarios reveals the
puter network datasets from the CIC and UNSW. However, the effects of these attacks.
use of FL in cybersecurity, particularly with realistic datasets, • Develop a novel technique of Random Deep Feature
such as CIC [11] and UNSW [12], is underexplored. These Selection (RDFS) to enhance server security against FP
datasets contain a variety of characteristics and forms of attacks. This method demonstrates significant enhanceattacks that mimic real-world settings, providing the oppor- ments in model robustness and resilience to poisoning
tunity to investigate the effects of data-poisoning attacks in attacks across several datasets. The research study india federated setting. Besides, they closely mimic actual oper- cates that when the RDFS method is employed on the
ational networks, simulating authentic network environments server, the ASR falls considerably when feature random
with a wide range of applications, real user behaviors, and a sizes are between 50 and 400, demonstrating that the
wide variety of normal and malicious activities. To make the model is more robust.
FL experimental setup sufficiently realistic, we considered 10
clients and applied the attacks to only one client. We generated B. Organization
adversarial samples using the two aforementioned methods,
 We outline the rest of our paper as follows: In Section II,
which were applied to a small percentage of the datasets.
 we provide an overview of related works that discuss data-
Next, we trained and evaluated the accuracy of the model
 poisoning attacks and defenses using different datasets. In
on adversarial datasets. We report the results for both benign
 Section III, we discuss the datasets and the network archiand manipulated datasets and find significant differences in
 tecture of our BAU1 model. This section also includes the
the accuracy of the models across the datasets. The results of
 experimental setup and techniques that we applied to perthe study clearly revealed that the LF attack failed; however,
 form both data-poisoning attacks and RDFS defense strategy.
the FP attack achieved successful outcomes, demonstrating its
 Section IV presents the results of our experiments performed
importance in deceiving a server.
 under different scenarios. In Section VI we summarize our
 The implementation code for this study is available at [13],
 study and its limitations.
and the RDFS methodology is available on [14].

 II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Contributions Data poisoning refers to the modification of data by adver-
 The following points highlight the contributions of this saries using various types of attacks. This section provides an
study: in-depth review of existing literature, organizing its contents
 • This study presents an innovative approach for perform- into three sections: GAN, LF, and FP.
 ing data-poisoning attacks in the realm of computer Label Flipping (LF): The authors in [15], [16], [17], [18],
 networks, focusing on the impacts of three types of investigated extensive strategies for FL with a special focus
 data-poisoning attacks: LF, FP, and VagueGAN. The on applying and tackling the issue of LF. These studies aim
 implementation of an FP attack is novel, using the to strengthen FL models against malicious label alterations
 Random Forest method to locate and change highly by using a mix of label noise assessment and adversarial
 contributing features that affect a classifier’s decision. training methods. Xu et al. [19], Zeng et al. [20], and
 This targeted strategy improves our understanding of how Tsouvalas et al. [21] employed knowledge obtained from
 such attacks affect the FL models. label noise analyses to detect and measure the influence of
 • This study utilizes two well-known datasets, CIC and contaminated labels on the efficiency of models. These meth-
 UNSW, both of which are highly relevant in computer ods demonstrate subtle and cooperative security mechanisms,
 networks. Experimentation with these datasets provides thereby providing a promising path toward minimizing labelsignificant insights into the limitations of FL models.The poisoning attacks in federated environments. The development
 originality lies in the choice and combination of these of defense tactics incorporates the objective of minimizing
 specific datasets for training and testing neural networks both conventional classification loss and a regularization term
 (NNs) in the context of data poisoning attacks, which to prevent adversarial label modifications [22], [23]. These
 leads to more realistic and practical findings. studies provide valuable insights into the subtle connection
 • The FL setup with ten clients and a server explores how between label noise, adversarial training, and challenges posed
 data poisoning threats affect the server’s accuracy. By by federated systems.
 attacking one client, the study reveals the FL framework’s Feature Poisoning (FP): LF attacks are mostly concerned
 weaknesses and mitigations. The novelty here lies in the with the manipulation of labels, whereas FP attacks specifanalysis of the impact of the attack on the FL system’s ically target features present in the data. Several studies
 performance and the resilience of the model. have investigated the vulnerability of FL models to FP.
 • In our investigation, we recorded the server accuracy Raza et al. [24] employed different data poisoning techniques,
 and Attack Success Rate (ASR) across varied poisoning including random LF and FP attacks. Furthermore, more
 scenarios for both datasets. Our findings underscore the sophisticated forms of data-poisoning attacks, such as GAN
 effectiveness of data poisoning attacks when implemented attacks [25], have been employed. In this form of attack, the
824 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARING P ROPOSED M ETHODS IN T HIS PAPER W ITH OTHER
 R ESEARCH , FL (F EDERATED L EANING ), D (D EFENCE M ETHOD ), LF
 (L ABEL F LIPPING ), FP (F EATURE P OISONING ), GAN (G ENERATIVE
 A DVERSARIAL N ETWORK )

 Fig. 1. Illustration of Data Manipulation: A Server and ten Clients. Trained
 Client 1 (CL1) on manipulated data with LF, FP, and VagueGAN attacks.
 Other Clients (CL2 to CL10) were trained with the original dataset without
 any manipulation.

 considered ten clients and a server, applying different dataadversary develops data that closely matches the real data poisoning attacks, such as LF, FP, and VagueGAN, to only
within a collaborative learning setting. However, there are one client (Client1, CL1). In DL, an attacker can modify the
several constraints to this approach. The attacker must have training dataset based on their knowledge and information.
prior knowledge of the victim’s data and all members of the According to the existing literature, there are three scenarios
class must exhibit similarity [26]. Another challenging form that an adversary can consider to conduct adversarial attacks:
of data-poisoning attack employs auto-encoders (AE). AEs are open-box, gray-box, and closed-box attacks. The adversary
NNs that replicate input data. These AEs can be exploited by possesses perfect knowledge (PK) about the training data and
adversaries to create poisonous samples that can be employed model in a open-box setting and can generate adversarial
for training purposes [27]. Nguyen et al. [28] demonstrated instances for training and modify the model updates. In the
that IDS for the Internet of Things (IoT) based on FL case of a gray-box scenario, the threat actor has limited
are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Their proposed attack knowledge (LK) of the training data and model. The adversary
technique demonstrates how malicious actors can deceive the does not know the internal information of the system in a
detection model by utilizing compromised IoT devices to closed-box setup, which is a more viable and complex case
add small amounts of contaminated data during the training than the other scenarios. Consequently, the attacker employs
process without being detected. recurring inquiries to gather such sensitive data. We carry out
 Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN): In recent years, this experiment in a open-box scenario, as we have access
researchers in the field of ML have shown that GANs are to both the data and the model. Additionally, a very simple
capable of generating pseudo-examples that are effective illustration of our methodology is given in Figure 1.
in extracting private features and enhancing data poisoning
attacks. This is the first time that a GAN model is proposed
 A. Threat Model
in an article [26] to derive the private features of local
data from GAN-generated pseudo-data. In [29], researchers The threat model in Adversarial Machine Learning typically
recommended that PoisonGAN, a standard GAN model, be involves the attacker’s knowledge, capability, and goal. In our
employed to augment standard LF attacks by utilizing a problem, these are considered as follows:
discriminator that is set by the global model. This model is Attackers Goal: The attacker’s goal is to introduce malispecifically employed to increase the size of local datasets cious data during the training phase in order to disrupt the
using authentic pseudo-examples. reliability and precision of the global FL model.
 In Table I, we list and compare our study with prior studies Attackers Knowledge: The adversary performs in a openon FL, for example, the types of attacks, and defenses. box scenario, ensuring that they have PK of the training data,
 model architecture, and training procedure.
 Attackers Capability: An attacker is a causative adversary
 III. M ETHODOLOGY who has the capability to modify training data and model
 updates by employing innovative methods to subtly alter
 In this study, the CIC and UNSW datasets have been chosen
 significant features, thereby influencing the model’s behavior.
due to their comprehensive and detailed nature, covering
various network traffic types and attack scenarios. Unlike other
datasets such as the NSL-KDD [31], the DARPA 1998 [32], B. Network Architecture
or those datasets are discussed in [33], which may focus on a We adopted a single deep-learning model for both clients
small number of features or simpler attack types, the CIC and and the server. Initially, this same model was utilized for our
UNSW datasets offer a comprehensive range of features and server as well. This model comprises an input layer, where
include a variety of attack types that correspond to real-world the number of neurons is set to the feature size. The feature
network scenarios. This wide range provides a more com- size represents the number of columns in the dataset minus
prehensive and realistic evaluation of data-poisoning attacks one, as one column represents the output label and is not part
on FL. We trained several DL models on these two datasets of the feature columns. The model also contains two hidden
separately and captured their accuracy. In this FL setup, we layers: the first hidden layer has 2048 neurons, and the second
NOWROOZI et al.: FL UNDER ATTACK: EXPOSING VULNERABILITIES THROUGH DATA POISONING ATTACKS 825

 attack on the UNSW dataset that is fed to the BAU1 model
 for training. Additionally, we consider the same scenario
 for the VagueGAN approach, such as NBAU CIC
 1−GAN and
 UNSW
 NBAU 1−GAN . The number of samples in both datasets is
 equal, with 1,048,575 examples in each dataset. Most DL
 models are designed to accept images as input, which are
 usually three-dimensional, whereas the IDS dataset we use is
Fig. 2. Architecture of the Neural Network Model (Known as BAU1).
 one-dimensional. Therefore, to make the model feasible, two
 TABLE II additional dimensions were added. After adding these extra
 ATTACK S CENARIOS ON BAU1 N ETWORK W ITH D IFFERENT DATASETS dimensions, the shape of the np array was changed, which was
 done for the clients’ training, testing, and validation data. We
 develop an NN using PyTorch, a popular Python library. Our
 analysis is performed using the hardware specification MSI
 GF65. For the NN model, we consider 20 epochs for training
 using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer with
 a random learning rate between 1 × 10−4 and 9.9 × 10−3 and
 a momentum of 0.9. The batch size for training and validation
 is set to 1000. For the ten clients, we employ the Federated
 Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm, a common setup in FL, where
hidden layer has 1024 neurons. Additionally, there are two multiple clients with local datasets collaboratively train models
output neurons in the third hidden layer, corresponding to while preserving data privacy.
the number of output classes. The model includes two activation functions: the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation
 D. Empirical Study
function, referred to as ReLU1, applied after the first hidden
layer, and ReLU2, applied after the second hidden layer. In this experiment, we performed three data-poisoning
The architecture of the neural network model, named BAU1, attacks on several NN models trained on two different datasets,
can be easily obtained from Figure 2. Furthermore, batch namely CIC and UNSW. First, an LF attack was applied.
normalization applies to both hidden layers. Normalization is Before performing this attack, we trained the model with a
performed during pre-processing to help the neural network benign dataset, captured the results, saved the models, and
become stable and generalize well. A dropout layer with a tested the accuracy of the saved models using test data. Then,
probability (self.dropout_p) is included in the NN architecture we poisoned the data by flipping the labels for 1% of the
to overcome overfitting. The output activation function is the data. The model was retrained with this malicious data, and
log softmax function, which computes the natural logarithm the results and models were saved. To compute the ASR, we
(base e) of softmax probabilities. The cross-entropy loss flipped the labels of the complete test data and noted the
function is used in this network, which is commonly employed accuracy, indicating the strength of the attack. We repeated
for classification problems to compute the loss between the the experiment with 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 7%, 10%, 15%, 20%,
predicted probability distribution and the true class labels. The and 25% poisoned data, documented the results for all these
output layer of our model comprises two neurons, with each attack percentages, and computed the ASR for each of them.
neuron representing one of the binary classes: 0 for the benign Our code is written in such a generic manner that by simply
class and 1 for the malicious class. changing the name of the dataset, the rest of the processes—
 such as pre-processing of data, splitting the training data for
 ten clients, training the model with/without attack, computing
C. Experimental Setup ASR, and saving the results in an Excel file—are performed for
 To build the model, we consider 838,861 samples for both datasets without any user interaction. For the FP attack,
training, 104,857 for validation, and 104,857 for the test set. we introduced some changes in the code and employed a
The dataset is divided as follows: 80% of the data for training random forest algorithm to compute feature importance. From
and 20% of the data for testing and validation. Furthermore, our perspective, this innovative approach helps identify which
we partition the training dataset into ten segments, allocating features contribute the most to the classifier. Based on the
one segment to Client1 (CL1), and the other segments to random forest outcome, in the CIC dataset, the first column
Client1 (CL1), and the other to Client2 (CL2),. . . , Client10 has the highest feature importance, which we computed using
(CL10). In Table II, different attack scenarios are presented. permutation on the full model. Permutation-based feature
 UNSW
For instance, NBAU 1−LF represents the NN model named importance involves logically rearranging the values of each
BAU1, which is trained with the UNSW dataset, to which feature, analyzing the influence on the model’s performance,
the LF attack is applied. Similarly, NBAU CIC
 1−FP indicates and determining the impact intensity of each feature in the
that we trained BAU1 with the CIC dataset that is poisoned decision-making process.
 CIC
using the FP attack. Another important scenario, NBAU 1−LF , We used a similar strategy to determine the feature imporpoints to the LF attack on the CIC dataset, which is used to tance in the UNSW dataset and found that the second column
train the BAU1 model, whereas NBAU UNSW
 1−FP denotes the FP has the highest feature importance.
826 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 j
 Algorithm 1: Feature Poisoning (FP) Attack dataset Dtrain using VagueGAN and replaces it. Finally, client
 Data: D: Feature column values, L: Labels (0 and 1), cj trains and sends a contaminated local model θpt,j to the
 j
 att_per: P server using Dp . In contrast to an LF and FP attack, which
 Result: Transformed feature values only affects specific labels, VagueGAN indirectly targets the
 Step 1: Find min and max values in feature column: global model, affecting all labels and classes. In this scenario,
 • min_value ← min(D) we only consider a small percentage of poisoned data, ranging
 • max _value ← max(D) from 1% to 5%, on CL1 to evaluate the robustness of the
 Step 2: Find average for label classes 0 and 1: server. From our point of view, other poison percentages will
 • avg_zero ← avg(D where L = 0) exhibit the same behavior as the 1% to 5% range.
 • avg_one ← avg(D where L = 1) In contrast, to calculate the ASR, the value of the column
 Step 3: Normalize the values: where the label was 0 is replaced with the normalized average
 • for i in dataset do value of label 1, and vice versa. The percentage of attacks
 if L = 0 then is calculated as the number of values to be manipulated
 norm_val ← avg _zero−min _val
 max _val−min _val
 according to the desired percentage. We set up an array
 else containing integer values. In every iteration, if the iterator
 avg _one−min _val value is not in that array, then the iterator value is considered
 norm_val ← max _val−min _val
 a percentage number. This percentage is multiplied by the
 Update feature value with norm_val number of labels in the training data of CL1, which is also
 Step 4: Modify malicious samples to benign samples: equal to the number of samples/rows in the training data. In
 • num ← P equation form, it can be written as:
 • percent ← int(len(L) × (num /100))  
 • for i = 1 to percent do len(CL1_Y ) · attack_percentage
 number_of _values = (1)
 rand _index ← random(0, len(unique_val ) − 1) if 100
 L[i ] = 1 then In the above equation, CL1_Y represents the length of the
 D[i , 0, 0, col_id ] ← unique_val [rand _index ] array of labels of training data for CL1, where len in Python
 is used to determine the length of an array, while _of_attack
 represents the percentage number, and the number_of_values
 denotes the number of values that we have to change in the
 feature column. During computations in Python, this equation
 In FP, we manipulate the values of the most important fea- can return the float value, so that it changes to the integer
tures that were determined using the random forest technique. value for which we have used the floor function.
There were two label classes in both datasets: 0 and 1. First,
we compute the mean of all values where the label is 0 and
 E. RDFS Strategy Integration for Server Security
then compute the mean of values with label 1. In the next step,
 Improvement
we found the minimum and maximum values in the feature
column that are different for the two datasets. Subsequently, Our study addresses the vulnerability of an FL server to
the values of the most important features are normalized using poisoning attacks. To mitigate this vulnerability, we applied the
the min-max normalization technique. We changed the values Random Deep Feature Selection (RDFS) technique proposed
of the column where the label was 0 to random unique values, in [35]. To improve server security, we integrated the
where the label was 1. Details regarding FP attack techniques PRDF technique into the server architecture. This integration
that we consider in this study is in Algorithm 1. In this included the use of randomly chosen subsets of features
algorithm, D represents a dataset that contains feature column with sizes of {50, 400} for training. We demonstrate that
values. att_per represents the attack percentage, which is also this approach enhances the robustness of the model against
represented as P in the algorithm, which is the percentage of poisoning attacks by introducing randomness into the training
values that are to be manipulated. min_value and max_value process. We applied RDFS before the attack and then checked
represent the minimum and maximum values in the feature the server against the attacks to evaluate the robustness of
column, respectively. The i represents the iterator value of the model against poisoning attacks. The RDFS steps are as
the loop, L represents the value of the label that may be follows:
either 0 or 1, and percent represents the number of values to • Let N represents the Neural Network (NN) architecture
be manipulated in the feature column. Additionally, number that includes layers {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck }. The Wj weight
represents the user-defined att_per, and column_index is the matrix and bj bias vector define each Cj layer.
index of the target feature column. • The representation of the feature space is illustrated
 The novel VagueGAN approach, which was recently by a feature vector for all inputs xi from the dataset
proposed by [34], is employed in our study as a third type of {(Xi , yi )}m
 i=1 ,
attack against an FL-IDS. This approach enables an adversary
 φ(Xi ) = (fe1 (xi ), fe2 (xi ), . . . , fen (xi )) (2)
to simply execute a data-poisoning attack. In particular, the
adversary initially controls the client cj . Next, malicious client • By applying a random selection method, we choose a
 j
cj generates a contaminated local dataset Dp from the original subset F ⊂ {1, 2,. . . , n} from the set {50, 400} for the
NOWROOZI et al.: FL UNDER ATTACK: EXPOSING VULNERABILITIES THROUGH DATA POISONING ATTACKS 827

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 CIC −LF
 R ESULTS W ITHOUT ATTACK LF P OISON ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO NBAU 1 ON CIC DATASET

 size of F. Choose s features at random from the entire set
 of features for a size s that lies between the intervals {50,
 400}. This implies that the features fed to the server for
 training were random. Therefore, a server trains with a
 random feature size separately. Here, we have two sets of
 random; therefore, we have for the server that is trained
 with {50, 400}.
 Fes = {fei1 , fei2 , . . . , feis } ⊂ {fe1 , fe2 , . . . , fen } (3)
 • A shortened feature vector should be built for each input
 Xi using the given features, therefore,
 φFes (Xi ) = (fei1 (Xi ), fei2 (Xi ), . . . , feis (xi )) (4)
 the model is the same but the dataset is different, specifically
 • Build a new dataset employing the shortened feature UNSW, the average loss from Client-1 to Client-10 is 0.6801,
 vectors that we obtained and that we want to deliver to and the server accuracy is approximately 80.27%. The purpose
 the server for training, therefore, of these scenarios is to establish basic performance metrics
 for the BAU1 model on pristine datasets. This enabled us to
 {(φFes (Xi ), yi )}m
 i=1 (5)
 evaluate the effects of different types of data poisoning attacks
 • Training is performed on N using the shorthand dataset on the performance of the model.
 obtained from the previous step Fes . The training phase
 minimizes the loss function L with respect to the network B. Results With Label Flipping (LF) Attack on CIC Dataset
 parameters Θ: The LF attack on the CIC dataset is shown in Table IV.
 min L(N (φFes (Xi )), yi ) (6) The results show how the attack affected the effectiveness of
 Θ the FL model and how easy it was to spot. When only 1%
 The symbol Θ denotes the weights and biases of each of the data are tampered with, the server’s accuracy drops
 layer. to 0.0428, and the ASR increases to 0.9564. The large drop
 in accuracy and high ASR show that even a small amount
 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION of corrupted data may disrupt the model, which makes the
 attack very easy to spot. The server’s precision remains low
 In this section, we discuss the results obtained during the at 0.0537, and the ASR remains high at 0.9457 when 2% of
experiment using different scenarios, with and without an the data have been contaminated in the same way. Given that
attack. it has such a large effect on model performance, these data
 prove that the LF attack is easy to detect at low percentages.
A. FL in the Absence of Attacks As the amount of poisoned data increases to between 3 and 4
 We trained the BAU1 model using benign datasets. First, percent, an interesting change occurs. While the ASR dropped
we trained FL on the CIC dataset in the absence of attacks drastically to 0.0329 and 0.0539, the server accuracy improved
 CIC . We used this notation in
and reported the results as NBAU to 0.9680 and 0.9486, respectively. The fact that precision
 1
Table III to clarify the results. Subsequently, we trained the returns to normal and ASR values are low indicates that the
BAU1 model with the UNSW dataset without an attack, which FL model is strong enough to withstand these low levels of
is denoted as NBAUUNSW in Table III, and we report the server LF attacks, making the attack useless. However, when there is
 1
accuracy for both scenarios and the average of losses regarding 5% poisoned data, the server’s precision falls to 0.7739, and
ten clients. its ASR increases to 0.2292. By this point, the attack is more
 In this table, we report the loss from Client-1 to Client-10 apparent but still not very problematic for the model. It can be
(or CL1 to CL10) for the CIC dataset, where the average of seen that, but not as serious as at lower levels. The results were
the losses is 0.6415, and save the values obtained after the last quite distinct when the amount of poisoned data increased to
epoch. In the same scenario, the server accuracy was 96.80%. 7%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 25%. In some situations, such as the
The high accuracy of the server is due to the fact that we 10% attack, the server accuracy remains very low at 0.0320,
did not apply any attack and trained the BAU1 model on a but the ASR is high at 0.9670, which means that the attack
clean dataset. In the second scenario without an attack, where fails because it is easy to spot. In other cases, the results are
828 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 UNSW −LF
 LF P OISON ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO NBAU 1 F EATURE P OISON (FP) ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO
 CIC −FP
 ON UNSW DATASET NBAU 1 ON CIC DATASET

 to lower percentages. Higher attack percentages (7, 10, 15,
 20, and 25%) resulted in different outcomes. The 7% and
 10% attacks have significant server accuracy but low ASR,
 suggesting unsuccessful attacks, whereas the 15% attack has
 moderate effects. The 20% attack reduces the server accuracy
 to 0.1795 and has an ASR of 0.8212, indicating that it is
 noticeable, but not completely successful. Furthermore, a 25%
 attack increases the server accuracy to 0.7097, resulting in an
 ASR of 0.2920, indicating an unsuccessful attack.
 These findings demonstrate that data poisoning ratios conmore mixed, with server accuracy sometimes improving and siderably affect the efficacy and detectability of LF attacks,
ASR values not meeting the requirements for an attack to be even in the UNSW dataset. Low percentages have no effect on
successful. For example, when 25% of the data are poisoned, the model, while other percentages degrade the performance
the server accuracy increases to 0.9204, but the ASR decreases and make the attack more detectable. High percentages indito 0.0797. This indicates that even high percentages of LF cate varying results, with low ASR attacks failing and others
attacks may not be able to deceive the system without being resulting in reduced accuracy.
detected.
 These findings verify the robustness of the FL model to the D. Results With Feature Poisoning (FP) Attack on CIC
LF data percentages. Low-percentage attacks are readily appar- Dataset
ent owing to significant decreases in server accuracy, whereas
in-between percentage attacks highlight the model’s durability, In this section, the FP Attack on CIC Dataset and the results
regaining accuracy, and low ASR. A high percentage of attacks are presented in Table VI, which shows the effectiveness
fail because they have either too low accuracy, making them as well as the effect of FP attacks on the FL model. The
traceable, or the ASR is too low. Thus, the LF attack on experiment demonstrated that even small amounts of poisoned
the CIC dataset fails to degrade the models sustainably and data can have significant effects on the performance of the
undetectably, demonstrating the necessity for more advanced model. For instance, even with only 1% of the data poisoned,
attack tactics, such as FP or VagueGAN, to have a significant the server’s precision remains high at 0.9642 and the ASR
impact. remains high at 0.9628, implying a successful and undetectable
 attack. This pattern remained in the 4% poisoned scenario,
 which had a server accuracy of 0.8611 and an ASR of 0.8616,
C. Results With Label Flipping (LF) Attack on UNSW demonstrating the efficacy of the attack. However, when the
Dataset amount of poisoned data increased to 20% and 25%, the
 The outcomes of the LF attack on the UNSW dataset, server accuracy and ASR continued to represent successful
shown in Table V, demonstrate the influence of the attack attacks, with values of 0.7427 and 0.7763 for 20% and 0.9680
on the accuracy and detectability of the FL model. Starting and 0.9671 for 25%, respectively. These findings indicate
with a 1% LF attack, the server’s accuracy is quite acceptable the model’s sensitivity to FP attacks because attacks remain
at 0.8554, but the ASR is reduced to 0.1423, suggesting a successful and difficult to detect as the amount of poisoned
failed attack because the ASR does not satisfy the criteria data increases.
for success. As the attack strength increases to 2% or 3%, These studies employ the CIC dataset to determine how FP
the server accuracy falls to approximately 0.1, but the ASR attacks affect FL models and their detectability. The research
rises to approximately 0.9, indicating that the attack is readily effort evaluates server precision and ASR at different data
apparent owing to the considerable reduction in accuracy and poisoning rates to determine how vulnerable the model is to
high ASR. At 4%, the server accuracy slightly increases to attacks like this and how well they may compromise model
0.8072, but the ASR decreases to 0.1918, failing to fulfill consistency without detection. Previously, LF attacks on the
the requirements for a successful attack. A 5% LF attack CIC dataset induced large accuracy decreases, making them
decreased the server accuracy to 0.2815 and the ASR to more apparent, whereas FP attacks maintained high accuracy
0.7193, showing an evident but less severe attack compared and ASR, making them more invisible and successful on
NOWROOZI et al.: FL UNDER ATTACK: EXPOSING VULNERABILITIES THROUGH DATA POISONING ATTACKS 829

 TABLE VII TABLE VIII
 UNSW −FP CIC −GAN
 F EATURE P OISON ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO NBAU 1 VAGUE G AN ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO NBAU 1 ON CIC DATASET
 ON UNSW DATASET

 TABLE IX
 UNSW −GAN
 VAGUE G AN ATTACK FOR THE S CENARIO NBAU 1
 ON UNSW DATASET

the CIC dataset. This comparison shows the need for better
defenses against the subtlety of FP assaults.

E. Results With Feature Poisoning (FP) Attack on UNSW
Dataset
 Table VII provides the findings of the FP attacks on the
UNSW dataset, demonstrating the different consequences of F. Results With VagueGAN Attack on CIC and UNSW
the attack on the performance and visibility of the FL model. Datasets
With a 1% FP attack, the server precision is 0.8195 and As shown in Tables VIII and IX, The VagueGAN attack has
the ASR is 0.8231, revealing that the attack is successful a significant effect on the performance of the FL models on
and subtle. As the amount of poisoned data increases to the CIC and UNSW datasets. Low server accuracies (0.1961 at
2% and 3%, the server precision increases to 0.8527 and 1% poisoning and 0.1201 at 5% poisoning) while maintaining
0.8433, respectively, while the ASR values remain high at high ASR (0.9752 and 0.7820, respectively) are the outcomes
0.8722 and 0.8194, confirming successful attacks that are of VagueGAN attacks on the CIC dataset. Similarly, with high
difficult to detect. Even at higher percentages, such as 5%, ASR values of 0.9872 and 0.8957, the UNSW dataset reveals
7%, and 10%, the server precision remains above 0.86, and that server accuracies declined to 0.1760 at 1% poisoning and
ASR values are continually high, proving that the attack is remained low up to 5%. With such a high ASR, these findings
effective. In particular, for 20% and 25% poisoned data, the demonstrate that VagueGAN successfully creates adversarial
server accuracy also reveals an effective impact with values attacks that significantly affect the performance of the model.
of 0.4682 and 0.9018, as well as ASR values of 0.4824 and A server can recognize a VagueGAN attack as it impacts
0.9064, respectively. These findings highlight the efficacy and all features, unlike FP and LF attacks, which change only
stealthiness of FP attacks, which pose a significant threat to one feature and may remain undetected. When comparing the
model precision. VagueGAN findings to FP and LF attacks, it is evident that
 The objective of this evaluation is to see how varying VagueGAN attacks are more generally effective and have a
percentages of data poisoning from FP attacks affect the higher ASR, but they are also easier to identify.
performance and detectability of FL models on the UNSW
dataset. By studying server precision and ASR, this study aims
to achieve a better understanding of the model’s sensitivity to G. RDFS Defense Strategy for Improving Server Security
FP attacks and how these attacks might subtly but effectively We prove that FP is more effective than LF and VagueGAN
impact model integrity. A comparison of the FP attack results attacks. Therefore, regarding the defense system, we consider
(Table VII) to the LF attack results (Table V) on the UNSW the recent strategy RDFS, which is based on random deep
dataset proves that FP attacks are typically more successful feature selection. This method has recently proven quite
and difficult to detect. Although LF attacks frequently cause effective in different domains, such as multimedia forensics
significant decreases in server precision, making them identi- and security [36], and in computer networks [35]. Applying
fiable, FP attacks maintain high accuracy and ASR, resulting the RDFS defense technique to the CIC dataset with random
in successful but less apparent disruptions. This comparison feature sizes of 50 and 400 shows significant effectiveness
emphasizes the need for improved protection systems that against diverse percentages of poisoned data (Table X). For
safeguard against the subtleties of FP attacks. 1% poisoned data, both feature sizes retain high server
830 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE X
 CIC −FP specific data attributes to undermine FL models. Moreover, our
 P ERCENTAGE OF R ANDOM I NDEX R ESULTS FOR NBAU 1
 ON CIC DATASET study developed the Random Deep Feature Selection (RDFS)
 strategy, which randomizes server features during training.
 This strategy is an effective defense mechanism against FP
 attacks and, as we demonstrated, is also effective against LF
 and VagueGAN attacks, proving its efficacy in maintaining
 model integrity under attack conditions.
 TABLE XI
 This study has some limitations:
 UNSW −FP Attack Scope: This study targeted LF, FP, and VagueGAN
 P ERCENTAGE OF R ANDOM I NDEX R ESULTS FOR NBAU 1
 ON UNSW DATASET attacks. Although these are prevalent, more complex attacks,
 such as backdoors and evasion techniques, were not considered. Future research should investigate a broader range of
 attack vectors.
 Defense Mechanisms: While the study emphasized the
 vulnerabilities and efficacy of three different types of attacks,
 it also developed and evaluated RDFS defense mechanisms
 against FP. Future research should investigate a general
 defense model against all possible poisoning and evasion
 attacks.
 Generalizability: These studies were conducted using
accuracy and low ASR, proving that RDFS is effective. When specific real-world datasets related to computer networks.
the poisoning percentage increases to 4%, 20%, and 25%, the Although these datasets are important, the generalizability of
server accuracy improves, while the ASR decreases slightly, the findings to other fields is unknown. Future research should
showing RDFS defensive resistance. Both feature sizes of 50 use a variety of datasets to confirm the strength of the results.
and 400 in the UNSW dataset (Table XI) at 1% poisoned
data exhibit high server accuracy and low ASR, comparable to
the CIC dataset, indicating good early defense. As poisoning VI. C ONCLUSION R EMARKS
grows to 2%, 3%, 5%, 7%, 10%, 15%, and 25%, the server In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of the RDFS defense
accuracy remains high and ASR remains low, demonstrating system in the computer network domain and examined the
the strength of the RFS strategy. vulnerability of FL models to LF, FP, and the recently introduced VagueGAN attacks. Our experiments focused on these
 V. D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS attacks on the CIC and UNSW datasets. They demonstrated
 that LF attacks were ineffective due to visible accuracy drops,
 Our research provided novel insights into the vulnerability
 whereas FP attacks significantly deceived the server in various
of FL models to data poisoning attacks by emphasizing the
 scenarios. Furthermore, our results underlined the potential
more effective nature of FP attacks compared to LF and
 threat to the integrity of FL models posed by VagueGAN
VagueGAN attacks. Our research highlighted the importance
 attacks. The analysis of feature importance revealed that
and details of these attacks in the context of FL-based
 dataset features are vulnerable to manipulation in FP attacks,
IDS by employing them specifically on computer network
 highlighting the significant effectiveness of FP attacks. The
datasets, namely CIC and UNSW. We proposed an innovative
 integrated defense mechanism of the RDFS defense strategy
method to conduct FP attacks by employing Random Forests
 is demonstrated by its promising performance in mitigating
to identify and manipulate highly contributing features. The
 some FP attacks. The objective of future research should be to
experimental results demonstrated the significant vulnerability
 develop a comprehensive defense strategy that can mitigate a
of FL models to FP attacks, as well as the efficacy and subtle
 broader range of attack vectors and enhance the robustness of
nature of these attacks. Model precision was significantly
 FL models in practical settings by incorporating more complex
reduced by even small modifications to features. In contrast,
 threats such as backdoors and evasion techniques.
LF attacks were significantly easier to identify than other
types of attacks, despite their significant impact, due to the
substantial reductions in precision they caused. Additionally, R EFERENCES
the VagueGAN attack, which utilized Generative Adversarial [1] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system:
Networks (GANs) to introduce adversarial examples into Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun.,
 vol. 195, Nov. 2022, pp. 346–361.
datasets, significantly reduced model accuracy while main- [2] R. Shrestha et al., “Anomaly detection based on LSTM and autoencoders
taining a high Attack Success Rate (ASR). The controlled using federated learning in smart electric grid,” J. Parallel Distrib.
experimental configuration involved ten clients, enabling a Comput., vol. 193, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104951. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731524001151
comprehensive analysis of the attack structure. This analysis [3] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-ANIDS: Federated learning for anomalyrevealed that FP and VagueGAN attacks were more capable of based network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234,
evading detection than LF attacks. This innovative application Dec. 2023, Art. no. 121000.
 [4] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A federated
of feature importance analysis in FP attacks has enabled a learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for Internet of
more thorough understanding of how adversaries may exploit Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103540.
NOWROOZI et al.: FL UNDER ATTACK: EXPOSING VULNERABILITIES THROUGH DATA POISONING ATTACKS 831

 [5] Z. Jin, J. Zhou, B. Li, X. Wu, and C. Duan, “FL-IIDS: A novel federated [29] J. Zhang, B. Chen, X. Cheng, H. T. T. Binh, and S. Yu, “PoisonGAN:
 learning-based incremental intrusion detection system,” Future Gener. Generative poisoning attacks against federated learning in edge com-
 Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 57–70, Feb. 2024. puting systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3310–3322,
 [6] O. Aouedi and K. Piamrat, “F-BIDS: Federated-blending based intrusion Mar. 2021.
 detection system,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 89, Feb. 2023, [30] Y. Jiang, W. Zhang, and Y. Chen, “Data quality detection mechanism
 Art. no. 101750. against label flipping attacks in federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 [7] M. Maddu and Y. N. Rao, “Network intrusion detection and mitigation Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1625–1637, 2023.
 in SDN using deep learning models,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23, no. 2, [31] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
 pp. 849–862, 2024. analysis of the KDD cup 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
 [8] Y.-C. Lai et al., “Two-phase defense against poisoning attacks on Intell. Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
 federated learning-based intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, [32] R. Lippmann, J. W. Haines, D. J. Fried, J. Korba, and K. Das, “The
 Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103205. 1999 DARPA off-line intrusion detection evaluation,” Comput. Netw.,
 [9] Y. Miao et al., “RFed: Robustness-enhanced privacy-preserving fed- vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 579–595, 2000.
 erated learning against poisoning attack,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics [33] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A
 Security, vol. 19, pp. 5814–5827, 2024. survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Comput. Secur.,
[10] A. Sharma and N. Marchang, “A review on client-server attacks and vol. 86, pp. 147–167, Sep. 2019.
 defenses in federated learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, [34] W. Sun, B. Gao, K. Xiong, Y. Wang, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “A GAN-
 Art. no. 103801. based data poisoning attack against federated learning systems and its
[11] J. L. Leevy and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey and analysis of intrusion countermeasure,” 2024, arXiv:2405.11440.
 detection models based on CSE-CIC-IDS2018 big data,” J. Big Data, [35] E. Nowroozi, M. Mohammadi, P. Golmohammadi, Y. Mekdad, M. Conti,
 vol. 7, no. 1, p. 104, 2020. and S. Uluagac, “Resisting deep learning models against adversarial
[12] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for attack transferability via feature randomization,” IEEE Trans. Services
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” Comput., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 18–29, Jan./Feb. 2024.
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6. [36] M. Barni, E. Nowroozi, B. Tondi, and B. Zhang, “Effectiveness of
[13] I. H. E. Nowroozi. “Federated learning under attack: Exposing vul- random deep feature selection for securing image manipulation detectors
 nerabilities through data poisoning attacks in computer networks.” against adversarial examples,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
 2023. Accessed: Jun. 16, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 2977–2981.
 ehsannowroozi/FederatedLearning_Poison_LF_FP
 Ehsan Nowroozi (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[14] B. T. M. Barni, E. Nowroozi, and B. Zhang. “Random Deep Feature
 the Ph.D. degree from the University of Siena,
 Selection (RDFS).” 2019. Accessed: Jun. 16, 2024. [Online]. Available:
 Italy. He is a Senior Lecturer with the Centre
 https://github.com/ehsannowroozi/RDFS
 for Sustainable Cyber Security, University of
[15] E. Hallaji, R. Razavi-Far, M. Saif, and E. Herrera-Viedma, “Label noise
 Greenwich, London. He held postdoctoral positions
 analysis meets adversarial training: A defense against label poisonwith the University of Siena, the University of
 ing in federated learning,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 266, Apr. 2023,
 Padua, Sabanci University, and Queen’s University
 Art. no. 110384.
 Belfast. He was also a Senior Lecturer with
[16] D. Li, W. E. Wong, W. Wang, Y. Yao, and M. Chau, “Detection and Ravensbourne University, London. His research
 mitigation of label-flipping attacks in federated learning systems with focuses on adversarial machine learning/adversarial
 KPCA and k-means,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Appl. (DSA), multimedia forensics. He has been an Associate
 2021, pp. 551–559. Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE
[17] N. M. Jebreel, J. Domingo-Ferrer, D. Sánchez, and A. Blanco-Justicia, M ANAGEMENT since 2024.
 “Defending against the label-flipping attack in federated learning,” 2022,
 arXiv:2207.01982. Imran Haider (Member, IEEE) received the bach-
[18] E. Nowroozi, N. Jadalla, S. Ghelichkhani, and A. Jolfaei, “Mitigating elor’s degree in computer science from the National
 label flipping attacks in malicious URL detectors using ensemble trees,” University of Computer and Emerging Sciences,
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 6875–6884, Pakistan. He is currently pursuing the master’s
 Dec. 2024. degree in cybersecurity with Bahcesehir University,
[19] J. Xu, Z. Chen, T. Q. Quek, and K. F. E. Chong, “FedCorr: Multi-stage Istanbul, Turkey. He possesses a strong passion
 federated learning for label noise correction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. for cybersecurity and artificial intelligence research.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 10184–10193. He also holds expertise in penetration testing—an
[20] B. Zeng, X. Yang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and Y. Zhang, “CLC: A consensus- essential skill for identifying and mitigating security
 based label correction approach in federated learning,” ACM Trans. vulnerabilities in digital systems.
 Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1–23, 2022.
[21] V. Tsouvalas, A. Saeed, T. Ozcelebi, and N. Meratnia, “Labeling chaos
 to learning harmony: Federated learning with noisy labels,” ACM Trans. Rahim Taheri (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–26, 2024. Ph.D. degree in information technology from the
[22] N. M. Jebreel, J. Domingo-Ferrer, D. Sánchez, and A. Blanco-Justicia, Shiraz University of Technology, Iran, in 2020. He
 “LFighter: Defending against the label-flipping attack in federated is currently a Senior Lecturer of Cyber Security
 learning,” Neural Netw., vol. 170, pp. 111–126, Feb. 2024. and Forensics with the University of Portsmouth,
 U.K. Before joining the University of Portsmouth,
[23] X. Shen, Y. Liu, F. Li, and C. Li, “Privacy-preserving federated learning
 he was a Postdoctoral Research Associate with the
 against label-flipping attacks on non-IID data,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 King’s Communications, Learning, and Information
 vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1241–1255, Jan. 2024.
 Processing Lab, King’s College London, U.K. His
[24] A. Raza, S. Li, K.-P. Tran, and L. Koehl, “Using anomaly detection
 main research interests include machine learnto detect poisoning attacks in federated learning applications,” 2023,
 ing applications in security, adversarial machine
 arXiv:2207.08486.
 learning, and federated learning.
[25] C. Yang, Q. Wu, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “Generative poisoning attack
 method against neural networks,” 2017,arXiv:1703.01340. Mauro Conti (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[26] B. Hitaj, G. Ateniese, and F. Perez-Cruz, “Deep models under the GAN: degree from the Sapienza University of Rome, Italy,
 information leakage from collaborative deep learning,” in Proc. ACM in 2009. He is a Full Professor with the University of
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 603–618. Padua, Italy. He is also affiliated with TU Delft and
[27] J. Feng, Q.-Z. Cai, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Learning to confuse: Generating the University of Washington, Seattle. His research
 training time adversarial data with auto-encoder,” in Proc. 33rd Conf. in the area of security and privacy is also funded by
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–11. companies, including Cisco, Intel, and Huawei. He
[28] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning published more than 500 papers in the topmost interattacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in national peer-reviewed journals and conferences. He
 Proc. Workshop Decent. IoT Syst. Secur. (DISS), 2020, pp. 1–7. [Online]. is the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:216086694 I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY.