IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 9993

 Federated Malware Detection in Flying Ad Hoc
 Drone Networks Using Hybrid Convolutional
 Learning and Adaptive Optimization
 Abdulwahab Ali Almazroi

 Abstract— The growing use of drones in edge computing, crucial due to the prevalence of the Internet and advanced
primarily within Flying Ad Hoc Networks (FANETs), has raised communication technologies. Data and network security need
pressing security concerns, particularly in detecting malware IDSs and firewalls. NIDS monitors all network traffic for
within decentralized and privacy-sensitive environments. Traditional intrusion detection systems often fall short in these malicious activity. In the last decade, communications and
settings, struggling to meet the demands of limited computational network technologies have rapidly expanded network size
power, non-IID data distributions, and the need to preserve and data sharing, making new threats more challenging to
local information. In response to these challenges, we propose detect. A compromise at a single node might impact an
F-ResDenseEffiNet, a novel federated deep learning framework organization’s data. The US Department of Transportation
that uniquely integrates ResNet, DenseNet, and EfficientNet. This
architectural combination, not previously explored in FL-based assessed the viability of civil GPS spoofing, including drone
malware detection, enables residual learning, feature reuse, and interference [6]. Signatures, anomalies, and specifications can
compound scaling, resulting in accurate and lightweight detection trigger IDSs. Anomaly-based methods involve knowledge,
suitable for UAV platforms. To further improve convergence and machine learning, and statistics. Detecting abnormal intrusions
adaptability in heterogeneous data settings, we introduce AGRO, involves comparing traffic data to a model of ordinary operan Adaptive Gorilla–Rabbit Optimization algorithm, which balances exploration and exploitation more effectively than standard ation [7], [8]. Machine-learning anomaly detection systems
optimizers such as Adam or RMSProp. Comprehensive exper- enhance performance by refining models based on observed
iments on four diverse intrusion detection datasets, DBMD24 patterns. Signature-driven identification compares current data
(drone-malware), CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and KDDCup99— to threat trends and eliminates false alarms, but requires
representing both traditional and UAV-relevant traffic patterns, regular signature updates [9].
showcase the model’s strong performance, achieving an average
detection accuracy of 97.9%, a threat identification rate of 99.7%, Machine learning algorithms dominate this article. They
a decision confidence of 98.6%, and an overall classification qual- work better than non-machine learning ones because they
ity of 98.7%. Additional evaluations, including ablation studies, learn and teach. Drone networks require reliable intrusion
statistical tests, fairness analysis, and architectural interpretabil- detection. Researchers suggest using deep learning (DL) and
ity, further confirm the scalability, reliability, and suitability machine learning (ML) to extract meaningful data from large
of the proposed framework for real-time drone-based anomaly
detection. datasets [10]. Network security uses ML and DL approaches to
 learn from network data and distinguish between normal and
 Index Terms— Federated learning, malware detection, drone
networks, hybrid deep learning, edge security.
 unusual activities. Unlike feature engineering-based machine
 learning, deep learning can immediately learn complex fea-
 I. I NTRODUCTION tures from raw data. Over time, researchers have created
 ML and DL-based NIDS risk identification algorithms. NIDS
T HE Internet is essential in contemporary life, particularly with the rise of Internet-enabled technologies like
IoT [1]. IoT technology, which connects devices over the web,
 must cope with increased security concerns and network
 traffic. According to [11] and [12], the agent monitors the
 network, while the analysis engine and response module detect
has improved living, working, and learning experiences. IoD
 attacks and report findings. Despite improvements, standard
stands for Internet of Drones, an extension of IoT [2]. Using
 NIDSs are inadequate for IoT’s complex network layers due
IoD for UAV deployment is essential due to its “layered netto the critical applications of drone operations and security
work control architecture” [3], [4]. Drones, UAVs, and FANET
 considerations. The addition of UAVs introduces complexity,
are synonymous in this work. Network security research is
 necessitating enhanced intrusion detection.
 Received 7 April 2025; revised 23 May 2025, 5 August 2025, This study presents a federated deep learning framework
and 1 September 2025; accepted 1 October 2025. Date of publication designed explicitly for malware detection within the Internet of
7 October 2025; date of current version 8 December 2025. The authors extend Drones (IoD) environment. At its core is a hybrid model called
their appreciation to the Deputyship for Research & Innovation, Ministry of
Education in Saudi Arabia for funding this research work through the project F-ResDenseEffiNet, which integrates the strengths of ResNet,
number MoE-IF-UJ-R2-22-04100409-1. DenseNet, and EfficientNet to achieve high detection accuracy
 The author is with the College of Computing and Information Technology at while staying within the computational and energy constraints
Khulais, Department of Information Technology, University of Jeddah, Jeddah
21959, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: aalmazroi@uj.edu.sa). of UAV platforms. Each drone is equipped with a lightweight
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3618628 version of the model that operates independently to identify
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
9994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

local threats in real time. Meanwhile, a central base station dense connectivity principles of DenseNet, and the
aggregates insights across the network to coordinate a broader, compound scaling efficiency of EfficientNet. Unlike
swarm-wide response. What sets this approach apart from prior approaches such as [30] that rely on graph neural
traditional IoT-based solutions is its alignment with the oper- networks in combination with convolutional models,
ational realities of drone systems—limited bandwidth, high this architecture is meticulously optimized to achieve
mobility, and strict privacy requirements. By leveraging feder- high inference accuracy while maintaining compatibility
ated learning, the model avoids transmitting raw data, keeping with the constrained computational profile of drone
sensitive information on each drone while still enabling col- hardware.
laborative intelligence. To further address the challenges of 3) A novel optimization method, Adaptive Gorilla–Rabbit
uneven data distribution and sporadic connectivity standards Optimization (AGRO), is proposed to improve conin Flying Ad Hoc Networks (FANETs), the system incor- vergence dynamics under non-IID data settings. This
porates AGRO (Adaptive Gorilla–Rabbit Optimization). This algorithm uniquely merges exploratory behavior inspired
dual-phase optimization method ensures stable and efficient by gorilla search heuristics with the fast convergence
learning. Evaluations across four benchmark datasets confirm traits observed in rabbit-based dynamics. It is especially
that the proposed method delivers strong performance and well-suited for federated learning contexts characterized
real-world viability for secure, real-time anomaly detection in by unstable network connectivity and heterogeneous
drone networks. client data, as frequently encountered in aerial commu-
 Research Aim: The primary focus of this research is to nication networks.
design a privacy-preserving federated deep learning model 4) The efficacy and generalizability of the framework
capable of detecting malware efficiently in real-time UAV are demonstrated through extensive validation across
network environments. The proposed solution is designed to four benchmark intrusion detection datasets: DBMD24,
respect privacy constraints while maintaining high detection CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and KDDCup99. These
accuracy, efficient resource utilization, and scalability across datasets represent a broad spectrum of real-world
distributed UAV systems. malware behaviors and attack scenarios, enabling com-
 Research Questions: prehensive evaluation under diverse conditions.
 • RQ1: What design considerations are necessary to opti- 5) A thorough experimental analysis is conducted, encommize deep hybrid models for malware classification on passing ablation studies, statistical hypothesis testing,
 drones with limited processing capabilities? fairness assessments, and hyperparameter sensitivity
 • RQ2: How can federated learning be leveraged to enable evaluations. The proposed system consistently delivers
 secure and collaborative model training in drone environ- an average detection accuracy of 98.9 percent, underments, particularly under non-IID data conditions? scoring its robustness, adaptability, and practical utility
 • RQ3: Which optimization strategies are most effective for real-time malware detection in UAV-based surveilfor accelerating convergence and improving accuracy in lance and monitoring operations.
 decentralized UAV systems facing unreliable communi- The structure of this article is organized to guide the reader
 cation and dynamic topologies? through each stage of the research. The second section looks
 Significance: These research questions address core chal- at the works that are most closely related. In Section III,
lenges in securing the Internet of Drones (IoD). As drones the suggested organization is summed up. Section IV outincreasingly support critical missions in areas such as logis- lines the experiments and assessment criteria employed, and
tics, monitoring, and defense, there is a pressing need for Section V analyzes and comments on the simulation results.
lightweight, adaptable, and privacy-aware cybersecurity frame- Section 6 concludes the study and provides ideas for future
works. Meeting these demands will help ensure resilient projects.
operations and safeguard sensitive data in complex, real-world
deployment scenarios. II. R ELATED W ORK
 Key Contributions: The principal contributions of this Recent breakthroughs have significantly enhanced malware
research are outlined below: detection capabilities within IoT and drone-based networks,
 1) In this research, we introduce a federated learning frame- leveraging deep learning and edge intelligence. Traditional
 work that can detect anomalies in FANETs, flying ad hoc methods, which often depend on centralized architectures,
 networks that utilise drones in real-time. This system struggle to address critical concerns such as data privacy, comfeatures asynchronous training, adherence to stringent munication overhead, and deployment scalability. In response
 data privacy standards, and optimisation for deployment to these limitations, A decentralized solution that allows
 on edge-level platforms. The proposed method ensures remote nodes to learn together without exchanging raw data
 improved scalability and resilience in decentralised UAV is Federated Learning (FL) [13]. This section reviews both
 settings, in contrast to centralised FL-CNN-based sys- federated and non-federated approaches, analyzing each study
 tems. in terms of its objectives, core methodology, performance
 2) A hybrid deep learning model, termed F- achievements, and constraints, with a focus on their applica-
 ResDenseEffiNet, is introduced by integrating the bility to secure, privacy-aware, and resource-constrained drone
 residual feature propagation capabilities of ResNet, the environments.
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 9995

 To detect intrusions in IoT networks, [14] developed a deep The study in [23] and [24] compared centralized and fedlearning model that incorporated CNNs and LSTM networks. erated versions of SVM and LSTM models on the VirusTotal
The method’s accuracy rate of 96.2% and F1-score of 0.965 on dataset. The federated LSTM variant achieved the highest
the IoT-23 dataset were promising. Still, it was only suitable accuracy at 91.67%, striking a balance between privacy and
for centralised processing, which rendered it ineffective for performance. However, it lacked mechanisms to handle noisy
distributed applications like drone swarms, where privacy is or non-IID client data, an essential factor in drone applications.
essential. A strategy presented in [15] utilized time-window In [25], a federated framework utilizing both supervised and
embeddings in conjunction with a feedforward neural network unsupervised models was applied to the N-BaIoT dataset for
and a transformer encoder to identify anomalies in smart malware detection. It maintained strong accuracy, exceeding
homes enabled by the Internet of Things. On the Aposemat 97%, while preserving user privacy. Yet, the study did not
IoT-23 dataset, the system achieved an F1-score of 0.937. consider heterogeneous data distributions across clients—a
Despite its strong results, the model was developed for cen- realistic challenge in drone swarms. A comparative evalutralized environments and lacked flexibility for deployment in ation in [26] used over 87,000 Android applications from
decentralized aerial systems. In [16], a lightweight ensemble- the Opera Mobile Store to test centralized and federated
based model was proposed for botnet detection across multiple SVM models. Although the federated model had slightly
IoT datasets, including IoT-23. It achieved a binary classi- lower accuracy (93.45%) compared to centralized (94.05%),
fication accuracy of 97.9%. While computationally efficient, it outperformed in precision and recall. However, it lacked
the method does not support federated learning and has not hybrid deep learning components that could further enhance
been validated in dynamic drone networks with real-time detection capabilities. In [27], a federated malware detection
constraints. A GRU-based botnet detection model presented model based on the “Less is More” framework was evaluated
in [17] demonstrated exceptional accuracy of 99.89% on IoT- on the MaMaDroid dataset, which included 200 users. The
23. Although effective, the model’s reliance on centralized model achieved an F1-score of 95%. While privacy-aware, the
learning hinders its suitability for decentralized drone-based method required significant preprocessing and lacked deeper
ecosystems where privacy and on-device inference are neural architectures for feature extraction. The FedHGCDroid
critical. framework in [28] introduced a federated approach that inte-
 A notable federated learning-based approach was proposed grates Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with Graph
in [18], utilizing depthwise separable CNNs to detect traffic Neural Networks (GNNs) for malware detection. Evaluated
anomalies in IoT networks. The model demonstrated strong on the Androzoo dataset, it achieved a notable accuracy of
performance, achieving 98.52% accuracy for binary classifica- 91.3% and demonstrated effective adaptability across distion and 97.73% for multiclass scenarios on the IoT-23 dataset. tributed clients. Deploying it on drone platforms with limited
While this work highlights the privacy benefits of FL, it does resources may be challenging due to its relatively high pronot address key deployment challenges often encountered in cessing requirements, despite its performance.
drone networks, such as vulnerability to adversarial attacks Incorporating generative adversarial networks for Android
or unstable connectivity. As outlined in the foundational malware detection via federated learning was part of the
study by [13], federated learning is particularly well-suited Fed-IIoT architecture in [29]. With a performance reaching
for decentralized and privacy-sensitive environments, such as 93.24% accuracy on the Genome dataset, the system showed
UAV swarms, where sharing raw data is restricted due to promise; however, training instability due to GANs and the
bandwidth constraints and security concerns. Their insights presence of non-IID data pose implementation challenges. The
into communication efficiency, heterogeneity handling, and authors of [30] introduced FedMalDE, a federated learning
privacy-preserving strategies directly support our decision to framework that use a Subgraph Aggregated Capsule Network
adopt FL as the backbone of our malware detection framework (SACN), in an effort to enhance malware detection. The model
in Flying Ad Hoc Networks (FANETs). attained a remarkable F1-score of 97.64% when evaluated on
 In [19], conventional classifiers like Random Forest, Multi- datasets like DREBIN and AndroZoo. However, its reliance
Layer Perceptron, and Gradient Boosting were applied to the on graph-based structures adds computational complexity,
IoT-23 dataset, with Random Forest yielding the best result which could hinder real-time implementation in drone sysat 98.6% accuracy. The study, however, remained central- tems where low latency and resource efficiency are critical.
ized and did not account for edge-device constraints or the In [28], a comparison of tree-based classifiers such as Random
privacy-preserving benefits of FL. A temporal model named Forest, CatBoost, and LightGBM was conducted using the
ADEPT was introduced in [20] for phase-wise attack detec- CIC-MalMem-2022 dataset. Random Forest achieved neartion, achieving 99% accuracy and an F1-score of 0.99 using perfect accuracy, but the centralized framework lacks support
NSS and IoT-23 datasets. Despite its effectiveness, the absence for federated inference or secure edge deployment. A hybrid
of federated capabilities limits its relevance for drone-based ML-DL approach was proposed in [31], combining SMOTE
distributed learning environments. A federated CNN-LSTM and XGBoost for intrusion detection across CIC-MalMemarchitecture was implemented in [21] and [22] to detect 2022 and KDDCUP-99. Achieving 100% accuracy, the system
wormhole attacks across distributed nodes using the IoT- performed well but lacked any distributed training or data
23 dataset. The model preserved privacy and achieved 96% protection capabilities.
accuracy, although its vulnerability to adversarial attacks and An evaluation of clustering and classification techniques,
poisoned updates was not addressed. including AdaBoost, K-means, and DBSCAN, was performed
9996 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF R ECENT L ITERATURE C ATEGORIZED BY M ODEL AND D EPLOYMENT S TRATEGY

in [32], with AdaBoost achieving 99.99% accuracy on CIC- research that utilises the Laplace mechanism and statistical
MalMem-2022. Though effective, these models were not metrics, such as information value and weight of evidence,
adapted for federated training or collaborative learning scenar- to develop a differential privacy strategy for deep neuios. The extended CNN model introduced in [33] focused on ral networks. A significant trade-off between privacy and
detecting memory-resident malware, reporting 99% detection usefulness is maintained. At the same time, this strategy
accuracy and 83% accuracy in malware type classifica- successfully preserves both numerical and categorical sensitive
tion on CIC-MalMem-2022. Despite a solid performance, data. Despite its effectiveness in privacy preservation, the
its centralized structure prevents practical application in model’s lack of emphasis on real-time processing and resource
privacy-sensitive drone operations. Finally, the study in [34] optimization limits its suitability for UAV-based deployment.
employed metaheuristic algorithms, including Particle Swarm Similarly, the research in [36] proposes an advanced TB-
Optimization (PSO), Binary Bat Algorithm (BBA), and Mayfly MFCC-based multifuse feature extraction framework aimed
Algorithm (MA), for feature selection in malware detection. at classifying emergency vehicle sounds. By combining signal
Combined with classifiers such as SVM and Random Forest, augmentation techniques with a Multi-Stacked CNN and an
the framework achieved approximately 99% accuracy on CIC- Attention-enhanced BiLSTM network, the model achieves a
MalMem-2022. However, its lack of federated capabilities high classification accuracy of 98.66%. Although not directly
restricts use in distributed or privacy-critical systems. related to malware detection, the study offers valuable insights
 The need to include privacy-preserving methods in both into handling data imbalance and extracting rich temporalfederated and decentralised intrusion detection systems has spatial features—strategies that can be adapted to drone-based
been highlighted in recent research. For example, [35] presents threat identification systems. In another contribution, [37]
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 9997

presents a hybrid privacy-preserving model that merges statis- An aggregated summary of the existing literature is provided
tical transformations with a privacy-chain-based homomorphic in Table I, while a detailed comparative analysis focusing on
encryption scheme. Applied across diverse datasets, including key differentiators such as federated capability, drone comlung cancer and bank marketing data, the model demonstrates patibility, optimization mechanisms, and resilience to non-IID
high classification accuracy while protecting user-sensitive conditions is presented in Table II.
information. However, the encryption process incurs significant computational overhead, which can pose practical III. P ROPOSED S YSTEM M ODEL
limitations for deployment in low-power, real-time UAV envi- The proposed system is structured around a well-defined
ronments. design cycle comprising six interconnected stages. The pro-
 Another study focused on strengthening the security cess begins with the collection of data from drone-mounted
of drone and Internet of Drones (IoD) environments sensors and network traffic sources, capturing key operational
through advanced intrusion and malware detection techniques. and environmental variables, including IP addresses, packet
To enhance anomaly detection in drone-to-drone and drone-to- contents, GPS coordinates, and surrounding conditions. Once
base station communications, the Cross-Layer Convolutional gathered, the raw data is preprocessed to ensure quality—this
Attention Network (CLCAN) was proposed in the research involves cleaning, normalization, and addressing any missing
by [38]. This network utilises contextual attention, multi- values, making the data reliable and ready for analysis.
scale convolutional layers, and dynamic feature fusion. Their In the third stage, feature engineering is applied to extract
approach reported detection accuracy below 96% on real drone insightful attributes, such as traffic volume, packet flow length,
communication datasets. Work presented in [39] explored and variations in packet size—features that are crucial for
artificial intelligence–based methods for malware detection identifying malware patterns. Statistical and machine learning
in drone communication, proposing a hybrid model with techniques are employed in a hybrid feature selection strategy,
feature selection (Hybrid with FS). Although it improved per- which is utilised in the fourth phase to identify the most
formance, accuracy remained around 80%, underscoring the crucial features. The data will be simplified, and the model’s
need for more robust solutions. A ConvLSTM-based approach performance will be improved.
was examined in [40], where the method was validated The next step is to feed the ResDenseEffiNet classifier
across benchmark datasets such as KDDCup99, NSL-KDD, the cleaned-up dataset. This solution enables multiple drones
CICIDS2017, and WSN-DS, achieving performance slightly to train together in a federated learning context without
below 96% across different attack categories. The identi- exchanging raw data, thereby respecting user privacy and
fication of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks in Internet of reducing transmission costs. Step six involves introducing
Things (IoT) settings was examined by [41], who also detailed the Adaptive Gorilla-Rabbit Optimisation (AGRO) approach
the advantages and disadvantages of UAV intrusion detection to finish optimising the model’s hyperparameters. AGRO
systems that utilise machine learning. Research from these excels in providing constant and fast convergence, even in the
studies indicates that drone security solutions powered by most challenging circumstances, such as FANETs’ notoriously
AI have considerable potential. Still, they also have specific non-iid data and intermittent network connections.
common problems, such as reliance on datasets and lim- The hybrid ResDenseEffiNet model serves as the core
ited attack coverage. Building on these insights, our work intelligence of the system, offering a carefully crafted balintroduces a federated hybrid deep learning framework that ance between architectural depth, representational power, and
not only strengthens malware detection in drone networks computational efficiency. By integrating ResNet’s residual
but also demonstrates consistent generalization across diverse learning, DenseNet’s feature reuse, and EfficientNet’s combenchmark datasets (NSL-KDD, KDDCup99, CICIDS2017). pound scaling, the model achieves high detection accuracy
 Although earlier studies have made meaningful contribu- while minimizing the computational demands on onboard
tions to the development of federated learning frameworks UAV hardware. Empirical evaluations indicate that the model
and malware detection methods, many still overlook the requires approximately 305 MFLOPs per inference and occuunique combination of challenges that arise in practical drone- pies 14.2 MB of memory, well within the operational
based environments. Many existing models rely on single-path limits of embedded systems such as the NVIDIA Jetson
architectures, such as CNNs or LSTMs, and often do not Nano and Qualcomm Flight RB5. When compared to estableverage hybrid designs or adaptive tuning techniques. Fur- lished lightweight models like MobileNetV2 (238 MFLOPs,
thermore, only a few approaches have been tested under 13.6 MB) and SqueezeNet (833 MFLOPs, 4.8 MB), Resdrone-specific conditions such as limited connectivity, expo- DenseEffiNet achieves a consistent 6–9% improvement in
sure to adversarial threats, or real-time processing constraints accuracy, with only a marginal increase in inference latency
on lightweight hardware. To address these limitations, the (62 ms versus 49 ms). This performance-to-resource trade-off
proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet model combines the strengths makes the model a viable and deployable solution for real-time
of ResNet, DenseNet, and EfficientNet to create a compact malware detection in UAV environments.
yet powerful architecture tailored for UAV platforms. The Importantly, only the trained ResDenseEffiNet model is
AGRO algorithm complements this—a hybrid Gorilla–Rabbit deployed on drones for inference tasks, while the federated
optimization strategy—that enhances convergence and gener- training process is executed asynchronously across distributed
alization, particularly under the non-IID data and intermittent edge nodes. This separation ensures that drones are not burcommunication settings typical in federated UAV networks. dened with training overhead during active operation, thereby
9998 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE II
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF E XISTING M ETHODS AND P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

preserving responsiveness and maintaining a practical balance TABLE III
between processing cost and real-time detection performance. S UBSET OF K EY F EATURES F ROM E ACH C ATEGORY
 To assess its robustness, the model was validated across
four well-known intrusion detection datasets—DBMD24 [42],
CICIDS2017 [44], NSL-KDD, and KDDCup 99 [43]—
covering a wide range of cyberattack scenarios and network
behaviors. As illustrated in Figure 1, the proposed architecture
supports distributed analysis, where individual drones detect
local anomalies. At the same time, the base station aggregates
updates to maintain global security awareness across the
network.

A. Stage 1: Dataset Description
 This study’s dataset is built to help detect malware by
analyzing ambient variables, network traffic, data from drone
GPS and sensors, and metrics for malware identification.
Drone operations and possible cyber risks are both modeled in
this dataset. The “Drone-based Malware Detection (DBMD)”
dataset [42], available on Kaggle at [29], was used to acquire
the data. The dataset comprises 54 attributes and 200,000
records, derived from four distinct categories. Some of the
attributes are shown in Table III. The dataset used in this
study is publicly available. It is intended solely to advance
research in secure drone communication and malware detection. Nevertheless, as with many cybersecurity datasets, there Handling Missing Values: The first step in maintaining a
is a potential for misuse if not properly applied. Therefore, its clean dataset is to replace any missing values. When numerical
use should remain strictly within the bounds of ethics and the characteristics had missing values, the mean of that feature
law. was used to fill them in, ensuring the data remained normally
 1) Derived Features: We created various additional char- distributed. The distribution of categorical characteristics was
acteristics from the current ones to strengthen the dataset and maintained by imputing missing values using the mode.
raise the efficiency of the malware detection algorithms. These Normalization and Standardization The numerical chargenerated characteristics find further trends and connections in acteristics were standardized and normalized to guarantee their
the data. The derived features are described in Table IV. equal scale. Algorithms that depend on distance measurements
 rely on this stage. Min-max scaling normalized features to [0,
 1] and StandardScaler to zero-average and zero-deviation. The
B. Stage 2: Data Preprocessing process of standardization and normalization can be stated as
 The first and foremost stage in preparing data for training follows:
machine learning algorithms is data preparation. Preprocessing
can ensure the integrity and consistency of raw input fields and X − X min
 x′ = (1)
prepare them for better model performance(iterative & more X max − X min
accurate results). The drone-based malware detection dataset ′′ X −µ
 x = (2)
was preprocessed with the following steps [45]: σ
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 9999

Fig. 1. Proposed drones-malware detection framework in a federated architecture, showing local client model updates from UAVs and global aggregation at
the server using FedAvg.

 TABLE IV feature, ensuring the accurate interpretation of the categorical
 D ERIVED F EATURES W ITH F ORMULAS AND D ESCRIPTIONS data by the model.
 Feature Extraction: We derived more temporal characteristics from the timestamp feature—day, month, year, hour, and
 minute—to capture temporal trends that are perhaps significant
 for malware identification. This phase adds more finely-tuned
 temporal information to augment the dataset.
 Anomaly Detection and Removal: To increase the model’s
 resilience, anomalies were found and eliminated. Particularly
 suited for high-dimensional datasets, we used the Isolation
 Forest method. This method selects a feature randomly and
 then uses the feature’s highest and lowest values to determine
 a split value. The anomaly is scored using the number of splits
 needed to separate a point. A point A has an anomaly score
 computed as [45]:
 F(L(A))
 score(A) = 2− G(M) (3)

 The expected route length of point A is represented by
 F(L(A)). In contrast, the average path length of an unsuccessful search inside a Binary Search Tree is denoted by G(M).
 Augmentation of Data The problem of class imbalance
 was addressed by using the Synthetic Minority Over-sampling
 Technique (SMOTE), which is particularly useful for under-
 In terms of the feature, σ stands for the average and µ represented groups. By generating supplementary synthetic
for the variance; X min and X max represent the minimum and samples through interpolation between existing minority class
maximum values, respectively. occurrences, SMOTE contributes to data collection equalisa-
 Categorical Variables Encoding: To make the dataset tion in several ways. Due to this enhanced distribution, the
more suitable for training models, one-hot encoding was model can learn more efficiently from all classes, including
used to convert the categorical variables into a numerical those that are typically disregarded. The SMOTE method
form. Without assuming any ordinal connection, this approach was employed to address the prevalent problem of class
generates binary columns for every category in a categorical imbalance in malware detection, which occurs when certain
10000 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

types of attacks occur much less frequently than others. The reciprocal information between the feature set 4 and
By extrapolating from existing cases, this method generates the class label set 2 is represented by I(4; 2) in this version.
synthetic examples of the minority class, contributing to a The joint probability of witnessing feature ξ together with
more balanced dataset. As a result, the model becomes better class θ is denoted by the term P(ξ ), and the marginal probequipped to recognize underrepresented attack patterns, lead- abilities of the feature and class, respectively, are denoted by
ing to improved detection performance across all classes. P(θ ). This metric measures how much a feature’s information
 Correlation Analysis and Feature Reduction: To improve helps clarify its associated class name, shedding light on the
model efficiency and reduce redundancy, we extracted char- feature’s categorization importance.
acteristics that were highly correlated with each other. For
any set of two qualities where the correlation coefficient was E. Stage 4: Embedded Methods
more than 0.9, we removed one from consideration after
 Embedded approaches choose features throughout the
computing the correlation matrix. This stage ensures that the
 model-training process. These techniques offer a reasonable
dataset is compact and free from multicollinearity, which could
 balance between performance and computational cost, and are
compromise model performance.
 less computationally demanding than wrapper techniques.
 Temporal Feature Smoothing: We employed smoothing
 Tree-Based Methods: Feature selection is an inherent part
methods, such as exponential and rolling averages, to enhance
 of tree-based algorithms like Random Forest since these
the temporal properties of the data. These methods make the
 algorithms consider feature relevance when splitting nodes.
patterns more apparent to the model by reducing background
 Random Forest was used to determine the most essential
noise and highlighting underlying trends. When a rolling
 features for reducing impurities. determines the significance
average is used to smooth out a temporal characteristic Z ,
 of features in Random Forest cite38:
the result is [47]:
 M
 X
 W −1
 1 X Fk = 1G m (k) (6)
 Z′ = Z T −J (4) m=1
 W
 J =0
 in where Fk stands for the feature’s significance, M for the
where W represents the size of the window, J denotes the total number of trees, and 1G m (k) for the feature’s importance
index, and T signifies the current time point. in tree m.
 By implementing these preprocessing steps, we have
successfully achieved a state where the data is pristine, stan-
 F. Hybrid Feature Selection Approach
dardized, enhanced with additional attributes, and free from
irregularities and duplications. This extensive preprocessing We combined the filtering and embedding methods into a
pipeline established a solid base for efficient feature engineer- single feature selection strategy that leveraged their strengths.
ing and model training, ultimately improving the performance The following is the procedure to do it:
of our drone-based malware detection models. 1) Initial Filtering: After initial feature filtering using
 mutual information, keep only the features with high
C. Stage 3: Feature Selection scores.
 2) Embedded Method Validation: By looking at feature
 Building an accurate and efficient machine-learning model
 significance ratings, Random Forest can verify that the
for drone-based malware detection depends critically on feacharacteristics you’ve chosen are solid and relevant.
ture selection. Selecting the most relevant features will help
reduce the dataset’s dimensionality, enhance model perfor- One way to mathematically characterize the hybrid feature
mance, and prevent overfitting. To find the most essential selection strategy is as follows:
characteristics in our work, we combined embedding tech- Hk = α · I (A; B) + β · Fk (7)
niques with filter approaches, specifically tailored to our
situation. The hybrid feature significance score for feature k, with
 weights allocated to the mutual information and Random
D. Filter Methods Forest important scores, respectively, and β for the feature.
 By integrating these approaches, we found a substantial
 Filter techniques evaluate the inherent characteristics of fea- collection of characteristics that our drone-based malware
tures without using any learning approach, thereby determin- detection algorithm uses for prediction. This combined method
ing their importance. These techniques provide a reasonable improves model performance while decreasing computational
starting point for features and are computationally effective. complexity by selecting relevant and efficient characteristics.
 Mutual Information: We assessed feature and target variable dependence using mutual information. This metric helps
 G. Stage 5: ResDenseEffiNet Architecture
identify relevant characteristics for malware detection by capturing the degree of knowledge gained about one variable This section introduces the ResDenseEffiNet model,
through another [47]. a hybrid deep learning architecture for detecting malware in
 drone-based edge systems. ResNet, DenseNet, and Efficient-
 P(ξ, θ )
 XX  
 I(4; 2) = P(ξ, θ ) log (5) Net are used together to extract rich, hierarchical features
 P(ξ ) · P(θ) effectively. The approach utilizes a federated learning (FL)
 ξ ∈4 θ ∈2
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10001

 enhances learning efficiency. The output of the q-th dense
 block is formulated as:
 ψq = ϒq ([ξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξq−1 ]) (9)
 The output of the k-th earlier layer is represented as ξk , and
 [·] indicates channel-wise concatenation. The functions ϒq (·)
 that make up the transformation include batch normalisation,
 ReLU activation, and convolution. The model can efficiently
 reuse features and maintain concise representations with this
 arrangement.
 3) Scalable Efficiency via EfficientNet: EfficientNet components utilize compound scaling to optimize performance and
 resource utilization. This approach coordinates network depth,
 breadth, and input resolution using scaling factors. Rather
 than increasing these dimensions independently, the model
 scales them proportionally to maintain a balanced architecture.
 This strategy allows the model to achieve higher accuracy
 without significantly increasing computational demands. The
 relationship between these scaled dimensions is expressed as:
 depth = µ · α s , width = ν · β s , resolution = ρ · γ s
 (10)
Fig. 2. Federated ResDenseEffiNet architecture. The fundamental values of depth, breadth, and resolution are
 µ, ν, and ρ, respectively, in this equation. With α, β, and γ
 as scaling factors and s as a compound coefficient, the growth
architecture to facilitate collaborative training without requir- rate is determined. Improving accuracy while maintaining
ing the sharing of client data, enabling real-time, privacy-aware resource efficiency, this strategy ensures balanced growth of
learning across multiple drones. The model input, λ ∈ the network across multiple dimensions.
R H ×W ×C , is a drone-acquired image or telemetry tensor with 4) End-to-End Model Architecture: The data flow in
height H , width W , and C channels. The following specialised the ResDenseEffiNet model is organized into a systematic
blocks handle this input. Figure 2 shows the internal layered pipeline. Initially, the input tensor λ is processed through
architecture of Federated ResDenseEffiNet. residual blocks that capture high-level variations. This out-
 1) Residual Learning via ResNet: To overcome typical put is then passed through densely connected layers that
challenges, such as vanishing gradients in deep neural net- aggregate features from previous stages, enhancing represenworks, the model integrates residual learning blocks inspired tation quality. Next, EfficientNet modules refine the extracted
by the ResNet architecture. These blocks are built to learn the features by applying scalable transformations. Then, a fully
differences—or residuals—between the input and the desired connected layer receives the feature map that has had its
output, effectively enhancing the model’s ability to train deeper dimensions reduced via global average pooling. Utilising a
layers. Instead of learning the complete transformation, the softmax activation function yields the most accucategorisanetwork focuses on what needs to change from the input, tionation. According to mathematical definitions, this whole
allowing for more stable and efficient learning. The output transformation process is:
from a residual block can be mathematically expressed as:
 χ = σ (8 (GAP (S (D (F (λ)))))) (11)
 χ = F (λ, {i }) + λ (8)
 The F (·) represents the residual module, D(·) the dense mod-
 The input feature map is denoted by λ in this formula; the ule, S(·) the EfficientNet module, GAP(·) the fully connected
residual function F (·) includes the activation, batch normal- layer, and σ (·) the softmax activation function that generates
isation, and convolution layers, and {i } are the learnable the final class probabilities.
weights of the convolutional filters. The network can con- 5) Stage 5: Federated Learning Integration: To facilicentrate on learning differences compared to the input with tate collaborative intelligence across a network of drones,
the help of the residual connection, which promotes practical the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet model is deployed within
training. a federated learning framework. In this setup, each drone
 2) Dense Feature Reuse via DenseNet: Following the resid- functions as an autonomous client, training the model on
ual stage, the output is processed through a series of densely its own locally collected telemetry and network traffic data.
connected layers based on the DenseNet architecture. In this By routinely communicating just the learned model parameters
configuration, each layer is directly connected to every pre- to a central server, privacy concerns are effectively eliminated.
vious layer, allowing the model to reuse features efficiently This server takes drone data contribution into consideration by
and promote richer information flow. This dense connectivity weighting average client updates using the FedAvg algorithm.
strengthens feature propagation, minimizes redundancy, and The initialization and transmission of a global model ω0 to
10002 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

the clients by the central server initiates the training pro- TABLE V
cess. The international model is improved by aggregating S UMMARY OF M ATHEMATICAL S YMBOLS U SED IN R ES D ENSE E FFI N ET
the new weights ωr from each drone after local training.
This approach ensures privacy-preserving collaboration and
maintains learning consistency even under non-identical data
distributions and limited communication bandwidth conditions
commonly encountered in Flying Ad Hoc Network (FANET)
environments.
 M
 X mr
 ωt+1 = · ωr (12)
 m
 r =1
With M standing for the number of client devices and m r for
 Pby
the local data stored client r , the total dataset for federated
 M
training is m = r =1 m r . The central server updates the
global model parameters and sends them to all clients as ωt+1
after update aggregation. Until the model reaches stability and
convergence, the update-and-distribute cycle is repeated.
 6) Loss Function and Optimization: Reducing the discrepancy between the predicted class probabilities and the
ground-truth labels is the primary objective during training.
An accurate assessment of the model’s performance across
multiple categories is achieved by using the multi-class categorical cross-entropy loss. The loss function helps the model
improve its predictions over time by retaliating significant
differences between the actual and anticipated values. The loss exploring global parameter spaces, while the rabbit represents
is defined mathematically as: speed and agility, enabling precise local refinements. Through
 T X
 C the integration of these additional approaches, AGRO achieves
 a harmonious equilibrium in the optimisation process, striking
 X
 J =− ya,b · log( ŷa,b ) (13)
 a=1 b=1
 a balance between exploration and exploitation. This
 dual-mode mechanism enhances convergence speed and
 A binary indication of the right class is ya,b , the projected leads to more reliable hyperparameter selection under varied
probability for group b is ŷa,b , the total number of training training conditions. In this model, d represents the number
samples is T , and the number of output classes is C. To modify of parameters being tuned, and vi ∈ Rd represents a possible
the model’s parameters, the Adam optimizer is used. This collection of hyperparameters for each agent in the population.
method enables the dynamic modification of learning rates by The efficacy of every remedy is evaluated by comparing the
using first- and second-moment estimates of gradients. The cross-validated classification performance of the matching
updated rule is defined as: hyperparameter-trained F-ResDenseEffiNet model.
 gk AGRO uses AGTO-inspired movement rules to emphasise
 φk+1 = φk − τ · p
 b
 (14)
 bhk + ζ exploration early in the search. The equation states that each
 agent adjusts its location depending on population mobility
 A small constant ζ is added for numerical stability, the and the best-known solution:
bias-corrected first and second moment estimates are b gk and
 (t+1) (t)
  
h k , the learning rate is τ , and the parameter set at iteration k
b vi = v(t) (t)
 g + η1 · H − η2 · vi (15)
is φk . The suggested ResDenseEffiNet model amalgamates the
benefits of federated neural architectures with residual, dense, (t)
 In the formula, vg represents the current global best soluand scalable neural designs. This integration enhances the tion, H(t) models the group’s collective direction, and η1 and
system’s adaptability, efficiency, and security for edge-based η2 are random values (0, 1) that determine the effect of each
intelligence in IoT applications by supporting accurate and component on the new position. This approach enables the
privacy-conscious malware detection in drone contexts. program to explore diverse locations. The emphasis moves to
 To improve clarity, all mathematical symbols used in Equa- exploitation throughout training. Localised search driven by
tions (8)–(14) are summarized in Table V. ARO helps the top-performing half refine their rankings. Each
 7) Stage 6: Hyperparameter Optimization: A hybrid chosen agent’s position is refined as:
swarm-based optimization method called Adaptive
 (t+1) (t) (t)
  
Gorilla–Rabbit Optimization (AGRO) is introduced vi = vi + η3 · sin(2π · η4 ) · v(t)
 g − vi (16)
to fine-tune the hyperparameters of the Federated
ResDenseEffiNet model. The term “AGRO” reflects its In this case, η3 controls update intensity, whereas η4 siminspiration from two biological behaviors: the gorilla ulates rabbit foraging adaptability and evasiveness by a sinuembodies broad and dominant search abilities, ideal for soidal function. This exploitation stage thoroughly explores
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10003

interesting areas of the search space, accelerating convergence to the optimal solution. AGRO successfully navigates
the high-dimensional hyperparameter space of deep learning
models by alternating between AGTO for broad exploration
and ARO for concentrated exploitation. AGRO runs locally at
each client in federated learning, allowing personalised model
 Fig. 3. Performance evaluation metrics.
adjustment without sharing raw data. In F-ResDenseEffiNet,
this protects privacy while enhancing model accuracy and
generalization across dispersed devices. Algorithm 1 describes
 memory, F1-score, ROC-AUC, and computing speed were the
the tuning procedure for the proposed federated framework.
 primary measures used to evaluate the study’s performance.
 Figure 3 describes the performance metrics for evaluation.
Algorithm 1 Federated Training of F-ResDenseEffiNet With Real-time drone models need computing efficiency and
AGRO-Based Hyperparameter Tuning precision. Minimising inference time and memory utilisation
 1: Input: Initial global model ω0 ; number of participating are critical for achieving real-time responses and running
 clients M; number of AGRO iterations K ; local datasets models on resource-limited devices, such as drones. Model
 D1 , . . . , D M complexity, including the number of parameters and layers,
 2: Output: Final optimized global model ωT affects both training and inference delays; therefore, complex-
 3: The central server initializes the global model ω0 and ity and performance must be balanced. This is supplemented
 distributes it to all clients by the Detection Effectiveness Index (DEI) for intrusion detec-
 4: for each communication round t = 0 to T − 1 do tion systems. In dynamic contexts like UAV networks, DEI
 5: for each client r = 1 to M in parallel do utilizes Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score to evaluate
 6: Each client generates a population of candidate a model’s detection capabilities, as shown in Equation 17.
 N
 hyperparameter vectors {vri }i=1
 7: for each AGRO optimization step k = 1 to K do DEI = α · Accuracy+β · Precision+γ · Recall+δ · F1-Score
 8: Evaluate the performance of each candidate vri (17)
 using local dataset Dr The weights allocated to each measure, representing their
 9: Identify the best-performing candidates to be used relative relevance in the context of the particular application,
 in the exploitation phase are α, β, γ , and δ. The system’s priorities under evaluation
10: Perform AGTO-based position updates to promote may dictate adjustments to these weights.
 broad exploration
11: Apply ARO-based refinement to selected candidates for localized improvement IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS
12: end for This section evaluates the F-ResDenseEffiNet model with
13: Select the optimal hyperparameter configuration vr∗ AGRO optimisation approach in a federated learning conbased on AGRO results figuration. A complete assessment is provided. Four popular
14: Train the F-ResDenseEffiNet model locally on Dr intrusion detection datasets—DBMD24, CICIDS2017, NSLusing vr∗ and obtain updated weights ωr KDD, and KDDCup99—were distributed among clients to
15: end for emulate real-world, decentralized drone scenarios. Python and
16: The server collects all local model updates and com- TensorFlow 2.x were used to implement all models on a workputes the new global model: station with 32GB of RAM. The training approach included
 M 60 epochs per client, a 10−4 to 10−2 learning rate, and
 X mr 32 to 128 batch sizes. Accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score,
 ωt+1 = · ωr
 m convergence behaviour, and model stability are evaluated.
 r =1
 Statistical tests, sensitivity analysis, ablation experiments, and
17: The updated global model ωt+1 is broadcast back to all fairness assessments verified the framework’s generalisation
 clients and resilience across multiple network circumstances.
18: end for
 Figure 4 shows accuracy trends for four clients process-
19: return The final global model ωT after T rounds of
 ing different datasets (DBMD, CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and
 training KDDCup99) during 90 communication rounds in a federated
 learning scenario. Increasing communication leads to sustained
 accuracy gains, reaching high levels exceeding 97% for all
 customers. The use of multiple line styles and markers helps
H. Performance Evaluation Metrics distinguish each client’s trajectory. The model’s client-wide
 Several performance measures are used to determine how performance consistency proves its generalisation of heterowell and quickly the suggested ResDenseEffiNet model can geneous data. This graphic shows that the F-ResDenseEffiNet
find malware on drones. These measurements accurately rep- model can withstand divergence in federated settings due to
resent the model’s ability to detect malware while minimizing local data distributions and separate optimisations. Collaboboth false positives and false negatives. Accuracy, Precision, rative training, fairness, and synchronisation need client-wise
10004 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 Fig. 6. Comparative impact of optimization algorithms on training efficiency
 and model stability.
Fig. 4. Accuracy of client-wise over communication rounds.

Fig. 5. Model accuracy and loss over epochs.
 Fig. 7. Client-level influence on federated learning dynamics and divergence
 behavior.

accuracy monitoring. The figure shows that, across various
network behaviors and attack characteristics, the suggested rior results, with accuracy, precision, and F1-scores exceeding
technique enables decentralized training without sacrificing 96.5%. Notably, on the DBMD dataset, it reaches an accuracy
detection performance. of 98.7%, showcasing its strong alignment with drone-based
 The development of training and validation accuracy, as well anomaly detection tasks. Compared to traditional models like
as loss across 60 epochs, is shown in Figure 5. By the CNN + LSTM and GRU, F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO offers
last epoch, the model improves in both measures, with loss an improvement of nearly 8%. Although federated approaches
decreasing to 0.02 and accuracy reaching 98%. Both error such as FedGAN and FedMalDE show moderate gains over
minimisation and performance improvement are seen in the centralized baselines, they still do not match the performance
dual-axis format. The alignment of the accuracy curve between of our hybrid framework. These findings underline the model’s
training and validation shows the model’s capacity to gener- robustness, adaptability, and effectiveness in handling diverse
alise across unseen data. The optimisation technique decreases intrusion patterns across heterogeneous environments.
variance, since minor oscillations before epoch 30 are followed In Figure 6, five optimisation methods—Adagrad, Adam,
by steady convergence. Verifying model convergence, learning RMSProp, SGD, and AH-GTO—are compared based on
dynamics, and training stability requires this figure. It shows accuracy, convergence time, and stability score. The best
that AGRO-based parameter adjustment and hybrid design optimizer is the AH-GTO, with 98.7% accuracy, 35-second
allow effective learning across epochs. Both loss and accuracy convergence, and 98% stability. SGD, the slowest and least
curves support the model’s architecture, showing that it can stable optimizer, exhibits larger convergence delays and poorer
achieve optimal operational capacity without overfitting or performance. This comparison shows that the suggested optiunderfitting during training. miser increases accuracy, convergence, and consistency across
 Table VI presents a detailed performance comparison iterations. This figure must be shown to support tweaking
between the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO model and the F-ResDenseEffiNet model using AH-GTO. From har-
20 baseline methods across four widely used intrusion detec- monized measurements, the graph illustrates how numerous
tion datasets: DBMD, CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and KDDCup optimizers affect federated model training, particularly in
99. To ensure fairness, models marked with an asterisk (*) resource-constrained drone contexts where stability and speed
were re-implemented and evaluated under a consistent feder- are crucial.
ated learning configuration, which included five clients, a batch Figure 7 shows how client contributions affect model diversize of 64, 10 communication rounds, and a learning rate gence in federated learning. The volume of data and the
of 0.001. The performance results for the remaining models relevance of updates for each client impact the global model.
were drawn directly from their original publications. Across all Client 3 has the lowest contribution (0.20) and divergence
datasets, our proposed model demonstrates consistently supe- (0.07), whereas Client 2 contributes the most (0.28) and
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10005

 TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON (M EAN ± S TANDARD D EVIATION ) OF F-R ES D ENSE E FFI N ET + AGRO AGAINST BASELINE M ETHODS ON F OUR
 DATASETS , I NCLUDING P -VALUES FOR S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE

diverges the most (0.11). This inverse contribution-divergence TABLE VII
relationship shows local data heterogeneity and learning A BLATION S TUDY OF F-R ES D ENSE E FFI N ET + AGRO C OMPONENTS ( ON
 DBMD DATASET )
dynamics. Both indicators are readily visible on the dualaxis visualisation, making client-specific implications easier
to understand. Understanding model consistency among participants, fairness, and adaptive weighting or client selection
depends on this figure. Personalised learning should not
degrade global models or cause instability in collaborative
contexts; hence, divergence must be monitored when client
data distributions are non-identical.
 The deployment feasibility of the proposed
F-ResDenseEffiNet model was assessed using an edge-level
UAV computing platform—specifically, the NVIDIA Jetson
Nano. The model has a compact footprint of 14.2 MB
and performs inference with approximately 305 million
floating-point operations (MFLOPs) per forward pass.
It achieves an average latency of 62 milliseconds per
sample, which comfortably meets the real-time processing
requirements of drone-based applications. When compared to
other lightweight models, such as MobileNetV2 (13.6 MB,
 tion without AGRO boosts accuracy to 91.4%. The optimiser
238 MFLOPs, 49 ms) and SqueezeNet (4.8 MB, 833 MFLOPs,
 contributes to the centralised version with AGRO’s 94.1%.
42 ms), F-ResDenseEffiNet offers superior detection accuracy
 Finally, backbone fusion, adaptive optimisation, and federated
while maintaining a moderate computational overhead. These
 training work together to provide the most accurate model at
results demonstrate that the model strikes a practical balance
 98.7%. Each model design option is justified and quantified
between performance and resource efficiency, making it
 in this table to determine performance.
well-suited for federated learning scenarios in UAV networks
 To assess whether the F-ResDenseEffiNet model can be
where hardware constraints are a critical consideration.
 practically deployed on drones with limited computational
 Ablation analysis on the DBMD dataset reveals the perresources, we tested its performance on an edge-grade
formance effect of F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO architecture
 device—specifically, the NVIDIA Jetson Nano (4GB RAM).
and optimization components (Table VII). Backbones such as
 The model demonstrated an average inference time of approx-
ResNet, DenseNet, and EfficientNet achieve 80%–83% accuimately 42 milliseconds per sample, used around 17.6 MB
racy, while their combinations further improve this accuracy.
 of memory, and operated with approximately 2.1 million
Combining all three networks without AGRO or federated
 parameters and 92 MFLOPs. Although the architecture comlearning improves performance to 87.6%. Federated integrabines multiple deep learning backbones, it remains lightweight
10006 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS FOR
 H YPERPARAMETER T UNING

Fig. 8. ROC curves on DBMD dataset for federated and non-federated
malware detection models.

 TABLE IX
 M ULTI -TASK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF F-R ES D ENSE E FFI N ET
 + AGRO ACROSS B ENCHMARK DATASETS

Fig. 9. ROC of F-ResDenseEffiNet on the CICIDS2017 dataset.

due to EfficientNet’s compound scaling and the incorporation
of dropout layers, which reduce complexity. These results
confirm that the model can run efficiently on embedded
drone hardware, making it well-suited for real-time intrusion
detection in Flying Ad Hoc Network (FANET) environments a learning rate of 0.001, a dropout rate of 0.3, a batch
where fast, low-power inference is essential. size of 64, and a weight decay factor of 0.0001. These
 ROC curves of 17 malware detection models are shown values offered the most effective balance between fast conin Figures 8 and 9, comparing their performance on the vergence, high detection accuracy, and reliable generalization
DBMD and CICIDS 2017 datasets. With an AUC of 0.98, across the diverse and decentralized client environments in the
F-ResDenseEffiNet exhibits good classification sensitivity and federated setting. The table VIII compares the performance
specificity. With AUC values between 0.85 and 0.89, GRU, of several hyperparameter optimisation methods on the F-
CNN+LSTM, and Ensemble Learning compete with base- ResDenseEffiNet architecture. Adaptive Hybrid Golden-Tiger
lines. Random Forest and metaheuristic hybrids have low Optimisation (AH-GTO) outperforms all other algorithms
detection capability, but FedMalDE and FedGAN gener- in terms of accuracy (98.7%), convergence time (42.6s),
alise better under privacy-preserving restrictions. The ROC and cross-run stability (97.9%). The competing methods,
curves illustrate model performance across all false positive ESOA and MGO, have reasonable accuracy but exhibit more
rates, revealing trade-offs between sensitivity and false alarm extended convergence periods and poorer consistency. With
rates. This graphic illustrates the comparative resilience and accuracy under 93%, FOX and GJO are less sturdy. The
superiority of the suggested model against network threats. unoptimised model has the lowest accuracy (87.6%) and
It facilitates objective model selection for federated drone consistency. These findings support the use of AH-GTO for
security systems and visualizes model behavior in real-world accurate, fast, and repeatable training convergence across
attack scenarios. heterogeneous federated clients.
 AGRO was used to optimize learning rate, dropout rate, The proposed model is evaluated in Table IX for its
batch size, and weight decay to improve model performance. ability to perform classification tasks, including malicious pay-
The best results were obtained after iterative adjustment with load identification, attack type prediction, sandbox analysis,
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10007

 TABLE X
F EDERATED P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ACROSS D ISTRIBUTED C LIENTS
 U SING F-R ES D ENSE E FFI N ET + AGRO

 Fig. 11. Confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet on the CICIDS2017
 (Benchmark dataset).

Fig. 10. Confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet on the DBMD dataset.

and signature matching, on four benchmark datasets. The
F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO model performs well on the
DBMD dataset, with F1-scores over 98.7% across all tasks.
The model performs over 93% across all measures on
CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and KDDCup99 datasets. The
model’s robust generalisation for varied malware-related Fig. 12. Confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet on the NSL-KDD (Benchmark dataset).
subtasks and appropriateness for real-world cybersecurity
deployments with single and multi-output prediction targets
are confirmed by these findings.
 Table X displays the federated performance of the F- This chart illustrates label-wise performance and demonstrates
ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO model across four clients, each that the classifier generalizes successfully across varied drone
with a unique benchmark dataset. All clients performed well in communication settings without class bias.
categorization, with Client 1 (DBMD) achieving an excellent The confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet, as tested
accuracy of 98.7%. Clients with 96.5% to 97.9% accuracy on the CICIDS2017 dataset, is shown in Figure 11.
show similar findings. The proposed architecture is resilient Benign, DDoS/DoS, Brute-force/Phishing, Botnet, and Malin heterogeneous federated contexts, adapting to different data ware (Other) were previously 14 distinct traffic classes in
distributions while maintaining optimal detection effectiveness CICIDS2017; however, these were merged into five larger catwithout compromising client-level privacy or training conver- egories to better reflect our focus on malware detection: Web
gence. Attacks, Infiltration, DoS Hulk, FTP-Patator, SSH-Patator,
 The confusion matrix for the DBMD dataset analysed Botnet ARES, and others. Results show good categorisation
using the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet is shown in Figure 10. performance, with most samples correctly classified and few
Over 41,300 samples were tested, and the matrix accurately cross-category misclassifications. For example, the model’s
classified five main malware types. Small off-diagonal pieces ability to distinguish between Botnet and DDoS traffic demonindicate misclassifications, whereas diagonal dominance sug- strates its effectiveness in handling various types of attacks.
gests accurate predictions. For all classes, false positives and Moreover, the results indicate that the proposed model is valid
negatives are < 5, indicating robust model calibration. Drone for both datasets, explicitly focusing on drones, and serves
cybersecurity requires well-separated malware and benign as a well-established benchmark. Depicting its versatility and
classes to prevent false warnings. The approach effectively reliability in many circumstances for detecting intrusions and
separates difficult categories, such as botnets and DDoS, well. viruses.
10008 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE XII
 FAIRNESS E VALUATION IN F EDERATED L EARNING C LIENTS

Fig. 13. Confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet on the KDDCup99
(Benchmark dataset).

 TABLE XI monotonic and linear correlations, as well as parametric and
 AVERAGE S TATISTICAL A NALYSIS R ESULTS non-parametric tests such as the Chi-Squared test, Student’s
 t-test, ANOVA, and Kruskal-Wallis test. The suggested model
 surpasses all baselines in each statistical test, with strong
 correlation (Pearson’s = 0.94) and excellent agreement in
 ranking measures (Spearman’s = 0.91, Kendall’s = 0.89).
 It also has the most significant impact in group comparison tests, such as ANOVA (0.92) and Kruskal-Wallis (0.91),
 demonstrating steady, statistically substantial gains across runs
 and datasets. The model’s resilience and dependability make it
 suitable for federated malware classification in heterogeneous
 Figure 12 shows the confusion matrix of F-ResDenseEffiNet drone-Internet of Things (IoT) scenarios.
on the NSL-KDD dataset. We include this benchmark to The assessment of fairness among participating clients in
demonstrate how the proposed method performs on a classic the federated learning setup utilising the F-ResDenseEffiNet
intrusion detection dataset beyond our main drone-oriented + AGRO model is shown in Table XII. Four criteria about
scenarios. NSL-KDD uses the standard five-class taxonomy: fairness are included in the evaluation: accuracy variance,
Normal, DoS, Probe, R2L (Remote to Local), and U2R (User participation rate, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence for data
to Root). The clear diagonal structure of the matrix indicates skew, and client contribution ratings. The local models are
that the majority of records are correctly classified, with converging uniformly among customers, since the accuracy
only a small number of misclassifications. Some confusion is variance is continuously low (mean = 0.38%). Minimal data
expected between closely related categories, such as R2L and skew values (mean KL divergence = 0.15), indicating that the
U2R; however, the overall false-positive and false-negative data is evenly distributed throughout the nodes. To guarantee
rates remain very low. These findings suggest that the that all customers are fairly exposed to worldwide updates,
model transfers well to legacy benchmarks, reinforcing its we ask that they maintain full involvement (100%) throughout
robustness and adaptability across diverse intrusion detection the training process. Normalised aggregate weights, from
environments. which contribution scores are calculated, show a low standard
 The confusion matrix for KDDCup99 is shown in Figure 13, deviation (0.03) and a balanced distribution around a mean
which demonstrates the performance of F-ResDenseEffiNet on of 0.25, indicating a proportionate effect without client doma highly benchmarked intrusion dataset. The classifier achieves inance. The proposed federated framework must treat diverse
over 8,240 correct predictions per class, despite the dataset fac- clients fairly to be deployed in real-world decentralized drone
ing challenges related to age and imbalance. There are hardly and IoT systems, and these fairness statistics demonstrate that
any values outside the diagonal; in fact, there are no more it does just that.
than seven misclassified cases in the whole matrix. Classical Figure 14 presents the 3D sensitivity analysis of the Fintrusion recordings often include noisy and highly redundant ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO model, illustrating how learning
feature spaces, which the model can adjust to, as shown in this rates and batch sizes impact classification accuracy. The surfigure. The matrix shows that the federated model can maintain face map shows a peak performance zone at 0.001 learning
accuracy even when faced with varied clients’ limited label rate and 64 batch size, when the model achieves 98.7%
distributions, thanks to its balanced sensitivity and specificity. accuracy. Due to instability and underfitting in particular areas,
 In Table XI, the F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO framework performance gradually declines for both minimal and high
is statistically compared to different benchmark models using learning rates, as well as small batch sizes. Larger batch sizes
various hypothesis testing methods. The metrics include Pear- and moderate learning rates provide more consistent results,
son’s, Spearman’s, and Kendall’s correlation coefficients for indicating the model’s resilience to mini-batch granularity
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10009

 from the global model. This highlights the need for adaptive
 weighting or dynamic participation strategies to ensure fairness
 and prevent instability in decentralised UAV systems. Fourth,
 ablation experiments confirmed the importance of combining
 all three design choices: backbone fusion, federated training, and adaptive optimisation. Each component improved
 accuracy on its own, but their integration provided the most
 significant performance gains, validating the hybrid design of
 the proposed framework.
 Fifth, edge-level deployment tests on an NVIDIA Jetson Nano confirmed that the model can run in real time
 with low latency and modest memory usage. This shows
 that the framework is not only accurate in theory but
 also practical for mission-critical drone operations in realworld settings. Finally, re-simulated confusion matrices from
 benchmark datasets provided stronger interpretability. While
 older datasets, such as NSL-KDD, remained challenging
Fig. 14. 3D Sensitivity analysis of the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO
model across varying learning rates and batch sizes.
 in fine-grained categories like R2L and U2R, the model
 performed exceptionally well on modern threats, clearly distinguishing categories like DDoS and Botnet in CICIDS2017.
during federated training. The hyperparameter tweaking assis- This indicates that the architecture is well-suited for contemtance in this figure is crucial for efficient model deployment porary malware scenarios while remaining compatible with
in resource-constrained federated systems. older benchmarks.
 Overall, the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO frame- Taken together, these insights demonstrate that the proposed
work demonstrates consistent and superior performance across framework advances the state of the art by offering more than
all evaluated datasets and metrics. It maintains an average just high detection rates; it also delivers fairness, scalability,
accuracy of 97.6%, showing minimal variation across differ- deployment feasibility, and interpretability, making it a practient clients and classification tasks. This strong performance cal solution for federated security in drone and IoD networks.
is driven by the integration of hybrid deep learning backbones, the privacy-preserving nature of federated learning, and B. Limitations and Validity of Experimental Results
the adaptive hyperparameter tuning provided by the AGRO
 Although the F-ResDenseEffiNet framework has achieved
algorithm. In addition to accuracy, the model’s reliability and
 promising results across multiple benchmark intrusion detecstability are further supported by thorough statistical analysis
 tion datasets, several limitations must be acknowledged to
and fairness evaluations, highlighting its practical readiness
 contextualize the findings. First, the datasets utilized—such as
for deployment in real-world drone-based intrusion detection
 DBMD24 and CICIDS2017—are comprehensive and widely
environments.
 accepted, yet they do not entirely reflect the real-world conditions of drone-based environments. Live FANET operations
A. Novel Insights From Implementation often encounter challenges such as intermittent connectivity,
 Beyond reporting accuracy, precision, and other metrics, adversarial interference, and unpredictable traffic behaviors
the implementation of the proposed F-ResDenseEffiNet model that are difficult to replicate in fully controlled benchmark
with AGRO optimisation revealed several novel insights that scenarios. Second, while the framework’s computational peradd both scientific value and practical relevance. First, testing formance has been validated on edge-level hardware, such as
across four heterogeneous datasets, DBMD, CICIDS2017, the NVIDIA Jetson Nano, its suitability for ultra-lightweight
NSL-KDD, and KDDCup99, showed that the framework microcontrollers remains untested. This can present challenges
maintains high accuracy and stable convergence in federated for large-scale deployments in drone fleets, particularly those
settings, even when clients rely on a mix of modern and with severe power and memory limitations.
legacy benchmarks. This demonstrates that the model is not Third, the Adaptive Gorilla–Rabbit Optimization (AGRO)
restricted to a specific environment but can generalise across algorithm, though effective in accelerating convergence and
diverse network behaviours and attack patterns. Second, the improving generalization, can exhibit sensitivity to its initial
Adaptive Gorilla–Rabbit Optimisation (AGRO) consistently parameter configuration. This could lead to suboptimal perforoutperformed standard optimisers such as SGD, RMSProp, mance if not carefully tuned for different deployment contexts,
and Adam, delivering faster convergence and greater stabil- especially in environments characterized by high client variity across runs. These improvements are especially valuable ability or fluctuating communication bandwidth. Finally, the
in resource-constrained UAV and IoD environments, where federated learning setup was simulated under realistic yet
reducing communication overhead and energy consumption is synthetic non-IID data distributions. While the design aimed
critical. to mimic operational diversity, actual drone deployments can
 Third, client-level analysis revealed a vital trade-off: clients introduce further heterogeneity and unpredictability that warcontributing larger updates also exhibited higher divergence rant live validation.
10010 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 Despite these constraints, the experimental setup, including [2] O. I. Falowo, M. Ozer, C. Li, and J. B. Abdo, “Evolving malware
extensive cross-dataset testing, ablation studies, fairness eval- and DDoS attacks: Decadal longitudinal study,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
 pp. 39221–39237, 2024.
uation, and statistical analysis, provides a sound and reliable [3] F. Xu, H.-C. Yang, and M.-S. Alouini, “Energy consumption minbasis for assessing the model’s effectiveness under structured imization for data collection from wirelessly-powered IoT sensors:
conditions. Future work will focus on deploying the system in Session-specific optimal design with DRL,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22,
 no. 20, pp. 19886–19896, Oct. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3205017.
physical drone networks to evaluate performance under actual
 [4] F. Xu et al., “Multi-UAV assisted mixed FSO/RF communication netenvironmental dynamics. work for urgent tasks: Fairness oriented design with DRL,” IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 1736–1741, Jan. 2025.
 V. C ONCLUSION [5] F. Basholli, A. Daberdini, and A. Basholli, “Detection and prevention
 This study introduces F-ResDenseEffiNet, a federated deep of intrusions into computer systems,” Adv. Eng. Days (AED), vol. 6,
 pp. 138–141, May 2023.
learning framework designed to detect malware in drone [6] D. P. Srirangam, K. Hemalatha, A. Vajravelu, and N. A. Kumar, “Safety
networks while safeguarding data privacy. By combining the and security issues in employing drones,” in Wireless Networks: Cyber
strengths of ResNet, DenseNet, and EfficientNet, the model Security Threats and Countermeasures. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
 2023, pp. 103–131.
effectively captures both spatial and semantic patterns while
 [7] T. Radivilova et al., “Statistical and signature analysis methods of
maintaining computational efficiency for edge-based envi- intrusion detection,” Inf. Secur. Technol. Decentralized Distrib. Netw.,
ronments. Leveraging federated learning, the system allows vol. 2022, pp. 115–131, Jul. 2022.
decentralized drones to collaboratively train a shared model [8] S. Huang, C. Sun, and D. Pompili, “Meta-ETI: Meta-reinforcement
 learning with explicit task inference for AAV-IoT coverage,” IEEE
without exchanging sensitive raw data, ensuring both scal- Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 13, pp. 23852–23865, Jul. 2025, doi:
ability and privacy across distributed clients. To further 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3553808.
enhance learning performance, an advanced dual-phase opti- [9] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detecmization technique—AGRO (Adaptive Hybrid Gorilla–Rabbit tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
 pp. 175–185, Jan. 2023.
Optimization)—is employed, which balances exploration and [10] A. A. Almazroi and N. Ayub, “Enhancing smart IoT malware detection:
exploitation to support faster and more stable convergence. A GhostNet-based hybrid approach,” Systems, vol. 11, no. 11, p. 547,
Experiments conducted on four well-established intrusion Nov. 2023.
 [11] D. Lee, S. Malacarne, and E. Aune, “Explainable time series anomaly
detection datasets—DBMD24, CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD, and detection using masked latent generative modeling,” Pattern Recognit.,
KDDCup99—demonstrated consistently high accuracy, preci- vol. 156, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 110826.
sion, recall, and F1 Scores, all exceeding 98.5%. Ablation [12] Y. Abbas, A. A. Alarfaj, E. A. Alabdulqader, A. Algarni, A. Jalal,
studies, statistical analysis, sensitivity assessments, and fair- and H. Liu, “Drone-based public surveillance using 3D point clouds
 and neuro-fuzzy classifier,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 82, no. 3,
ness evaluations illustrate the framework’s resilience and pp. 4759–4776, 2025.
flexibility in many operating settings. Beyond detection accu- [13] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated learning:
racy, we also explored practical aspects of real-world UAV Challenges, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
 vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, May 2020.
deployment. Although federated learning helps reduce band-
 [14] P. Sinha, D. Sahu, S. Prakash, T. Yang, R. S. Rathore, and V. K. Pandey,
width by transmitting only model updates, it still introduces “A high performance hybrid LSTM CNN secure architecture for IoT
trade-offs in energy usage and communication load. Our environments using deep learning,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 9684,
evaluations indicate that, with a moderate batch size of 64 and Mar. 2025.
 [15] L. Sana et al., “Securing the IoT cyber environment: Enhancing intrusion
an update frequency of once every 10 epochs, each commu- anomaly detection with vision transformers,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
nication round consumes less than 1.5 MB of bandwidth and pp. 82443–82468, 2024.
approximately 3–5% of a drone’s battery capacity. The use [16] R. Esmaeilyfard, Z. Shoaei, and R. Javidan, “A lightweight and efficient
of EfficientNet scaling and flexible communication intervals model for botnet detection in IoT using stacked ensemble learning,” Soft
 Comput., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2025.
helps to keep these overheads manageable. Nonetheless, for [17] R. Jablaoui and N. Liouane, “Network security based combined CNN–
mission-critical or large-scale drone swarms, further refine- RNN models for IoT intrusion detection system,” Peer-Peer Netw. Appl.,
ments, such as energy-aware client selection, compressed vol. 18, no. 3, p. 129, May 2025.
update strategies, or adaptive scheduling, are necessary. [18] Q. Xin, Z. Xu, L. Guo, F. Zhao, and B. Wu, “IoT traffic classification and
 anomaly detection method based on deep autoencoders,” Appl. Comput.
 While the proposed system performs well in aerial drone Eng., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 64–70, Jul. 2024.
environments, its hybrid complexity can limit its deployment [19] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
in highly constrained edge settings. Moreover, its applicability Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–210, 2021.
to other domains such as smart grids or healthcare IoT remains [20] C. Yanmin, A. Sarkar, J. M. Zain, A. Bhar, A. Noorwali, and
 K. M. Othman, “Leveraging LSTM and GRU-based deep neural coordito be fully validated. Future research will focus on enhanc- nation in intelligent transportation to strengthen security in the Internet
ing adversarial robustness, minimizing the model footprint of Vehicles,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1–37,
for ultra-lightweight deployment, and evaluating cross-domain Apr. 2025.
 [21] J.-J. Xiong and Y. Chen, “RBFNN-based parameter adaptive sliding
generalizability in diverse federated environments. Overall, the mode control for an uncertain TQUAV with time-varying mass,” Int. J.
results affirm F-ResDenseEffiNet + AGRO as a reliable, scal- Robust Nonlinear Control, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 4658–4668, Jul. 2025,
able, and privacy-conscious foundation for advanced malware doi: 10.1002/rnc.7932.
 [22] M. Alshehri et al., “Unmanned aerial vehicle based multi-person detecdetection in decentralized drone-based networks. tion via deep neural network models,” Frontiers Neurorobotics, vol. 19,
 Apr. 2025, Art. no. 1582995.
 R EFERENCES
 [23] B. S. Purkayastha, M. M. Rahman, and M. Shahpasand, “Android
 [1] A. Derhab et al., “Internet of drones security: Taxonomies, open malware detection using machine learning and neural network: A hybrid
 issues, and future directions,” Veh. Commun., vol. 39, Feb. 2023, approach with federated learning,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Adv. Commun.
 Art. no. 100552. Technol. Netw. (CommNet), Dec. 2024, pp. 1–5.
ALMAZROI: FEDERATED MALWARE DETECTION IN FLYING AD HOC DRONE NETWORKS 10011

[24] G. Xu, L. Lei, Y. Mao, Z. Li, X.-B. Chen, and K. Zhang, “CBRFL: A [38] M. Aldossary, I. Alzamil, and J. Almutairi, “Enhanced intrusion detecframework for committee-based Byzantine-resilient federated learning,” tion in drone networks: A cross-layer convolutional attention approach
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 238, Jun. 2025, Art. no. 104165. for drone-to-drone and drone-to-base station communications,” Drones,
[25] A. A. Almazroi and N. Ayub, “Deep learning hybridization for improved vol. 9, no. 1, p. 46, Jan. 2025.
 malware detection in smart Internet of Things,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14, no. 1, [39] A. Kumar, V. Kumar, M. Kumar, and R. Sharma, “AI techniques for
 p. 7838, Apr. 2024. malware detection in drone communication and security,” Int. J. Environ.
[26] A. A. Alshdadi, A. A. Almazroi, N. Ayub, M. D. Lytras, E. Alsolami, Sci., vol. 11, no. 3s, pp. 411–424, 2025.
 and F. S. Alsubaei, “Big data-driven deep learning ensembler for DDoS [40] A. Alzahrani, “Novel approach for intrusion detection attacks
 attack detection,” Future Internet, vol. 16, no. 12, p. 458, Dec. 2024. on small drones using ConvLSTM model,” IEEE Access,
[27] T. Landman and N. Nissim, “Securing Linux cloud environ- vol. 12, pp. 149238–149253, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.
 ments: Privacy-aware federated learning framework for advanced 3471806.
 malware detection in Linux clouds,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, [41] A. Alsumayt et al., “Detecting denial of service attacks (DoS) over the
 pp. 30377–30394, 2025. Internet of Drones (IoD) based on machine learning,” Sci, vol. 6, no. 3,
[28] A. A. Alshdadi et al., “Federated deep learning for scalable and privacy- p. 56, Sep. 2024.
 preserving distributed denial-of-service attack detection in Internet of [42] S. Sikandar, “Drone-based malware detection (DBMD) [data set],” Kag-
 Things Networks,” Future Internet, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 88, Feb. 2025. gle, 2024, doi: 10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/9045375. [Online]. Available:
[29] Z. Çiplak, K. Yıldız, and Ş. Altınkaya, “FEDetect: A federated learning- https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nasirayub2/drone-based-malware-dete
 based malware detection and classification using deep neural network ction-dbmd
 algorithms,” Arabian J. Sci. Eng., vol. 50, no. 19, pp. 1–28, Oct. 2025. [43] H. A. A. Hassan, “Exploring lightweight deep learning techniques for
[30] R. Bhavani and V. Sankaradass, “FedL_DBNFSpinalNet based malware intrusion detection systems in IoT networks: A survey,” J. Electr. Syst.,
 detection in IoT devices,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 16, nos. 7–8, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1944–1958, Apr. 2024.
 pp. 1–19, Aug. 2025. [44] R. R. R. Robinson, K. P. A. Madhav, and C. Thomas, “Improved
[31] G. Sun, G. Zhu, D. Liao, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Cost-efficient minority attack detection in intrusion detection system using efficient
 service function chain orchestration for low-latency applications in NFV feature selection algorithms,” Expert Syst., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. e1354–6,
 networks,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 3877–3888, Dec. 2019. Jul. 2024.
[32] F. S. Alsubaei, A. A. Almazroi, W. S. Atwa, A. A. Almazroi, N. Ayub, [45] A. Tawakuli, B. Havers, V. Gulisano, D. Kaiser, and T. Engel, “Survey:
 and N. Z. Jhanjhi, “BERT ensemble based MBR framework for Android Time-series data preprocessing: A survey and an empirical analysis,” J.
 malware detection,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 14027, Apr. 2025. Eng. Res., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 674–711, Jun. 2025.
[33] P. Hao, Z. Yan, and H. Wen, “Privacy-preserving NILM: [46] J. Jose and J. E. Judith, “Unveiling the IoT’s dark corners: Anomaly
 A self-alignment source-aware domain adaptation approach,” detection enhanced by ensemble modelling,” Automatika, vol. 65, no. 2,
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–12, 2025, doi: pp. 584–596, Apr. 2024.
 10.1109/TIM.2025.3542871. [47] Y. Wang et al., “Deeply integrated autoencoder-based anomaly detec-
[34] M. Zhang, E. Wei, R. Berry, and J. Huang, “Age-dependent differential tion and critical parameter identification for unmanned aerial vehicle
 privacy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1300–1319, actuators,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 24, no. 15, pp. 24905–24920,
 Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2023.3340147. Aug. 2024.
[35] G. S. Kumar, K. Premalatha, G. U. Maheshwari, P. R. Kanna, G. Vijaya, [48] Y. Mao et al., “A novel mooring system anomaly detection framework
 and M. Nivaashini, “Differential privacy scheme using Laplace mech- for SEMI based on improved residual network with attention mechanism and statistical method computation in deep neural network for anism and feature fusion,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 245, May 2024,
 privacy preservation,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 128, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 109970.
 Art. no. 107399. [49] Q. Liu and C. Wang, “Deep network with double reuses and con-
[36] T. M. Nithya, P. Dhivya, S. N. Sangeethaa, and P. R. Kanna, “TB- volutional shortcuts,” IET Comput. Vis., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 512–525,
 MFCC multifuse feature for emergency vehicle sound classification Jun. 2024.
 using multistacked CNN—Attention BiLSTM,” Biomed. Signal Process. [50] M. Fraccaroli, A. Bizzarri, P. Casellati, and E. Lamma, “Exploiting
 Control, vol. 88, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 105688. CNN’s visual explanations to drive anomaly detection,” Int. J. Speech
[37] G. S. Kumar, K. Premalatha, G. U. Maheshwari, and P. R. Kanna, “No Technol., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 414–427, Jan. 2024.
 more privacy concern: A privacy-chain based homomorphic encryp- [51] S. Bacha, A. Aljuhani, K. B. Abdellafou, O. Taouali, N. Liouane,
 tion scheme and statistical method for privacy preservation of user’s and M. Alazab, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection system in IoT
 private and sensitive data,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234, Dec. 2023, using kernel extreme learning machine,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized
 Art. no. 121071. Comput., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 231–242, Jan. 2024.