9250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 FedIn-NID: A Federated Learning Framework for
 Network Intrusion Detection in Large-Scale
 Heterogeneous Industrial IoT
 Jingxin Mao , Zhiwei Wei , Bing Li , Member, IEEE, Rongqing Zhang , Member, IEEE,
 and Lingyang Song , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The evolving Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) Index Terms—Federated learning, industrial Internet of Things
is shifting towards decentralized collaborative manufacturing, (IIoT), network intrusion detection.
posing heightened network security issues within interconnected
value chains, thus requiring advanced Network Intrusion Detec-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
tion (NID) systems to identify potential threats. In this context,
traditional centralized NID systems are insufficient due to crossindustrial privacy concerns and interconnected secure threats.
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising solution
 T HE advent of Industry 4.0 marks a transformative era
 in both manufacturing and service sectors, with the
 Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) serving as its cornerto enable the sharing of security insights without compromising
privacy across participants. However, establishing an FL-based stone [1]. Enabled by advanced wireless technologies like 5G
NID framework in realistic IIoT scenarios faces several hurdles, and Beyond 5G (B5G), the IIoT landscape is increasingly
including the limited availability of large-scale devices and characterized by cross-industrial collaborative manufacturing,
heterogeneous attack data distributions. The former leads to allowing diverse entities and stakeholders to join forces
inconsistent client participation and degraded performance, while for resource sharing and cooperative work [2]. While this
the latter hinders model convergence. To address these, we
propose a novel Federated Learning-based Industrial Network integrated approach offers enormous benefits in terms of
Intrusion Detection (FedIn-NID) framework, incorporating a operational efficiency and innovation, it introduces unique
multidimensional client selection strategy and a dynamic global network security challenges. In a collaborative manufacturing
aggregation strategy. The selection strategy synergistically con- ecosystem, entities not only share resources but also integrate
siders multidimensional factors including client availability, local their data streams and control systems, increasing the surface
dataset distribution, and dataset size. This approach accommodates clients with varying availability and avoids the selection area for potential cyber-attacks, thereby exposing their collabof biased clients with data concentrated in a few categories. orators to new and diverse threat landscapes. Subsequently, to
During model aggregation, the proposed strategy leverages the efficiently identify and counteract the various types of security
concept of exponential moving average to dynamically balance threats in the foreseeable collaborative IIoT paradigm, the
the holistic yet slightly older knowledge in the global model critical role of Network Intrusion Detection (NID) has been
with the partial but relatively newer knowledge in local models,
ensuring effective aggregation and convergence of the global NID magnified [3].
model. Experiments demonstrate that FedIn-NID outperforms NID is a security mechanism designed to monitor and
baselines by 10% to 30%, showcasing remarkable robustness analyze network traffic for signs of malicious attacks or
with increasing data distribution heterogeneity and device count. security policy violations. However, traditional NID methodologies, such as signature-based and rule-based systems [4],
 Received 4 October 2024; revised 27 June 2025; accepted 16 August 2025. [5], are becoming increasingly inadequate and less scalable
Date of publication 25 August 2025; date of current version 5 September in collaborative manufacturing facilitated by the complex
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3104200, in part by interconnection of systems and attack-type imbalances. With
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271351 and the development of powerful deep learning techniques, specif-
Grant 62201390, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the ically exemplified by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was Prof. Abderrahim Benslimane. and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), existing works have
(Corresponding author: Rongqing Zhang.) turned to learning-based NID systems [6], [7], [8]. These deep
 Jingxin Mao and Rongqing Zhang are with the Thrust of Intelligent learning architectures are adept at modeling complex patterns
Transportation, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511453, China (e-mail: jmao913@connect. and extracting hierarchical features from data, making them
hkust-gz.edu.cn; rongqingz@tongji.edu.cn). intrinsically suited for identifying a wide array of intrusion
 Zhiwei Wei is with Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent activities in the next-generation IIoT. In [9], Shone et al.
Autonomous Systems, Tongji University, Shanghai 201210, China (e-mail:
2311769@tongji.edu.cn). introduced nonsymmetric deep autoencoder and random forest
 Bing Li is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji classification for NID. In [10], Liang et al. proposed an
University, Shanghai 200092, China (e-mail: lizi@tongji.edu.cn). industrial NID algorithm based on multifeature data clustering
 Lingyang Song is with the School of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China (e-mail: lingyang.song@pku.edu.cn). optimization model. In [11], Lin et al. introduced an intrusion
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3602226 detection system featuring stacked sparse autoencoders and
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9251

RNNs. In [12], He et al. proposed an intrusion detection model intrusion detection system for securing vehicular networks,
that leverages multi-modal deep autoencoders and LSTM to Sun et al. [25] proposed a hierarchical FL intrusion detection
effectively integrate features from different levels of network system with transformer-based local models, and Ruzafa et al.
connections. In [13], Hu et al. proposed a deep learning-based [26] evaluated the use of various differential privacy methods
one-class intrusion detection scheme to improve the security in FL-based network intrusion detection.
of industrial networks. In [14], Andresini et al. introduced a Despite these pioneering efforts, the application of FLmethod that represents network flows as images and obtains its based network intrusion detection in realistic (i.e., large-scale
imagery representation by combining nearest neighbor search and heterogeneous) IIoT environments still faces two main
and clustering processes. Thanks to the nonlinearity approx- challenges that hinder model performance:
imation capabilities of neural networks, the learning-based 1) Massive devices as clients with limited availability1 :
NID methodologies can effectively extract latent features and Though massive devices are interconnected in IIoT
patterns from IIoT networks, and excels at detecting intrusions. networks, not all devices can maintain consistent active
 Nonetheless, these approaches necessitate extensive datasets states in each communication round due to resource confor effective training among different entities, a requirement straints on access devices and communication overhead
that often involves handling diverse data characteristics due costs on the server. This results in inconsistent selection
to the geographical distribution variances of these industrial of clients over iterations, leading to divergent directions
entities [15]. Further complicating matters is the sensitive during the model aggregation process, potentially causnature of IIoT data, which demands adherence to rigorous ing the trapped in the sub-optimal global model.
privacy regulations and ethical guidelines, thereby obviating 2) Data heterogeneity: The data on each device is inherthe feasibility of centralized data pooling for model training ently heterogeneous. This stems from intrinsic factors,
[16]. In light of these constraints, Federated Learning (FL) [17] such as different device types generating unique benign
emerges as a promising solution. FL aligns seamlessly with the traffic patterns, as well as external factors like diverse
distributed and edge-centric characteristics of contemporary attack distributions, where different devices are exposed
IIoT systems. By retaining data locally on edge devices, FL to various types of attacks. This overall heterogeneity
not only fulfills privacy and regulatory mandates but also means the local data of any specific device does not
accommodates the inherent geographical distribution diversity, represent the global data distribution.
allowing for more contextually relevant model development
 Most existing methods [23], [24], [25] have not explicitly
without the need for centralized data aggregation. Additionally,
 handled data heterogeneity or provided detailed insights into
FL facilitates the deployment of robust deep learning models
 the scale and quantity of participating clients for FL in
across a distributed network without the necessity for central-
 NID. While [26] addresses data heterogeneity, the application
ized data collection, thus offering a holistic resolution to the
 scenario is primarily confined to small-scale clients scenario
multifaceted challenges of network security in distributed IIoT.
 (5 to 10 clients). There exists a pronounced research gap for an
 Since its inception, research in FL has rapidly evolved,
 FL-based framework capable of concurrently addressing these
with a significant focus on the security and robustness of
 challenges in the large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environment.
the learning process itself. For instance, to defend against
 Motivated by this, in this paper, we propose an effective and
model poisoning attacks, Ma et al. [18] proposed ShieldFL, a
 robust Federated Learning-based Industrial Network Intrusion
defense using homomorphic encryption to identify malicious
 Detection (FedIn-NID) framework. We first propose a novel
encrypted gradients, while Yazdinejad et al. [19] developed
 client selection strategy that synergistically integrates multia model with an internal auditor using statistical methods
 dimensional factors (including client availability, local dataset
for the same purpose. Other works focus on securing the
 distribution, and dataset size) to ensure efficient and balanced
aggregation process; Jebreel et al. [20] presented fragmented
 client participation. By leveraging these factors, the approach
federated learning to reconcile accuracy with security by
 effectively evaluates the consistency of participating clients
mixing update fragments, and Eltaras et al. [21] introduced
 and avoids the selection of biased clients with data concenan efficient protocol that is robust against user dropouts.
 trated in a few categories. Then, considering the heterogeneity
From an attack perspective, research has also revealed new
 of attack data distributions, we introduce FedEMA, a dynamic
vulnerabilities, such as the External Gradient Inversion Attack
 aggregation strategy that leverages the concept of Exponential
(EGIA) proposed by Liang et al. [22], which shows that exter-
 Moving Average (EMA) to dynamically update the global
nal adversaries can reconstruct private data from intercepted
 model. This innovative approach harmoniously integrates both
gradients.
 previously learned global knowledge and newly acquired local
 While securing the FL process against such attacks is a
 knowledge, consequently accelerating the convergence of the
critical long-term goal, the practical application of FL to a
 global model and improving the performance of the detection
demanding domain like NID first requires overcoming more
 model. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
foundational challenges that can prevent the model from
converging effectively. This has motivated a significant line 1) Comprehensive FedIn-NID Framework for IIoT Enviof work focused on making FL viable for NID in the first ronments: We propose a FedIn-NID framework to
place. For example, Mothukuri et al. [23] introduced an FL
 1 Limited availability means that not all devices can maintain consistent
approach for intrusion detection in IoT networks, Liu et al.
 active states in each communication round due to interruptions caused by
[24] combined FL with blockchain technology to develop an changes in device state, system quotas, and network connectivity [15], [27].
9252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 address the comprehensive challenges in the realistic the flow type, with the number of classes for network flows
 IIoT environment characterized by heterogeneous data (benign and other attack types) denoted by K. The distribution
 distribution, inherent massive devices as clients, and of this data is naturally heterogeneous, influenced by both the
 limited availability across devices. Additionally, we con- intrinsic characteristics of the client device (e.g., its function
 tribute a 1D-CNN model for efficient network intrusion and resulting benign traffic patterns) and its unique exposure
 detection, enhancing the practicality and applicability of to different types of network attacks. Following [28] and [29],
 our framework in real industrial settings. we perform Dirichlet distribution for train to generate Non-
 2) Multidimensional Client Selection Strategy: We intro- IID data partitions. Specifically, consider the data distribution
 duce a client selection strategy that synergistically as follows:
 integrates multidimensional factors, including client π = [π0 , π1 , . . . , πK−1 ]T , (1)
 availability, local dataset distribution, and dataset size.
 By leveraging a selection weight derived from these where πk (k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K − 1}) is the data distribution for M
 factors, the strategy effectively mitigates the consistency clients at the kth class as follows:
 among participating clients and avoids the selection of M
 1 Y γk, j −1
 biased clients with data concentrated in a few categories, πk ∼ Dir(πk |γk ) = πk, j , (2)
 B(γk )
 ultimately enhancing the performance of FL in realistic j=1

 and dynamic IIoT scenarios. where πk = πk,1 , πk,2 , . . . , πk,M , and πk, j is the proportion
  
 3) Global Model Aggregation Strategy Using FedEMA: We of the instances of the kth class for the jth client; γk =
 present a dynamic global model aggregation strategy, [γk,1 , γk,2 , . . . , γk,M ]  0 is the parameter of the Dirichlet
 termed FedEMA. This strategy employs the concept of distribution; B(γk ) is the multivariate beta function for normalexponential moving average to dynamically balance the ization. Hence, π ∼ Dir(γ) denotes the data
 holistic yet slightly older knowledge in the global model  distribution across
 T
 M clients for K classes, where γ = γ0 , γ1 , . . . , γK−1 =
 with the partial yet relatively newer knowledge in local γ · 1K×M . For ease of presentation, we adopt Dir(γ) to denote
 models. Consequently, FedEMA achieves a harmonious the Dirichlet distribution with the scalar hyper-parameter γ.
 integration of knowledge acquired by the global model Then, we follow [30], [31] to model the availability of
 and local models, accelerating the convergence of the clients in a heterogeneous IIoT environment. The availability
 global model and improving the model performance. of clients are affected by their current conditions, basically
 Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed FedIn- including their state of energy, communication costs for FL,
NID achieves efficient detection of network intrusions amidst and computational costs for local training. To facilitate comthe large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environment. Specifically, parison among those factors, we project them to the range of
FedIn-NID exhibits outstanding performance by 10% to 30% 0 to 1 without loss of generality.
over baselines. Compared to other methods, our approach 1) State of Energy (Oenergy,i ): The state of energy can be
excels in detecting rare categories of attack instances, empha- estimated based on the current and maximum energy capacity
sizing its effectiveness in the heterogeneous data distribution of the client, as outlined below:
environment. Furthermore, our method exhibits significant Ei
 −γ E
robustness in diverse heterogeneous data distribution settings Oenergy,i = e Max,i , (3)
and varying client numbers, confirming its superior adaptability to the complexity of realistic IIoT environments. where Ei is the remaining energy of client Ci , EMax,i denotes
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: it maximum energy capacity, and γ is the scaling factor.
Section II provides the system modeling. Section III describes 2) Communication Cost (Ocomm,i ): In this paper, the comthe proposed FedIn-NID framework, including the proposed munication cost is evaluated by the quality of transmission
multidimensional client selection strategy, the designs of the (i.e., transmission rate) and can be modeled as:
model structure, local training, and the FedEMA strategy. rMin
 Ocomm,i = , (4)
Section IV presents the experimental setup and results. Finally, ri
we conclude the paper with a summary in Section V. where ri ∈ [rMin , rMax ] is the transmission rate. A higher rate
 indicates lower communication cost for FL.
 II. S YSTEM M ODEL 3) Computation Cost (Ocomp,i ): The computation cost is
 In this section, we illustrate the client model and network based on the client’s available computational capability, such
intrusion model in the large-scale heterogeneous IIoT scenario. as CPU or GPU performance per training task. The higher
 the computational capability, the more efficiently the client
 can handle tasks, resulting in a lower cost. The cost can be
A. Client Model
 computed as follows:
 The large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environment is illus-
 PMax
trated on the right side of Fig. 1. We denote a total of M Ocomp,i = (5)
clients (devices) as C = {C1 , . . . , C M }. Each client Ci has a local Pi
dataset˚ (collected Ndata) D i comprising Ni data pairs, defined as where Pi ∈ [PMin , PMax ] is the computational power. Note that
D i = xi, j , yi, j j=1
 i
 , where xi, j ∈ X ⊂ Rd represents a network rMin , rMax , PMin , PMax are evaluated from the bound of total
flow with d features, and yi, j ∈ Y ⊂ {0, 1, . . . , K − 1} denotes clients C.
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9253

 Fig. 1. An overview of our proposed FedIn-NID framework in the large-scale heterogeneous industrial IoT environment.

 To summarize, the total cost for client Ci can be calculated 6) Backdoor: Anomalous flows to uncommon ports or desas follows: tinations, indicating traffic to unauthorized entry points.
 Oi = wT O, (6) 7) Man-In-The-Middle (MITM): Anomalies in flow data
 T that may suggest interception or alteration of traffic.
where O = Oenergy,i , Ocomm,i , Ocomp,i is the cost vector for
 
 T 8) Ransomware: Abnormal flow patterns related to encrypclient Ci , and w = wenergy , wcomm , wcomp is the corresponding
 
 tion or data exfiltration activities.
weight vector that indicate the importance of each cost, and Given the pressing need to enhance NID accuracy while
device availability for Ci is given by: concerning clients’ data privacy, there is a compelling case for
 1 adopting an FL framework. To further address the comprehen-
 Ai = (7) sive challenges in the realistic IIoT environment characterized
 1 + Oi
 by heterogeneous data distribution and limited device availwhere higher weighed costs lead to lower device availability. ability, a FedIn-NID framework is proposed in Section III.

B. Network Intrusion Model
 III. P ROPOSED F ED I N -NID F RAMEWORK
 Each client Ci has a local multi-class NetFlow traffic classification model θi , and the goal is to collaboratively train In this section, we introduce the proposed FedIn-NID framea good multi-class NetFlow traffic classification model θg work. We first provide an overview of the framework. Then we
by leveraging the isolated local datasets for efficient NID. present the multidimensional client selection strategy, followed
NetFlow collects data about the IP traffic passing through by the proposed model structure design for network intrusion
it. This data is aggregated into what are called “flows”. A detection, the descriptions of local training, and the proposed
flow is typically defined by several key attributes, such as FedEMA aggregation algorithm.
source/destination IP address and port, network protocol, type
of service, etc. Based on NetFlow, the following attack types
are considered in this paper besides “benign” flows: A. FedIn-NID Framework
 1) Scanning: An unusually high number of flows indicating Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1 provide the overview and procedure
 an attempt to discover accessible devices or services. of our designed FedIn-NID framework in investigated large-
 2) Cross-Site Scripting (XSS): Irregular flow patterns to scale heterogeneous IIoT environment. In the initialization
 web servers, indicating injection of malicious scripts. phase, the global model is used to initialize the local models of
 3) Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) & Denial of Ser- all clients (step O).
 1 In each communication round, client selecvice (DoS): A surge in flow volume, targeting specific tion is performed to obtain a subset of clients for participating
 destinations, overwhelming the network resources. in the current round (step O).
 2 All participating clients undergo
 4) Password Attacks: Repeated flows to authentication ser- local training (step O),
 3 then upload the updated local models to
 vices, suggesting brute-force attempts. the server (step O).
 4 The server employs our proposed FedEMA
 5) Injection: Unusual or unexpected flows to database to aggregate uploaded local models (step O), 5 resulting in a new
 servers, attempting to exploit database vulnerabilities. global model for the next communication round (step O). 6
9254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 FedIn-NID Framework Algorithm 2 Multidimisional Client Selection at the t-Th
 Communication Round

 In addition to the aforementioned algorithmic procedure, the learning in large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environments. This
framework includes the following pivotal parts: the proposed becomes even more important when facing diverse network
client selection strategy, the proposed model design structure, attacks with varying intensities and extreme heterogeneity. To
the local training method, and the proposed FedEMA global this end, we introduce a novel client selection strategy in our
aggregation algorithm. Each of these details will be introduced proposed FedIn-NID framework, as illustrated in Algorithm 2.
in the following subsections. Firstly, for each client Ci and its local dataset D i , the client
 derives the count Y i and distribution probability P i of attack
B. Multidimisional Client Selection Strategy categories in D i as follows:
 In practice, the limited availability of the devices in the
 Yi,yi, j = Yi,yi, j + 1, for each xi, j , yi, j ∈ D i ,
 
IIoT environment restricts their consistent participation in each (8)
round of FL, different from the devices in data centers. The Yi
 P i = PK−1 , (9)
main discrepancy between end devices and data centers is their k=0 Yi,k
availability [15], which is affected by the interruption due to
 where Yi,k ∈ Y i = Yi,0 , Yi,1 , . . . , Yi,K−1 ∈ NK is ini-
  
changes in device state and network connectivity. Hence, in
the communication round of FL (step O), 2 only a small subset tialized to 0 before counting attack categories, and P i =
 Pi,0 , Pi,1 , . . . , Pi,K−1 ∈ RK . Hence, the local dataset distri-
 
of all devices can participate.
 In [17], an initial client selection strategy based on random bution of client Ci can be quantified as follows:
sampling is proposed. In this approach, a subset of clients
 K−1
is randomly chosen to participate in each communication X
 Hi = − Pi,k log2 Pi,k +  ,
 
round of federated learning. Due to its straightforward imple- (10)
 k=0
mentation, this random sampling method has been widely
 K−1
adopted in subsequent works [32]. However, random selection X
 Gi = 1 − 2
 Pi,k , (11)
is trivial as it does not account for specific client availabilities.
 k=0
Additionally, it fails to consider the variability and heterogene- K−1
 !
ity of local datasets among clients. Addressing these factors Bi = Hi ∗ Gi =
 X
 Pi,k log2 Pi,k + 
 
is essential for the effectiveness and efficiency of federated k=0
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9255

 K−1
 !
 X
 ∗ 2
 Pi,k −1 , (12)
 k=0

where  = 1e−8 is a small positive constant, Pi,k ∈ P i is the
probability distribution of class k for client Ci , Hi is the entropy
of P i , Gi is the Gini coefficient (also known as the Gini index)
of P i , a common metric used to measure the inequality of a
distribution [33]. A higher Gini coefficient indicates a greater
concentration of data within a few categories, signifying a Fig. 2. Structure of designed 1D-CNN for network intrusion detection. The
less balanced distribution. Bi is the distribution balance factor. final linear layer outputs predictions for 10 classes, corresponding to one
 benign class and the nine attack types detailed in Section IV-A.
The combination of entropy and the Gini coefficient reflects
both the balance and uniformity of the data distribution. By
multiplying entropy and Gini coefficient, the balance of the function that returns the indices of the set sorted in descending
client’s dataset distribution is quantified. A higher Bi indicates order. Therefore, the selected participating clients and their
that the data distribution P i of client Ci is more uniform and corresponding indices are as follows:
balanced, without being dominated by any particular category.
 I select = I00 , I10 , . . . , Im−1
 0
 ,
 ˚
 In addition to data distribution, the quantity of local dataset
 C select = CI0 , CI1 , . . . , CIm−1 ,
 ˚
D i in each client Ci also plays a crucial role in FL. Therefore, 0 0 0 (17)
we define the local dataset volume impact factor for each client
as follows: where m = max (1, b|C| ∗ Fc) is the number of participating
 |C| ∗ Ni clients, and F ∈ [0, 1] represents the client participation ratio.
 Ni = P|C| , (13)
 i=1 Ni
where Ni = |D i | is the quantity of local dataset D i , and |C| C. Model Structure Design
represents the total number of clients, M. The |C| term serves In the continuation of our FedIn-NID framework, the
to scale this factor by normalizing the client’s data contribu- model structure is intricately designed to cater to the intricate
tion against the average data volume across all clients. This requirements of network intrusion detection within the IIoT
ensures Ni is on a comparable numerical scale to the other landscape. At its core, the model harnesses a deep neufactors in (14). Hence, by synergistically considering these ral network architecture optimized for extracting meaningful
multidimensional factors, which do not compromise the data representations from the network traffic data. To effectively
privacy of clients, we ultimately derive the selection weight classify the attack types of NetFlow traffic for the NID task, we
Ri for each client Ci by combining these factors. To allow for introduce a dedicated 1-dimensional CNN (1D-CNN) model
tunable importance of each dimension while preserving the structure tailored specifically for NID.
multiplicative gating effect, we use an exponential weighting As depicted in Fig. 2, we employ a 1D-CNN as the feature
scheme: w extractor for the NID task, with a fully connected layer serving
 Ri = Ati A ∗ (Ni )wN ∗ (Bi )wB , (14) as the classification head to output the classification predictions. The designed network architecture primarily consists
where Ri ∈ R = R1 , R2 , . . . , R|C| , and the non-negative
 ˚
 of 1D convolutional layers, ReLU activation layers, maxexponents (wA , wN , wB ) control the sensitivity of the total pooling layers, and fully connected layers. More specifically,
score to each factor. A weight wk > 1 makes the selec- we employ four 1D convolutional layers with a kernel size
tion criterion stricter by amplifying the influence of the of 3, no padding, and a stride of 1, with output dimensions
corresponding factor k. This intensifies penalties for clients of 32, 64, 128, and 256, respectively. Each convolutional
with suboptimal scores (e.g., in availability) and accentuates layer is subsequently followed by a ReLU activation layer,
differences in other dimensions by strongly rewarding high collectively constituting a convolutional module. Additionally,
scores and penalizing low ones (e.g., in data volume and following the initial two convolutional modules and the latter
distribution). Conversely, a weight 0 < wk < 1 reduces the two, we apply max-pooling and adaptive max-pooling to
influence factor k, leading to a more lenient selection by downsample the convolutional results, respectively. Finally,
narrowing disparities among clients. This formulation offers a fully connected layer is used as the classification head,
flexibility in tuning the selection behavior to suit different yielding classification logits as the output.
operational scenarios. By comprehensively considering client
availability, local dataset distribution, and the size of the local
dataset, the selection weights Ri can be used to optimize the D. Local Training for NID
selection of participating clients in large-scale heterogeneous For each participating client Ci in the t-th communication
IIoT environments. The details are as follows: round, we conduct local training for NID on θti by minimizing
 the loss as follows:
 I = Index(R) = {1, 2, . . . , |C|}} , (15)
 Ni K−1
 I = arg sort(R), where RI00 ≥ RI10 ≥ . . . ≥ RI|C|−1
 0 0 , (16) LCE xi, j , yi, j = −
  1 XX
 I(yi, j = k) log (ŷi, j )k , (18)
 Ni
where Index(·) is the indices function that maps an index to j=1 k=0

 ŷi, j = softmax f xi, j ; θti
 
each element in the set, and arg sort(·) is the index-sorting
9256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 e f ( xi, j ;θi )
 t

 =P , (19) it exceedingly challenging for all devices to maintain a
 e( f ( xi, j ;θi ))k
 t
 k
 consistent active state during each communication round. Consequently, the central server can only gather responses from a
 xi, j ; θti
 
where f is the output of given network flow xi, j small fraction of devices for updates, causing the global model
through a NID model that is parameterized by θti , I(·) is the bias and deviating toward different subsets of devices during
indicator function, and (·)k denotes the kth element of (·). the iterative training process, diminishing convergence speed
 and model performance. To this end, we set a vast number of
E. Global Aggregation With FedEMA clients within the federated learning scenario (ranging from
 During the global model aggregation at the server side, the 50 to 500), but with a low client participation ratio (10%),
most widely employed aggregation method is FedAvg [17]: to simulate the realistic IIoT environment. To demonstrate
 n
 the performance and robustness of our FedIn-NID in such
 X N a realistic IIoT scenario, we conduct experiments on a real
 θgt+1 = Pn i θti , (20)
 i=1 j=1 N j IoT dataset and further evaluate our approach with elaborate
 settings.
where θti is the local model of Ci at the t-th communication
round and θt+1g is the global model for the next round. A. Dataset and Preprocessing
 However, naively aggregating local models using FedAvg
 We employ NF-ToN-IoT-v2 [34] as the network intrusion
makes it challenging to effectively adapt to the heterogedetection dataset, which is an IoT network dataset based
neous and dynamic NID environment in federated learning.
 on NetFlow involving diverse attack categories, and its Net-
Furthermore, in the next-generation IIoT environments with
 Flow records are generated using publicly available pcap
large-scale clients, traditional solutions for heterogeneous fedfiles from the ToN-IoT dataset. The dataset comprises a
erated learning struggle to address the challenges posed by
 total of 16,940,496 data flows, with 10,841,027 (63.99%)
massive clients combined with a low participation ratio. It
 attack instances and 6,099,469 (36.01%) benign instances.
is difficult to strike an effective balance between the overall
 Specifically, the attack categories consist of nine distinct types:
global model and the local models acquired by a small
 Scanning, XSS, DDoS, Password, DoS, Injection, Backdoor,
subset of participating clients. Consequently, straightforward
 MITM, and Ransomware. Besides, each data flow is made up
application of FedAvg can easily lead to the global model bias,
 of 43 NetFlow features.
hindering the acquisition of genuinely valuable knowledge.
 We perform preprocessing for this dataset at the experimen-
 To address this, we propose a novel dynamic aggregation
 tal setup stage. To begin with, we remove two features in the
strategy, termed FedEMA. By incorporating the concept of
 dataset: IPV4 SRC ADDR and IPV4 DST ADDR. Subse-
Exponential Moving Average, FedEMA dynamically balances
 quently, we perform label encoding to all remaining features
the relatively older but holistic knowledge acquired by the
 and drop the redundant data flows. Finally, we randomly split
global model with the relatively newer but partial knowl-
 60% of data flows as train and the rest of 40% as test,
edge acquired by a small subset of participating clients.
 followed by dataset normalization.
This approach enables us to encompass both previously
 We conduct data partitions on train according to
learned global knowledge and newly acquired local knowl-
 Section II-A, Figs. 3, 4 and 5 illustrate the data distribuedge. Specifically, we calculate the global model for the next
 tions under varying Non-IID settings with Dir(γ) for diverse
communication round using FedEMA as follows:
 numbers of clients. It is evident that as γ decreases from 0.5
 n
 X N to 0.2 and then to 0.1, the heterogeneity in data distribution
 θt+1
 g = αθtg + (1 − α) Pn i θti , (21)
 j=1 N j significantly intensifies. This strategy of partitioning a featurei=1
 t+1 2
 rich dataset across numerous, heterogeneously distributed, and
 α = λe−β(1− T ) , (22) intermittently available clients (as detailed in Section IV-C)
 allows us to effectively simulate the complex data and device
where α is the exponential moving average factor, FedEMA
 landscape of a real-world large-scale heterogeneous IIoT
degenerates into FedAvg when α is 0 and retains the global
 environment.
model from the previous round without any updates when α is
1; λ ∈ [0, 1] is the extremum control coefficient; β > 0 is the B. Compared Methods
control coefficient of the exponential moving average process;
 We compare our method against three methods, including:
T is the total number of communication round. 1) FedAvg [17], which serves as a baseline for federated
 learning;
 IV. E XPERIMENT AND R ESULTS 2) FedProx [35], which incorporates a proximal term dur-
 Given the requirements for data security and privacy in ing local model training to prevent over-bias, becoming
the large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environment, effectively the baseline for federated learning under Non-IID data
conducting network intrusion detection under the premise of settings;
privacy protection is crucial. Furthermore, the fluctuations 3) SCAFFOLD [32], which corrects the overall model
in device statuses, operating system quotas, and network training direction using a control variable, standing as
connections across a myriad of IIoT devices result in device a state-of-the-art for federated learning under Non-IID
interruptions, leading to limited device availability. This makes data settings.
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9257

Fig. 3. Data distribution of each client under Non-IID setting with Dir(0.5). The color bar refers to the number of data samples. Each patch represents the
number of data samples for a specific class in a client. The horizontal axis denotes the client ID, and the vertical axis denotes the attack class ID.

Fig. 4. Data distribution of each client under Non-IID setting with Dir(0.2). The color bar refers to the number of data samples. Each patch represents the
number of data samples for a specific class in a client. The horizontal axis denotes the client ID, and the vertical axis denotes the attack class ID.

Fig. 5. Data distribution of each client under Non-IID setting with Dir(0.1). The color bar refers to the number of data samples. Each patch represents the
number of data samples for a specific class in a client. The horizontal axis denotes the client ID, and the vertical axis denotes the attack class ID.

 To more accurately evaluate the performance of each C. Implementation Details
baseline in large-scale heterogeneous IIoT environments, we We employ Pytorch to conduct our experiment, utilizing
employ a client selection strategy based on client availability the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e−3 .
for these methods as follows: The batch size is set to 1024. We train 50 communication
 I  = arg sort(At ), where AtI0 ≥ AtI1 ≥ . . . ≥ AtI|C|−1
  , (23) rounds (T ), with the client participation ratio (F) of 0.1, and
 the local epoch (E) is set to 1. During the training stage,
 I select = I0 , I1 , . . . , Im−1 ,
 
 ˚   
 we adopt AMP (Automatic mixed precision) to all methods.
 C select = CI0 , CI1 , . . . , CIm−1 ,
 ˚
  (24) Evaluations are conducted at an interval of 5 communication
 n o rounds. For two hyper-parameters of FedEMA, we empirically
where Ati ∈ At = At1 , At2 , . . . , At|C| is the device availability set the extremum control coefficient λ = 0.5 and the control
for client Ci at the t-th communication round, and C select is the coefficient of the exponential moving average process β = 4.0
selected clients for these baseline methods at this round. for all experiments. Furthermore, we set wA = wN = wB = 1
9258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 6. Illustrate the quantitative results (average and standard deviation of 5 trials) on test in terms of accuracy.

 TABLE I
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (AVERAGE AND S TANDARD D EVIATION OF 5 T RIALS ) ON test IN T ERMS OF F1-S CORE U NDER D IR (0.5) S ETTING

to FedIn-NID. To reduce computational complexity, the avail- 2) Accuracy: The multi-class accuracy is given by:
ability of each client is sampled from a random distribution PK−1 (k)
in each communication round. TP
 Accuracy = PK−1 k=0 , (27)
 (k)
 k=0 (TP + FN(k) )
D. Evaluation Metrics
 To evaluate the performance of network intrusion detection, where K is the number of classes, TP(k) and FN(k) denote the
we employ widely-used metrics such as F1-score and accuracy true positive and false negative values for the kth class in the
for the multi-class classification task. Furthermore, we utilize confusion matrix, respectively.
the macro-average to calculate average values for the multiclass NID task. E. Quantitative Results
 1) F1-Score: This metric represents the harmonic average
of precision and recall, formulated as follows: Tables I, II, and III present the quantitative results of our
 2 ∗ Precision ∗ Recall proposed FedIn-NID and other methods on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 in
 F1 = terms of F1. The IMP column in the tables demonstrates the
 Precision + Recall
 improvement of the other methods over the traditional FedAvg.
 2 ∗ TP
 = . (25) Fig. 6, illustrates the quantitative results of our proposed
 2 ∗ TP + FN + FP
 FedIn-NID and other methods on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 in terms
 This metric provides a balanced measure of accuracy for of Accuracy. Due to the diversification of NetFlow attack
the NID task. We calculate the macro-F1 as follows: types and the disparities in encountering different network
 K−1
 1 X (k) attacks, the NetFlow attack category classification datasets
 macro-F1 = F1 , (26) often exhibit severe class imbalance. For instance, the benign
 K
 k=0 category constitutes the majority, while there are significant
where K is the number of classes, and F1(k) denotes the F1- numerical disparities among attack categories. Therefore, we
score for the kth class. comprehensively evaluate performance employing the F1 and
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9259

 TABLE II
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (AVERAGE AND S TANDARD D EVIATION OF 5 T RIALS ) ON test IN T ERMS OF F1-S CORE U NDER D IR (0.2) S ETTING

 TABLE III
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS (AVERAGE AND S TANDARD D EVIATION OF 5 T RIALS ) ON test IN T ERMS OF F1-S CORE U NDER D IR (0.1) S ETTING

Accuracy from fine-grained and coarse-grained perspectives, Injection, Backdoor, and Ransomware, which become increasrespectively. ingly difficult for other methods to classify as dataset
 When interpreting the results, it is important to consider heterogeneity increases. Significantly, FedAvg fails to classify
the nature of the macro-average F1-score in the context of the some small-sample categories under all settings, which is
highly imbalanced NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset. The macro-average primarily due to the fact that our FL scenario involves a
F1-score computes the unweighted mean of per-class F1- vast number of clients, but only a minuscule proportion of
scores, giving equal importance to both populous classes (e.g., clients participate in each communication round. The scenario
Benign) and extremely rare attack classes (e.g., Ransomware, stands in stark contrast with the generic scenario of FedAvg
MITM). As shown in Tables I, II, and III, achieving a high (with fewer clients and higher participation proportion), further
F1-score on these rare categories is exceptionally challenging, underscoring that FedAvg fails to meet the requirements of the
with many baseline methods scoring 0.00. These low scores more complex and realistic IIoT environment characterized
from the minority classes significantly pull down the overall by data heterogeneity, massive devices, and limited device
macro-average value for all methods. The key strength of availability.
FedIn-NID is its superior performance on these specific rare From the fine-grained perspective of F1, FedIn-NID outclasses, which demonstrates its enhanced robustness against performs FedAvg by approximately 8% to 30% under all γ
severe class imbalance and is the primary driver of its overall settings. For example, under the Dir(0.1) setting in Table III,
performance gains. We analyze the experimental result from FedIn-NID achieves around 20% to 30% improvement over
two distinct perspectives as follows: FedAvg in macro-F1, demonstrating its robustness even in
 1) Evaluation on Data Distribution: It is evident that as extreme heterogeneity scenarios. This further demonstrates
the heterogeneity of the datasets increases (i.e., as γ decreases that the multidimensional client selection strategy within the
in Dir(γ)), the performance of all methods suffers degrada- FedIn-NID framework ensures efficient and balanced client
tion, further demonstrating the impact of heterogeneous data participation, thus effectively mitigating the heterogeneity in
on federated learning [15], [36]. Nevertheless, our FedIn- attack data. Other methods, such as FedProx and SCAFFOLD,
NID continues to demonstrate outstanding performance and struggle to maintain high performance as γ decreases, particrobustness, particularly in small-sample categories such as ularly in small-sample categories. The stability and robustness
9260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 7. Convergence plots in terms of macro-F1 for FedIn-NID and baselines. Subplots represent varying total client counts (M) and data heterogeneity levels
controlled by the Dirichlet parameter (γ), where a lower γ indicates higher heterogeneity.

of FedIn-NID in classifying both frequent and rare categories different client numbers. For example, in the M = 500 setting,
make it especially suitable for highly heterogeneous IIoT FedIn-NID delivers a significant improvement over FedAvg,
environments. achieving up to 22% higher macro-F1 under the Dir(0.5)
 From the coarse-grained perspective of Accuracy, FedIn- and Dir(0.2) settings, and maintaining a 23% improvement
NID also outperforms other methods, with an average even under the more challenging Dir(0.1) setting. This further
improvement of around 5% to 20% across all γ settings. How- demonstrates that the FedEMA global model aggregation
ever, due to the dominance of benign categories, the Accuracy strategy dynamically balances global model updates by using
improvements are less pronounced than the F1 improvements. an exponential moving average to reduce the bias introduced
This highlights the need to evaluate performance using multi- by large-scale and highly diverse client models.
ple metrics, especially in imbalanced classification tasks like From the coarse-grained perspective of Accuracy, it can
network intrusion detection. be observed that when the total number of clients is rela-
 2) Evaluation on the Total Number of Clients: With an tively low, the performance of FedProx is inferior to FedAvg,
increase in the total number of clients, it is evident that all particularly under more heterogeneous settings like Dir(0.2)
methods undergo a performance decline. This is attributed to and Dir(0.1). Conversely, with a relatively larger total number
the reduction in the number of training instances per client of clients, FedProx shows performance improvement against
as the number of total clients grows. When conducting local SCAFFOLD. This demonstrates that SCAFFOLD performs
training with fewer training samples, it becomes easier for worse under the more large-scale client environment. In conthe model to overfit, leading to increased disparities among trast, FedIn-NID exhibits consistently stable and outstanding
models during global model aggregation, exacerbating model performance across all client numbers and data distributions,
drift. This is due to the reduction in training samples per reinforcing its robustness and suitability for large-scale IIoT.
client, leading to overfitting during local training and increased 3) Convergence Analysis: To further illustrate the convermodel drift during global aggregation. However, FedIn- gence dynamics and the impact of our proposed framework,
NID consistently demonstrates superior performance across Fig. 7 presents the macro-F1 score of all methods over the
MAO et al.: FedIn-NID: A FL FRAMEWORK FOR NID IN LARGE-SCALE HETEROGENEOUS INDUSTRIAL IoT 9261

50 communication rounds for each experimental setting. To system-level efficiency for practical, production-level deploybetter visualize the underlying convergence trends, the solid ment. Our second direction is to enhance the framework’s
lines show the average performance smoothed with a Gaussian adaptability to novel threats by integrating incremental learnfilter [37] (with σ = 0.9), while the shaded regions represent ing capabilities. This will empower individual clients to locally
the standard deviation of the raw results across trials. The learn emerging, previously unseen attack classes, with the
convergence plots clearly show that FedIn-NID consistently federated learning framework then efficiently propagating this
achieves a higher macro-F1 score throughout the training pro- critical knowledge to the global model. These advancements
cess compared to the baseline methods. It not only converges will ensure the system can adapt more quickly to the everto a superior final performance but also demonstrates a faster evolving threat landscape of real-world IIoT systems.
convergence rate. This advantage is especially pronounced in
the more challenging settings with higher data heterogeneity R EFERENCES
(i.e., lower γ) and a larger number of clients. This empirically
demonstrates that the proposed multidimensional client selec- [1] A. Mahmood et al., “Industrial IoT in 5G-and-beyond networks: Vision,
 architecture, and design trends,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
tion and FedEMA aggregation strategies work in synergy to no. 6, pp. 4122–4137, Jun. 2022.
create a more stable and efficient training process, leading to [2] Y. Wang et al., “MPCSM: Microservice placement for edge-cloud
a more robust final global model. collaborative smart manufacturing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17,
 no. 9, pp. 5898–5908, Sep. 2021.
 In summary, the comprehensive experimental results, con- [3] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
ducted under varying dataset distributions and client numbers, of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
consistently demonstrate the excellent performance and robust- Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Dec. 2019.
 [4] B. Mukherjee, L. T. Heberlein, and K. Levitt, “Network intrusion
ness of our proposed FedIn-NID framework. The framework detection,” IEEE Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 26–41, Mar. 1994.
excels in handling heterogeneous, large-scale IIoT networks, [5] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
providing significant improvements over baselines across all E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28,
settings. Feb. 2009.
 [6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 [7] J. Gu et al., “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” Pattern
 The advent of the next-generation Industrial IoT has intensi- Recognit., vol. 77, pp. 354–377, Apr. 2017.
 [8] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, and J. Zhang, “A review of recurrent neural
fied the demand for robust, scalable, and decentralized network networks: LSTM cells and network architectures,” Neural Comput.,
security mechanisms. This paper presented a novel FedIn- vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1235–1270, Jul. 2019.
NID framework to effectively tackle the issues arising from [9] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach
heterogeneous data distributions, large numbers of devices, to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
 Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
and varying device availability in realistic IIoT environments. [10] W. Liang, K.-C. Li, J. Long, X. Kui, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An industrial
We introduced a novel multidimensional client selection strat- network intrusion detection algorithm based on multifeature data clusegy that integrates various factors to ensure efficient and tering optimization model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3,
 pp. 2063–2071, Mar. 2020.
balanced client participation. This strategy effectively miti- [11] Y. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Tu, L. Chen, and Z. Dou, “Time-related network
gates the attack data heterogeneity among participating clients intrusion detection model: A deep learning method,” in Proc. IEEE
and accommodates the diverse availability of these clients. Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [12] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel multimodal-
Additionally, we proposed FedEMA, a dynamic global model sequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion
aggregation strategy to balance the global model and local detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, 2019.
models, achieving a robust and efficient integration of knowl- [13] B. Hu et al., “A deep one-class intrusion detection scheme in softwaredefined industrial networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 6,
edge. Extensive experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of pp. 4286–4296, Jun. 2022.
FedIn-NID, particularly its robust detection performance as [14] G. Andresini, A. Appice, and D. Malerba, “Nearest cluster-based intrudata distribution heterogeneity increases and the number of sion detection through convolutional neural networks,” Knowl.-Based
 Syst., vol. 216, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106798.
devices grows, showcasing its superior overall performance [15] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
compared to existing solutions. In summary, FedIn-NID offers Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, nos. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021.
a harmonious blend of scalability, adaptability, and robustness, [16] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
 Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10,
positioning it as a cornerstone for future research and devel- no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
opment aimed at safeguarding the increasingly complex and [17] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
distributed world of next-generation IIoT. “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
 To build upon this foundation, our future work will address [18] Z. Ma, J. Ma, Y. Miao, Y. Li, and R. H. Deng, “ShieldFL: Mitigating
both the practical deployment challenges and the algorithmic model poisoning attacks in privacy-preserving federated learning,” IEEE
adaptability of the framework. It is important to note that Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1639–1654, 2022.
 [19] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour, G. Srivastava, and
our current investigation focused on fundamental algorithmic R. M. Parizi, “A robust privacy-preserving federated learning model
solutions within an idealized communication environment. against model poisoning attacks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
Therefore, our first direction for future work is to evaluate and vol. 19, pp. 6693–6708, 2024.
 [20] N. M. Jebreel, J. Domingo-Ferrer, A. Blanco-Justicia, and D. Sánchez,
enhance the proposed method on standardized FL benchmark “Enhanced security and privacy via fragmented federated learning,”
platforms. This will allow us to analyze its performance IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6703–6717,
under realistic communication constraints and optimize its May 2024.
9262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[21] T. Eltaras, F. Sabry, W. Labda, K. Alzoubi, and Q. Ahmedeltaras, Zhiwei Wei received the master’s degree from
 “Efficient verifiable protocol for privacy-preserving aggregation in Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2023.
 federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 pp. 2977–2990, 2023. Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent
[22] H. Liang, Y. Li, C. Zhang, X. Liu, and L. Zhu, “EGIA: An external gra- Autonomous Systems, Tongji University. His
 dient inversion attack in federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics research interests include vehicular fog computing,
 Security, vol. 18, pp. 4984–4995, 2023. industrial service provision, and dynamic resource
[23] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, allocation.
 and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT
 security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
 Feb. 2022.
[24] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative
 intrusion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
[25] X. Sun et al., “A hierarchical federated learning-based intrusion detec- Bing Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 tion system for 5G smart grids,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 16, p. 2627, from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2021.
 Aug. 2022. She is currently an Assistant Professor with Tongji
[26] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy- University. Her current research interests include
 preserving federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. UAV communications, wireless resource allocation,
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023. and relay communications.
[27] X. Gu, K. Huang, J. Zhang, and L. Huang, “Fast federated learning in
 the presence of arbitrary device unavailability,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 12052–12064.
[28] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y. Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y. Khazaeni,
 “Federated learning with matched averaging,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
 Learn. Represent., 2020, pp. 1–16.
[29] J. Mao, Z. Wei, B. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Song, “Toward ever-evolution
 network threats: A hierarchical federated class-incremental learning
 approach for network intrusion detection in IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things Rongqing Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 J., vol. 11, no. 18, pp. 29864–29877, Sep. 2024. and Ph.D. degrees (Hons.) from Peking University,
[30] B. Luo, X. Li, S. Wang, J. Huang, and L. Tassiulas, “Cost-effective Beijing, China, in 2009 and 2014, respectively.
 federated learning design,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May Currently, he is an Associate Professor at The
 2021, pp. 1–10. Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
[31] P. M. Mammen, “Federated learning: Opportunities and challenges,” (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China. Before joining
 2021, arXiv:2101.05428. HKUST(GZ), he held faculty positions at Tongji
[32] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. J. Reddi, S. U. Stich, University and Colorado State University. His
 and A. T. Suresh, “SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for research interests include vehicular communications
 federated learning,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, and networking, low-altitude vehicular networks,
 pp. 5132–5143. and connected intelligence. He has authored and
[33] J. Franklin, “The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference co-authored three monographs and over 200 papers in top journals and conferand prediction,” Math. Intelligencer, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 83–85, Mar. ences, with three best paper awards at IEEE ICC 2016, GLOBECOM 2018,
 2005. and ICC 2019. He also received the 2017 First-Class Prize in Natural Science
[34] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature of Ministry of Education of China, the 2023 First-Class Prize in Natural
 set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl., Science of Chinese Association of Automation, and the 2023 First-Class
 vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022. Prize in Natural Science of China Institute of Communications. He is also
[35] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, serving as the Secretary General for the Connected Intelligence Committee
 “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach. of Chinese Association of Automation, the Vice-Chair for the Information
 Learn. Syst., 2018, pp. 1–22. Services Committee of IEEE ComSoc Asian–Pacific Board, and an Associate
[36] Q. Li, Y. Diao, Q. Chen, and B. He, “Federated learning on non-IID Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY and IET
 data silos: An experimental study,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data Communications.
 Eng. (ICDE), May 2022, pp. 965–978.
[37] J.-S. Lee, “Digital image smoothing and the sigma filter,” Comput. Vis.,
 Graph., Image Process., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 255–269, Nov. 1983.

 Lingyang Song (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the University of York, U.K., in 2007.
 He was a Research Fellow with the University
 of Oslo, Norway, until rejoining Philips Research,
 Jingxin Mao received the B.E. and M.E. degrees U.K., in March 2008. In May 2009, he joined the
 from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2022 Department of Electronics, School of Electronics
 and 2025, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, and is currently a Boya Distinguished Professor.
 Ph.D. degree in intelligent transportation with The
 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology His research interests include wireless communica-
 (Guangzhou). His current research interests include tion and networks, signal processing, and machine
 federated learning, large language models, semi- learning. He was a recipient of the IEEE Leonard
 supervised learning, and incremental learning. G. Abraham Prize in 2016 and the IEEE Asia Pacific (AP) Young Researcher
 Award in 2012. He has been an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer since 2015. He
 received the K. M. Stott Prize for excellent research from the University of
 York.