632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

 Few-Shot Website Fingerprinting With
 Distribution Calibration
 Chenxiang Luo , Wenyi Tang , Qixu Wang , and Danyang Zheng , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Website Fingerprinting (WF) aims to identify users’
visited websites from encrypted traffic traces, disabling the
anonymity of encrypted communication like the Tor network. It
is practical to use historically labeled (source) data, e.g., public
datasets, to pre-train a WF model, and then collect few incoming
(target) data to re-train this model within a low cost. Unfortunately,
there is always a considerable difference of latent feature distributions between the source and target data (i.e., the cross-domain
problem) and an inevitable bias of feature distribution caused by a
limited volume of target data (i.e., the biased distribution problem).
Although current Few-Shot Learning-based WF (FSWF) methods
achieve satisfactory performance on the efficient establishment,
they lack cross-domain transferability, and meanwhile, are unable
to alleviate the distribution bias. In this paper, we first systematically analyze the cross-domain problem among different domains
of traffics, revealing the ubiquity and dominant factors of it. To
mitigate the cross-domain and biased distribution problems, we
propose a Distribution Calibrated Website Fingerprinting (DCWF)
method that incorporates a two-stage distribution calibration process and a tailored circle network. In the two-stage calibration Fig. 1. The example of WF practical application scenario. Attackers use
process, we first devise a re-modeling mechanism capturing the already-made historical datasets to pre-train a WF model, and then collect and
information distribution of the target domain to extract represen- label a few data from the target users’ network to finetune this WF model, i.e.,
tative features, and then design a calibration process to adjust the transfer the model from the source domain to target domain.
biased distribution of the target domain. Subsequently, a tailored
circle network is proposed to reduce the noise caused by the calibration process. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted and the
results demonstrate the superiority of our DCWF over comparisons onion. Nevertheless, the encrypted network traffic transmitted
under both close-world and open-world settings. through such safeguards still discloses sensitive information. A
 passive attacker could eavesdrop on the Tor traffic in the user’s
 Index Terms—Network privacy, traffic analysis, website fingerprinting, cross-domain transfer, biased distribution.
 Local Area Network (LAN) or wireless network, such as the
 user’s Internet Service Provider (ISP), the network administrator, and the sniffer. Then, the visited websites of the user could
 I. INTRODUCTION be inferred from the captured traffic data, forming a general
 OWADAYS, the protection of network individual privacy WF attack [2]. The investigation of the WF attack exhibits the
N is increasingly brought into focus. The Onion Router
(Tor) [1], the primary tool of anonymous communication, has
 insight of anonymous tools’ vulnerability, meanwhile, supports
 the further development of the corresponding defense.
exhibited a way to safeguard online privacy. Tor browser routes a In the consistent studies of WF, Artificial Intelligence exhibits
packet through a series of random-selected relays, each layer of its spectacular potential. Deep learning based WF (DWF) methwhich can encrypt or decrypt traffic, much like the layers of an ods automatically extract features and learn latent patterns from
 website traces [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], eliminating the reliance
 Manuscript received 10 August 2023; revised 3 June 2024; accepted 4 June on hand-crafting features of earlier methods [9], [10], [11], [12],
2024. Date of publication 7 June 2024; date of current version 16 January [13], [14], [15], [16]. However, DWF methods need a significant
2025. This work was supported in part by the Young Scientists Fund of the amount of training data collected from the network of target
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302322 and
Grant 62302404, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the users, which is both resource-consuming and time-consuming.
Central Universities under Grant 2022SCU12116 and Grant 2023SCU12129. The practical application of WF requires a low labor of data
(Corresponding author: Wenyi Tang.) collection and labeling. Therefore, as the example shown in
 Chenxiang Luo, Wenyi Tang, and Qixu Wang are with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610207, China (e-mail: Fig. 1, attackers naturally prefer to use a ready-made (source)
iridescense@std.scu.edu.cn; wtang@scu.edu.cn; qixuwang@scu.edu.cn). dataset to pre-train a WF model, and then collect and label a
 Danyang Zheng is with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, few (target) data from the target users’ network to finetune this
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China (e-mail: dzheng5@
swjtu.edu.cn). WF model. The ready-made dataset could be existing public
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3411014 WF datasets or historically collected from the own network of
 1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 633

attackers. Moreover, if attackers already have a well-trained WF are following a Gaussian distribution and features of the same
model, it is more efficient to collect a few data from the target type of websites (e.g., shopping websites or video platforms)
network to transfer (finetune) the model, instead of collecting have similar covariance. Therefore, the biased distribution of
abundant new data to train a new model. As a result, the few-shot the target data is calibrated according to the covariance of the
and cross-domain transferability of a WF method is necessary previously selected subset from the source domain. Furthermore,
for the practical application. a tailored circle network is proposed to increase the separability
 Although current FSWF methods are capable of learning of the feature space and mitigate the inevitable noise caused
traffic patterns from a small number of target data [17], [18], [19], by calibrating the distribution of features. Subsequently, we
[20], [21], the majority of current studies are still far away from conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness
the practical application because of the unsolved cross-domain of our approach to the cross-domain problem.
and biased distribution problems. The cross-domain problem We summarize our key contributions as follows:
indicates that feature distributions of the source domain and r To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
target domain are different, which is widely existing because analyzes and addresses the cross-domain problem under
of the changing Tor Browser Bundle (TBB) versions, visited the scenario of WF.
websites, network conditions, etc. Since the feature extractor is r We motivate why an attacker might be interested in the
pre-trained by the data from the source domain and applied for cross-domain problem and four substantial factors that
WF attack using the data from the target domain, the prevalent FSWF attacks induce the cross-domain problem are discross-domain problem significantly jeopardizes the effective- closed, including the time gap, diverse TBB versions, and
ness of the feature extractor. Most current works ignore the cross- websites overlap and network locations.
domain problem, thus failing to extract representative features r We propose a two-stage distribution calibration where the
from the target domain to adjust the difference between the two first stage extracts more representative features and the secdomains. Although [22] applies adversarial domain adaption to ond stage mitigates the bias of the feature distribution due
WF mitigating the cross-domain problem, it needs extra source to insufficient samples. We find that our DCWF achieves
datasets and retraining the feature extractor every time meeting nearly 85% accuracy when using only one sample per class.
a new target domain. Besides, the biased distribution problem r We propose a tailored circle network to mitigate the extra
means that the feature distribution of the limited (few) data from errors and noise caused by the calibration of features distrithe target domain is biased, i.e., different with the ground-truth bution, which makes the model more robust and effective
distribution of all target data. Since current studies overlook the in open-world settings.
biased distribution problem, it has a fairly high probability that r Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the perthe WF classifier could easily become overfitted due to such a formance comparisons. Evaluation results show that our
problem. As a result, there are two non-trivial challenges we method outperforms the state-of-the-art method in both
must tackle for further improvements. The one is How to extract closed-world and open-world settings, with and without
representative features under the cross-domain scenario? and WF defense.
the other one is How to alleviate the biased distribution caused The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Secby limited target? tion II, we describe the background of Website Fingerprinting
 In this paper, the empirical evidence that the cross-domain and related works. Then, Section III analyzes the cross-domain
problem is widely existing under the WF scenario is first ex- problem and corresponding factors. Further, we go into detail
hibited through systematic analysis. We comprehensively an- about our method in Section IV. In Section V, we evaluate
alyze such a problem with datasets collected under different our DCWF and other FSWF attacks under diverse experimental
network conditions and identify several factors that dominantly settings. Finally, in Section VI, we summarize our work, and
induce the cross-domain problem, including time gaps, and point out the limitations of this work and potential future works.
non-overlapping website categories. In addition, the similarity
results of the above analysis inspire us to design the coun- II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
termeasure of the biased distribution problem. To tackle the
two non-trivial challenges, we propose our DCWF method that A. Background
incorporates a two-stage distribution calibration process and a 1) Threat Model: Tor is a free and open-source software
tailored circle network. In the first stage which addresses the providing anonymous communication for users [23]. The goal
cross-domain problem, we capture the information distribution of Tor is to safeguard users’ privacy by hiding the real IP address
of the target domain by re-modeling the channel relationships of and identity of users by randomly routing their communication
the feature extractor with channel weights which highlight the traffic through multiple nodes [24]. In this paper, we assume
channel features that carry more informative content, to extract a local and passive adversary, which is a common assumption
representative features on the target domain. In the second stage in other literature [11], [17]. Specifically, local means that the
which tackles the biased distribution problem, we select a subset attacker is located on the user’s local network, while passive
from the source domain to calibrate the feature distribution of the means that the attacker can monitor the user’s network traffic,
target data based on the analyzed similarity results. Specifically, but cannot modify or decrypt it. Potential adversaries could be
we adopt the assumption that distributions of extracted features campus network administrators, residential ISPs, etc. When a
634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

user initiates a request to access a website, the adversary captures updating the classifier. [28] augment traffic traces through semithe user’s traffic traces. Then the attacker analyzes the traffic supervised and self-supervised learning techniques to cover
traces and determines whether the user has visited a monitored comprehensive network conditions mitigating the concept drift
website. Moreover, we assume that there are strong attackers problem.
and weak attackers, where strong attackers could collect vast 4) Cross-Domain: Deep learning achieves great success in
amounts of data under specific network conditions when they the area of Computer Vision (CV) for tasks such as image
want to train a feature extractor while weak attackers could only classification [29], object detection [30], and face recognirely on the data provided by other attacks e.g., public datasets tion [31]. However, in practical applications, we face an imfrom the Internet, which is more common in cross-domain portant challenge, namely the cross-domain problem that data
scenarios. distributions are different in source and target domains. Math-
 2) Closed-World Versus Open-World: WF attacks are typi- ematically, assuming we have training data xtrain and testing
cally evaluated in closed-world and open-world scenarios. In data xtest , the distributions of xtrain and xtest are different,
the closed-world scenario, users are limited to accessing a small while the class labels of xtrain and xtest may be different,
subset of the Internet (monitored websites), typically denoted as indicating a variation distinct from the concept drift. Therek websites. The goal of the adversary is to determine which of fore, the concept drift can be considered as a factor causing
the k websites the user has visited. Although this assumption has the cross-domain problem. When we apply a feature extractor
faced criticism for being impractical [25], [26], the evaluation trained on one domain and extract features on another dounder such scenarios still is used as a metric for evaluating the main, the performance of the feature extractor will degrade due
quality of attacks. We also consider the open-world scenario to the inability of the feature extractor to adequately adapt to
which represents a more realistic setting. In this scenario, as the data distributions and feature representations in the target
shown in Fig. 1, users could visit other websites (unmonitored domain.
websites) except the monitored websites. The Standard model As we mentioned in Section I, the few-shot and cross-domain
and AWF model discussed in [17] are employed to evaluate the transferability of a WF method is necessary for practical applicaperformance of WF classifiers. For the Standard model that is tion. Therefore, the cross-domain problem and the biased distriused extensively in previous works [3], [4], [5], [11], traces from bution problem become intractable but fundamental challenges.
the unmonitored set are incorporated into the training data with Current approaches can be categorized into two groups: feature
an additional label. This model is based on the assumption that alignment and data augmentation methods. In feature alignment
including such samples could enhance the classifier’s ability methods, [22] utilizes Adversarial Domain Adaptation [32] to
to distinguish between monitored and unmonitored websites. learn domain-invariant features, mitigating the cross-domain
For the AWF model, in contrast, training data does not in- problem. Parameter fine-tuning [33] involves modifying the
clude any unmonitored website traces which are classified as parameters of a pre-trained model to adapt it to a new dataset
monitored or unmonitored websites by a threshold based on while focusing on a specific task. [34] re-initializes the final
cross-entropy loss. [6] argues that the provision of any traces residual block of the feature extractor before fine-tuning on
from the open world to the classifiers can lead to a distortion the target domain. However, these methods merely mitigate the
of the actual performance of WF attacks. Thus, we choose cross-domain problem but suffer from the biased distribution
the AWF model as our evaluation criteria in an open-world problem. In data augmentation methods, [35] constructs auxilsetting. iary datasets using Mixup [36] and employs encoders to learn
 3) Concept Drift: Concept drift occurs when recognizing domain-irrelevant features, guiding network generalization to
traffic traces collected over time since the distribution of traffic other tasks. Meanwhile, [37] and [38] apply rotation transformatraces changes [6]. Mathematically, assuming we have training tions to images and predict the rotation angle in the pre-training
data xtrain and testing data xtest , the distributions of xtrain phase. These data augmentation-based methods essentially inand xtest are different and the class labels of xtrain and xtest crease the diversity of samples by enlarging the sample space.
are same. In [25], the classification accuracy drops drastically However, these methods primarily target three-dimensional imin the first ten days, and then drops to zero as the time gap ages, which have strong spatial dependencies. Concerning the
widens. A model that remains robust against concept drift ef- network traffic, the data has strong temporal dependencies,
fectively captures the representative features highly correlated making it unsuitable to use techniques like Mixup and Ranwith the website fingerprint, ensuring consistent performance domCrop for data augmentation. To simultaneously address
over time [6]. In [6], they use DL-based WF to capture more both problems in WF, we propose our two-stage distribution
representative features utilizing the advantages of deep learning. calibration, which tackles the cross-domain and biased distribu-
Meanwhile, [8] leverages the snapshot ensemble technique to tion problems separately. Specifically, the first stage fine-tunes
make the model more robust to concept drift. Another solution the parameters of the SE Block to mitigate the cross-domain
to concept drift is to continuously re-fetch the latest pages and problem, and then the second stage augments labeled samples in
retrain the classifier [17], [27]. For instance, [27] operates exit the feature space without the constraint of input data. Moreover,
relays and possesses continuous access to labeled traffic traces, the cross-domain problem is still not systematically studied
facilitating the training of a WF classification model while miti- in WF. Therefore, we use domain similarity to analyze the
gating the adverse impacts of concept drift. [17] introduces Few- cross-domain problem in WF scenarios with prevailing public
Shot Learning based WF to mitigate the concept drift by rapidly datasets.
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 635

B. Related Work a single source domain, and the feature extractor can be used
 [15] makes the first attempt to apply WF to Tor in 2009. In the for multiple target domains. There are also some other related
following decade, WF attacks typically train classifiers based on works. [41] proposes a defense mechanism against cache-based
a set of hand-crafted features. These attacks have been shown to Website Fingerprinting attacks. This approach involves genbe effective including k-NN [14], CUMUL [9], and k-FP [11], erating spurious network activity to introduce noise into the
etc. However, the hand-crafted features are highly susceptible to cache, effectively concealing the website rendering activity. [42]
variations in traffic, which restricts the usability of such attacks. proposes an obfuscation defense technique based on eXplainable
 As the potential benefits of deep learning are further ex- Artificial Intelligence (XAI) to counter microarchitecture-based
plored, researchers actively apply deep learning techniques to Website Fingerprinting attacks. [43] constructs a WF classifier
deep website fingerprinting (DWF). [3] explores the Stacked using the XGBoost algorithm, supplanting the initial random
Denoising Autoencoder (SDAE) in WF for detecting whether a forest classifier from previous work [44]. Since our work focuses
user has visited illegal websites. Following this, [6] compares on the cross-domain in FSWF, these work are not considered in
the performance of several deep-learning models on WF. The this paper.
results exhibit that DWF methods benefit from the increase in the
amount of training data and SDAE obtains the best results, with III. CROSS-DOMAIN ANALYSIS
96.3% accuracy. Subsequently, [4] proposes an attack named In this section, we analyze the cross-domain problem in WF
Deep Fingerprinting (DF), which incorporates the sophisticated by measuring the similarity between two domains and show what
features extracted from traffic traces with Convolutional Neural factors contribute such a problem. In [25], they point out that
Networks. The DF attack achieves 98.3% accuracy in the closed WF methods should be evaluated in practical settings including
world and 99% accuracy and 94% recall in the open world. user’s browsing habits, differences in location and version of
Moreover, the DF attack demonstrates a remarkable closed- TBB, etc. In particular, they discuss the impact of the time
world 90.7% accuracy under the WF defense scenario, under- gap between training data and testing data, which is known as
mining the effectiveness of the WTF-PAD defense [39] which concept drift. In this section, we consider these assumptions as
is widely regarded as the primary candidate for deployment in factors causing the cross-domain problem, and we propose our
Tor. Subsequently, [5] proposes Var-CNN, specifically designed solution in the next section.
for the WF problem leveraging techniques tailored to address
the challenges of small training data. Remarkably, Var-CNN
achieves an impressive closed-world accuracy of approximately A. Datasets
92.4% with just 40 traces per site. Moreover, [40] explores We carry out our experiment on several datasets collected
unsupervised deep learning and highlights the utility of their in different conditions, with which we simulate different crossmodel for feature extraction separately from the classification domain scenarios and analyze the contributing factors. We label
task. Based on this, [8] proposes the snWF leveraging snapshots these datasets as follows:
ensemble technique and reaches the best performance in deep AWF dataset [6]: Rimmer et al. collected traffic traces of mon-
WF attacks. itored websites from the 1,200 Alexa Top sites, and unmonitored
 However, these deep WF attacks suffer from substantial gath- websites from the 400,000 Alexa Top sites in 2017 using TBB
ering time of training data where network conditions will change version 6.5. Among the monitored websites, they revisit the top
in such a big bootstrap time which are assumed to be the same in 200 websites and collected 100 test traces per website 3 days, 10
their works [3], [4], [5]. To address such problems, [17] proposes days, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, and 6 weeks after the end of the initial
TF using triplet networks and evaluate it in a more challenging data collection for these 200 websites. We categorize the AWF
scenario where the training and testing data are collected years dataset into several different sets:
apart on different network conditions. Furthermore, Chen et al. r AWFk: The set of the first k monitored websites, where
improve the performance of FSWF attacks by employing trans- each website has 2,500 examples. Especially AW F 775 is
fer learning, meta-learning [20], and data augmentation [19] the set of remaining 775 excluding the Top 100 monitored
techniques respectively. Meanwhile, [21] proposes WFBDC to websites same as [17].
mitigate domain deviation by leveraging the Brownian Distance r AWFλ K: A subset with λ× 1000 of the 400,000 unmoni-
Covariance (BDC) and achieving the best performance. Never- tored websites, where each website has one example.
theless, these works do not explicitly consider the cross-domain r AWF200δ : A subset with δ time after the end of the
problem where the feature extractor could not extract represen- initial data collection for these 200 websites. Since the
tative features on the target domain without transferability. [22] AW F 2006w is contaminated, we do not consider it in the
utilizes Adversarial Domain Adaption [32] to learn domain- next analysis.
invariant features with a Source Classifier and a Domain Dis- DF-95 dataset [4]: Sirinam et al. collected traffic traces of
criminator mitigating the cross-domain problem. However their monitored websites from the 100 Alexa Top sites, and unmonimethod either requires data from multiple source domains, or the tored websites from the 9000 Alexa Top sites in 2016 using TBB
feature extractor needs to be pre-trained with the source domain version 6.X.
each time they encounter a new target domain. In contrast, our DS-14 dataset [14]: Wang et al. collected traffic traces of
method only needs to pre-train the feature extractor once with monitored websites from a list of sites blocked in China, the
636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

U.K., and Saudi Arabia, and unmonitored websites from the Then we have the distance between S and T is defined as their
9000 Alexa Top sites in 2014 using TBB version 3.5.1. Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD):
 DF-19 dataset [45]: Wang et al. collected traffic traces of m,n
monitored websites from the 100 Alexa Top sites, and unmoni- i=1,j=1 fi,j di,j
 d(S, T ) = EM D(S, T ) = m,n , (4)
tored websites from the 9000 Alexa Top sites in 2019 using TBB i=1,j=1 fi,j
version 8.5a7.
 Data Representation: We follow the data representation used where the optimal flow fi,j corresponds to the least amount of
by recent FSWF works [17], [18], [19], [20]. Each trace is total work by solving the EMD optimization problem. Finally,
transformed into a sequence where we disregard packet size and the domain similarity is defined as
timestamps, retaining only the traffic direction of each packet.
 sim(S, T ) = e−γd(S,T ) , (5)
Outgoing and target packets are represented as +1 and −1,
respectively. To ensure consistency, the sequences are trimmed where γ is set to 0.1 which is different from previous works [46],
or padded with 0’s to reach a fixed length of 5,000 packets. As a [47] due to that we think prototypes of domains of network traffic
result, the input data is organized as a 1-D array of [n × 5000], are more difficult to distinguish.
where n denotes the total number of examples provided to the
model.
 C. Analysis
 We use AW F k as the source domain which is commonly
B. Domain Similarity
 given as an auxiliary dataset to train the feature extractor.
 Suppose there is a source domain S and a target domain Concerning the target domain, we use AW F 100, AW F 200δ ,
T projected into the feature space. In the context of transfer DS-14, DS-19, and DF -95 which are commonly given as
learning, the distance between two domains can be quantified target datasets to train the classifier in FSWF [17]. Table I
as the minimum amount of work required to move the features shows the similarities between source domains and target
of one domain to the other. Therefore we use Earth Mover’s domains. We observe a similar trend, that the order of
Distance (EMD), which searches for the minimum amount of domain similarities to source domains is AW F 2003d >
work, to measure domain similarities between available datasets AW F 20010d > AW F 2002w > AW F 2004w > AW F 100 >
[46], [47]. DS-14 > DS-19 > DF -95. For instance, with δ increasing,
 First we define the prototype vector pc of class c on a domain: the similarities between AW F 200δ and AW F k become
 smaller and DF -95 has the smallest similarities to source
 1 c n
 domains. Then we synthesize previous research and motivate
 pc = g(tck ), (1)
 nc the factors that we meet in the real world and cause cross-domain
 k=1
 problems. We classify them into the following categories.
where nc is the total number of traces in class c, tck is the k-th trace Time Gap: In the scenario where both training and testing
in class c and g(·) denotes a feature extractor for a trace. The datasets are collected in the same domain, WF attacks exhibit
feature extractor is required to extract high-level information their best performance [25]. However, maintaining this advanfrom traffic traces [46]. Therefore we use the Var-CNN as tageous situation requires the attacker to constantly collect the
the trained extractor on the large scale AWF dataset where latest data, which is a resource-intensive operation and poses
Var-CNN is considered the best deep WF model and we use limitations on weak attackers. The advent of FSWF reduces
outputs of Global Average Pooling [48] as features, and AWF such awkward conditions to some extent by leveraging a hisdataset contains the largest websites categories and traffic traces. torically collected dataset. However, such methods give rise to
 |S| the cross-domain problem, as the feature extractor and classifier
Suppose we have a source domain S = {(pi , wpi )}i=1 and a
 |T | are trained on two different domains separated by a significant
target domain T = {(pj , wpj )}j=1 , where pi is the prototype time gap. To further study such cross-domain problems, we
vector of category i in S and wpi is the normalized number of analyze the effect of the time gap on cross-domain problems
traces in that category; similarly for pj and wpj in T . Since we using AW F 200δ datasets where these datasets are designed
normalize the number of traces, we have to gradually increase the time gap between the target domains
 
 n 
 m and the source domain. In our analysis of domain similarities,
 wi = wj = 1. (2) we find that, as the time gap increases, the similarities between
 i=1 j=1 the source and target domains become smaller, decreasing from
 0.800 to 0.633. This is because the content of websites changes
Then the distance between the two domains can be considered over time leading to changes in traffic patterns. For example,
as the cost of moving prototype vectors from one domain to Google’s homepage has different doodles for different holidays
the other in the transfer learning context [46], [47]. We define as Fig. 2, which results in a very noticeable change in traffic
the distance between two prototypes pi ∈ S and pj ∈ T as the payload.
euclidean distance: TBB Version&Setting: To perform FSWF attacks, an attacker
 is required to collect the auxiliary data on a TBB with a certain
 di,j = pi − pj . (3) version (source domain) where the attacker could not collect
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 637

 TABLE I
 SIMILARITIES BETWEEN THE SOURCE DOMAINS AND TARGET DOMAINS

Fig. 2. Standard (Left) and doodle (Right) versions of google.com.

datasets of multiple versions due to resource constraints. However, an attacker, such as network administrators, would like to
monitor all users in the Intranet who visit websites with different
TBB versions. In this case, the attacker needs to train classifiers Fig. 3. Various backbone network and main languages in the world.
on target data with different versions of TBB (target domain),
which causes cross-domain problems, otherwise, the accuracy of
FSWF attacks drops dramatically [25]. Therefore we study the
cross-domain problem induced by the factor that the auxiliary of Section V-B also suggests that the more identical websites in
data and target data are collected in different versions of TBB. the source and target domains, the better the performance of the
The similarity between AW F 200 and DS-14 is 0.326 with FSWF attacks.
the versions 6.5 and 3.5.1. Moreover, the similarity between Network locations: When utilizing a historically collected
AW F 200 and DS-19 is 0.338 with the versions 6.5 and 8.5a7. In dataset, it is essential to consider the location where the dataset
fact, Tor’s security policy and browser optimization policies are was collected. In [25], the authors found that traces collected in
subject to change with each version update. With each update, it different locations close to the backbone exhibit high similarleads to a change in traffic patterns. For instance, they consider ity, while the similarity is significantly lower when comparing
disabling TLS cipher suites containing SHA-1 and enabling traces from distant locations. When we analyze the factors, we
HTTP/2 push in version 12.0.1 In addition, [26] evaluates the observed a counter-intuitive result that, the similarity between
performance of WF with a random forest model when training AW F 200 and DF -95 is 0.249 with the same TBB version
data and testing data are collected from different TBB versions, 6.X, while that between AW F 200 and DS-19 is 0.338 with
e.g., [7,8,9,10]. For example, the accuracy drops from 77% to TBB versions 6.5 and 8.5a7. We consider the reason to be
3% when the training data and testing data are collected from related to network locations and it is the different network
TBB versions 9 and 10 respectively. Moreover, Tor undergoes conditions that cause packets to arrive in a different order and
rapid updates,2 and thus the TBB versions among users can be thus the overall traffic patterns to change. Additionally, websites
different. Therefore, the TBB version&setting is a possible cause in different regions often employ different languages, which can
of cross-domain problems. lead to significant variations in traffic payload sizes as shown in
 Websites Overlap: In general, weak attackers tend to rely on Fig. 3.
historically collected datasets to train their feature extractors. In conclusion, many factors could cause cross-domain prob-
However, it is important to note that the websites monitored by lems which are common in the real world. Inspired by the
the attacker may differ from the websites present in the source measure of the similarity between domains, we propose to select
dataset. In the area of CV, domains of two different class sets some websites of the source domain that are similar to websites
are considered to cause cross-domain problems [47]. Inspired by of the target domain, and the characteristics of selected websites
it, we conduct an analysis to investigate the impact of website are borrowed to calibrate the biased distribution of the target
overlap on the cross-domain problem. Our results show that the data, which can be found in Section IV-C2.
similarity between AW F 200 and AW F 100 is 0.556 while that
between AW F 500 and AW F 100 is decreasing similarity by
 IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
0.400. In addition, the result in the website overlap experiment
 This section provides a detailed introduction to the proposed
 1 [Online]. Available: https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser- DCWF attack. We first give an overview of the architecture.
120/ And then describe how DCWF learns representative features
 2 [Online]. Available: https://blog.torproject.org/ on the target domain, calibrates the distribution of features,
638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 4. Schematic overview of the proposed DCWF. Note: GT is Ground Truth and the snowflake means freezing the weights of the neural network.

and mitigates the extra errors and noise caused by the feature in [49]. Therefore we consider channel weights of lower layers
calibration. to be external representations of the information distribution of
 a particular domain. Then we keep the SE block after the second
A. Overview layer of the feature extractor and remove other SE blocks. We
 randomly select four websites from AW F 100, and the channel
 The overview of DCWF is presented in Fig. 4. Our method
 weights of feature extractors trained in two domains DS-14 and
consists of domain-agnostic pre-training and domain-specific
 DS-19 are illustrated in Fig. 5. The SE block is implemented
distribution calibrating. During the domain-agnostic learning
 by two operations.
process, a tailored extractor fθ is trained to learn the knowledge
 Squeeze: To capture the global perceptual field of a feature
on the source domain. In the domain-specific distribution calmap and understand the interrelationship between channels, we
ibrating process, we capture the information distribution with
 utilize global average pooling to encode the entire spatial feature
channel weights to approximate the data distribution on the
 vector of a channel into a global feature representation. Suppose
target domain. Finally, we calibrate the distribution of features
 we have a feature map X ∈ RW ×C where X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xC ]
based on similar classes from the source domain with adequate
 and C is the numbers of channels. Since the input data is 1-
traces.
 dimensional, the length of the feature is W . A global feature Gc
 can be calculated using the following equation:
B. Domain-Agnostic Pre-Training
 In this process, we aim to not only train a powerful feature
 1 
 W
extractor to obtain robust features but also promote the separa- Gc = sq(Xc ) = xc (i), (6)
bility in the feature space which mitigates the inevitable errors W i=1
and noise caused by the distribution learning process in Section
IV-C. The subsequent subsections provide a detailed explanation
 where c is the c-th channel.
of the network structure and the role played by each component.
 Excitation: To make use of the information aggregated in
 1) Squeeze and Excitation Block: To extract representative
 the squeeze operation, the excitation function must capture the
features on a specific domain, it is important to learn the
 nonlinear relationship between channels. We employ a botdistribution of data on the specific domain which is difficult.
 tleneck structure consisting of two fully connected layers to
Therefore, we use the information distribution of target data
 control the channel weights. The first fully connected layer, with
which is obtained by the SE block and can be substituted to some
 parameters W1 , reduces the input dimension to 1/r, followed
extent for the data distribution. The SE block models the interby ReLU activation. Then, the second fully connected layer,
dependence between feature channels, and obtains the weights
 with parameters W2 , restores the activation vector to its original
of each feature channel [49]. With these weights, the extractor
 dimension. Finally, a Sigmoid gating function σ is applied to
selectively emphasises informative channels and suppresses less
 obtain normalized weights ranging between 0 and 1. The formula
useful ones. We first add SE blocks after each basic block and
 for Excitation is as
find that the channel weights across different classes are nearly
identical in lower layers and at greater layers, the weight of
each channel becomes much more class-specific which is similar S = ex(G, W ) = σ(g(G, W )) = σ(W2 ReLU(W1 , G)). (7)
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 639

Fig. 5. The channel weights of feature extractors trained separately in two domains DS-14 (a) and DS-19 (b). We randomly select four websites from AW F 100
to illustrate the channel weights.

The final output of the block is obtained by rescaling the feature in which αnj and αpi are non-negative weighting factors, γ is a
map X with the scalar S, scale factor, Δn and Δp are the between-class and within-class
 x̃c = Fscale (xc , sc ) = sc · xc , (8) margins.
 When a similarity score deviates far from its optimum (i.e.,
where X = [x̃1 , x̃2 , . . ., x̃C ] and Fscale (xc , sc ) refers to On for sjn and Op for sip ), it should be assigned a large weighting
channel-wise multiplication between the feature map xc and factor. This ensures that these deviations receive a stronger
the scalar sc . In this paper, we set r equal to 2. emphasis during the update process, allowing for more effective
 2) Big Kernel Size and Bottleneck: We sort to convolutional updates with larger gradients. The authors define the αnj and
layers with big kernel sizes to solve the background noise while αpi as
previous WF attacks mainly use convolutional layers with a  i
kernel size of 8 or smaller. Traditional convolutional layers with αp = [Op − sip ]+ ,
 (10)
small kernel sizes focus more on the local details in which αnj = [sjn − On ]+ ,
the background noise leads to greater adverse effects while
 in which [·]+ is the “cut-off at zero” operation to ensure αpi
convolutional layers with big kernel sizes capture more global
 and αnj are non-negative. Considering the case of binary classiinformation of traffic traces [50]. Considering the efficiency,
 fication, the decision boundary is achieved at αnj (sjn − Δn ) −
we use depth-wise convolution layers with big kernel sizes in
 αpi (sip − Δp ) = 0. Setting Op = 1 + m, On = −m, Δp = 1 −
bottleneck blocks as illustrated in Fig. 4. In fact, the time of
 m,and Δn = m. Consequently, the decision boundary is retraining our feature extractor is less than that of TF and WFBDC.
 duced to
 3) Circle Loss: Note that the feature calibration of the second
stage induces inevitable errors. In this case, our features extractor (sn − 0)2 + (sp − 1)2 = 2m2 . (11)
must improve the separability of feature space to mitigate such
errors and we sort to Circle loss [51]. Loss functions like triplet The decision boundary is the arc of a circle. In this paper, we set
loss and softmax cross-entropy loss are designed to incorporate m = 0.25 and γ = 64.
both within-class similarity (sn ) and between-class similarity
(sp ) into similarity pairs and aim to minimize the difference C. Domain-Specific Distribution Calibrating
(sn − sp ) where we use cosine similarity as similarity measure- Here we propose our two-stage distribution calibration proment. However, this optimization approach can be inflexible as it cess. In the first stage, we fine-tune the channel weights to extract
imposes an equal penalty strength on every individual similarity more representative features on the target domain. Then, we
score. In contrast, Circle loss dynamically adjusts its gradients select a subset from the source domain to calibrate the feature
on sp and sn , and thus benefits from a flexible optimization distribution of the target data based on the analyzed similarity
process. It is defined by results. Because the dimension of the traffic feature is large and
 the variables are not independent, it is difficult to directly test
 Lcircle = log
 ⎡ ⎤ which distribution the feature satisfies. Therefore, we assume
 
 L  K that the distribution of features follows the Gaussian distribution
 ⎣1 + exp(γ(αnj (sjn − Δn ) − αpi (sip − Δp )))⎦ , (9) (BN) due to the Batch Normalization in the feature extractor
 j=1 i=1 where BN can produce feature maps with a stable and “more
640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

 Algorithm 1: Domain-Specific Distribution Learning. distribution of the target domain. We first compute centroid
 1: Input: source domainDS , target domain DT , feature vectors for each class within the source domain, followed by
 extractor θ, SE block θC , linear classifier θclf , number Cosine Distance computation between these centroids and target
 of samples k, T iterations. domain features. Subsequently, a top-k class subset which is
 2: Output: output similar to the training data of the target domain is selected to
 3: a = 0 approximate its distribution according to the Cosine Similarity.
 4: for each iteration t =, . . ., T do For instance, the covariance matrix of target features is derived
 5: xd ← a batch from DS with size m by averaging the covariance matrices of the chosen subset.
 6: θC (t + 1) ← θC (t) − α m 1
 ∇LCE (fφ (θ, θclf ; xd )) Consequently, features are sampled from the calibrated Gaussian
 7: end for distribution and fed into a new classifier. The general pseudocode
 8: for each class c = 1, . . ., C do is shown in Algorithm 1.
 9: xc ← {x|x ∈ DS , y = c} Specifically, with the definition of domain similarity in (4), a
 10: uc ← |x1c | fθ (xc ) subset of the source domain that is similar to the target domain
  c is selected to calibrate the distribution of the target domain.
 11: Σc ← nc1−1 ni=1 (xi − µc )(xi − µc )T
 Suppose we have source domain S = {pi }m i=1 same as Section
 12: end for
 III-B. We suppose there are only a few available labeled samples
 13: for each sample xs ∈ DS do
 for the target domain. The most common way to test FSWF
 14: x˜s ← fθ (xs )
 attacks is to build a task called N -way-K-shot task [56]. N is
 15: Ks ← k nearest base classes from (14)
 the number of categories in the target domain and K-labeled
 16: DS ← Gaussian distribution from (16)
 samples are provided for each class. The few available labeled
 17: Fs ← sample k features from DS
 data are called support set and the attack is evaluated on another
 18: end for
 query set.
 19: for each iteration t =, . . ., T do
 Using a feature extractor, we obtain the features of samples
 20: xs ← a batch from Fs and DS with batch size n
 from both the source domain and the target domain. We assume
 21: θclf (t + 1) ← θclf (t) − α n1 ∇L(fφ (θ, θclf ; x˜s ))
 that the feature distribution follows a Gaussian distribution. The
 22: end for
 mean of the feature vector belonging to class c is denoted as
 μc . Since variables on each dimension are not independent, we
 utilize the covariance matrix to represent the variance of feature
Gaussian” distribution [52]. Moreover, assuming a Gaussian
 vectors. The covariance matrix Σc for the features belonging to
distribution for features is common in various fields due to its
 class c is calculated as
practical effectiveness [53], [54], [55].
 1 
 nc
 1) Stage 1 Domain Distribution Learning: The SE block is
trained to capture the information distribution of a domain. To Σc = (xi − µc ) (xi − µc )T , (13)
 nc − 1 i=1
learn the information distribution of the target domain, we finetune the SE block of the feature extractor fθ with batch size 32 where xi is the i-th feature vector in class c.
on the target domain. Suppose θC is the parameters of SE block, Utilizing these statistics, we perform a transfer of these statis-
θ is the parameters of the whole feature extractor, and (x, y) is a tics from the source domain to the target domain. This transfer
trace from the target domain with its label. We select the linear leverages the more accurate estimation of statistics in the source
classifier with parameters θclf to adopt the stochastic gradient domain, which is based on sufficient data, and applies them to
descent algorithm for update at every iteration t as the target domain. We use the Cosine Distance as the distance
 between the feature of a sample x̃ from the support set and
 1 
 m
 θC (t + 1) = θC (t) − α ∇LCE (f (θ, θclf ; x), y), (12) features of the source domain, instead of [57] using the euclidean
 m i=1 distance. We define
where α denote the learning rate and m is the batch size. LCE Sd = {−cos < µc , x̃ >| i ∈ Cb } ,
is the cross-entropy loss function.
 SN = {i | −cos < µc , x̃ >∈ topk (Sd )} , (14)
 2) Stage 2 Feature Distribution Calibration: The biased distribution problem is that the number of samples in the target where cos <, > is Cosine Distance, topk(·) is an operator to
domain is too small to accurately represent the distribution select the top elements from the input distance set Sd . SN stores
of the whole target domain, resulting in the classifier learning the k nearest base classes with respect to a feature vector x̃.
inaccurate distribution and overfitting. However, addressing this Then, the covariance of the distribution is calibrated as
problem is not trivial. Due to the presence of high-dimensional 
 
 Σc
feature vectors, utilizing standard Gaussian distribution random Σ = i∈SN + α, µ = x̃, (15)
sampling encounters the challenge known as the curse of di- k
mensionality. Additionally, a few training data within the target where α is a hyper-parameter that determines the degree of
domain is insufficient to adequately represent the holistic feature dispersion of features sampled from the calibrated distribution.
distribution. Therefore, we need distributions of source domain Given a set of calibrated statistics Sy for a class on the target
features that are similar to training data to calibrate the biased domain, we generate a set of feature vectors with label y. This is
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 641

 r TLFA [20] trains a feature extractor on a large auxiliary
 data with Cross-entropy loss leveraging classical machine
 learning models (e.g., SVM).
 r MBL [18] introduces parameter factorization idea for facilitating meta-training with Cross-entropy loss.

 B. Closed-World Evaluations on Disjointed Websites
Fig. 6. The illustrations of the distribution of data. The calibration and sampling would induce some noisy to the class boundary (Left). Our circle network The websites that the attacker monitors and the websites used
makes distributions more aggregated (Right). to train the feature extractor may not be the same, which causes
 the cross-domain problem. In this experiment, we evaluate attacks in the scenario where the cross-domain problem is caused
achieved by sampling from the calibrated Gaussian distributions, by disjointed websites. The two datasets are both collected
which allows us to create feature vectors that align with the from the same period of time (2016) using the same version
desired distribution of target data: of TBB (6.X) where the website categories do not overlap. For
 the close-world setting, we use Accuracy [%], True positive rate
 Dy = {(x, y)|x ∼ N (µ, Σ), ∀(µ, Σ) ∈ Sy }. (16) (TPR [%]), and False positive rate (FPR [1e-4]) to evaluate the
We set the total number of generated features per class as performance of WF attacks. For the open-world setting, due to
512. The generated features, along with the original support set the base rate fallacy [59], we use the Area under the Precisionfeatures, for the target domain are combined to form the training Recall Curve (AUC) metric to evaluate the performance of WF
data for a classifier. The classifier is trained specifically for the attacks. We repeat 5 times with different seeds and report the
target domain by minimizing the cross-entropy loss over both results in the form of mean ± standard deviation compared with
the features of its support set and the generated features Dy . other methods.
 Experimental setting: We follow the same experimental setup
 
 L= −logP r(y|x; θclf ). (17) as [17]. The feature extractor is pre-trained on source do-
 (x,y) S̃∪Dy,y∈Y T
 main AW F 775 with randomly sampled 25 examples for each
 website. When testing classification performance. We select
 The feature sampling methods inevitably induce errors and AW F 100 as our target domain where we use the first 90 traces
noise. However, in conjunction with our tailored model, these for each website for a fair comparison to all attacks. We divide
adverse effects are effectively attenuated which is illustrated in the traces of each website into two groups, with the first group
Fig. 6. consisting of 20 traces and the second group consisting of 70
 traces. The traces in the first group are reserved for evaluating
 V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATIONS the classification performance on N = 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20
 traces, and the remaining 70 traces are utilized as testing data
A. Experimental Setting to evaluate the performance of attacks. Please note that these
 In this section, we design a series of experiments that may fundamental experimental settings will be consistently applied
be encountered in real-world scenarios where different target in the subsequent experiments presented in this paper.
domains represent various cross-domain problems with dif- Results: Fig. 7 shows the performance of DCWF and other
ferent numbers of shots. We evaluate the performance of the attacks on disjointed websites. As we can see, WBDC is the
DCWF attack with the baseline attacks: TF [17], WFBDC [21], best baseline attack and DCWF achieves better performance
TLFA [20], MBL [18]. We implement our DCWF based on than other attacks. In the case of the 1-shot setting, DCWF
Pytorch 1.12. For TF we download their code and migrate achieves 86.2% accuracy which is more 15% than the best
them to Pytorch 1.12 without any structural or hyperparameter baseline WFBDC 71% accuracy. The performance of the attacks
changes. For WFBDC, TLFA, and MBL, we implement them improves as the training trace increases and DCWF achieves
according to the author’s description. All experiments are per- 97.9% in the 20-shot setting. An interesting result is that the
formed with an NVIDIA Geforce RTX 4090 GPU. The other TLFA and MBL perform poorly with no more than 50% accuracy
hyperparameters of DCWF can be found in our experiment code in the 1-shot setting, and even in the 20-shot setting they only
at https://github.com/chenxiang3luo/DCWF/. achieve 85.4% and 77.8% respectively. The reason is related
 We compare our proposed DCWF with three baselines [17], to the fact that, in their works, they use softmax entropy-cross
[18], [20] and the state-of-art WFBDC [21] model. loss and not fully exploit the data. Also, they pre-train the
 r TF [17] selects Triplet as the loss function using DF [4] feature extractor on a huge dataset that has 576×2500 traces,
 backbone as the feature extractor. For the classifier, the and in our experimental setting, there are only 775×25 traces.
 K-Nearest Neighbors classifier is selected. Therefore we do not evaluate the two attacks in the next several
 r WFBDC [21] computes the BDC of the output from the experiments.
 feature extractor as the feature of a sample and uses Multi- We also evaluate the performance of attacks when traces of
 similarity [58] as the loss function to train the feature the same class are included between both source domain preextractor. For the classifier, the Linear classifier is selected. training and target domain adapting. For example, if an attacker
642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. The performance of FSWF attacks under the cross-domain scenario caused by disjointed websites on AW F 100.

 TABLE II circle loss to differentiate the given pair of inputs (similar or
 THE IMPACT OF INCLUDING DIFFERENT PORTIONS OF THE DATASETS DURING
 TRAINING (ACCURACY)
 dissimilar) without locally mapping to the particularly assigned
 website’s label. Although the relationship between accuracy
 and inclusion rate is not simply linear. This work focuses on
 the cross-domain scenario where the inclusion rate is 0%, and
 our method generally outperforms the comparisons under such
 scenario.

 C. Closed-World Evaluations on Time Gaps
 A strong attacker collecting the latest auxiliary data faces a
 substantial time investment in gathering enough data to train
 a feature extractor. This process generates a time gap between
 the source domain and the target domain. In contrast, a weak
 attacker relying on historically collected data as auxiliary data
 naturally encounters a time gap between the two domains. As
 a result, we evaluate the performance of WF (watermarking
 and fingerprinting) attacks in scenarios where a time gap exists
selected propub3r6espa33w.onion as a monitored website which between the source domain and the target domain, leading to
is commonly selected by other attackers who use his feature ex- cross-domain challenges.
tractor, he could collect the traffic traces of propub3r6espa33w. Experimental setting: We use the same extractor from the
onion and include them during the pre-training phase. It is first experiment trained with the AW F 775 dataset for feature
interesting to explore the performance of the attack in this case. extraction. The data of the target domain were collected from
Therefore, we perform experimental evaluations to compare 100 test traces per website 3 days, 10 days, 2 weeks, 4 weeks,
the case of disjointed datasets with different percentages of and 6 weeks after the end of the initial data collection for these
inclusion. The inclusion rates are ranged from 25% to 100%. 200 websites. The data of two domains were collected in 2016
When the inclusion rate reaches 100%, there is no cross-domain and the same TBB 6.X. This setting closely resembles real-world
problem. The results of these experiments are shown in Table II. scenarios.
 We discover some contrary conclusions compared to [17]. To Results: Fig. 8 illustrates the performance of WF attacks on
DCWF and WFBDC, allowing inclusion between the source and target domains with different time gaps. Across all time gaps,
target domain does not improve attack performance. In fact, the as the number of shots increases, the accuracy of all attacks
performance tends to degrade as the inclusion rate increases, tends to improve. Furthermore, as the time gap lengthens, the
showing better results only at 100% inclusion. One possible performance of attacks decreases, aligning with our intuition
explanation for this observation is that both attacks employ linear that a longer time gap exacerbates the cross-domain problem.
classifiers with cross-entropy loss functions. Consequently, due This observation reinforces the findings from our analysis of
to the inherent differences between the two domains, website domain similarity. Notably, DCWF consistently maintains high
overlaps induce noise to the linear classifier, degrading the accuracy compared to other attacks across various n-shot settings
performance of our method. TF adopts a KNN classifier that and time gaps. For instance, even in the 1-shot and 6-week time
relies on local neighborhood decision boundaries. It is more gap scenario, DCWF achieves an accuracy of 72%, while the
sensitive to minority samples and benefits from website overlaps best baseline only reaches 63% and achieves almost 95% with
between the source and target domains. Our method uses the 20 shots. Therefore, we can conclude that DCWF is an effective
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 643

Fig. 8. The performance of FSWF attacks under the cross-domain scenario caused by time gaps (a) 3 days, (b) 10 days, (c) 2 weeks, (d) 4 weeks, and (e) 6 weeks.

approach for mitigating cross-domain problems caused by time analysis of domain-similarity that DF -95 < DS-14 < DS-19.
gaps. Third, all attacks perform worse on DF -95 compared to other
 target domains. The reason may be related to network locations
 which we discussed in Section 3.B. Finally, even in such a
D. Closed-World Evaluations Under Complete Cross-Domain difficult setting, our DCWF remains fairly effective and achieves
Scenarios more than 70% with 1-shot learning on DS-14 and DS-19. On
 A weak attacker prefers to use the traffic trace data available DF -95, it increases up to 92% with 20-shot learning.
on the network to train a feature extractor and collect a few
traffic traces of monitored websites in the subsets the attacker is
 E. Open-World Evaluations Under Complete Cross-Domain
interested in. In this case, the complete cross-domain problem
is caused by factors such as time gap, browser versions, and Scenarios
network locations. Therefore, in this experiment, we evaluate the In the previous experiments, we examined the effectiveness of
performance of WF attacks in the scenario where the traces of WF attacks in the closed-world scenario. However, this scenario
the source domain and target domain were collected at different is not representative of real-world conditions, as it assumes that
times with different versions of TBB, time gap, etc, leading to users will only interact with websites within the monitored set.
more challenging cross-domain problems. Therefore, we conduct further experiments to evaluate the per-
 Experimental setting: We still use the AW F 775 dataset for formance of WF attacks in a more realistic open-world setting. In
feature extraction. To fully evaluate the performance of attacks the open-world scenario, the classifier is required to differentiate
on cross-domain problems, we select DS-14, DS-19, DF -95 between monitored sites and unmonitored sites.
three datasets as the target domain. AW F 775 was collected in Experimental setting: We evaluate attacks on the open-world
2016 with TBB 6.5, while DS-14 was collected in 2014 with setting under the AWF model in which the unmonitored traces are
TBB 3.5.1, DS-19 was collected in 2019 with TBB 8.5a7 and not in the pre-training phase. We use a threshold based on cross-
DF -95 was collected in 2016 with TBB 6.X. entropy loss as a classification criterion which is considered as a
 results: We find the following observations as show the results binary classification problem. To evaluate We use the AW F 100,
of the experiments in Table III. First, with the shot increasing, DS-14, DS-19 and DF -95 for the monitored websites respecthe accuracy of all attacks tends to increase. For instance, our tively and AW F 9k for the unmonitored websites. We use AUC
DCWF increases from 71% accuracy with 1-shot to 94% with as our metric. Due to TF is not available in 1-shot setting under
20 shots on DS-19. Second, A similar trend was observed in the open-world scenario, here we only show experiments on
the accuracy of attacks on different target domains and our shots of [5,10,15,20].
644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE III
 THE PERFORMANCE OF FSWF ATTACKS ON DIFFERENT TARGET DOMAINS

Fig. 9. The performance of FSWF attacks under the open-world scenario with different target domains (a) AW F 100, (b) DS-14, and (c) DS-19, (d) DF -95.

 Results: Fig. 9 shows the experimental results on different domains like AW F 100 and DS-14. We attribute this to the
target domains. With the shot increasing, the accuracy of all presence of some noise traces under the target domain.
attacks tends to increase on different target domains which Two interesting observations are found. First, the open-world
means that, the more traces you provide, the more confidence results of TF DS-14 are better than those on AW F 100. The authe model has. For example, with 5 shots, DCWF reaches almost thors believed that the monitored sites in the DS-14, originating
0.90 AUC and 0.946 AUC with 20-shot on DF -95. However, from a list of websites blocked in China, the U.K., and Saudi
the models’ performance degrades with 20-shot on certain target Arabia, exhibit unique content, making them more susceptible
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 645

Fig. 10. The performance of FSWF attacks under the larger open-world scenario with different target domains (a) AW F 100, (b) DS-14, (c) DS-19,
and (d) DF -95.

 TABLE IV
 THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FSWF ATTACKS AGAINST WTFPAD DEFENSE (ACCURACY).

 TABLE V
 THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FSWF ATTACKS AGAINST FRONT DEFENSE (ACCURACY).

 TABLE VI to that traces of DS-19 were collected over a shorter period of
 ABLATION EXPERIMENTS OF OUR METHOD.
 time with powerful and stable bandwidth in 2019 leading to the
 features of these traces being more aggregated in feature space.
 The traces of other target domains were collected in 2016 or
 before which have large variations in feature space.

 F. Larger Open-World Evaluations Under Complete
 Cross-Domain Scenario
 In the real world, it’s estimated that over 1.7 billion websites
 exist.3 It is interesting to investigate the performance of WF
 attacks against different open-world sizes.
 Experimental setting: Obtaining a dataset of all unmonitored
 websites is not feasible. The largest available unmonitored set, to
 the best of our knowledge, is the AW F 400K dataset consisting
 of 400,000 websites collected by [6]. Therefore, we utilize
 a set of unmonitored classification datasets of various sizes,
 including AW F 9K, AW F 50K, AW F 100K, AW F 200K,
to fingerprinting, while the unmonitored websites are in the and AW F 400K, and we still use the AW F 100, DS-14, DS-19
Alexa Top list, which accounts for the inconsistency between and DF -95 for the monitored websites respectively to evaluate
the closed-world and open-world scenarios [17]. However, the the performance of WF attacks in a larger open-world scenario.
results of DCWF are consistent between the closed-world and We adopt the evaluation approach used by TF where they assess
open-world conditions. We believe this is because our model the attacks with 10-shot learning on datasets of increasing size.
improves the separability of feature space making it more robust
on different target domains. Second, the open-world results on
DS-19 are better than those on AW F 100. The reason is related 3 https://websitesetup.org/news/how-many-websites-are-there/
646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE VII
 THE PERFORMANCE OF THE DIFFERENT LOSS FUNCTIONS (ACCURACY).

 Results: Fig. 10 shows the performance of the FSWF attacks to evaluate the performance of the distribution calibrator. The
with respect to the increased size of the unmonitored set. Sur- performance of DCWF without the distribution calibrator is
prisingly, we observed that the increase in unmonitored websites denoted as w/o all and the performance of DCWF without stage
had minimal impact on the model’s AUC scores for the attacks. 2 in the distribution calibrator is denoted as w/o calibration
Additionally, in the Open-world setting, we found that TF out- Experimental setting: The feature extractor is pre-trained on
performed WFBDC, which contradicts previous experimental the source domain AW F 775. For simplicty, we select AW F 100
results. We hypothesize that TF’s superior performance can as our target domain.
be attributed to their use of a Triplet loss function and semi- Results: Corresponding results are shown in Table VI. Comhard negative mining strategy, which leads to more aggregated paring DCWF without all and DCWF without calibration, the
features in the extracted feature space compared to WFBDC. performance of the latter is better than the former, which proves
However, regardless of the number of unmonitored websites or that recognition of information distribution makes feature exthe target domain, the AUC scores of DCWF remain consistently tractor extract more representative features. DCWF achieves
the best. For instance, WFBDC achieved a 96 AUC score while 2.7% TPR more than the one without calibration in the 1-shot
TF reached 88 on the AW F 100 dataset. setting, meanwhile, DCWF achieves 0.2% TPR more than that
 in the 20-shot setting. As the number of samples increases, the
 performance gap between each variant decreases. This demon-
G. Evaluations on WF Defenses
 strates that when the sample size is small, like one sample, the
 As research on WF attacks continues, various countermea- classifier is more likely to overfit and our correction process
sures, known as WF defenses, are proposed by researchers. is effective. When the sample size gradually increases and the
Therefore, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of WF at- distribution becomes unbiased, our correction process produces
tacks against two prominent WF defense mechanisms. The first only a small improvement. Each component of our method
defense mechanism we examine is WTF-PAD [39], which stands is important and contributes to the better performance of our
as a primary candidate for deployment in Tor. The second one method.
is FRONT [45], a zero-delay lightweight defense that has been Moreover, in the pre-training stage, we adopt circle loss [51]
shown to be more effective than WF-PAD. as our loss function. To show that circle loss can outperform other
 Experimental setting: Due to the AW F dataset containing loss functions, we evaluate the performance of other losses e.g.,
only packet direction, we simulate defended traces using WTF- triplet loss [17] and multi-similarity loss with BDC [21] with our
PAD and FRONT on the DS-14 and DS-19 datasets. Specifi- feature extractor architecture. Specifically, we directly replace
cally, we pre-train the feature extractor on DS-14 and evaluate the model architecture of [17], [21] in the pre-training stage,
on DS-19 to evaluate the performance of the DCWF attack with and get trained models with different losses. Then we put these
different data distributions. models into our two-stage Distribution Calibration Process and
 Results: Tables IV and V show the performance of the WF evaluate their performance. The results are shown in Table VII.
attacks against the WTF-PAD defense and FRONT defense. We can find that the performance of circle loss outperforms other
The results show that the accuracy of the attacks in both cases loss functions since it is selected to increase the separability
significantly decrease compared to the non-defended dataset. of feature space, which can alleviate the noise caused by the
As we see, FRONT has a stronger resistance effect to attacks calibration process, while other loss functions cannot handle
than WTF-PAD. Nevertheless, compared to the best baseline such a problem.
WFBDC which reaches 46% accuracy with 10 shots and 56%
accuracy with 20 shots, our DCWF reaches almost 60% accuracy
 VI. CONCLUSION
with 10 shots and 67% accuracy with 20 shots on FRONT
defense. In this work, we comprehensively analyze the cross-domain
 problem and biased distribution problem in exiting FSWF attacks. We find that the two problems are common in the real
H. Ablation Study
 world in the form of the difference between the network con-
 We conduct an ablation study to analyze the effectiveness ditions of the source domain and target domain and limited
of different components in DCWF. Since our DCWF adapts target data. We further propose the DCWF attack leveraging
two modules including a domain-agnostic feature extractor our tailored circle network and two-stage distribution calibraand a domain-specific distribution calibrator, it is interesting tion process, which mitigates the cross-domain problem and
LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION 647

addresses the bias of feature distribution. We evaluate the DCWF [18] M. Chen, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting
attack under such challenging cross-domain scenarios with dif- attack with meta-bias learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 130, 2022,
 Art. no. 108739.
ferent levels of biased distribution problems. The results show [19] M. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprintthat our DCWF attack effectively tackles the two problems. In ing attack with data augmentation,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
terms of the limitation of this work, we do not have control pp. 1–13, 2021.
 [20] M. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Xu, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting
over every variable due to the limitations of public datasets. attack,” Comput. Netw., vol. 198, 2021, Art. no. 108298.
To evaluate the effects of four factors, we would change one [21] H. Zou, J. Su, Z. Wei, S. Chen, and B. Zhao, “An efficient cross-domain
factor while keeping the others constant. Using public datasets, few-shot website fingerprinting attack with brownian distance covariance,”
 Comput. Netw., vol. 219, 2022, Art. no. 109461.
we can control the website overlap and time gap. However, we [22] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang, “Adaptive fingerprinting:
cannot independently assess TBB version&setting and network Website fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 11th ACM
locations. Also, we adopt an assumption that users browse Conf. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy, 2021, pp. 149–160.
 [23] N. Schmucker, “Web tracking,” in SNET2 Seminar Paper-Summer Term,
websites sequentially using Tor and utilize only a single tab vol. 2011. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer, 2011.
at a time, which is rare in the real world. Future works will [24] D. McCoy, K. Bauer, D. Grunwald, T. Kohno, and D. Sicker, “Shincollect data where only one-factor changes and the remaining ing light in dark places: Understanding the tor network,” in Proc.
 Privacy Enhancing Technol.: 8th Int. Symp., Leuven, Belgium, 2008,
stays the same and consider the multiple-tab scenario and other pp. 63–76.
human-related behavior. We also plan to leverage other effective [25] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
techniques like domain adaptation and GANs to further solve the evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014, pp. 263–274.
cross-domain problem. [26] C.-M. Chang, H.-C. Hsiao, T. Lynar, and T. Mori, “Know your victim:
 Tor browser setting identification via network traffic analysis,” in Proc.
 REFERENCES Companion Web Conf., 2022, pp. 201–204.
 [27] G. Cherubin, R. Jansen, and C. Troncoso, “Online website fingerprinting:
 [1] R. Dingledine et al., “Tor: The second-generation onion router,” in Proc. Evaluating website fingerprinting attacks on tor in the real world,” in Proc.
 USENIX Secur. Symp., 2004, pp. 303–320. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 753–770.
 [2] A. Hintz, “Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis,” in Proc. Int. [28] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website fin-
 Workshop Privacy Enhancing Technol., Springer, 2002, pp. 171–178. gerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 [3] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on tor anonymity using deep Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 1035–1049.
 learning,” in Proc. Asia-Pacific Adv. Netw., vol. 42, pp. 15–20, 2016. [29] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
 [4] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in Proc. 2020.
 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1928–1943. [30] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look once:
 [5] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-efficient Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc. Privacy Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 779–788.
 Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, 2019. [31] Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. Ranzato, and L. Wolf, “Deepface: Closing the
 [6] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen, gap to human-level performance in face verification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. 25th Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2014, pp. 1701–1708.
 Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018. [32] Y. Ganin et al., “Domain-adversarial training of neural networks,” J. Mach.
 [7] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and M. Wright, Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 59, pp. 1–35, 2016.
 “Tik-Tok: The utility of packet timing in website fingerprinting attacks,” [33] J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for text
 Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2020, no. 3, pp. 5–24, 2020. classification,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
 [8] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “snWF: Website fingerprinting Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
 attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. [34] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Refine: Re-
 Forensics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, 2022. randomization before fine-tuning for cross-domain few-shot learning,” in
 [9] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc. Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022, pp. 4359–4363.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016. [35] Y. Fu, Y. Fu, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Meta-fdmixup: Cross-domain few-shot
[10] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a distance: learning guided by labeled target data,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf.
 Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Multimedia, 2021, pp. 5326–5334.
 Commun. Secur., 2012, pp. 605–616. [36] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
[11] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, ”k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website empirical risk minimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2016, 2018.
 pp. 1187–1203. [37] Q. Zhang, Y. Jiang, and Z. Wen, “Tacdfsl: Task adaptive cross domain
[12] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on tor,” in few-shot learning,” Symmetry, vol. 14, no. 6, 2022, Art. no. 1097.
 Proc. 12th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2013, pp. 201–212. [38] S. Deng, D. Liao, X. Gao, J. Zhao, and K. Ye, “Improving few-shot image
[13] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprint- classification with self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud
 ing in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th Annu. Comput., Springer, 2022, pp. 54–68.
 ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, pp. 103–114. [39] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
[14] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. 21st Eur. Symp. Res.
 attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd Comput. Secur., Heraklion, Greece, Springer, 2016, pp. 27–46.
 USENIX Secur. Symp., 2014, pp. 143–157. [40] S. E. Oh, S. Sunkam, and N. Hopper, “p1-FP: Extraction, classification,
[15] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting: and prediction of website fingerprints with deep learning,” Proc. Privacy
 Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 3, pp. 191–209, 2019.
 naïve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur., [41] A. Shusterman et al., “Website fingerprinting through the cache occupancy
 2009, pp. 31–42. channel and its real world practicality,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
[16] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine, “Inferring the source of encrypted HTTP Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2042–2060, Sep./Oct. 2021.
 connections,” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2006, [42] B. Gulmezoglu, “XAI-based microarchitectural side-channel analysis for
 pp. 255–263. website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
[17] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet finger- Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 4039–4051, Nov./Dec. 2022.
 printing: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with n-shot [43] Q. Yin et al., “An automated multi-tab website fingerprinting attack,”
 learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2019, IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 3656–3670,
 pp. 1131–1148. Nov./Dec. 2022.
648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

[44] Y. Xu, T. Wang, Q. Li, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “A multi-tab Wenyi Tang received the PhD degree from the School
 website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. of Computer Science and Engineering, University
 Conf., 2018, pp. 327–341. of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
[45] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website Chengdu, China, in 2021. He is currently an assistant
 fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 717–734. professor with the School of Cyber Science and Engi-
[46] Y. Cui, Y. Song, C. Sun, A. Howard, and S. Belongie, “Large scale fine- neering, Sichuan University. His research interests are
 grained categorization and domain-specific transfer learning,” in Proc. both theoretical and experimental, including weakly
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4109–4118. supervised learning, data privacy and security.
[47] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Understanding
 cross-domain few-shot learning based on domain similarity and few-shot
 difficulty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 2622–2636.
[48] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,”
 2013, arXiv:1312.4400.
[49] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[50] X. Ding, X. Zhang, J. Han, and G. Ding, “Scaling up your kernels to
 31x31: Revisiting large kernel design in CNNs,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 11963–11975.
[51] Y. Sun et al., “Circle loss: A unified perspective of pair similarity opti- Qixu Wang received the PhD degree in computer
 mization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, science and technology from the University of Elecpp. 6398–6407. tronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
[52] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network China, in 2017. He is currently an associate protraining by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. fessor with the School of Cyber Science and Engi-
 Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456. neering, Sichuan University, Chengdu. He was also
[53] R. Tao, H. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and M. Savvides, “Powering finetuning in few- a postdoctoral researcher fellow with the School of
 shot learning: Domain-agnostic bias reduction with selected sampling,” in Information and Software Engineering, University
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8467–8475. of Electronic Science and Technology of China, in
[54] V. Ganatra, “Logarithm-transform aided gaussian sampling for few-shot 2020. His current research interests include cloud
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 247–252. computing security, trusted computing, and machine
[55] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter, learning and its applications. He was a technical program committee member
 “GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash for the IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China and
 equilibrium,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6629–6640. the EAI International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking,
[56] Y. Song, T. Wang, P. Cai, S. K. Mondal, and J. P. Sahoo, “A comprehen- Applications and Worksharing.
 sive survey of few-shot learning: Evolution, applications, challenges, and
 opportunities,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 13s, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[57] S. Yang, L. Liu, and M. Xu, “Free lunch for few-shot learning: Distribution
 calibration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[58] X. Wang, X. Han, W. Huang, D. Dong, and M. R. Scott, “Multi-similarity
 loss with general pair weighting for deep metric learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 5022–5030.
[59] T. Wang, “High precision open-world website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 152–167.
 Danyang Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the BS
 degree in computer science from the University
 of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
 Chenxiang Luo is currently working toward the Chengdu, China, in 2016, and the PhD degree in
 bachelor of engineering degree with the School of computer science from the Georgia State University,
 Cyber Science And Engineering, Sichuan University. Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2021. He is currently an as-
 He is expected to graduate in June 2024. His research sociate professor with Southwest Jiaotong Univerinterests include privacy protection and web security. sity, Chengdu, China. His research interests include
 network function virtualization, resilient service deployment, in-network computing, and combinational
 optimization. He was the TPC member of ICCC
 2021-2023 and ICTC 2023.