4892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 FIR-GNN: A Graph Neural Network Using Flow
 Interaction Relationships for Intrusion Detection of
 Consumer Electronics in Smart Home Network
 Mengyi Fu , Student Member, IEEE, Pan Wang , Member, IEEE, Shidong Liu, Xuejiao Chen,
 and Xiaokang Zhou , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In the smart home scenario, the Consumer Internet terminal devices safeguard the health of family members [2],
of Things (CIoT) deeply integrates into daily life with various bringing people an unprecedentedly convenient experience.
Consumer Electronics (CEs) like home cameras, smart speakers, However, the complexity of the CIoT network in the smart
smoke/fire detectors, VR/AR game boxes/handles, and future
home medical terminals. However, CEs face multiple risks due to home has exacerbated security risks and has become a key
attack concealment and protocol differences. Against this back- bottleneck restricting its further development.
drop, embedding Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) in There are numerous hidden risks among CEs. For CEs like
the smart home gateway is proposed. Despite Machine Learning home cameras, if they are subject to a man-in-the-middle attack,
(ML) and Deep Learning (DL) enhancing network intrusion attackers can intercept, modify, and steal information during the
detection, challenges remain in sample collection, traffic feature
expression, and gateway resource constraints. To address these, data transmission process between them and servers or other
we propose FIR-GNN. It constructs a FIRG graph for traffic devices, which may lead to the leakage of the family’s private
pattern capture, uses edge-wise graph attention in FIR-GNN for images. If smart speakers are hacked, attackers may remotely
semi-supervised learning, and selects features by SHAP to cut control them to play audio without reason, thus interfering
resource consumption. Experiments show FIR-GNN improves with normal life. Once smoke/fire detectors are maliciously
classification performance by 3-5% on BoT-IoT and CICIDS2017
data, safeguarding smart home CEs. interfered with, they will fail to give timely alarms in case of
 a fire, which will bring great danger to families. In addition, a
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, graph neural large number of heterogeneous CEs in smart homes, such as
networks, smart home gateways, graph attention networks,
consumer electronics. smart TVs, smart refrigerators, and smart lighting systems, are
 interconnected and communicate with each other, forming a
 huge and complex network topology. These CEs from different
 I. I NTRODUCTION manufacturers adopt different communication protocols and
 N THE smart home scenario, the Consumer Internet of technical standards, making it difficult for traditional security
I Things (CIoT) [1] has been deeply integrated into people’s
daily lives, covering numerous fields. Consumer Electronics
 protection means to respond effectively.
 In recent years, Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning
(CEs) play a crucial role in it. For example, home cameras (DL) techniques have been applied to the field of network
are used for home security monitoring, smart speakers enable security. Machine learning can extract latent patterns from
convenient voice interaction, smoke/fire detectors ensure res- traffic features for traffic classification. However, obtaining
idential safety, VR/AR game boxes/handles bring immersive high-quality traffic features is both time-consuming and laborentertainment experiences and even future home medical intensive. Deep learning techniques have also been widely
 used due to their capabilities of automatic feature extraction
 Received 6 January 2025; revised 11 February 2025; accepted 28 and uncovering deep nonlinear features. Nevertheless, they
February 2025. Date of publication 6 March 2025; date of current version
14 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the Suzhou Science face problems such as weak generalization and robustness,
and Technology Planning Project under Grant SYG202311, and in part by the especially in the highly dynamic and heterogeneous smart
Suzhou Science and Technology Planning Project under Grant LHT202326. home IoT environment when dealing with traffic data with
(Corresponding author: Pan Wang.)
 Mengyi Fu and Pan Wang are with the School of Modern Posts, Nanjing limited representativeness. For example, most ML/DL-based
University of Post and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: methods have difficulties in handling traffic data in non-
2023070802@njupt.edu.cn; wangpan@njupt.edu.cn). Euclidean space, which is common in smart home networks.
 Shidong Liu is with the Institute of Communications, China Electric
Power Research Institute, Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: liushidong1@ Although some studies convert network traffic into graphepri.sgcc.com.cn). based representations to make better use of Graph Neural
 Xuejiao Chen is with the School of Communications, Nanjing Vocational Network (GNN) methods, existing deep learning models
College of Information Technology, Nanjing 210046, China (e-mail: chenxj@
njcit.cn). still require a large number of labeled samples. In smart
 Xiaokang Zhou is with the Faculty of Business Data Science, Kansai home networks, the scarcity of labeled data can lead to
University, Osaka 565-0823, Japan, and also with the RIKEN Center for a decline in classification performance. Additionally, Graph
Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan (e-mail:
zhou@kansai-u.ac.jp). Neural Networks consume a large amount of resources during
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3548798 the training and inference processes, making it difficult to
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FU et al.: FIR-GNN: A GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK USING FLOW INTERACTION RELATIONSHIPS 4893

meet the requirements of resource-constrained smart home model parameters corresponding to the attack characteristics
gateways. of different CEs.
 Against this background, embedding and deploying a To overcome the limitations of existing technologies and
Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) [3] on the smart improve the detection ability of the home smart gateway
home gateway has opened up new ideas for solving the against the intrusion behaviors of CEs, we are in urgent need
CIoT security problems of the CEs in smart homes [4]. of a brand-new method and model. This method and model
As the core hub of the home network, the smart home can not only effectively solve the problem of obtaining attack
gateway is capable of monitoring and managing the data samples and enhance the expression ability of traffic features,
traffic of all connected CEs. By embedding and deploying but also adapt to the environment where the smart home
the network intrusion detection system, abnormal behaviors in gateway has limited resources and is closely connected to
the network can be monitored in real-time, potential attacks numerous CEs.
can be detected and blocked promptly, and the safe operation
of various types of CEs in smart homes can be effectively ensured, safeguarding the privacy and safety of family B. Contributions
members. The embedded intrusion detection framework based on FIR-
 GNN proposed by us aims to fully utilize the flow interaction
 behavior and time-related payload interaction information to
 provide support for the security protection of the home smart
A. Motivation gateway.
 Although Machine Learning and Deep Learning techniques Firstly, we propose a traffic graph named FIRG, which is
have significantly improved the performance of NIDS, chal- a directed graph that describes the traffic interaction process
lenges remain, especially in the effective representation of between the IPs of various devices at the topological level.
network traffic features. These problems become even more With the help of FIRG, the traffic behavior is transformed
prominent when they are closely associated with CEs. into a directed graph of network flows, so as to better capture
 Firstly, it is extremely difficult to obtain attack samples [5]. the traffic interaction patterns based on source and destination
Due to the concealment and diversity of the attack behav- IPs under the constraint of time correlation. Secondly, we
iors faced by CEs, it is even more challenging to collect propose a network intrusion detection model named FIR-GNN
comprehensive and representative attack samples. As a result, (Flow Interaction Relationship Graph Neural Network) based
some methods that rely on a large number of labeled attack on Graph Neural Network. The edge-wise graph attention
samples for supervised learning are unable to fully learn the mechanism is introduced to characterize the microscopic
characteristic patterns of attacks targeting CEs when there is interaction characteristics of network flows through packet
a lack of sufficient samples. direction and length information. At the same time, the labeled
 Secondly, the insufficient expression ability of traffic fea- nodes can aggregate the features of the surrounding unlabeled
tures is a key issue. Current technologies have obvious nodes to enhance their feature expression ability, and semilimitations in describing the traffic interaction patterns of supervised learning can be achieved by only calculating the
abnormal attacks targeting CEs, and they are unable to fully loss of the labeled nodes during training, thereby reducing
capture the complex dynamic relationships therein. Taking the dependence of the model on labeled samples. In addition,
the group of smart home appliances as an example, existing we use a method of selecting a subset of traffic features
methods can often only analyze some superficial features of based on SHAP. The importance of the features is measured
the traffic among devices such as smart refrigerators and smart by calculating their marginal contribution (Shapley value) to
TVs, and it is difficult to dig deeper into the attack interaction the prediction result, and then the best subset of features is
logic and potential security threats hidden behind the traffic. selected based on the importance of the feature. Thus, the
For instance, attackers may take advantage of loopholes in number of input features of the model can be significantly
the communication protocols of smart home appliances, and reduced to improve training time and computational resource
manipulate smart TVs to send malicious instructions to other requirements.
devices, while existing technologies can hardly detect such In summary, the main contributions of FIR-GNN include:
deep-seated hidden dangers. • A novel topological level traffic graph representation of
 Finally, the deployment requirements for smart home gate- FIRG, which can capture the traffic interaction patterns
ways with limited resources [6] are extremely challenging. based on IPs under the constraint of time correlation.
Smart home gateways usually have limitations in terms of • Based on the construction method of FIRG, we proposed
computing resources, storage capacity, and energy supply [7], FIR-GNN NIDS method, achieving semi-supervised
which are closely related to a large number of connected CEs. learning on a small number of labeled samples.
On the one hand, the massive real-time traffic generated by • A feature selection method based on SHAP, which selects
numerous CEs, such as home VR/AR game boxes, needs to be a subset of features based on feature importance, thereby
processed quickly by the gateway, imposing huge pressure on reducing the resource consumption of the model.
its computing resources. On the other hand, the limited storage • The experimental results show that on the BoT-IoT [8]
space of the gateway can hardly accommodate the complex and CICIDS2017 [9] data, FIR-GNN can achieve a 3-5%
4894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 improvement in classification performance compared to utilizing enhanced convolutional neural networks and hyperother methods. parameter optimization techniques. Chang and Branco [23]
 The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II introduce residual connections by extending the GraphSAGE
reviews related work on GNN-based NID. Section III illus- and GAT algorithms to deal with the class imbalance problem,
trates the CIoT security framework in a smart home scenario. but this method may fail to fully utilize the interaction rela-
Section IV details the FIR-GNN NIDS method, including tionships between flows. Nie et al. [24] detect abnormal traffic
FIRG construction and the structure of the FIR-GNN model. fluctuations in the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [25] by analyzing
Section V evaluates our method using the BoT-IoT and the link load behaviors of Road Side Units (RSUs). Faced with
CICIDS2017 datasets. Finally, Section VI summarizes our limited labeled samples [26], the FT-GCN method proposed
findings and suggests future research directions. by Deng et al. Faced with limited labeled samples [26], the FT-
 GCN method proposed by Deng et al. [27] improves statistical
 II. R ELATED W ORKS features by constructing traffic graphs with interval constraints
A. Netwrok Traffic Graph Construction and introducing a spatial attention mechanism at the node
 level.
 The construction of network traffic graphs [10], [11], [12], Existing methods have some limitations, especially in
[13], [14], [15], [16], [17] is the process of converting network dealing with resource-constrained environments and handling
communication behaviors into graphical structures, aiming imbalanced classes.
to capture the characteristics and patterns of network traffic
through graphical representations. Some studies, such as FRG
proposed by Jiang et al. [10], integrate packet-level details and C. Feature Selection for Network Intrusion Detection
flow-level relationship data. The work of Zheng et al. [11] In network intrusion detection systems, feature selechas successfully combined the statistical properties of network tion [30], [31], [32], [33], [34] is a crucial step for
flows with their structural context to capture the homogene- improving detection performance, reducing the consumption
ity of links and the characteristics of specific flows, but of computational resources. IGRF-RFE [30] filters by comthis method may not be able to fully express the dynamic bining information gain and random forest and optimizes
interactions among flows. Methods such as MAppGraph [12] feature selection through the recursive feature eliminaand TIG [13] focus on static graph structures and ignore tion of MLP. The FS-DL method of Zhang et al. [31]
the time dimension and dynamic changes between traffic removes redundant features through standard deviation and
flows, which is a significant drawback when facing complex association rule mining, and is applicable to online abnorscenarios such as multi-step attacks. CGNN [14] captures mal traffic detection of SDN controllers. Turukmane and
the complex associations between packets using PMI as edge Devendiran [32] use the modified singular value decompofeatures, and TFE-GNN [15] designs a dual embedding layer sition (M-SvD) for feature extraction and optimize features
to handle header and payload byte information. Although these through the Oppositional Northern Goshawk Optimization
methods enhance the understanding of the internal information algorithm (ONgO). Thakkar and Lohiya [33] select features
of traffic, their capture of the interactions among flows is still with high discrimination and deviation through a statistical
limited. The work of Huoh et al. [16] and Xu et al. [17] significance method that fuses standard deviation and meanattempts to introduce the time dimension into traffic graphs, median difference, but this method may ignore the interaction
but they often rely on a single application flow or local among features. Wu et al. [34] have developed a feature
subgraphs. selection method that combines FRS and FKD to optimize
 The existing traffic graph construction methods have limi- memory usage and efficiency, and it is combined with GAT
tations in capturing the interactions between flows, time series for real-time network data update.
characteristics, and spatial relationships, which restricts their The existing research work has put forward a variety of
performance in practical applications. feature selection methods, but they have some limitations in
 measuring the importance of features and have poor inter-
B. GNN-Based Network Intrusion Detection for IoT pretability.
 In the field of the Internet of Things (IoT) [18], Graph
Neural Networks, as part of Intrusion Detection Systems [19], III. T HE CI OT S ECURITY F RAMEWORK FOR CE S IN
[20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], have S MART H OME
already demonstrated the advantages in dealing with complex As shown in Fig. 1, from the data collection and interaction
network traffic patterns and capturing the relationships among at the consumer electronic layer to the security detection and
nodes. The method proposed by Ning et al. [19] improves traffic management at the network layer, and then to the remote
the cross-domain generalization ability of the model through monitoring and management at the cloud service layer, all
semi-supervised learning, transfer learning [20], and domain aspects of this architecture work closely together to jointly
adaptation. However, it usually requires a large amount of ensure the security, stability, and convenience of the smart
labeled data. However, it usually requires a large amount home environment.
of labeled data. The Intelligent Intrusion Detection System The CEs layer contains a variety of smart home devices,
(IIDS) proposed by Anbalagan et al. [21] focuses on 5G vehi- such as intelligent alarm devices, PC/PAD, AR/VR, smart
cle networking [22], improves the detection performance by home appliances, etc. They will upload their own operating
FU et al.: FIR-GNN: A GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK USING FLOW INTERACTION RELATIONSHIPS 4895

 Relationship Graph (FIRG), and the structure of the FIR-GNN
 model, respectively.

 A. Preliminary
 1) Network Traffic Flow Definitions: A traffic flow is
 identified by a five-tuple consisting of the source address,
 destination address, source port, destination port, and the
 TCP/UDP protocol. A flow is made up of multiple packets
 that move in opposite directions.
Fig. 1. The CIoT security framework for CEs in smart home. 2) Graph Notations: Graph G = (V, E, F,P,A), where
 V = VL ∪ VU = {υ1 , υ2 , . . . , υN } denotes the set of
 nodes, with VL representing labeled nodes and VU represtatus data to the network layer and can also receive security senting unlabeled nodes. E = {eij = (υi , υj )|υi , υj ∈ V}
policies from the network layer. The network layer shoulders describes the edges in the FIRG. The nodes and edges
the important task of data transmission and ensures the smooth are characterized by feature matrices, F for the nodes,
and secure information exchange between the CEs device and P for the edges, which represent their properties
layer and the cloud service layer. The smart home gateway and attributes. We use A to denote an adjacency matrix
is the core hub and contains an embedded intrusion detection and Ni = {υj |eij ∈ E} to denote the neighbor nodes
security system. This system constructs traffic data into FIRG of υi .
traffic graphs and inputs them into the FIR-GNN intrusion
detection model to identify potential cybersecurity threats. B. FIRG Construction
The cloud service layer integrates a rich variety of functional
 In this section, we need to convert the original PCAP files
services such as status monitoring, remote control, device
 into a graph structure, where the nodes represent the flows
management, and user authentication.
 identified by the five-tuple, and the edges denote interactions
 1) Normal situation: The operating data and status
 between the flows, as shown in Fig. 3. We create a flow
information generated by the CEs layer are uploaded through
 interaction relationship graph to describe the traffic interaction
the smart home gateway at the network layer for functions such
 process between IP hosts, extracting similarity relationships
as status monitoring at the cloud service layer. When users
 based on link homogeneity among network flows, thus transperform remote operations or trigger instructions according to
 forming network intrusion detection into a node classification
preset rules, the cloud service layer sends instructions to the
 task. We aim to convert the Traffic Trace into a directed
smart home gateway. After receiving the instructions from the
 graph by mining the interaction characteristics between flows.
cloud service layer, the smart home gateway transmits them to
 Specific details are provided in Algorithm 1.
the corresponding CEs, prompting the CEs to perform actions
 1) Feature Extraction: The traffic characteristics here consuch as turning on/off or adjusting, thus completing the remote
 sist mainly of two types: one type is the flow level
control loop.
 characteristics extracted using the CICFlowMeter tool, includ-
 2) Abnormal situation: Once the embedded intrusion
 ing flow length, flow duration, the number of packets in
detection system at the network layer detects abnormal traffic
 the flow, and their mean, variance, maximum, and minimum
or signs of attacks, it will upload abnormal instructions or
 values, denoted as [f1 , f2 , . . . , fm ]. The other type is the packet
alarm information to the cloud service layer. Meanwhile,
 length feature sequence that is extracted by using the flowconaccording to the preset security policies, it will automatically
 tainer tool. In this case, the packet direction determines the
send instructions to the CEs Layer, taking emergency measures
 sign of the packet length, and it is denoted as [p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ],
such as traffic blocking, device isolation, password resetting,
 where pi represents the length and direction feature of the ietc., to promptly contain the spread of security incidents and
 th packet within the flow. When extracting the packet length
minimize losses to the greatest extent.
 sequence, irrelevant packet information, such as the three-way
 handshake in TCP, is not considered.
 IV. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD FIR-GNN 2) SHAP-Based Interpretable Feature Selection: After
 Through the above elaboration on the CIoT security frame- obtaining the raw traffic features by processing PCAP files,
work in smart homes, we have gained a clear understanding additional operations such as feature cleaning, Min-Max norof the security architecture and data interaction processes in malization, and feature selection are required. This paper uses
the smart home environment. To effectively address these a SHAP-based interpretable feature selection method to select
challenges and enhance the intrusion detection capabilities for flow-level features, aiming to reduce the model complexity
consumer electronics in smart home networks, we propose a and computational load.
novel method FIR-GNN. This section describes the overall Firstly, a simple-structured CNN model is pre-trained on the
framework and workflow of our proposed method first as pre-processed dataset. This model consists of convolutional
shown in Fig. 2, then demonstrates each part of the modeling layers, pooling layers, and fully-connected layers. During the
process, including the construction of the Flow Interaction training process, the Adam optimizer and cross-entropy loss
4896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 2. The intrusion detection security system for CEs embedded in smart home gateway.

Fig. 3. A graph-structured representation of a FIRG’s overall structure, as well as detailed information on the nodes and edges.

function are used. Subsequently, the trained CNN model is Node Feature Matrix F. In the FIRG, a node represents a
used to predict the test dataset. Based on the prediction results, flow, and the best flow-level features [f1 , f2 , . . . , fK ] selected
Shapley values are calculated to determine the contribution by SHAP-based interpretable feature selection are used as
of each feature to the final outcome, and then a descending node features. Based on the experimental results, we choose
ranking of feature importance is generated. the optimal characteristic dimension K = 20.
 Considering the performance and storage limitations of Adjacency Matrix A. In the FIRG, an edge represents
the smart home gateway, the appropriate value of K is the similarity between any two flows. Here, we use Flowi to
determined through multiple experiments. The top K-ranked denote the i th flow. The elements Aij of the adjacency matrix
features are selected. When constructing the FIRG for A are set according to the following three principles to indicate
the FIR-GNN model, these features are used to popu- whether an edge exists between nodes υi and υj , and whether
late the node feature matrix F. During the training and it is bidirectional:
inference processes of the FIR-GNN model, these fea- (1) Time Window Constraint. We introduce a hyperparametures are used to calculate the interactions between nodes, ter T to limit the time window for flows. An edge will only be
conduct semi-supervised learning, and classify network traf- considered between two flows if they appear simultaneously
fic. This not only reduces the computational and storage within a time window of length T, that is, tj − ti < T. This is
requirements but also improves the intrusion detection because as the time interval increases, the correlation between
performance. flows decreases. Furthermore, if the time window T is too
 3) Graph Construction: In this process, an adjacency large, it can lead to an excessively dense FIRG, resulting in
matrix A is generated to describe the structural information significant memory consumption for edge storage.
of the graph, along with a node feature matrix F and an edge (2) If Flowi .dstip = Flowj .srcip, then Aij = |ti − tj |, Aji =
feature matrix P to represent the features of the graph. The 0. If an attack targets a destination node, intermediate nodes,
specific construction methods are as follows: such as in a DoS attack, might also be impacted.
FU et al.: FIR-GNN: A GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK USING FLOW INTERACTION RELATIONSHIPS 4897

Algorithm 1 The Construction of FIRG capacity to distinguish between various traffic relationships.
Require: PCAP file; Consequently, for edge feature construction, we concatenate
Ensure: The FIRG = (V, E, F, P, A); the packet length feature sequences of the first N packets from
  Step 1: Feature Extraction
 1: Extract flow-level features using CICFlowMeter:
 both flows to effectively capture their packet-level interaction
 Flow length, Flow duration etc. → [f1 , f2 , . . . , fm ] features.
 2: Extract packet-level features using Flowcontainer: The method in this paper conducts a series of experiments,
 Packet length sequence → [p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ] compares the performance and memory usage of the model
  Step 2: SHAP-based Interpretable Feature Selection under different values, and then selects a compromise value
 3: Remove duplicates, missing items, and anomalies.
 4: Perform Min-Max normalization.
 T = 20 after weighing various factors, so as to balance
 5: Compute Shapley values for each flow-level feature: the performance and memory consumption of the model. We
 set N = 5, padding with zeros if there are fewer than 5
 
 m
 Score(fi ) = Shapley(fij ) packets, and truncating if there are more than 5. Selecting the
 j=1 first 5 packets can ensure that enough packet-level interaction
 features are captured to describe the relationships between
 6: Select the top K most important flow-level features.
 traffic flows, while at the same time not affecting the overall
  Step 3: Graph Construction
 7: Initialize node feature matrix F using selected features performance of the model due to being overly large and
 [f1 , f2 , . . . , fK ]. complex.
 8: Initialize adjacency matrix A.
 9: Initialize edge feature matrix P.
 C. The Structure of FIR-GNN Model
10: for each pair of flows (Flowi , Flowj ) do
11: if tj − ti < T then In this section, we introduce the Edge-wise Intrusion
12: if srcIP of Flowi = srcIP of Flowj then Detection Network FIR-GNN for feature learning, which
13: 1 → Aij , Aji operates directly on graph-structured data. Two layers of
 j j j
14: [pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pin , p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ] → Pij , Pji GCN and one layer of Edge-wise GAT are employed as core
15: end if
 algorithms for classifying each node in the graph. During
16: if dstIP of Flowi = srcIP of Flowj then
17: 1 → Aij this process, an edge-wise attention mechanism is applied
18:
 j j j
 [pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pin , p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ] → Pij to calculate an attention matrix for edges which aggregates
19: end if neighbor node information through pooling layers. Then GCN
20: end if is utilized to extract deeper-level features for final node-level
21: end for classification purposes.
 1) Graph Convolutional Network Layer: The GCN layer
 comprises both node features and adjacency information.
 After performing Laplacian eigenvalue decomposition, ReLU
 (3) If Flowi .srcip = Flowj .srcip, then Aij = Aji = |ti − tj |.
 activation is applied to obtain the first layer feature embedding
When Flowi and Flowj share the same source IP, it is likely
 Hl . The formula is as follows:
that they exhibit similar activities or applications.  
 Edge Feature Matrix P. In constructing edges, we consider Hl =ReLU ÂFWl (1)
two crucial aspects. Firstly, we take into account the time
interval between the start times of flows and the correlation of We transform the input adjacency matrix A into a normalstarting IPs. This helps us simulate interactions between flows, ized Laplacian matrix Â using the following formula:
as the temporal and IP relationships can provide valuable Â = D̃-1/2 ÃD̃-1/2 (2)
insights into the possible connections and dependencies among
different flows. In this context, Ã is computed as A + IN , where IN  ∈ RN×N
 Secondly, the packet length feature plays a vital role in char- represents the identity matrix. D̃ is given by D̃ii = vj Ãij ,
acterizing network traffic. Different types of traffic, whether − 12
 and D̃ is the inverse of the square root of the diagonal
it is normal business traffic or malicious attack traffic, display matrix.
distinct distribution patterns in terms of packet length. By 2) Edge-Wise Graph Attention Network Layer: We first
extracting and combining the packet length features of the first concatenate the node feature matrices with the edge feature
N packets, we can zoom in on the interaction characteristics matrix and then apply a linear transformation. Subsequently,
of the traffic at the micro level during the initial stage. At a MASK operation is used to select the neighboring nodes of
the onset of network communication, the changes in packet υi . The formula is as follows:
length can disclose some essential attributes of the traffic. For  
 (l) (l−1) (l−1)
instance, normal communication typically exhibits a relatively aij = aT W(l) hi ||W(l) hj ||W(l) pij (3)
stable packet length pattern, whereas attack traffic might 
 aij if Aij = 0
present abnormal combinations like the frequent alternation MASK(aij ) = (4)
 0 if Aij = 0
between extremely large packets and small packets.
 By combining these packet length features as edge fea- where W(2) represents the current weight matrix; a is a
tures, the model is empowered to grasp the interaction feedforward neural network; hi(l−1) and hj(l−1) respectively
details between traffic more precisely, thereby enhancing its represent the first layer embeddings of the central node υi and
4898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE I
one of its adjacent nodes υj ; pij refers to the initial feature T HE H YPERPARAMETERS OF E XPERIMENTS
embedding of the edge eij .
 Next, we apply the LeakyReLU activation function as σ to
perform a non-linear transformation on it and normalize using
the softmax function. The purpose of doing this is to allow
the model to better focus on important neighboring nodes.
  
 (l) (l)
 αij = softmax σ (MASK(aij ))
  
 exp σ (MASK(aij(l) ))
 =    (5)
 (l)
 υj ∈Ni exp σ (MASK(aij ))
 TABLE II
 Finally, we multiply the feature vectors of all neighboring T HE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT IDS M ETHODS ON B OT-I OT AND
nodes of node υi by their corresponding attention coefficients CICIDS2017 DATASETS
 (2)
and sum them up to obtain a new node feature vector hi .
This process can be seen as a weighted fusion of the features
of node υi , where the weights are determined by the attention
coefficients.
 ⎛ ⎞
 (l)
  (l) 
 hi = ReLU⎝ αij W(l) h j ⎠ (6)
 υj ∈Ni

 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
A. Experimental Settings in edge feature dimensions of 20. The ratio of labeled samples
 1) Experimental Environment: We used a computer is default set to 0.8, and in the semi-supervised learning
equipped with a 13th Gen Intel Core i7-13700KF × experiments with limited labeled samples, it is varied from 0.1
24 processor, 16GB of memory, and an NVIDIA RTX to 0.9 in increments of 0.1. All models are implemented using
4080 graphics card. The software environment includes CUDA PyTorch, and each experiment is independently run 10 times.
12.2 and CUDNN 9.1.0. Python 3.9.12 was chosen as the Our approach FIR-GNN is compared with three GNN-based
programming language, and the PyG framework was used to models (GCN, GAT, GCN+GAT) and four DL-based models
implement the GNN. (CNN, AE, VAE, ET-BERT [35]). GCN and GAT both utilize
 2) Datasets: We compare different network traffic clas- the same FIR graph construction method as ours. The GCN
sification algorithms on CICIDS2017 [8] and BoT-IoT [9] node classification model consists of two layers of GCN, and
datasets. The BoT-IoT dataset originally contained 8 cat- the GAT model comprises two layers of single-head GAT, with
egories. However, due to the extremely small number of the latent feature dimensions set to 32 for both.
samples in the UDP Denial of Service (UDP DoS) and
Keylogging categories, we excluded them from our analysis.
 B. Experimental Results and Discussion
The CICIDS2017 dataset contains 13 types of attack samples.
For the specific categories of these two datasets, please refer to 1) Comparison of Classification Performance of Different
Table III and Table IV. On both datasets, we did not take any Methods: Evaluate the performance of different neural
class balancing measures to augment the samples. We selected network methods in various network attack detection scenar-
3000 samples from each attack category whenever possible; ios. Conduct a comparative analysis of the accuracy, recall, and
if the number of samples was less than 3000, we used all F1 value of methods such as CNN, AE, VAE, ET-BERT, GAT,
available samples. In addition, 80% of the datasets were used GCN, GCN+GAT, and FIR-GNN when detecting different
for training and 20% for testing. types of network attacks, so as to verify the effectiveness
 3) Implementation Details and Baselines: This paper com- of the FIR-GNN method. As shown in Table II, FIR-GNN’s
prehensively evaluates the proposed FIR-GNN1 intrusion overall performance is excellent, second only to ET-BERT and
detection method from the perspectives of classification better than others. CNN, AE, and VAE have relatively low
performance and resource consumption, conducting the fol- performances with accuracy and F1 score below 0.97.
lowing three sets of experiments: comparison of classification In Table III for the BoT-IoT dataset’s attack detection, FIRperformance of different methods, comparison of different fea- GNN reaches high levels (close to 1) in metrics like PR, RC
ture selection methods, and comparison of different parameter and F1. For attacks like UDP DDoS, TCP DDoS and HTTP
settings. Table I presents the hyperparameter configurations. DDoS, its precision, recall, and F1 value are all 1, showing
We set the maximum time interval T to 30 seconds, and the few misjudgments or missed detections. FIR-GNN performs
packet length sequence for a single flow is set to 10, resulting better in almost all attack types than others. Although GCN’s
 accuracy (0.9491) is relatively high, FIR-GNN (0.9926) is
 1 Source code available at https://github.com/MengyiFu/FIR-GNN. superior. In the ServiceScan detection, compared to GCN +
FU et al.: FIR-GNN: A GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK USING FLOW INTERACTION RELATIONSHIPS 4899

 TABLE III
 T HE C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF FIR-GNN ON THE B OT-I OT DATASET

 TABLE IV
 T HE C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF FIR-GNN ON THE CICIDS DATASET

 TABLE V
 T HE FIR-GNN IDS ACCURACY OF D IFFERENT F EATURE S ELECTION
 M ETHODS

Fig. 4. The comparison of classification performance.

GAT’s metrics, FIR-GNN’s better metrics also indicate its
detection performance superiority. In the CICIDS2017 dataset
(Table IV), FIR-GNN’s precision is excellent in most attack
detections. Under the BoT-IoT dataset, as the node feature count rises
 Fig. 4 presents the performance evaluation results of four from 5 to 20, the accuracy stays relatively high, shown in
GNN-based IDS methods across two datasets. It shows that the Table V. At 5 features, it’s 0.9648, and at 20, it’s 0.9901 with
performance of FIR-GNN is superior to other methods across little fluctuation, showing the method can screen features well
all metrics, with GCN performing next best, while GAT and for stable model performance. The CICIDS2017 dataset shows
GCN+GAT exhibit relatively weaker performance. In the BoT- a similar pattern, with an accuracy of 0.9505 at 5 features
IoT dataset, FIR-GNN achieved an accuracy improvement of and 0.9806 at 20, reflecting its adaptability and stability across
approximately 3.55% compared to GAT. different datasets and feature scales.
 2) Comparison of Different Feature Selection Methods: Fig. 5 (a) and (e) present the FIR-GNN model’s accuracy
The purpose of the experiment is to compare the model with five feature selection algorithms for different feature
performance of different feature selection methods, includ- counts. The SHAP-based method often has higher accuracy
ing SHAP-based methods, Univariate Feature Selection than UFS in both datasets. For example, at 5 node features. It
(UFS), Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE), Random Forest also shows good performance compared to RFE, RFI, and IG,
Importance (RFI), and Information Gain (IG), when the having unique advantages in considering feature interactions
number of feature selections is 5, 10, 15, and 20 respectively and contributions, and can mine better feature subsets, while
on different datasets (BoT-IoT and CICIDS2017), so as to other methods have limitations.
prove the effectiveness of the SHAP-based feature selection 3) Comparison of Different Parameter Settings: Analyze
method. the sensitivity of the FIR-GNN intrusion detection method to
4900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 5. The comparison of different feature selection methods and parameter settings.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 T HE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT PARAMETER S ETTINGS ON THE T HE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT PARAMETER S ETTINGS ON THE
 B OT-I OT DATASET CICIDS2017 DATASET

three parameters (time window T, number of data packets N,
and number of node features K) so that appropriate parameter resource, its usage (Max GPU used) will naturally increase as
combinations can be selected according to specific circum- the amount of data increases.
stances in practical applications. Table VI and Table VII Based on these findings, the optimal parameter settings
presents the impact of varying parameters, Time Window T, would need to balance classification performance against
Number of Packets N and Number of Node Features K, on the resource consumption. When a high level of accuracy is
performance of the system in terms of Max GPU Used (MB), required and resources are sufficient, a larger time window T
FIRG Data Size (MB), Testing Time (s), and Accuracy. (such as T = 20) and a greater number of node features K
 Fig. 5 (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), and (h) show the model (such as K = 20) can be chosen, because these two parameters
performance and resource consumption under different param- can improve the accuracy within an appropriate range. The
eter settings. Due to the large difference in data magnitudes, number of data packets N can be selected according to the
the data was standardized using z-score normalization. It is actual data situation. Since it has a relatively small impact on
obvious that the polylines of Max GPU used and FIRG the accuracy, it can be appropriately increased when resources
Data Size have a relatively high degree of overlap and a permit. If GPU resources and data processing time is limited,
similar trend. In the FIR-GNN intrusion detection method, a smaller time window T (such as T = 10), a smaller number
the processing of data and the operation of the model are of data packets N (such as N = 3), and a moderate number
closely related. When the amount of processed data (FIRG of node features K (such as K = 10) can be selected. In this
Data Size) increases, more computing resources are usually way, the occupation of resources can be controlled to a certain
required to handle this data. As the GPU is the main computing extent while maintaining a relatively high accuracy.
FU et al.: FIR-GNN: A GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK USING FLOW INTERACTION RELATIONSHIPS 4901

 VI. C ONCLUSION [12] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
 “MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic
 This study proposed a novel FIR-GNN framework to using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. 37th Annu.
address the network security challenges in cyber-physical Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 1025–1038.
systems (CPS), especially in smart home settings. The frame- [13] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
work outperforms existing methods in accuracy, precision, graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
recall, and F1 value, and shows high stability. It constructs a pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
directed graph and uses an edge feature self-attention mech- [14] G. Hu, X. Xiao, M. Shen, B. Zhang, X. Yan, and Y. Liu,
 “TCGNN: Packet-grained network traffic classification via graph neural
anism, combined with semi-supervised learning, to enhance networks,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 106531.
generalization. The SHAP-based feature subset selection [15] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
reduces the computational cost. neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
 In addition to developing adaptive continuous learning [16] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
methods for NIDS, there are several potential future devel- traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
opment directions for FIR-GNN. As more and more home Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
 [17] R. Xu, G. Wu, W. Wang, X. Gao, A. He, and Z. Zhang, “Applying
devices are connected to the network, real-time intrusion self-supervised learning to network intrusion detection for network
detection has become crucial. FIR-GNN can be optimized flows with graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 248, Jun. 2024,
to further reduce its response time, ensuring that it can Art. no. 110495.
 [18] J. K. Samriya, C. Chakraborty, A. Sharma, M. Kumar, and
quickly identify and respond to threats in high-speed traffic S. K. Ramakuri, “Adversarial ML-based secured cloud architecture for
scenarios. Moreover, FIR-GNN can be applied in enterprise consumer Internet of Things of smart healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
IoT environments, where the security requirements are equally Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2058–2065, Feb. 2024.
 [19] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation
strict. By adapting to the larger-scale and more complex and ladder network for secure Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
network topologies in enterprises, FIR-GNN helps protect Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022.
enterprise-owned smart devices and sensitive data. [20] X. Zhou et al., “Spatial–temporal federated transfer learning with
 multi-sensor data fusion for cooperative positioning,” Inf. Fusion,
 Overall, the FIR-GNN framework has broad prospects for vol. 105, May 2024, Art. no. 102182. [Online]. Available: https://www.
enhancing the security of a wide range of CPS. Continuous sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253523004980
research and development in this field are likely to yield more [21] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
effective security solutions. in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
 no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
 [22] X. Zhou, W. Liang, A. Kawai, K. Fueda, J. She, and K. I.-K. Wang,
 R EFERENCES “Adaptive segmentation enhanced asynchronous federated learning for
 sustainable intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 [1] J. Huang et al., “An energy harvesting algorithm for UAV-assisted Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 6658–6666, Jul. 2024.
 TinyML consumer electronic in low-power IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. [23] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Embedding residuals in graph-based solutions:
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 7346–7356, Nov. 2024. The E-ResSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms. A case study in intrusion
 [2] T. Bhavani, P. VamseeKrishna, C. Chakraborty, and P. Dwivedi, detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 6025–6040, 2024.
 “Stress classification and vital signs forecasting for IoT-health mon- [24] L. Nie, Z. Ning, X. Wang, X. Hu, J. Cheng, and Y. Li, “Dataitoring,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinf., vol. 21, no. 4, driven intrusion detection for intelligent internet of vehicles: A deep
 pp. 652–659, Jul./Aug. 2024. convolutional neural network-based method,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
 [3] P. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “A smart home gateway platform for Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2219–2230, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
 data collection and awareness,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 9, [25] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
 pp. 87–93, Sep. 2018. Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
 [4] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921,
 forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for Feb. 2025.
 consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2, [26] X. Zhou et al., “Digital twin enhanced federated reinforcement learning
 pp. 4976–4987, May 2024. with lightweight knowledge distillation in mobile networks,” IEEE J.
 [5] D. Srivastava, R. Singh, C. Chakraborty, S. K. Maakar, A. Makkar, Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3191–3211, Oct. 2023.
 and D. Sinwar, “A framework for detection of cyber attacks by the [27] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
 classification of intrusion detection datasets,” Microprocess. Microsyst., topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in
 vol. 105, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 104964. label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
 [6] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
 distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural [28] Z. Li, P. Wang, and Z. Wang, “FlowGANAnomaly: Flow-based anomaly
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024. network intrusion detection with adversarial learning,” Chin. J. Electron.,
 [7] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 58–71, Jan. 2024.
 encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE [29] X. Zhou, W. Liang, W. Li, K. Yan, S. Shimizu, and K. I.-K. Wang,
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018. “Hierarchical adversarial attacks against graph-neural-network-based
 [8] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating IoT network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characteriza- no. 12, pp. 9310–9319, Jun. 2022.
 tion,” in Proc. ICISSP, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116. [30] Y. Yin et al., “IGRF-RFE: A hybrid feature selection method for MLP-
 [9] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, and E. Sitnikova, “A new network forensic based network intrusion detection on UNSW-NB15 dataset,” J. Big Data,
 framework based on deep learning for Internet of Things networks: vol. 10, no. 1, p. 15, 2023.
 A particle deep framework,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 110, [31] L. Zhang, K. Liu, X. Xie, W. Bai, B. Wu, and P. Dong, “A data-driven
 pp. 91–106, Sep. 2020. network intrusion detection system using feature selection and deep
[10] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level learning,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 78, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 103606.
 relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, [32] A. V. Turukmane and R. Devendiran, “M-MultiSVM: An efficient
 Nov. 2022, Art. no. 109309. feature selection assisted network intrusion detection system using
[11] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, and T. Feng, “GCN-ETA: High-efficiency machine learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103587.
 encrypted malicious traffic detection,” Secur. Commun. Netw., [33] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Fusion of statistical importance for feature
 vol. 2022, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 4274139. [Online]. Available: selection in deep neural network-based intrusion detection system,” Inf.
 https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/4274139 Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 353–363, Feb. 2023.
4902 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

[34] Y. Wu, L. Nie, X. Xiong, B. Sadoun, L. Yang, and Z. Ning, “Incremental Shidong Liu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
 update intrusion detection for industry 5.0 security: A graph attention computer engineering and telecommunication enginetwork-enabled approach,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, neering from the Dalian University of Technology,
 no. 1, pp. 2004–2017, Feb. 2024. Dalian, in 1992 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D.
[35] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A degree in computer engineering and telecommunicontextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers cation engineering from the Nanjing University of
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in
 pp. 633–642. 2008. He is currently employed with the Institute of
 Information and Communication Technology, China
 Electric Power Research Institute. His research
 interests include AI-powered data network, SDN,
 IMS, and network operation and maintenance of electric communication
 Mengyi Fu (Student Member, IEEE) received network.
 the B.Sc. degree from the Nanjing University of
 Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in
 2022, and got an MD-PhD qualification with an
 examination-free recommendation. She is currently Xuejiao Chen received the B.E. and M.E.
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Nanjing degrees in communication and information systems
 University of Posts and Telecommunications. She from the Nanjing University of Posts and
 has published some research works on IEEE Telecommunications in 2001 and 2006, respectively.
 Transactions on Vehicular Technology, IEEE She is currently an Associate Professor with
 T RANSACTIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS, the Nanjing Institute of Information Vocational
 and IEEE N ETWORK. Her research includes Technology. She was a Visiting Scholar with the
encrypted traffic identification, deep learning, and traffic prediction. University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA, from 2017
 to 2018. Her research areas are B5G/6G network
 security and artificial intelligence.

 Pan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
 M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and com- Xiaokang Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 puter engineering from the Nanjing University of degree in human sciences from Waseda University,
 Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in Japan, in 2014. He is currently an Associate
 2001, 2004, and 2013, respectively, where he is Professor with the Faculty of Business Data Science,
 currently a Full Professor. From 2017 to 2018, Kansai University, Japan. From 2012 to 2015, he
 he was a Visiting Scholar with the Department of was a Research Associate with the Faculty of
 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Human Sciences, Waseda University. He was a
 Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA. His research interests Lecturer/Associate Professor with the Faculty of
 include AI-powered networking and security in Data Science, Shiga University, Japan, from 2016
 B5G/6G/IoT/Smart Grid/CFN, and AI-enabled big to 2024. He also has been working as a Visiting
data analysis. He is also a Reviewer for several journals, includ- Researcher with the RIKEN Center for Advanced
ing IEEE T RANSACTION ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan, since 2017. he has been engaged in
IEEE T RANSACTION ON E MERGING T OPICS IN C OMPUTATIONAL interdisciplinary research works in the fields of computer science and
I NTELLIGENCE, IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, IEEE J OURNAL engineering, information systems, and social and human informatics. His
ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE ACCESS , Computer recent research interests include ubiquitous computing, big data, machine
Networks, Computer and Security, Computer Communications, Engineering learning, behavior and cognitive informatics, cyber-physical-social systems,
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, and Big Data Research. He served as and cyber intelligence and security. He is a member of the IEEE CS, and
a TPC member of the IEEE CyberSciTech Congress. ACM, USA, IPSJ, and JSAI, Japan, and CCF, China.