10604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Flow Microelement-Driven Traffic Relationship
 Analysis: Robust Detection of Malicious
 Encrypted Traffic
 Hao Fu , Degang Sun , Jinxia Wei, Wei Wan , and Chun Long

 Abstract—Encryption technologies randomize network com- cyberattacks. Attackers exploit encrypted malicious traffic as
munication to protect user privacy. However, attackers exploit efficient carriers, posing serious security threats with minimal
encrypted traffic to conceal malicious activities. The existing costs [1]. Since cyberattacks are executed along with multidetection methods rely primarily on traffic content or interactive stage network traffic, mainstream defences focus on detecting
patterns. Nevertheless, static methods can be easily obfuscated
by advanced attacks. Since the set of potential attacks is open and mitigating the actual impact through traffic analysis [2].
and infinite, models regularly lose effectiveness against novel Currently, industries widely deploy intrusion detection systems
attacks. Robust encrypted malicious traffic detection remains (IDSs) for malicious traffic detection. These systems (such as
a valuable research area. In this paper, we propose BSTS- Suricata [3] and Snort [4]) efficiently detect encrypted traffic
Net, a robust unsupervised encrypted malicious traffic detection on the basis of threat intelligence and predefined rules [5].
model based entirely on traffic relations. The key motivations However, with the emergence of novel attacks, rigid detection
are to construct a relation-based traffic contextual representation
and to establish dynamic baselines for anomaly detection. To
 methods of IDSs are becoming increasingly ineffective in
represent local relations within flows, we innovatively introduce dealing with encrypted and obfuscated malicious traffic.
the concept of traffic microelements, which capture fine-grained In recent years, various efforts targeting encrypted traffic
interaction pattern relations. To integrate the global relationships detection using artificial intelligence have been proposed [6].
between flows, we construct a traffic microelement space based Most of the related research has focused on traffic content to
on the Siamese neural network. Three optimization functions are extract complex potential attack features, and some methods
proposed to optimize the intraservice, interservice and internode have achieved accuracies exceeding 99% [7]. Some research
relations. For robust detection, we introduce a reputationenhanced dynamic encrypted traffic detection algorithm that has avoided encrypted traffic content analyses and opted for
constructs dynamic baselines and continuously detects novel traffic interactive patterns to detect malicious communicaanomalies. We evaluate BSTS-Net through extensive experiments tion behaviour. To leverage network communication features
on three datasets and compare it with seven SOTA methods. and enhance the representation of nodes in non-Euclidean
Our results demonstrate its superiority, with an F1 score of spaces, models such as graph neural networks [8] (GNNs) and
more than 99.63% across all the datasets in multiclassification knowledge graphs [9] (KGs) integrate entities and interflow
scenarios. Additionally, we simulate three adversarial scenarios correlations. However, these static methods learn the distribufor robustness analysis. Although the baseline methods experience
an F1 score degradation of 32.21%, BSTS-Net achieves high tional representation of malicious traffic from labelled datasets
performance, with only 1% degradation. and lack robustness for novel malicious traffic. Specifically,
 real-life scenarios still face the following challenges:
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, traffic behaviour,
Siamese neural network, spatial–temporal graph.
 • High-precision complex models rely on millions of
 high-quality labelled data for reliability, while the persis-
 I. I NTRODUCTION tence and stealthiness of attacks complicate the labelling
 process [7].
W ITH the increasing awareness of privacy protection
 and security, anonymous communication technologies
such as secure sockets, secure shell protocols, virtual private
 • While complex model structures enhance generalization
 by fitting labelled datasets, the set of potential attacks is
 open and infinite. Detection models are updated slower
networks (VPNs), and Tor have been widely adopted. This than novel attacks are generated [10].
trend has been followed by a significant increase in encrypted • Attackers can easily circumvent static detection meth-
 Received 7 April 2025; revised 23 August 2025; accepted 16 September
 ods by modifying encryption algorithms, communications
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version protocols, etc. [11]
9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the Youth Innovation Anomaly-based unsupervised detection methods alleviate
Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) under Grant the aforementioned challenges to a certain extent [12]. These
2022170 and in part by the Special Project for Cybersecurity and Informatization of CAS under Grant CAS-WX2022GC-04. The associate editor methods construct baselines of normal traffic and subsequently
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was detect deviations from these baselines. Since encryption pro-
Prof. Mika Ylianttila. (Corresponding author: Chun Long.) tocols generate different encrypted content for the same raw
 The authors are with the Computer Network Information Center, Uni- traffic content, it is impossible to find a completely closed
versity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail:
anquanip@cnic.cn). set of benign traffic. Currently, baselines are constructed on
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3613971 the basis of normal traffic content or interactive behaviour,
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10605

and malicious traffic is detected by comparing reconstruction • We introduce the traffic microelement space, which
errors (e.g., Autoencoder [13]). These methods necessitate is implemented by an optimized Siamese neural
meticulous attention to the fitting of traffic content to con- network. By incorporating traffic microelements, our
struct distinct categorical boundaries. Since the randomness of method achieves efficient similarity embedding without
encryption eliminates the information entropy of the content, the need for labels. We propose three targeted loss funcmodels tend to generate false positives because of overfitting. tions to improve the model performance.
Even though some studies integrate more universal features, • We propose a method to construct a fine-grained traffic
such as temporal and graph structures of traffic, models baseline on the basis of similarity. On the basis of
trained on encrypted content are susceptible to evasion. Cur- the baseline, we propose a dynamic reputation-enhanced
rent anomaly-based malicious traffic detection methods fail malicious traffic detection model. The model analyses
to meet the robustness requirements necessary for reliable traffic in real time and detects unknown attacks
cybersecurity applications. • We conduct experiments on three large-scale datasets,
 To achieve robust detection, we propose a model based namely, CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018, and UNSWNB15,
on traffic microelements to extract features of relationships and the results demonstrate that our method outperforms
between similar flows. The microelement is the description the current state-of-the-art approaches. A perturbation
of the intrinsic communication metadata pattern of given experiment is used to verify the ability to detect adverservices, which remains relatively stable across multiple sarial attacks. Our model is complete and open source.1
encrypted traffic detection instances. The model focuses on
the traffic relations with better generalization rather than II. R ELATED W ORK
the encrypted content. To enhance robustness, the traffic
microelements extract flow metadata as features that are less A. Content-Based Detection
affected by encryption-related interference. While some works Attackers hide attack intent using unique encryption algoalso propose metadata-based features, their models essentially rithms, which makes traffic payloads differ. Researchers have
perform static feature classification and fail to analyse cor- analysed differences in traffic content distribution by building
relations [14], making it difficult to dynamically detect novel deep learning models. Wang et al. [16] first utilized CNN
attacks. Specifically, we introduce a malicious traffic detection networks to detect the grayscale images converted from raw
model named BSTS-Net, which is able to exploit the fine- bidirectional traffic, which revealed the difference in traffic
grained relations of traffic. By observing the mechanisms of distribution through visualization. To improve the semantic
service traffic generation, we identify their special modular understanding of encrypted traffic, Hwang et al. [17] proposed
fragmentation structure. On this basis, observation, a greedy a novel embedding mechanism and leveraged LSTM for
strategy is employed to extract optimal traffic microelements. temporal correlation in packet headers. Recent studies have
 Then, the traffic microelements are used to construct a increased the model parameters for complex flow contents. Lin
traffic microelement space, which maps traffic to a suitable et al. [18] proposed a contextualized datagram representation
relational distance space. The subspace reflects high-order with transformers pretrained from large-scale unlabelled data,
traffic flow behaviours. We construct datasets based on traffic which was applied to different encrypted traffic scenarios.
microelements, including positive and negative samples, which Zhou et al. [19] proposed TrafficFormer, a general pretrained
are used to train an optimized Siamese neural network [15]. To large model for generalization across diverse traffic analysis
the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in which the tasks, which achieved the best performance on six classi-
Siamese neural network is applied to unsupervised malicious fication tasks. For robust traffic feature representation, Fu
traffic detection. To represent the exact relationships between et al. [20] introduced frequency-domain analysis into the task
flows, we propose three loss functions that are optimized of malicious traffic detection. Barradas et al. [21] proposed
for the intraservice, interflow, and internode flow distances. an unsupervised feature compression mechanism based on
The traffic microelement space forms a similarity relationship quantization and truncation, which seamlessly integrates a
between flows. downstream machine learning model. Holland et al. [22]
 Finally, we construct baselines based on flows with similar combined a unified binary packet representation, enabling endrelationships and obtain these baseline reputation scores. This to-end automation from raw network traffic to high-accuracy
article proposes a method for dynamic baseline construction classification models. For efficient detection, Zhou et al. [23]
that is based on the reputation score. We pass and update the proposed real-time traffic classification, which is implemented
reputation score through the temporal communication struc- on a programmable switch, enabling high-speed performance.
ture. Baselines with lower reputation scores will be dropped. Zhao et al. [24] proposed a unified detection framework
Our approach enables dynamic, continuous and robust mali- for attack traffic that supports fine-grained classification and
cious encrypted traffic detection. incremental updates. In summary, content-based detection can
 In summary, the contributions of this paper are summarized be improved by complex modelling, while static methods are
as follows: costly and unreliable for novel encrypted traffic.
 • By analysing traffic relations, we propose a novel
 method for traffic microelement extraction. Intraflow B. Interaction-Based Detection
 and interflow relations are combined to extract optimal Owing to the low entropy of malicious encrypted traffic
 traffic microelements. The experiments show that the content and the difficulty of representation generalization,
 extracted traffic microelements are robust for adversarial
 traffic. 1 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net.git
10606 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED W ORKS

researchers have aimed to detect attacks in terms of flow datasets, some studies have used anomaly-based detection
interactions. Gu et al. [25] discovered temporal similarities methods. These methods use self-supervised or unsupervised
in communication within the same botnet and employed approaches to construct normal traffic baselines and detect
statistical algorithms to detect malicious traffic from botnets. deviation anomalies. Xie et al. [34] proposed Rosetta to
To improve detection, researchers have used fine-grained accurately construct a baseline for TLS-encrypted traffic,
features to represent interaction patterns. Shen et al. [26] enhancing classification performance across various network
proposed a detection method using packet length from two- environments. Kitsune [35] introduced an autoencoder to learn
way client–server interactions to train a machine learning from normal traffic and detect abnormal network attacks for
classifier. Fu et al. [27] detected tunnelled attack traffic various network channel patterns. The existing anomaly-based
by analysing packet length patterns. Recent studies have detection methods rely on traffic content or interactions for
constructed communication graphs for topological feature rep- baseline construction, which establish classification boundresentation. Veličković et al. [28] introduced graph attention aries by analysing the closure of traffic behaviour. However,
networks (GATs), which enhance node features using message evolving networks lead to high false-positive rates, which
passing methods. Pareja et al. [29] proposed a model that is particularly common in large-scale networks. Nakip and
dynamically adjusts graph convolutional neural networks to Gelenbe [36] proposed an online learning detection method
capture the dynamics of graph sequence data. To incorporate without human involvement to automatically adapt models to
temporal features, Duan et al. [30] presented sequences of novel malicious traffic. However, long-term baselines produce
spatiotemporal graphs and analysed their evolutionary rela- biases in classification boundaries, resulting in unreliable
tionships. To better integrate various graph interactions, Li results. Moreover, detection models exhibit significant hystereet al. [31] transformed user features and structural information sis in response to novel malicious traffic.
into heterogeneous graphs on the basis of relationship weights. We improve anomaly-based detectors by exploiting flow
Fu et al. [33] constructed lightweight flow interaction graphs relationships and computing local baselines on the fly, elimito capture multiflow collaboration patterns in fully encrypted nating long-term bias. Compared with existing anomaly-based
environments. Although interaction-based approaches have methods, the present method demonstrates superior robustness.
improved detection, graph models are sensitive to perturbed Table I summarizes the relevant works.
network environments. Consequently, [32] optimized the graph
structure for noise, but the models still lack robustness to III. M OTIVATION
address novel malicious traffic interactions. Advances in traffic encryption have resulted in increas-
 Graph-based methods struggle with dynamic environments ingly unreliable content-based analysis methods since traffic is
because of poor generalization, adversarial fragility, and high encrypted into entirely unrelated random payloads at different
computational cost. GNNs require global graph traversal, levels of access. As highlighted by Papadogiannaki and Ioancausing high latency in incremental updates. Their memory nidis [37] in their survey, traditional malware traffic detection
overhead scales linearly with graph size, limiting scalability. methods that rely on payload-based features have become
Attackers can manipulate topology via malicious nodes or significantly less effective because of the widespread adoption
edges, distorting neighbourhood relationships and misleading of encryption technologies such as TLS 1.3 and encrypted
predictions. These issues hinder real-time, large-scale, robust server name indication. To investigate the information content
deployment in evolving network settings. of encrypted traffic payloads, we design a dedicated experiment aimed at assessing whether communication patterns
C. Anomaly-Based Detection generate distinguishable and meaningful payload-level features
 To address the problem of weak robustness of malicious despite encryption. Specifically, we establish a proxy server
traffic detection models trained on limited malicious type using Nginx to access static resources and utilize Scapy to
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10607

Fig. 1. Packet information entropy and the difference between and maximum
randomness.

 Fig. 3. Packet length and time series statistical analysis.

 • Traffic data that were once homogeneous are now
 segmented because of the finer-grained divisions [41].
 Fig. 2. Traffic componentized communication sequence diagram. These metadata leads to more traffic information. Similar
 services utilizing common modules generate comparable fragments [42]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the same
capture the encrypted packets. Fig. 1 shows the information video services produce analogous traffic segments when
entropy and Pearson coefficient of the encrypted packet during accessed by different users, and different video services
1000 repeated accesses. The experimental results demonstrate also produce partly analogous traffic segments. Although
several key characteristics of the encrypted packets: the content of the encrypted traffic has become completely
 • They exhibit a high level of information entropy, with indistinguishable, its traffic metadata information has a
 values exceeding 5.7. The difference from the maximum large degree of similarity. Although there are variations
 random information entropy is less than 0.27. in packets due to the content distinction, common frames
 • The absolute value of the Pearson coefficient between and static resources result in common patterns.
 encrypted packets that originate from the same data • The change in design pattern introduces temporal features
 remains within 0.25, indicating nearly uncorrelated [43]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the authenticated flows
 relations. precede the resource flows. Flows from the same ser-
 • Overall, the entropies of the encrypted packets appear vice exhibit consistent access temporal patterns. Different
 to be highly random and exhibit less significant packets from flows also possess temporal features (e.g.,
 differentiation. heartbeat packets, etc.). The temporal features are crucial
Although the traffic payload is entirely indivisible, the traf- for detecting malicious traffic. On the one hand, traffic
fic interactions exhibit a modular pattern [38], [39], [40], generated by scripts and tools exhibits strong periodicity.
revealing the behaviour of traffic relations. As illustrated in In contrast, attackers use high-frequency attack flows
Fig. 2, users access a video service through multiple requests. to improve intrusion efficiency (e.g., probe scanning)
Initially, users visit a website and authenticate their identify or directly cause damage (e.g., DDoS attacks). Thus,
through requests and then access the images and video data temporal features reflect traffic intentions to some extent.
through staged media requests. Multiple accesses follow a sim- • Flows of similar services result in more granular similarilar interactive mode, and segmented communication reveals ities [44]. The communication patterns of normal service
the identities. traffic are highly similar and prevalent, forming a majority
 For further research, we analyse the access patterns during that differs sharply from the distinct and minority malithe communication process in the same encrypted traf- cious traffic. Moreover, the finer-grained design pattern
fic analysis experiments. Fig. 3 illustrates the sequence of results in more obvious service behaviours [14] between
packet lengths and time intervals during the 1000 accesses. benign and malicious.
Fig. 3 (a) and (b) illustrate the distribution of the packet lengths Inspired by the scientific findings above, sophisticated
and sequential lengths, respectively. Fig. 3 (c) and (d) illustrate design methodologies are needed. Specifically, we need to
the distribution of the time intervals and sequential time inter- construct the following core functional components:
vals, respectively. The results indicate that the packet lengths • Extraction of traffic relations from network flows.
and intervals of the same service are confined within finite sets • Construction of dynamic relevance based on traffic relaand exhibit stable and consistent sequential characteristics. tions.
 Combining the results of the theoretical analysis and exper- • Detection of malicious traffic through deviation analysis
imental verification, we obtain the following conclusions: from established relevance patterns.
10608 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 4. System architecture diagram.

 We build the above components in steps. First, we analyse TABLE II
the traffic metadata within services and identify the most S YMBOL M EANINGS
representative as traffic microelements, which belong to the
most common interactive patterns between traffic and capture
the essential features of services. Second, we construct a traffic
microelement space that uses an optimized Siamese neural
network to determine the relevance between flows. Third,
we construct a dynamic baseline for aggregated traffic on
the basis of time windows and assign reputation. Malicious
encrypted traffic is identified with dynamic baselines. In fact, main components–traffic microelement extraction, the SNN
our detection integrates various perspectives. By integrating (Siamese neural network), and anomaly detection.
behavioural patterns and entities, we construct traffic microelements to achieve dynamic optimality. By integrating local A. Notation
and global features, we construct integrated distance representations between flows. By integrating temporal and spatial For clarity, we summarize the key notations used throughout
dimensions, we achieve robust malicious detection based on this paper. All the symbols are defined at their first appearance,
dynamic local aggregation. In Section IV, we elaborate on the and this table II serves as a consolidated reference.
methodology employed to address the identified issues.
 B. Traffic Microelement Extraction
 The proposed microelements are designed to derive stable
 IV. M ODEL S TRUCTURE metadata fingerprints from multiple flows F communicating
 To address the challenge of robust malicious traffic detec- with S . The fingerprint, composed of packet slices and their
tion, we introduce a dynamic detection method that leverages sequential patterns, captures consistent and recurring comtraffic relations named BSTS-Net. Fig. 4 illustrates the munication behaviours while ignoring user-specific payload
overall structure of BSTS-Net, which consists of three variations.
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10609

 TABLE III 3) Greedy Traffic Microelement Extraction: For service
 F EATURE S ELECTION FOR F ILTERING N OISY S AMPLE DATA S , we model its intrinsic behaviour from observed traffic
 S N = {F N1 , F N2 , . . . , F Nn }, which consists of fragmented flows
 induced by heterogeneous user access patterns and each corresponding to distinct phases such as authentication or data
 transfer. By grouping flows on the basis of service, we extract
 microelements via the longest matching patterns, capturing a
 stable behavioural fingerprint that abstracts transient details
 while preserving invariant protocol-level interactions. During
 A novel end-to-end approach for extracting traffic features is training, microfeatures are derived from a clean and compreintroduced by identifying traffic microelements, which search hensive dataset S F , enabling optimal baseline construction.
for as many similar interactions as possible from the traffic of In real-time detection, where full traffic S F is unavailable,
the same service. The method encompasses three steps: Zeek- a greedy on-the-fly extraction algorithm ensures low latency
based feature extraction, flow feature aggregation and data and achieves near-optimal matching on the basis of S N ⊆ S F .
filtering, and a greedy traffic microelement extraction process. A reliable fingerprint requires at least two flows per functional
 1) Zeek Feature Extraction: To obtain a more robust and group for comparison, with statistical stability achieved at
generalized representation of flow interactions, we extract three or more flows. The success probability P of fingerprint
metadata from raw traffic using Zeek [45]. We avoid using raw generation is defined in Eq. 1
metadata features directly. Instead, we leverage these metadata  T (Nt , Ng )
to construct microelements, which capture higher-level pat- P = Nt ≥ 2Ng · (1)
terns for relation understanding. Since Zeek efficiently handles S (Nt , Ng )
packet reordering, loss, and corruption during transmission where Nt is the number of traffic fragments and Ng is
[46], it also enables direct alerts on low-level link errors. the number of functional groups. Here, S (Nt , Ng ) denotes
Specifically, we develop a custom Zeek script,2 spanning the Stirling numbers of the second kind, representing the
over 1000 lines for various common protocols, to extract the number of ways to partition Nt distinguishable elements
following information: into Ng nonempty unordered subsets. T (Nt , Ng ) represents
 • 4-tuple information, including source IP, destination IP, the number of such partitions where each subset contains at
 source port, and destination port. least two elements, ensuring meaningful group-level matching.
 • Packet timestamp and payload size. We compute S (n, m) using the recurrence relation as shown
 • Application layer metadata of traffic. This information in Eq. 2.
 extracted by Zeek verifies the effectiveness of traffic S (n, m) = m · S (n − 1, m) + S (n − 1, m − 1)
 microelements.
 S (0, 0) = 1, S (n, 1) = 1, S (n, n) = 1
 2) Flow Feature Aggregation and Data Filtering: As mentioned earlier, we extract traffic microelements under services S (n, 0) = 0, f or n > 0, S (0, m) = 0, f or m > 0 (2)
provided by specific servers [47]. Therefore, we first aggre- Similarly, T (n, m) is computed via Eq. 3
gate flow metadata based on 4-tuples, and flows under the !
same destination IP are considered the same service traffic. n−1
 T (n, m) = m · T (n − 1, m) + T (n − 2, m − 1)
Afterwards, the following processes are carried out on each 1
flow to extract fine-grained interactions: (2m)!
 • Record the direction of the packet. T (0, 0) = 1, T (2m, m) =
 m! · 2m
 • Sort the packets with metadata on the basis of the T (n, 0) = 0, f or n > 0, T (0, m) = 0, f or m > 0
 timestamp.
 T (n, m) = 0, i f n < 2m (3)
 In fact, services such as CDN [48] generate a large number
of accesses infrequently, which produces a significant amount We evaluate the probability over up to 200 traffic fragments
of diverse noise traffic. We filter the noise that is irrelevant and 10 functional groups. As shown in Fig. 5, our greedy
for the traffic microelements before detection. Specifically, algorithm achieves a 96% success rate in generating valid
the DBSCAN algorithm [49] is used for clustering, and the traffic fingerprints, with 94.92% of matches being stable and
features extracted are shown in Table III. On the one hand, 93.34% for groups of size 5. The histogram further shows
DBSCAN enables fast detection by leveraging precomputed that when there are two functional groups, more than 80% of
distance metrics. On the other hand, it performs coarse- the configurations achieve a matching probability above 95%,
grained grouping, focusing only on the salient and distinctive which holds for more than 75% of the cases with three groups
characteristics of CDN traffic to ensure stable and efficient and 70% of the cases with five groups, demonstrating the
batch filtering. After that, we filter out the most isolated robustness of our approach under practical grouping scenarios.
IPs whose traffic can be regarded as noise. Experiments on The analysis of the CICIDS2017 dataset reveals that 86.74%
the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [50] demonstrate that the filtering of services exhibit 3 or fewer functional groups, and 95.87%
reduces traffic by approximately 17%, without introducing any have 5 or fewer functional groups. Under these realistic
false positives. In the analysis, the IPs filtered include DNS conditions, our method achieves a matching rate of 99.78%,
servers and benign websites. demonstrating the high effectiveness and practicality of the
 proposed greedy microelement extraction strategy for real-
 2 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net/blob/main/AllFeas.zeek world deployment.
10610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 7. Example for F~lf .

 Fig. 8. Example for F~f .
 p

 Owing to the complexity of network environments, fuzzy
 Fig. 5. Fingerprint matching probability. matching based on the forwards and backwards positions
 is used to address traffic fragmentation and manage packet
 backlog to achieve robust feature extraction. Matching
 segments are considered successful when they satisfy the
 following rules:
 • The size of the segment matches the size of the target
 segment.
 • The size of the segment matches the size of the target
 Fig. 6. Example for F~rf . segment’s preceding or succeeding segment in the
 same direction.
 • The size of the segment matches the sum of the
 Within the traffic of the same service, we identify and size of the target segment’s preceding and succeeding
extract a wealth of traffic interaction patterns. Specifically, we segment in the same direction.
focus on the following five microelements: The specific process is shown in Algorithm 1.
 • Repetition microelements. Protocols’ (e.g., SMB and As illustrated in Figure 7, the longest local packet
 MDNS) fixed packet sizes [51], [52] allows for the sequence common to the same service is matched as
 categorization˚of packets with fixed patterns. Specifically, 873, 165, 539, and 721. The positive and negative signs
 for flow f = p1s , p2s , . . . , pks , the repeatability feature is associated with these values indicate the direction of each
 computed as Eq. (4) packet.
 • Packet microelements. Similarly, we implement the
 F~ τf = 1{k f k>θr ∧k{ f }k=1} · (p1s + 1) − 1 (4)
 greedy algorithm to identify bidirectional traffic segments
 wherek{ f }k indicates the type of packets in the flow and that exhibit similar features within the same service. The
 k f k indicates the number of packets in the flow. As packet feature is computed by Eq.(6)
 illustrated in Figure 6, flow pairs with identical packet
 lengths are assigned feature values of 873. For flows that F~pf = argmax ζ( fct , f pt )|| argmax ζ( fc f , f p f ) (6)
 f p ∼ fs f p ∼ fs
 do not meet this criterion, the default feature value is set
 to -1. where || represents the splice of vectors. Unlike local fea-
 • Local microelements. Owing to the similarity of request ture extraction, this algorithm employs a direction-based
 or response fragments within the flow under the same correlation, which resolves the issue of long-distance data
 service, we employ a greedy algorithm to extract the dependency. The matching rules are as follows:
 most common fragments between traffic. Specifically, • When the current direction traffic and the target
 we compare the current traffic with historical traffic, traffic have a common packet size, calculate the
 identify similar fragments, and flag the longest sequence minimum match quantity, and save the matching
 of matches. The local feature F~lf is computed as Eq. (5) segment.
 • Choose the segment with the largest total matching
 argmax argmin ζ i (χ( fc ), χ( f p )), F~lf = ζ( fc , f p )|| (5) quantity as the best matching segment. The specific
 f p ∼ fs i∈[0,lmin ]
 algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2.
 where fc is the current flow to be matched, f p is the As shown in Figure 8, forwards and reverse packet
 matched flow, and f s is the flow of service. χ(•) denotes sequences are matched separately, producing directional
 the split function, which splits flows by direction. ζ(•) matching patterns. The forwards direction produces the
 finds common segments of flows. || combines all seg- sequence 873, whereas the reverse direction yields 165
 ments and lmin denotes the minimum length of the flows. and 721. Each packet is matched only once to ensure an
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10611

 Algorithm 2 Packet Feature Extraction
 Input: Flow metadata: F;
 Output: Packet microelements:PF;
 1: Segmenting the traffic metadata by service yields G,Nb =
 −1,S b
 Fig. 9. Example for F~cf . 2: R = newHashT able()
 3: for fd ∈ [T rue, False] do
 4: for F c , F m ∈ G do
 5: store S m = GetDirFinger(F c [ fd ], F m [ fd ]) if R[F c , F m ] is
 not stored.
 6: PF(F c , F m )[ fd ] = the longest of all S m
 7: end for
 8: end for
 Fig. 10. Example for F~df . 9: return PF

 accurate representation of the communication volume and the direction, with positive signs for outbound transmisprevent duplication. sions and negative signs for inbound transmissions.
 • Cyclical microelements. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
 Additionally, we do not utilize a transport layer or other
 video service periodically fetches segments of resources
 headers of traffic, since this information, such as the window
 after the initial request. Services generate periodic data
 sizes, is mostly influenced by network conditions. Even so,
 packets. Accordingly, we compute the directional periodic
 we can still efficiently detect protocol-targeted attacks such as
 segments of flows and count the repetitions. The circle
 slow DDoS using Zeek. Compared with the other potential
 feature is computed as Eq. (7)
 features, the uniqueness of these five features is as follows:
 F~cf = argmax Ξi (χ( fc )) (7) • Among all traffic metadata, these microelements are
 i∈[0,lmin ] derived from the packet length and direction, which
 where Ξ(•) calculates the number of repetitions. Common remain highly stable across diverse encrypted traffic and
 protocols, such as HTTPS [53], generate data packets of can be extracted efficiently to enable real-time detection.
 size 0 no less than twice and interference with features. • These microelements are comprehensive, covering all the
 Therefore, segments of size 0 need to be repeated at metadata features used in the existing studies, except for
 least 3 times. Figure 9 shows successful matching of the time metrics and header fields, which are susceptible
 repeated traffic segments across flows. The first segment to networks. For example, they cover all nontemporal
 contains 853 and 259 packets, and the second segment features among the more than 80 attributes extracted by
 contains 259 and 539 packets. Tye packet signs indicate CICFlowMeter [54], a tool widely used for malicious
 the direction, with positive signs for outbound traffic and encrypted traffic detection.
 negative signs for inbound traffic. • These microelements are both independent and indispensable. Empirical analysis of the CICIDS2017 dataset
Algorithm 1 Local Feature Extraction has demonstrated that pairwise mutual information is
Input: Flow metadata F; less than 0.15 and that additional features contribute less
Output: Local microelements LF; than 0.5% to the F1 score, satisfying the conditions for
 1: Segmenting the traffic metadata by service yields G
 minimally sufficient statistics.
 2: R = newHashT able()
 3: for F c , F m ∈ G do C. Microelementary Space Construction
 4: store S m = GetLocalF(F c , F m ) if R[F c , F m ] is not stored. Traffic microelements cannot be directly used as features for
 5: LF(F c ) = the longest of all S m detection. Since different traffic microelements exhibit signif-
 6: end for icant variability, making it challenging to achieve a consistent
 7: return LF and reasonable vector representation in Euclidean space. To
 address this, we employ a feature mapping method based on a
 • Duplicate features. Services generate a large number of Siamese neural network. The Siamese neural network (SNN)
 duplicate message fragments. For example, proxy services [15] is a special type of neural network architecture that is
 transport data with the same size packets. In this paper, typically used to process paired data. It consists of two (or
 we extract the duplicated segment size within a flow and more) weight-sharing subnetworks that independently process
 choose segments whose number of duplicates is no less the input data and then compare their respective outputs.
 than 2. The duplicate feature is computed as Eq. (8). Owing to weight sharing, the SNN can learn more general
 and robust feature representations during training and improve
 F~df = argmax(Ξ( fci )) (8) feature extraction.
 i∈[0,lmin ]
 We adopt an SNN in place of AE-based approaches such
 Figure 10 shows the matched periodic patterns from two as variational autoencoders (VAEs) or graph autoencoders
 flows, identified as 873 and 259. Tye packet signs indicate (GAEs), which focus on reconstruction and lack explicit
10612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 where  is the noise parameter and || • || is the Euclidean
 distance between flows. This loss function supports the baseline detection that uses the Euclidean distance for anomaly
 judgement, which encourages instances with fewer shared
 microfeatures to be farther apart in the embedding space.
 Since the interservice traffic has a large sequence of
 microelements, the loss function is constructed, and the error
 coefficients are computed to allow the model to learn larger
 interservice microelement features. The specific calculation
 equation is shown in Eq. (10)
 |IPS (S x )&IPS (S y )| |IP (S )&IP (S )|
 τ2 = 0.5 · 24 + 0.5 · D x 24 D y (10)

 Fig. 11. Siamese network structure.
 where mask denotes the sought IP binary code, IPS denotes
 the source IP, and IPD denotes the destination IP. This loss
modelling of pairwise similarity. In contrast, the SNN is penalizes reliance on IP similarity, where traffic between
specifically designed to learn a similarity-preserving embed- identical or similar IP pairs is overfit to IP-specific patterns
ding, where instance distances directly reflect behavioural instead of generalizable microelement similarity.
relevance. If the number of clients for the same service is greater,
 the more accurate the micrometadata it creates. To reduce the
Algorithm 3 Sampling Method noise of the model, the internode factor is calculated as shown
Input: Fingerprints group: Fg , sample size:N s ; in Eq. (11)
Output: Datasets:D; τ3 = 1/num(S ac ) + 1/num(S pe ) (11)
 1: for all F gs ∈ F g do
 2: for gc , g p ∈ Fgs do where num is the number of client streams in the service.
 3: if len(gc ) < 2 then This loss function includes confidence-aware weighting based
 4: continue on microelement reliability, which reduces the penalty as the
 5: end if number of flows per service increases, encouraging the model
 6: for i = 0, 1, · · · N s do to focus on microelements from abundant traffic samples.
 In summary, the loss function is calculated as shown
 7: S an , S ac ← random(gc ), S ne ← random(g p )
 in Eq. (12)
 8: D.add([S an , S ac , S ne ])
 9: end for L(S an , S ac , S pe ) = τ2 ∗ (τ1 /ω1 + ω2 + τ3 ) (12)
10: end for
 where ω1 and ω2 are regularization factors. ω1 is set to
11: end for
 the feature dimensionality to prevent loss explosion from
12: return D
 high-dimensional vector norms. ω2 is initialized as −1 to
 balance the scaling effect of τ3 on the product of confidence
 Dataset Construct Beforehand, we propose a method to factors. This ensures stable training and proper sensitivity to
construct positive and negative sample pairs for the model, confidence variations across flows.
which is named the microelement dataset. As mentioned pre- Our network architecture supports the representation of
viously, traffic microelements indicate traffic relationships, and traffic relations, as motivated by the earlier discussion. For
the pairs are divided on the basis of microelements. We choose any two traffic flows, the learned embedding space satisfies
a flow from the service as the anchor data and select positive the condition stated in Eq. 13
data that share two or more microelements; the negative data
are selected randomly from the rest of the service. The specific d( f s − fa ) > d( fd − fa ) (13)
sampling method is illustrated in Algorithm 3. where d denotes the distance in the embedding space, fa
 Model Structure Subsequently, we train the SNN model. represents the anchor flow, f s denotes the flow with a similar
As illustrated in Fig. 11, the Siamese neural network uses pattern to fa , and fd denotes the flow with a dissimilar
different networks for positive and negative sample pairs pattern. The smaller distance between similar flows ensures
while sharing model weights. Specifically, we employ fully that the model explicitly preserves the relational structure in
connected layers, along with batch normalization and dropout, the space, enabling effective discrimination between normal
to prevent overfitting. and anomalous traffic.
 The loss function minimizes the distance between outputs of
similar samples and maximizes the distance between the outputs of dissimilar samples. The intraservice loss is represented D. Traffic Anomaly Detection
as Eq. (9) We construct a traffic microelement spatiotemporal graph
 to represent the state. As illustrated in Fig. 12, IPs serve as
 τ1 = max {kS an , S ac k − kS an , S ne k + , 0} nodes, and traffic flows as edges.
 lmax
 X The graph is segmented by service. As the time window
 kS x , S y k = S ix − S yi (9) advances, we construct a baseline of normal traffic for each
 i=0 service within the time window. Specifically, we extract the
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10613

 where Re denotes a reputation list that represents either baseline entries or the client.

 E. Continuous Detection and Complexity Analysis
 Continuous detection is achieved by maintaining a baseline
 repository for long-term anomaly monitoring. The process
 involves baseline construction and anomaly detection. When
 incoming traffic matches a known service in the database,
 its behaviour is compared against established baselines for
 Fig. 12. Graphic of flow spatiotemporal behaviour.
 anomaly identification. Concurrently, the reputation score is
 updated on the basis of the detection results, enabling adapspatiotemporal features of the traffic microelements in the tive refinement and improved baseline stability. For unseen
subgraph for clustering according to Eq. (14) services, new baselines are constructed and initialized on the
 fly. We conduct algorithm complexity analysis for real-time
 Fni = Ψ f ( fnj ||) + Ψt ( f ) + Ψe ( f ) (14) detection.
where Ψ f (•) represents the flow features, Ψt (•) represents the • Zeek processes N flows in O(N). Subsequently, DBSCAN
temporal feature and Ψe (•) represents the entropy feature. On introduces O(NlogN) overhead, where N denotes the total
this basis, clustering is performed using the K-means algorithm number of flows. Flow aggregation is incremental and
[55]. This process is formulated as shown in Eq. (15) lightweight.
 Pm ˚ i • Greedy pairwise matching over K service-associated
 1 c = j xi flows yields O(KlogK) complexity.
 c = argmin( x − µ j ), µ j = Pi=1
 i i
 m (15)
 i=1 1 c = j
 ˚ i
 j • Sample selection and SNN inference both run in
 O(K) because of parallel feature extraction and fixed
where µ j is the centre of the clusters and ci represents the architecture.
centre point speculation. The ci of the majority clusters are • Graph construction, K-means clustering, and dynamic
utilized as the flow baselines for anomaly detection. Clustering baseline updates each take O(K).
is applied after the SNN, where the output consists of pairwise
 Overall, the pipeline achieves O(N + NlogN + KlogK + K),
distance metrics between traffic flows. This naturally aligns
 dominated by KlogK, resulting in quasilinear complexity. The
with distance-based K-means methods, making them well
 main limitation, which is greedy flow matching, is mitigated
suited for grouping flows by behavioural similarity.
 in practice, as most flows are sparse, reducing the number
 In addition, we consider a particular server as an attack
 of effective comparisons. Consequently, the empirical runtime
server where most of the traffic is attack traffic such that it is
 scales near O(K), with sublinear growth under increasing load,
impossible to identify the flow baselines. Therefore, we also
 confirming the high efficiency and scalability of real-time
construct a baseline for the services and cluster for the service
 intrusion detection.
grouping. We extract features and perform K-means clustering
for the server subgraph with the following features:
 • Flow features. Central traffic features for flow baselines. V. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
 • Temporal features. Interactions of intragroup traffic within A. Dataset and Experimental Setup
 the service.
 • Entropy features. Cross-entropy of client frequency. We use the CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018, and UNSW-
 NB15 datasets for evaluation. The nonencrypted flows in
 Furthermore, we consider scenarios where services change
 these datasets are processed using the same feature extraction
frequently or attacks change the baselines. To address this, we
 pipeline as encrypted traffic, where plaintext content is not
employ a reputation-enhanced dynamic baseline construction
 inspected, ensuring a protocol-agnostic evaluation framework.
method. First, the reputation scores are evenly allocated to all
 The CIC-IDS2017 [50] dataset resembles real-world scethe baselines. When dynamic traffic is subsequently routed to a
 narios. To generate realistic traffic data, the dataset employs
specific baseline, a corresponding reputation value is assigned
 the B-Profile system to profile abstract human interaction
to the client. If client traffic is segmented and allocated to a
 behaviours and generate naturalistic benign background traffic.
baseline, the client’s reputation is updated and integrated into
 The dataset is based on 25 common user abstract behaviours
that baseline. Finally, all the reputation values are normalized
 built upon application layer protocols. It contains data from
to ensure consistency and fairness. The reputation calculation
 July 3 to July 7, 2017, spanning five days.
is shown as Eq. (16)
 The CIC-IDS2018 [56] dataset is generated using a
 n + (1 − α)Rn )
 Rb = λ(α ∗ Rnew old combination of B-profile and M-profile configuration files to
 create a diverse and comprehensive network intrusion detec-
 Rn = λ(β ∗ Rb + (1 − β) ∗ Rold
 n ) (16)
 tion dataset. Spanning a 10-day period in 2018, it captures
where Rb denotes the baseline reputation, Rn denotes the client a wide array of network activities. The attack infrastructure
reputation, α and β are the forgetting rates, and λ is the comprises 50 machines, and the victim organization has 5
regularization function. The function λ is defined as shown departments and includes 420 machines and 30 servers.
in Eq. 17 The UNSW-NB15 [57] dataset is created by the IXIA
 λ(Re ) = mean(Re ) (17) PerfectStorm tool in the Cyber Range Lab of UNSW Canberra,
10614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

which generates a hybrid of real modern normal activities and • The second hidden layer is a linear layer with a size of
synthetic contemporary attack behaviours. 32 ∗ 16.
 The three public datasets contain pcap files of malicious • The output layer is a sigmoid layer, which limits the
traffic generated by network attacks, as well as features output values to the range [0, 1]. This facilitates the
extracted for machine learning. Since the raw datasets are normalization of different types of classification outputs
labelled only for features, we extract the traffic metadata from to a consistent data distribution range.
the pcap files and label them by comparison. Specifically, for
the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the pcap files are labelled by 4-tuple.
 B. Analysis of Experimental Results
For the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, more precise labels are marked
by matching the 4-tuple and timestamps of the flows. The Table IV presents the comparative experimental results
CIC-IDS2018 dataset is labelled by combining the IPs of the between BSTS-Net and baseline algorithms across three
attackers, the IPs of the victims, and the time period when the datasets. Bold denotes the best results, and underline denotes
attack took place. The evaluation metrics are accuracy (AC), the second-best results. The results indicate that BSTS-Net
precision (PR), recall (RE), and F1 score (F1). Our code3 is achieves the best detection performance across all three
implemented using Zeek and Python. datasets, with F1 scores of 99.74, 99.63, and 99.88, respec-
 To validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, tively. Different sizes and categories of datasets demonstrate
experiments are conducted on the same datasets and compared the effectiveness of BSTS-Net. Among the content-based
with seven state-of-the-art algorithms, representing three main- methods, TMG-GAN achieves a high F1 on CICIDS2017 but
stream research directions. For the comparative algorithms, F1 scores that are 3.07% and 6.85% lower on the others due to
detection is performed using the corresponding feature types GAN training instability. Interaction-based DL-GNN and Conextracted from the datasets. traMTD use GCNs and contrastive learning but struggle with
 • Content-based detection. We choose the TMG-GAN algo- irregular traffic. BSTS-Net avoids long-term dependencies by
 rithm as the baseline. The algorithm employs multiple segmenting traffic into dynamic windows and comparing it
 generators to increase the diversity of generated samples, against local baselines, achieving F1 values that are 8.84%
 addressing the issue of sample imbalance in malicious and 11.92% higher than those of DL-GNN and ContraMTD on
 traffic detection. UNSW-NB15, respectively. Among the anomaly-based meth-
 • Interaction-based detection. (1) DL-GNN [7] uses a ods, Rosetta-IF achieves a 91% F1 on CICIDS2017 using TCP
 dynamic line graph neural network to extract spatial semantics, but BSTS-Net outperforms it by 17.21% via SNNinformation from each discrete snapshot and capture based microelement mapping. Kitsune and CPS-Guard use
 temporal variations in IP communication. It then uses line packet-level or environmental features, yielding only 54.99%
 graphs to enhance the detection capabilities of the graph and 59.70% F1 scores, respectively. CIC-GMM, which is
 neural network. (2) ContraMTD [58] comprehensively based on Gaussian modelling, achieves an approximately 51%
 considers both vertical and horizontal perspectives and F1 and is sensitive to the data distribution.
 uses SEC strategies and DE-GAT graph neural networks
 to extract local features and global interaction features C. Results of the per-Attack Binary Classification Experiment
 of normal traffic. It employs contrastive learning techniques to learn the consistency relationship between these In the binary classification experiment on the CICIDS2017
 features and ultimately detects malicious traffic through dataset, BSTS-Net achieves an F1 score exceeding 99% and
 multiple rounds of scoring. outperforms the best baseline methods by 1.17% to 3.92%
 • Anomaly-based detection. (1) CIC-GMM [50] uses a for the F1 and 3.13% to 3.99% for the accuracy across seven
 Gaussian mixture model for detection. (2) Rosett-IF [34] attack types. Simple anomaly-based baselines such as Kitsune
 trains an isolation forest to classify the malicious data. have shown limited detection ability. The content-based meth-
 (3) Kitsune [35] uses an autoencoder to train on nor- ods perform better on Patator, Web Attack, Botnet, PortScan,
 mal data and identifies attack samples by evaluating and LOIT, achieving approximately 2% higher accuracy, but
 the reconstruction error. (4) CPS-Guard [13] employs are less effective on DoS and DDoS attacks, with 1.85%
 an outlier-aware autoencoder, detecting by setting an lower accuracy and a 1.9% lower F1 score. Interaction-based
 adaptive threshold and comparing reconstruction loss. methods struggle to capture structural patterns. BSTS-Net
 Parameter Settings. The training parameters for the SNN integrates traffic microelements and structural information,
are configured as follows: 100 epochs, an initial learning rate achieving the best overall performance and demonstrating
of 0.001, and the Adam optimizer. The weights from the strong robustness across diverse attack categories and scales.
epoch with the lowest computed loss value are selected as the
optimal model weights. The network architecture is configured D. Adversarial Experimental Analysis
as follows:
 To evaluate the detection capability under attack conditions,
 • The input layer is a linear layer with a size of 128 ∗ 64,
 the dataset is perturbed, an adversarial dataset is constructed,
 the following is a batch normalization layer, and then a
 and experiments are conducted accordingly. Specifically, the
 dropout layer with a dropout rate 0.2.
 adversarial dataset is designed for the CICIDS2017 dataset,
 • The first hidden layer is a linear layer with a size of
 with packet-level, stream-level and feature-level perturbations
 64 ∗ 32, followed by a batch normalization layer and then
 constructed as follows:
 a dropout layer with a dropout rate 0.2.
 • Packet perturbation. The packet-level perturbation is cre-
 3 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net ated by randomly adding, removing, or modifying a
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10615

 TABLE IV
 R ESULTS OF THE M ULTICLASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS (%)

 TABLE V
 B INARY C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS (%)

 TABLE VI
 R ESULTS OF THE A DVERSARIAL E XPERIMENTS (%)

 certain number of packets within the flows of the original TABLE VII
 dataset. B EHAVIOURAL M ICROELEMENT I NFORMATION
 • Flow perturbation. The flow-level perturbation is created
 by randomly adding, removing, or modifying a certain
 number of flows within the services of the original
 dataset.
 • Feature perturbation. We modify the malicious flows such
 that their statistical features resemble those of the benign
 traffic in the dataset.
 E. Traffic Microelement Analysis
 Table VI presents the adversarial evaluation results. BSTS-
Net achieves the best performance across all the scenarios, Traffic microelements capture the interaction correlations
with an F1 score decrease ranging from 0.66% to 2.9%. between flows. To assess the consistency of the proposed
This strong robustness is due to its service-specific baseline microelements, we compare their features. The traffic informaconstruction from normal traffic, which reduces the impact tion used for this analysis is detailed in Table VII. We analyse
of perturbations. In addition, the microelement space captures traffic consistency using metadata. First, flows sharing more
complex flow correlations, making it difficult for attackers than two identical microelements in either the source or the
to generate evasive samples. Interaction-based methods suffer destination port are grouped. This grouping does not rely on IP
heavily under flow perturbations, with F1 decreases of 17.96% addresses or service labels, making achieving accurate results
and 18.48%, because injected noise disrupts the communi- more challenging. Next, we evaluate the consistency within
cation graph and impairs feature fusion. The content-based groups by checking the metadata overlaps. The results across
methods are most affected by feature perturbations, with a the three datasets are shown in Table VIII and demonstrate that
23.63% decline in the F1 score as the adversarial samples more than 99 % of similar traffic from the same service is corresemble benign traffic. The anomaly-based baselines show rectly aggregated, validating the ability of the microelements
inconsistent robustness, with F1 decreasing between 6.99% to capture flow relationships. This approach provides a novel
and 32.21% under packet and feature perturbations because and efficient feature extraction method. We also compare the
of simplistic baseline modelling. consistency and efficiency of the microelements with those
10616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VIII
 F INGERPRINT C ONSISTENCY D ETERMINATION (%)

 TABLE IX
 CICIDS2017 DATASET F INGERPRINT C ONSISTENCY AND
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

of alternative methods, including statistical features, deep
learning and graph neural networks. Deep learning consists
of multiple fully connected layers. Graph neural networks
employ two graph convolutional layers. Statistical features
are extracted using CICFlowMeter [54]. The results are presented in Table IX. The microelement achieves the highest
consistency and shortest processing, outperforming the worst Fig. 13. Effect of feature extraction.
method by 42.77% in terms of consistency and 47-fold in
terms of efficiency. Deep learning performs poorly because of
the randomness of the encrypted traffic. The use of a graph distributed, which minimizes both the false-positive rate for
neural network improves the consistency by 58.29% when flow malicious traffic and the false-negative rate for benign traffic.
dependencies are modelled, but both deep and graph models We conduct a comparative analysis of the training time and
require training and incur a computational cost that is more sample distribution, which reveals that the SNN reduces the
than an order of magnitude greater. Statistical features are loss to a low level within just 10 epochs, indicating fast conefficient but sensitive to traffic variations, resulting in 25.5% vergence and minimal training overhead. Further experiments
lower consistency than microelements. reveal that increasing the complexity of the SNN increases
 To study the distribution of the proposed traffic microele- the training time without yielding significant improvements in
ment space, we select samples from three major categories of detection performance, suggesting that a lightweight architecattacks and label the samples simply as benign or malicious. ture is sufficient for effective learning.
Afterwards, we perform PCA dimensionality reduction on
the original traffic metadata and traffic microelements for
visualization. The results are shown in Fig. 13 (a-f). The exper- G. Ablation Experiment
imental results indicate that although the original traffic shows To investigate the contributions of each component of the
some clustering indications of distribution, the distribution is BSTS-Net model, we conduct three ablation experiments.
irregular and inconsistent. In contrast, the traffic microele- • Ablation Experiment 1: Flow features are extracted
ments exhibit a clear linear distribution, which demonstrates by packet size and timestamps instead of traffic
that the proposed microelements achieve a normalized suitable microelements.
data distribution. However, relying solely on microelements • Ablation Experiment 2: The traffic microelement space
overlooks the unique features of different samples, thereby is deleted, and the microelements are input into a spacausing diverse traffic patterns to be mapped into a nondis- tiotemporal graph for classification.
criminative space. The traffic microelement space will be used • Ablation Experiment 2-1: The traffic microelement space
to address this issue. is deleted and replaced with VAE embedding.
 • Ablation Experiment 2-2: The traffic microelement space
F. Analysis of the Traffic Microelement Space is deleted and replaced with GAE embedding.
 To evaluate the mapping effectiveness of the microelement • Ablation Experiment 3: The spatiotemporal graph is
space, we visualize the same three attack features after map- replaced with an autoencoder from the baseline methods.
ping. Fig. 13 (g-i) reveals a surprising finding: despite the The results of Table X on the CICIDS2017 dataset show
samples being input to the SNN consisting only of positive that the traffic microelements significantly increase detection
and negative sample pairs based on microelements, with- when relational patterns missed by traditional metrics are
out explicit labels, benign and malicious traffic demonstrate captured. The SNN enhances global pattern learning, but direct
distinct distribution patterns, especially for botnets. These classification harms accuracy because of poor group generalpatterns arise from the correlations and comparisons among ization. Autoencoder-based methods underperform, with the
the traffic microelements, thereby creating varying levels of GAE being better than the VAE. While autoencoder integration
correlation. Additionally, the samples are more uniformly improves accuracy and recall, it remains sensitive to traffic
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10617

 TABLE X
 R ESULTS (%) OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

 TABLE XI Fig. 14. Comparison of the memory usage over time.
 R ESULTS (%) OF THE F INE -G RAINED A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

 Fig. 15. Change in the proportion of baseline matches.

 3.3 times more time than the third-slowest. method. TMG-
 TABLE XII
 GAN’s adversarial training leads to a 2.5 higher training cost,
 R ESULTS OF THE P ERFORMANCE E XPERIMENTS (%) although the inference is fast. Kitsune and CPS-Guard reduce
 inference latency but still require 3.1 and 1.3 times more time
 than the next slowest method, respectively. CIC-GMM and
 Rosett-IF complete detection in under 9 seconds but suffer up
 to a 46% decrease in the F1 score. In contrast, compared with
 the most expensive baseline, BSTS reduces the training time
 by more than 2.1-fold and achieves an inference that is 50%
 faster than the autoencoder-based models and only 12 seconds
 slower than the fastest method. As the baseline repository
 increases, the matching efficiency improves, enabling sublinear
 scaling and progressively lowering the end-to-end latency.

noise, reducing precision. In addition, we conduct a fine- I. Online Analysis Experiments
grained ablation study to evaluate the contribution of each
of the five microelements and three components of the loss BSTS-Net establishes service-specific baselines and monfunction. The results are presented in Table XI. Each feature itors for deviations in real time. To evaluate its online
 detection capability, we replay CICIDS2017 traffic using tcpreand contrastive component is essential. F~lf and F~pf reduce the play. During processing, BSTS-Net dynamically generates
F1 scores by 51.92% and 38.03%, respectively, as they capture 1317 baseline profiles. The corresponding memory and time
local patterns and directionality, which are core to protocol overheads are shown in Fig. 14(a) and 14(b), respectively.
patterns. Among the loss components, τ1 has the greatest BSTS-Net achieves real-time detection on a 2.7 GB dataset
impact, with an 18.2% decrease in the F1 score because of its with a peak memory usage of 559 MB and an average of only
focus on fine-grained low noise comparisons. In contrast, τ2 39 MB, with processing traffic at 145.6 MB/s. In contrast, the
and τ3 yield smaller performance drops of 5.91% and 5.03%, most memory-efficient autoencoder-based method requires a
respectively, as they operate over broader noisier traffic scopes peak memory usage of 47189 MB, which is more than 84
with lower discriminability. times greater than that of BSTS-Net. This efficiency stems
 from the lightweight SNN and baseline-deviation classifica-
H. Performance Analysis tion. During detection, 65.84% of flows are classified via
 We evaluate the performance of the compared algorithms direct baseline matching, bypassing costly model inference.
on the CICIDS2017 dataset. To ensure fairness, deep learning Fig. 15 shows that matching accelerates after an initial 20%
models are trained to convergence for optimal performance. slow phase caused by few baselines, revealing self-reinforcing
The results are summarized in Table XII. The training and efficiency.
detection times of ContraMTD are the longest because of the
use of dual-loop graph contrastive learning, taking 2.7 and J. Sensitivity Analysis
5.4 longer than those of the second-slowest method. DL-GNN In this section, the CICIDS2017 dataset is used for experiscales superlinearly with the graph size, requiring 1.8 and ments to validate the influence of parameter selection.
10618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XIII environments. While our current approach excels in stable
 W INDOW S IZE A NALYSIS (%) settings, we plan to develop dynamic updating mechanisms
 to improve generalization and reduce false alarms in evolving
 networks.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 Current malware detection methods rely on payload or
 traffic interactions, which are easily evaded by encryption. In
 this paper, BSTS-Net, a behaviour-based approach robust to
 encrypted traffic, is proposed. We introduce a greedy-based
 TABLE XIV microelement extraction method to capture intrinsic traffic
 C ONTRASTIVE L OSS H YPERPARAMETER A NALYSIS (%) relations. An SNN models local and global communication
 patterns in the microelement space without the need for labels.
 We further construct a spatiotemporal graph integrated with
 reputation scoring for dynamic anomaly detection. Clustering
 and dynamic baseline analysis enable effective malicious traffic identification. Experiments show that BSTS-Net achieves
 detection rates over 99% across multiple datasets, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by up to 8%, with strong
 robustness under adversarial settings. Future work will explore
 1) Analysing the impact of window size selection. Given richer microelement representations.
 varying session lengths, the window size significantly
 affects classification. As shown in Table XIII, a window R EFERENCES
 size of 4 is too small to capture traffic patterns, whereas [1] S. Elmohamed. (2021). Acronis Cyberthreats Report 2021. [Online].
 a window size of 256 includes mixed communica- Available: https://community.spiceworks.com/t/acronis-cyberthreatstion stages and introduces interference. For the dataset report-mid-year-2021/807520
 [2] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrin this work, a window size of 32 achieves optimal ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
 performance. suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy,
 2) Analysing the impact of cluster size selection. As shown Mar. 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
 in Table XIII, small cluster sizes disperse malicious [3] (2024). Suricata 7.0.6. [Online]. Available: https://suricata.io/
 [4] (2024). Snort 3. [Online]. Available: https://www.snort.org/
 samples across clusters, increasing the false-positive [5] R. A. Bridges, T. R. Glass-Vanderlan, M. D. Iannacone, M. S. Vincent,
 rate. A cluster size of 10 achieves optimal detection and Q. Chen, “A survey of intrusion detection systems leveraging
 performance, with stability maintained for larger sizes host data,” ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR), vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1–35,
 and no significant degradation observed. 2019.
 [6] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
In conclusion, the selection of parameters in this study influ- Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
ences the experimental outcomes. However, window sizes [7] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
ranging from 8 to 256 and cluster numbers from 6 to 14 yield Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
relatively high accuracy. The robustness of the proposed model pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
is insensitive to parameter variations. [8] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
 In addition, we analyse the impact of hyperparameter “The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20,
 no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2008.
settings in contrastive loss on detection performance. The [9] S. Ji, S. Pan, E. Cambria, P. Marttinen, and P. S. Yu, “A survey on
results are summarized in Table XIV. A large ω1 weakens knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications,” IEEE
the relation modelling and sharply decreases the F1 score. A Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 494–514, Feb. 2022.
small ω1 causes overfitting to host-specific patterns. A large [10] Y. Zhang, P. Tiňo, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A survey on neural
 network interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
ω2 amplifies noise and false positives. A small ω2 fails to vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 726–742, Oct. 2021.
balance the confidence weighting. ω1 has a greater impact [11] M. Liu et al., “Enhanced detection of obfuscated HTTPS tunnel traffic
than ω2 because it nonlinearly scales an unstable loss term. using heterogeneous information network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 257,
Training is highly sensitive to ω1 , and improper values cause Sep. 2024, Art. no. 110975.
 [12] V. Jyothsna, V. V. R. Prasad, and K. M. Prasad, “A review of anomaly
severe degradation. based intrusion detection systems,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 7,
 pp. 26–35, 2011.
 [13] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “CPS-GUARD: Intrusion detec-
K. Zero-Day Attack Detection tion for cyber-physical systems and IoT devices using outlier-aware deep
 BSTS-Net effectively detects zero-day attacks by modelling autoencoders,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103210.
 [14] D. Zhao et al., “Botnet detection based on traffic behavior analysis and
robust benign baselines and identifying deviations. When flow intervals,” Comput. Secur., vol. 39, pp. 2–16, Nov. 2013.
trained on CICIDS2017 and evaluated on CICIDS2018, it [15] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
achieves 99.59% recall, demonstrating strong generalizability in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
to unseen attacks. However, when applied to the benign traffic 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
 [16] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
of CICIDS2018, a 13.84% false-positive rate occurs because classification using convolutional neural network for representation
of behavioural shifts not captured by the static baseline. This learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
highlights the need for adaptive baseline modelling in new Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS 10619

[17] R.-H. Hwang, M.-C. Peng, V.-L. Nguyen, and Y.-L. Chang, “An LSTM- [37] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
 based deep learning approach for classifying malicious traffic at the traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
 packet level,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 16, p. 3414, Aug. 2019. Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022.
[18] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [38] K. J. Sullivan, W. G. Griswold, Y. Cai, and B. Hallen, “The structure
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers and value of modularity in software design,” ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng.
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, Notes, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 99–108, Sep. 2001.
 pp. 633–642. [39] M. Papazoglou and W. Van Den Heuvel, “Service oriented architectures:
[19] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An Approaches, technologies and research issues,” VLDB J., vol. 16, no. 3,
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. pp. 389–415, 2007.
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860. [40] I. Nadareishvili, R. Mitra, M. McLarty, and M. Amundsen, Microservice
[20] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic Architecture: Aligning Principles, Practices, and Culture. Sebastopol,
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. CA, USA: O’Reilly Media, 2016.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446. [41] O. Mämmelä, J. Hiltunen, J. Suomalainen, K. Ahola, P. Mannersalo, and
[21] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos, J. Vehkaperä, “Towards micro-segmentation in 5G network security,” in
 and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun. (EuCNC) Workshop Netw. Manage.,
 ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. 2016, pp. 3–5.
 Secur. Symp., Mar. 2021, pp. 4–5. [42] S. McCanne et al., “Toward a common infrastructure for multimedia-
[22] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions networking middleware,” in Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Netw. Operin automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. ating Syst. Support Digit. Audio Video (NOSSDAV), Jun. 1997,
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383. pp. 39–49.
[23] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of [43] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service usage
 intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging
 2023, pp. 6203–6220. apps,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–2864,
[24] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer- Nov. 2016.
 sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic [44] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619. encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (IEEE INFO-
[25] G. Gu, J. Zhang, and W. Lee, “BotSniffer: Detecting botnet command COM), Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 and control channels in network traffic,” in Proc. 15th Netw. Distrib. [45] (2024). Zeek 7.0. [Online]. Available: https://zeek.org/about/
 Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2008, pp. 4–5. [Online]. Available: https:// [46] B.-K. Lee and J.-H. Chang, “Packet loss concealment based on deep
 api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13302792 neural networks for digital speech transmission,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
[26] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage Audio, Speech, Language Process., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 378–387, Feb.
 fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,” 2016.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021. [47] (2024). Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number
[27] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic Registry. [Online]. Available: http://www.iana.org/assignments/
 via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proc. ACM service-names-port-numbers/service-names-port-numbers
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024, pp. 3659–3673. .xhtml
[28] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and [48] G. Peng, “CDN: Content distribution network,” 2004, arXiv:cs/0411069.
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903. [49] E. Schubert, J. Sander, M. Ester, H. P. Kriegel, and X. Xu,
[29] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks “DBSCAN revisited, revisited: Why and how you should (still) use
 for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Apr. 2020, DBSCAN,” ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 1–21,
 vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 5363–5370. Sep. 2017.
[30] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic [50] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714, in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, Portugal, Jan. 2018,
 2023. pp. 108–116.
[31] X. Li et al., “A high accuracy and adaptive anomaly detection [51] (2024). Samba 4.20.2 Document. [Online]. Available: https://
 model with dual-domain graph convolutional network for insider threat www.samba.org/samba/docs/
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1638–1652, [52] (2013). Multicast DNS. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/
 2023. rfc/rfc6762
[32] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A [53] (2000). Http Over TlS. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/
 robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on rfc/rfc2818
 heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, [54] (2021). Ahlashkari/Cicflowmeter. [Online]. Available: https://
 vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024. github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter
[33] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted mali- [55] M. Ahmed, R. Seraj, and S. M. S. Islam, “The k-means algorithm: A
 cious traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” 2023, comprehensive survey and performance evaluation,” Electronics, vol. 9,
 arXiv:2301.13686. no. 8, p. 1295, Aug. 2020.
[34] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic clas- [56] (2018). A Realistic Cyber Defense Dataset (CSE-CIC-IDS2018).
 sification in diverse network environments with TCP-aware traffic [Online]. Available: https://registry.opendata.aws/cse-cicaugmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf.-China, ids2018/
 Jul. 2023, pp. 131–132. [57] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
[35] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, set),” in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015,
 arXiv:1802.09089. pp. 1–6.
[36] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning [58] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
 for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web
 vol. 19, pp. 5668–5683, 2024. Conf., May 2024, pp. 1680–1689.