IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2520516

 Frequency-Domain Spectrum Discrepancy-Based
 Fast Anomaly Detection for IIoT Sensor
 Time-Series Signals
 Lei Chen , Member, IEEE, Xuxin Liu , Ying Zou , Jiajun Tang ,
 Canwei Liu , Bowen Hu , and Mingyang Lv

 Abstract— Driven by Industry 4.0, anomaly detection for the Things (IIoT) [1]. Based on the granularity of anomaly detec-
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) has new demands: high tion, existing methods can be primarily categorized into three
accuracy, high speed, and low resource consumption. However, types, collective-level, subsequence-level, and timestampmost existing models prioritize accuracy by constructing deep
structures with huge parameters, often neglecting timeliness level detection [2], [3]. Collective-level detection determines
and resource efficiency in resource-limited IIoT environments. whether an entire time series is abnormal. Subsequence-level
To solve these limitations, a nonneural-network-based sensor sig- detection determines whether a time interval consisting of
nal fast anomaly detection model, named FADSD, is proposed for multiple consecutive timestamps is abnormal. Timestamp-level
resource-limited IIoT scenarios. Unlike traditional bulky neural- detection, in contrast, assesses whether an individual timesnetwork solutions, FADSD only uses spectrum discrepancy in the
frequency domain, a nonneural-network approach, to meet these tamp is abnormal. With the growing demand for fine-grained
three demands. First, the spectrum discrepancy is introduced to intelligent control, timestamp-level anomaly detection has
break the dilemma of not being able to perform timestamp-level become a hot topic in the research area and also the focus
feature extraction and anomaly detection in the frequency of this article [4].
domain. Second, both point-level and sequence-level computation components are developed as complementary branches
to generate the spectrum discrepancies for each timestamp. A. Challenge
Finally, a novel anomaly scoring strategy combines point-level
and sequence-level spectrum discrepancies for more accurate Existing timestamp-level IIoT anomaly detection methods
anomaly detection. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this is mainly focus on developing high-accuracy neural-network
the first work to deploy anomaly detection exclusively in the models without the aid of supervised labels [2]. To achieve
frequency domain. Extensive experiments on eight IIoT sensor high accuracy, these models make an effort to build bulky
signal datasets demonstrate that FADSD outperforms multiple
 neural networks with numerous parameters and deep strucstate-of-the-art (SOTA) deep models and can be easily deployed in
resource-limited IIoT environments. The source code of FADSD tures. Inevitably, these models require long training/testing
is available at https://github.com/infogroup502/FADSD. times and consume many resources. When these models are
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, fast anomaly detection,
 deployed on a cloud with powerful resources, their detection
frequency domain, Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), sensor time and resource consumption will not be a concern. Coming
signal, spectrum discrepancy. to Industry 4.0, large-volume sensor signals, intensive resource
 scheduling, and frequent computing tasks bring high latency
 I. I NTRODUCTION issues for anomaly detection in the cloud. Consequently,
 anomaly detection models are increasingly being deployed on
A NOMALY detection plays a crucial role in ensuring
 the security and stability of the Industrial Internet of edge devices with limited computational resources, a paradigm
 known as edge computing. In this case, it introduces two key
 Received 15 September 2024; revised 17 January 2025; accepted 5 February challenges for timestamp-level anomaly detection [5].
2025. Date of publication 24 March 2025; date of current version 3 April
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science 1) Neural Network-Based Models May Not Be Deploy-
Foundation of China under Grant 62103143 and Grant 62203164, in part able and Run Stably: Unlike servers or clouds, IIoT
by Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant edge devices have very limited resources. For exam-
2024JJ5162, in part by the Young Backbone Teacher of Hunan Province
under Grant 2022101, and in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan ple, an MCU-based STM32 microcontroller only has
Provincial Education Department under Grant 22B0471. The Associate Editor <1-MB SRAM and <168-MHz clock speed. Even the
coordinating the review process was Dr. Dong Wang. (Corresponding author: high-performance Raspberry Pi 4b has only 2-GB RAM
Lei Chen.)
 Lei Chen, Xuxin Liu, Ying Zou, Jiajun Tang, Bowen Hu, and Mingyang and 1.5-GHz clock speed. These limited resources ren-
Lv are with the School of Information and Electrical Engineering, Hunan der neural-network-based models inoperable or unable
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China (e-mail: to run stably on such devices.
chenlei@hnust.edu.cn; xuxinliu@mail.hnust.edu.cn; 1040134@hnust.edu.cn;
jiajuntang@mail.hnust.edu.cn; hubowen@mail.hnust.edu.cn; lvapple@hnust. 2) Tradeoff Between High Accuracy and High Speed: Even
edu.cn). if the resources of an edge device are sufficient to sup-
 Canwei Liu is with the School of Computer Science and Engi- port deep neural-network-based models, these models
neering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China (e-mail:
canweiliu@csu.edu.cn). face the tradeoff between high speed and high accu-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3554286 racy. Specifically, bulky neural-network models with
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Spectrum discrepancy in the frequency domain. (a) Illustration of amplitude discrepancy in the frequency domain for a timestamp. (b) Comparison
of the amplitude and phase discrepancies between a normal (943 timestamps) and an outlier (937 timestamps) of the Yahoo dataset. (c) Comparison of the
amplitude and phase discrepancies between a normal (14 795 timestamps) and an outlier (14 789 timestamps) of the second variable in the SMTP dataset.

 deep structures and extensive parameters achieve high or DWT cannot directly perform timestamp-level anomaly
 accuracy. However, it requires substantial computation detection. It is because FFT or DWT can only work when
 time, particularly on resource-constrained edge devices. the input is an entire time series or a subsequence, whereas
 Conversely, lightweight models with shallow architec- they cannot work when the input is a timestamp. It means
 tures and fewer parameters offer faster detection speeds that a timestamp in the time domain cannot be directly
 with a reduction of reduced accuracy. mapped to the frequency domain to get its frequency-domain
 features. To take advantage of the frequency domain, existing
B. Existing Solution timestamp-level anomaly detection models [11], [14] incorporate the frequency-domain features of a time series or its
 To address the abovementioned challenges, some studsubsequences as auxiliary information alongside time-domain
ies [6], [7] propose some lightweight neural networks that
 data. Neural networks are then employed to extract the features
adapt to limited resources while maintaining accuracy. Howof each timestamp from this combined time–frequency-domain
ever, these models require frequent updates and redeployment
 information and determine whether a timestamp is abnormal.
in the cloud to sustain their accuracy. Other research [8], [9]
 Such models are, namely, time–frequency anomaly detection
constructs high-accuracy anomaly detection models by intemodels.
grating multiple nonneural-network techniques. These models
 To the best of authors’ knowledge, there is no
offer advantages such as online updates or operations without
 nonneural-network approach that has been developed to perupdates. Nevertheless, they often exhibit unstable detection
 form timestamp-level anomaly detection solely within the
accuracy due to limited representation capabilities. In sumfrequency domain.
mary, while nonneural-network solutions are more suitable for
real-world industrial edge devices with constrained resources,
further optimization is necessary to enhance their representa- C. New Insight
tion capabilities and detection stability. To fill such a gap, this article aims to design a purely
 Recent studies [10], [11] reveal that the complex feature frequency-domain-based and nonneural-network timestamppatterns of sensor signals in the time domain can always be level anomaly detection model for resource-limited IIoT
simplified and effectively identified in the frequency domain. environments.
Consequently, frequency-domain analysis, such as fast Fourier To achieve this objective, two critical tasks should be
transform (FFT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT), taken into consideration. First, the feature of a timestamp
emerges as a promising nonneural-network technology for in the frequency domain must be measured. In this article,
timestamp-level anomaly detection, which provides both the frequency-spectrum (amplitude or phase) discrepancy with
strong representation ability and fast processing speed. How- and without a timestamp is considered as the feature of this
ever, existing frequency-domain analysis-based nonneural- timestamp in the frequency domain, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
network models mainly focus on collective-level [12] or It can be seen that the two sequences, with and without the
subsequence-level anomaly detection [13]. Technically, they red-marked timestamp, form two comparison branches in the
use FFT or DWT to transform an entire time series or a subse- figure. The spectrum discrepancy between the two sequences is
quence into the frequency domain to extract spectral features. regarded as the feature of the red-marked timestamp. Second,
These spectral features are then used to determine whether it is crucial to verify whether this measurement method can
the time series or subsequence is abnormal. However, FFT effectively distinguish outliers from normal points. To verify
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

the effectiveness, a sequence of length 20 containing at least TABLE I
one outlier is selected from two real-world datasets, Yahoo R ELATED W ORK
and SMTP. Next, the amplitude and phase discrepancies of a
normal point and an outlier from two datasets are plotted in
Fig. 1(b) and (c), respectively. By observation, it is not difficult
to find that the spectrum discrepancy can distinguish outliers
from normal points.

D. Contribution
 Based on the above discussions, a fast and nonneuralnetwork timestamp-level anomaly detection model is proposed
for IIoT sensor signals via spectrum discrepancy in the frequency domain. The main contributions of this work are
summarized as follows.
 1) Spectrum discrepancy is introduced to measure
 timestamp-level features in the frequency domain,
 which overcomes the difficulty of timestamp-level
 feature extraction and anomaly detection only in the
 frequency domain.
 2) A nonneural-network fast anomaly detection model,
 namely, FADSD, is proposed for IIoT sensor signals.
 Technically, FADSD designs customized point-level and
 sequence-level learning components, and a spectrum
 discrepancy-based scoring strategy. They work together
 to achieve anomaly detection with high speed, high
 accuracy, and low resource consumption. To the best
 of authors’ knowledge, this is the first work to deploy bulky models often require a lot of GPU/CPU and storage
 timestamp-level anomaly detection exclusively in the resources, and they require long training time and testing time.
 frequency domain. Therefore, their timeliness is compromised, with processing
 3) Extensive experiments on eight real-world IIoT datasets times potentially extending to several hours or even days for
 demonstrate that FADSD outperforms several state-of- large-volume sensor signals.
 the-art (SOTA) deep models. Moreover, experiments on To enhance timeliness, acceleration techniques such as
 STM32 and Raspberry Pi 4b verify that FADSD has high parallelization, federated learning, and model compression
 speed and is easily deployable on IIoT edge devices with are often employed to optimize existing deep models. For
 limited resources. example, the PAFormer model [19] parallelizes the attention
 mechanism and Transformer network to improve timeliness.
 The DAD model [20] employs a lightweight CNN and a
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 parallelized two-stage LTSM autoencoder to quickly detect
 The related works in the three categories relevant to our IoT anomalies. The TinyAD model [6] designs multiple stratemodel are summarized in Table I. gies to compress the parameters of the convolutional neural
 network (CNN). The ANNet model [7] uses a lightweight
A. Neural-Network-Based Anomaly Detection multilayer perceptron (MLP) network with fewer parameters
 to replace computationally intensive LSTM cells with huge
 Unsupervised neural-network-based deep models have
 parameters. Although these models achieve high accuracy and
become the mainstream approaches in recent years because
 high speed, they still carry numerous parameters, requiring a
they do not rely on labeled data and have strong representation
 lot of CPU/GPU and storage resources. As a result, they cannot
capabilities. These models are typically designed for deploybe directly deployed on edge devices with limited resources.
ment on cloud servers with powerful resources, so they only
focus on high accuracy by constructing deep structures with
huge parameters. For example, the TMANomaly model [15] B. Nonneural-Network-Based Anomaly Detection
designs a mutual adversarial network to effectively capture the Nonneural-network models employ statistical, clustering,
temporal features in IIoT sensor signals. The AnomalyTrans and machine learning techniques to identify anomalies in IIoT
model [16] employs multilayer Transformer network to learn sensor signals. These models do not have deep structures and
association discrepancies as anomaly scores. Based on this, the large parameters, so they are very fast and take up only a few
DCdetector model [17] develops a two-branch contrasting net- resources. For instance, Pascoal et al. [21] use the principal
work with deep structures and numerous parameters. Similarly, component analysis (PCA) to select distinguishable features
the DTAAD model [18] integrates the deep TCN network with for anomaly detection. The LODA model [22] aggregates
a computation-sensitive attention mechanism. However, these multiple weak anomaly detectors to build a strong anomaly
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

detector. The optiforest model [23] optimizes the traditional
isolation forest method to identify anomalies in IIoT. However,
these models often exhibit poor representation capabilities,
which result in unsatisfactory accuracy when encountering
sensor signals with complex features.
 To improve model accuracy, multiple nonneural-network
technologies are integrated to build a hybrid anomaly detection
model. For example, the extend FCM model [8] combines
fuzzy C-means and PSO to enhance anomaly detection accuracy. The MDS_AD model [9] incorporates locality-sensitive
hashing (LSH), isolation forest, and PCA techniques. Similarly, the LSTM-MARKOV model [24] integrates Markov
processes into the LSTM network. The DIF model [25] uses
a shallow neural network to map raw data into a feature space
and then employs the isolation forest method for anomaly
detection in this new space. Although these models show
improved accuracy, they are still not as accurate as deep
models. Therefore, these models cannot perfectly meet the
accuracy requirements of IIoT anomaly detection in the context of Industry 4.0. Fig. 2. IIoT environment.

C. Time–Frequency-Based Anomaly Detection resource consumption. Driven by these new requirements,
 Compared to the time domain, it is always easy to identify traditional popular cloud deployment solutions are beginning
the complex feature of signals from sensors in the frequency to be replaced by edge deployment solutions. In this case,
domain. However, traditional frequency-domain analysis tech- it is valuable to explore the construction of a nonneuralniques, such as FFT and DWT, are unable to directly extract network timestamp-level anomaly detection model based only
features from a single timestamp. Thus, these techniques can- on frequency-domain analysis.
not be directly applied to timestamp-level anomaly detection. III. P RELIMINARY
To overcome this limitation, time–frequency-based models
for timestamp-level anomaly detection have been developed. A. IIoT Environment
These models utilize frequency-domain features, such as The IIoT facilitates real industrial production processes
amplitude or phase, derived from an entire time series or by enabling remote monitoring and control, as illustrated
its subsequences to complement time-domain data. Subse- in Fig. 2. Specifically, various heterogeneous smart senquently, neural networks are employed to extract features of sors, including vibration, pressure, and oil sensors, are
a single timestamp from the mixed time–frequency informa- deployed at key locations within the production process
tion, thereby achieving timestamp-level anomaly detection. to monitor the operational status of equipment. The data
Therefore, most existing time–frequency-based models are collected by these sensors are transmitted to edge gateneural-network-based anomaly detection models. For exam- ways and resource-constrained edge hosts using various
ple, the FCVAE model [11] extracts high-frequency and network technologies (Wi-Fi/5G/Ethernet), and protocols
low-frequency features from the frequency domain and con- (Modbus/UDP/TCP). Subsequently, the edge gateway forcatenates them with the raw data to enhance time-domain wards this data to the cloud with power resources for further
features for anomaly detection. Similarly, the KreqGAN monitoring and control.
model employs adversarial learning to identify anomalies In this article, we consider an industrial production process
from concatenated time–frequency information. The TFAD employing M sensors for data collection. After T collection
model [10] employs TCN networks to learn features from intervals, the resulting sensor signal data form a multivarithe combined time–frequency information. Furthermore, the ate time series. This time-series data is formally expressed
Dual-TF model [26] and the TF-C model [27] design dif- as X = {x 1 , . . . , x T } ∈ R M×T , where T denotes the number
ferent mechanisms to align the time domain and frequency of timestamps and M represents the number of variables
domain. Additionally, the ATF-UAD model [14] integrates (sensors). The data comprise two dimensions: the time dimen-
CNN, GCN, and adversarial learning to construct time and fre- sion and the variable (sensor) dimension. As for the time
 T
quency reconstructors for learning features of the concatenated dimension, X = {xt ∈ R M×1 }t=1 , where xt represents the
time–frequency information. To the best of authors’ knowl- values of M sensors at the tth timestamp. As for the variable
edge, there has been no work that performs timestamp-level dimension, X = {x m ∈ R1×T }m=1 M
 , where x m represents values
anomaly detection only in the frequency domain. from T timestamps at the mth sensor.

D. Summary B. Problem Statement
 In Industry 4.0, anomaly detection models for IIoT must Traditionally, anomaly detection models are deployed on
meet new requirements: high accuracy, high speed, and low the cloud with powerful resources. However, driven by the
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

Fig. 3. Overview of the FADSD model. (a) Point-level spectrum discrepancy calculation. (b) Sequence-level spectrum discrepancy calculation. (c) Spectrum
discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.

need for fine-grained monitoring, anomaly detection models FADSD, is designed to achieve high-speed and high-accuracy
have begun to migrate from the cloud to resource-limited edge anomaly detection on resource-limited IIoT edge devices.
hosts for the goal of real-time detection. Therefore, this article To the best of authors’ knowledge, this is the first work to
aims to construct a nonneural-network fast anomaly detection deploy timestamp-level anomaly detection exclusively in the
model for IIoT sensor signals. First, the anomaly detection frequency domain. The overview of the FADSD model is
model generates an anomaly score for each timestamp in X, shown in Fig. 3, which consists of three components.
which is formulated as follows: 1) The first component calculates the frequency-spectrum
 discrepancy for each timestamp from a point-level
 Scoret = FADSD(x t ) (1)
 perspective, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Specifically, a cus-
 M tomized point-level sampling strategy works with the
where x t ∈ R denotes the values of M variables at
tth timestamp. Second, the anomaly score is used to classify FFT to generate point-level spectrum (amplitude or
a timestamp as an anomaly or not, which is defined as phase) discrepancies in the frequency domain. This
 ( component aims to accurately identify explicit anomalies
 1, if Scoret ≥ λ in IIoT sensor signals.
 ȳ t = (2)
 0, otherwise 2) The second component complements the first by
 calculating another frequency-spectrum discrepancy
where λ is a preset threshold ranging from 0 to 1.
 from a sequence-level perspective, as shown in
If ȳ t = 1, the tth timestamp is classified as an anomaly;
 Fig. 3(b). Specifically, a sequence-level sampling stratotherwise, it is considered normal. Finally, the predicted labels
 egy is designed and combined with FFT to generate
for all timestamps are expected to align closely with the true
 sequence-level amplitude or phase discrepancies. This
labels.
 component aims to identify implicit anomalies.
 3) The third component combines the point-level and
 IV. P ROPOSED M ODEL
 sequence-level frequency-spectrum discrepancies to gen-
A. Overview erate a final anomaly score for each timestamp, as shown
 In this article, we replace traditional deep neural-network- in Fig. 3(c). Based on this score, (2) is employed to
based solutions by developing a nonneural-network anomaly decide whether the timestamp is an anomaly.
detection model only in the frequency domain. Additionally, Note that the IIoT sensor signals X need to be instance
we introduce spectrum discrepancy to measure the impor- normalized [17] before being processed by our model.
tance of each timestamp in the frequency domain, which Additionally, the point-level and sequence-level spectrum discan circumvent the inherent barrier of the inability to extract crepancy calculations are independent and can be executed
timestamp-level features in the frequency domain. In sum- in parallel. In both components, the calculation process of
mary, a timestamp-level anomaly detection model, namely, M variables is also performed independently and in parallel.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 4. Point-level and sequence-level sampling. (a) Explicit outlier. (b) Implicit outlier. (c) Point-level sampling. (d) Sequence-level sampling.

B. Point-Level Spectrum Discrepancy Calculation in the frequency domain. If a timestamp is not replaceable in
 its neighbor sequence, it is not similar to its neighbors. On the
 Anomalies in IIoT sensor signals generally fall into two contrary, it is similar to its neighbors. Therefore, spectrum
categories: explicit anomalies and implicit anomalies. These discrepancy is introduced to quantify the replaceability of
anomalies often persist over multiple timestamps. If fine- each timestamp within its neighbor sequence. The core idea is
grained timestamp-level anomaly detection is performed, to observe the amplitude or phase discrepancy of the same
timely warnings can be issued at the early stage of an anomaly, neighbor sequence with or without a timestamp, as shown
thereby ensuring the security and stability of IIoT systems. in Fig. 1(a).
In this section, we focus on designing a component to perform Based on the analysis, a novel point-level spectrum discreptimestamp-level anomaly detection in the frequency domain ancy calculation component is designed to identify explicit
for explicit anomalies. anomalies in the frequency domain.
 In an explicit anomaly, the values of each timestamp are 1) Point-Level Sampling: To calculate the spectrum discrepsignificantly different from each other and from normal times- ancy, a variable-independent point-level sampling strategy is
tamps. As illustrated in Fig. 4(a), the timestamps between designed to generate a neighbor sequence for each timestamp
1600 and 1700 in the 136th variable of the real-world UCR and a replacement sequence without it, as shown in Fig. 4(c).
dataset present an explicit anomaly. In the figure, x1 rep- Taking the tth timestamp of the mth variable as an example,
resents an abnormal timestamp and y1 represents a normal the generation process for these two sequences is outlined as
timestamp. When comparing these two timestamps within follows.
neighbor sequences of the same length (purple region for x1
and green region for y1 ), x1 is significantly different from its 1) Neighbor Sequence Generation: Timestamps from the
neighbors, while y1 is relatively smooth with its neighbors. range (t − L/2) to (t + L/2) are extracted from the
This implies that x1 is not similar to its neighbors, whereas mth variable x m ∈ R1×T to form the neighbor sequence
y1 is more similar to its neighbors. Therefore, the similarity of Ptm ∈ R1×L .
a timestamp with its neighbors is a good indicator to accurately 2) Replacement Sequence Generation: The average Avg
identify explicit anomalies in the frequency domain. For this of all timestamps in Ptm except the tth timestamp
goal, we need to get the features of each timestamp in the is calculated. The value at the tth timestamp in Ptm is
frequency domain. then replaced by the Avg. The generated sequence is the
 However, an inherent obstacle arises: the features of a
 m
 replacement sequence Pno−t ∈ R1×L .
timestamp cannot be directly measured in the frequency Finally, these two sequences of length L are used to assess
domain. This obstacle stems from the lack of a one-to-one the replaceability of timestamp t in the frequency domain.
correspondence between the time domain and the frequency It is important to note that the sampling processes for the
domain. For example, a sensor signal of length L in the M variables and the timestamps within each variable can be
time domain is transformed by FFT into a superposition of executed in parallel.
L/2 frequency components in the frequency domain. As a 2) Spectrum Discrepancy Calculation: Once the two neighresult, the features of a specific timestamp are dispersed across bor sequences are generated, the spectrum discrepancy
these L/2 frequency components, making direct measurement calculation is very simple for each timestamp. We use the
impossible. To solve this problem, we convert from measuring tth timestamp of the mth variable as an example to outline the
the features of each timestamp to evaluating its replaceability detailed calculation process in the frequency domain.
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

 First, the FFT is employed to transform two neighbor 1) Sequence-Level Sampling: Similar to the point-level
sequences Ptm and Pno−t
 m
 of length L into L/2 frequency sampling, a variable-independent sequence-level sampling
components, respectively, strategy is designed to generate a neighbor sequence for the
 ( substitute of each timestamp and a replacement sequence
 FPm m
 
 t = FFT Pt without the substitute, as shown in Fig. 4(d). Taking the
 (3)
 FPm m
 
 no−t = FFT Pno−t tth timestamp of the mth variable as an example, the sampling
 process is expressed as follows.
where [FPm t , FPno−t ] ∈ C and [Ptm , Pno−t
 m 1×(L/2) m
 ] ∈ R1×L
 Second, the amplitudes or phases of FPt and FPm m
 no−t are 1) Neighbor Sequence Generation: Timestamps in the
calculated as the frequency-domain features of Ptm and Pno−t m range (t − LS/2)–(t + LS/2) are extracted from the
 ( mth variable x m ∈ R1×T to form the first neighbor
 APm t = abs FPt ,
 m
 APm m
  
 no−t = abs FPno−t sequence Stm ∈ R1×LS .
 (4)
 PPmt = phase FPt , PPno−t = phase FPno−t
 m m m
  
 2) Grouping: All data in Stm are sequentially divided
 into G groups, each containing LG timestamps, where
where [APm t , APno−t ] ∈ R t , PPno−t ] ∈
 m 1×(L/2)
 and [PPm m
 1×(L/2) LS = G × LG.
R . Here, abs(·) denotes the amplitude calculation func-
 3) Substitute Generation: The group where timestamp t is
tion, and phase(·) denotes the phase calculation function.
 located is considered its substitute, with a length of LG.
 Finally, the mean-square-error (mse) function is used to
 4) Replacement Sequence Generation: The value of each
measure the amplitude or phase discrepancy in the frequency
 timestamp in the substitute group is replaced by the averdomain for the tth timestamp
 ( age of the corresponding positions in the other groups
 MSE APm t , APno−t
 m
 
 m to generate the replacement sequence Sno−t m
 ∈ R1×LS ,
 DPt = (5)
 t , PPno−t
 MSE PPm m which excludes the substitute of the tth timestamp.
 

where DPm Finally, these two sequences of length LS are used to
 t ∈ R.
 It is worth noting that the amplitude or phase discrepancy measure the sequence-level replaceability of timestamp t in
calculations for each timestamp in the M variables can be the frequency domain.
performed in parallel for faster speed. 2) Spectrum Discrepancy Calculation: Similar to the pointlevel calculation, the sequence-level spectrum discrepancy
C. Sequence-Level Spectrum Discrepancy Calculation calculation for each timestamp is straightforward. Taking
 the tth timestamp of the mth variable as an example, the
 Unlike explicit anomalies, implicit anomalies exhibit more calculation process is described as follows.
complex patterns. In such anomalies, some timestamps differ First, the FFT is used to transform two neighbor sequences
significantly from normal timestamps, while others closely Stm and Sno−tm
 , each of length LS, into LS/2 frequency
resemble them. For instance, the timestamps between 8580 and components
8640 in the real-world Sed dataset present an implicit anomaly,
as shown in Fig. 4(b). In the figure, x2 represents an abnormal
 (
 FSm m
 
 t = FFT St
timestamp and y2 is a normal timestamp. Notably, x2 has (6)
 FSm m
 
the same value as y2 , and their local neighbor sequences are no−t = FFT Sno−t
very similar. In this case, the replaceability of x2 and y2 in
 where [FSm t , FSno−t ] ∈ C and [Stm , Sno−t
 m 1×(LS/2)
their respective neighbor sequences is also very similar. This
 m
 ] ∈ R1×LS .
similarity makes the previously proposed point-level spectrum Second, the amplitudes or phases of FSt and FSm m
 no−t are
discrepancy approach ineffective for accurately identifying calculated as
anomalies like x2 . (
 ASm t = abs FSt ,
 m
 ASm m
  
 To solve this problem, the most straightforward approach no−t = abs FSno−t
 (7)
 PSmt = phase FSt , PSno−t = phase FSno−t
 m m m
  
is to make x2 and y2 significantly distinguishable in their
neighbor sequences. Thus, we extract multiple local neighbors
 where [ASm t , ASno−t ] ∈ R t , PSno−t ] ∈
 m
as the substitute sequence of a timestamp. This approach intro-
 1×(LS/2)
 and [PSm m

duces significant differences between the substitute sequences R1×(LS/2) .
of initially similar timestamps. It also means that the replace- Finally, the mse function is employed to measure
ability of these substitute sequences differs within their similar sequence-level spectrum discrepancy for each timestamp
neighbor sequences. For example, we use the dark red (
 MSE ASmt , ASno−t
 m
 
subsequence as the substitute for x2 and the dark green subse- m
 DSt = (8)
 t , PSno−t
 MSE PSm m
 
quence as the substitute for y2 . As a result, the replaceability
of the subsequences for x2 and y2 within their respective
sequence-level neighbor sequences (long purple and long where DSm t ∈ R is the sequence-level spectrum discrepancy
green areas) becomes significantly different. of the tth timestamp.
 Based on this analysis, a sequence-level spectrum dis- Similar to the point-level calculation, the sequence-level
crepancy calculation component is designed to identify spectrum discrepancy calculation for each timestamp in the
implicit anomalies in the frequency domain from a sequential M variables can be performed in parallel to enhance compuperspective. tational efficiency.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

D. Spectrum Discrepancy-Based Anomaly Scoring Algorithm 1 FADSD
 In this section, a spectrum discrepancy-based scoring strat- input : Time-series X ∈ R M×T ; Parameters α and λ.
egy is proposed to combine point-level and the sequence-level output: Anomaly labels for all timestamps ȳ.
perspectives for more accurate anomaly detection. The scoring 1 for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
process for the tth timestamp is illustrated in Fig. 3(c) and is // Spectrum discrepancy calculation
summarized as follows. 2 for m ∈ {1, . . . , M} parallel do
 First, the tth timestamp x t ∈ R M×1 , t ∈ (1, . . . , T ) is // point-level discrepancy
simultaneously input into the point-level and sequence-level 3 Ptm ; Pno−t
 m
 ← point-level sampling for xtm ;
spectrum discrepancy calculation components. Second, each 4
 m m
 F Pt ; F Pno−t ← FFT(Ptm ; Pno−t m
 ) by Eq. (3);
of M variables at tth timestamp independently calculate its 5
 m m m
 A Pt ; A Pno−t ← abs(F Pt ; F Pno−tm
 ) by Eq. (4);
spectrum discrepancy in both two components. For each 6 D Ptm ← MSE(A Ptm ; A Pno−t m
 ) by Eq. (5);
variable m ∈ (1, . . . , M), the point-level and sequencelevel spectrum discrepancies, DPm m // sequence-level discrepancy
 t ∈ R and DSt ∈ R, are
generated as the point-level and the sequence-level anomaly 7 Stm ; Sno−t
 m
 ← sequence-level sampling for xtm ;
scores, respectively. Third, the point-level and sequence-level 8
 m m
 F St ; F Sno−t ← FFT(Stm ; Sno−t
 m
 ) by Eq. (6);
 m m m m
average anomaly scores for the M variables are calculated as 9 ASt ; ASno−t ← abs(F St ; F Sno−t ) by Eq. (7);
DP(xt ) = mean({DPm DStm ← MSE(AStm ; ASno−t m
 t }m=1 ) and DS(x t ) = mean({DSt }m=1 ),
 M m M 10 ) by Eq. (8);
respectively. Finally, the final score for the tth timestamp is 11 end
generated as // Anomaly scoring
 M
 D P(xt ) = mean( D Ptm m=1 );
 
 Scoret = α × DP(xt ) + (1 − α) × DS(xt ) (9) 12
  m M
 13 DS(xt ) = mean( DSt m=1 );
where α is a preset parameter with the range of [0∼1]. 14 Scor et = α × D P(xt ) + (1 − α) × DS(xt );
When α = 0, we only consider the sequence-level spectrum
discrepancy. When α = 1, only the point-level spectrum // Anomaly
  detection
discrepancy is considered. 1, if Scor et ≥ λ
 15 ȳ t =
 After getting the anomaly score, (2) is employed to deter- 0, otherwise
mine whether the tth timestamp is an anomaly. 16 end
 17 Return ȳ;

E. Algorithm and Analysis
 The pseudocode of FADSD is shown in Algorithm 1.
 V. E XPERIMENT
 Complexity: The computational costs of the FADSD model
come from three sequential stages: spectrum discrepancy A. Experimental Goal
calculation, spectrum discrepancy-based anomaly scoring, We conduct a series of experiments to address the following
and anomaly detention. In the first stage, the spectrum research questions.
discrepancy calculation for M variables is performed in 1) RQ1 (Accuracy): Does the FADSD model outperforms
parallel, and point-level and sequence-level spectrum discrep- other popular deep learning models?
ancy calculation on a variable can also be performed in 2) RQ2 (Deployability): Can our model be easily deployed
parallel. Specifically, the complexity of the point-level spec- on resource-limited IIoT edge devices?
trum discrepancy calculation is O(T × ( |{z} L + L × log L )), 3) RQ3 (Timeliness and Resource Consumption): Does
 | {z }
 sampling FFT our model has good timeliness and low resource
where T is the length of the time series and L is consumption?
the point-level neighbor length. Similarly, the complexity 4) RQ4 (Robustness): How well does our model performs
of the sequence-level spectrum discrepancy calculation is in noisy environments?
 LS + LS × logLS )), where T is the length of the
O(T × ( |{z} 5) RQ5 (Ablation): Does each innovative component of our
 | {z }
 sampling FFT model enhances overall performance?
time series and LS is the sequence-level neighbor length. 6) RQ6 (Sensitivity): How do different parameters affect
Therefore, the complexity of spectrum discrepancy calcu- model performance?
lation is O(T × (L + L × log L + LS + LS × logLS )), where
L , L × log L , LS, LS × logLS ≪ T . In the second stage,
the mean spectrum discrepancy of M variables is converted B. Dataset
into an anomaly score of a timestamp, and its complexity is We select eight publicly available real-world time-series
O(T × M), where M ≪ T . In the last stage, each timestamp datasets from the IIoT environment, including two univariate
is determined to be an anomaly, and its complexity is O(T ). and six multivariate datasets, as listed in Table II. Among
In summary, ignoring relatively small factors (L , LS), the time these, MSL, GECCO, Genesis, HAI, SKAB, and SWAT are
complexity of our FADSD model is O(T × (M + L × log L + multivariate IIoT sensor signals, whereas Dodgers and UCR
LS × logLS )), which is nearly linear because (M+L × log L + are univariate IIoT sensor signals. These datasets cover var-
LS × logLS ) ≪ T . ious industrial domains, including aviation, water treatment,
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

 TABLE II range from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating better anomaly
 E IGHT P UBLIC DATASETS detection performance.
 3) Experimental Environment: All experiments are conducted in a Windows 11 environment equipped with an Intel1
 Core2 i7-10700KF CPU, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU
 (24-GB VGA-RAM), and 64 GB of system memory. The
 FADSD model is developed in Python using PyCharm as the
 integrated development environment (IDE). The source code is
 publicly available at https://github.com/infogroup502/FADSD.
 For the other models, official Python implementations are
 obtained from the websites of respective authors, as detailed
 in Table III.

mechanical manufacturing, and transportation, to ensure a fair
 D. RQ1 (Accuracy)
and unbiased evaluation.
 Specifically, the MSL dataset captures the operating status To answer RQ1, we compare the FADSD against nine
of multiple sensors or controllers on the Mars rover. The baselines across eight IIoT datasets.
GECCO dataset stores drinking water quality data from mul- Table IV presents the accuracy of ten models on eight IIoT
tiple IoT sensors. The Genesis dataset records five continuous datasets. In the table, the best performance is highlighted in
signals and 13 discrete signals form IIoT multisensors. The bold, while the second-best performance is underlined. From
SWAT dataset consists of 51-D data collected by sensors in the table, several findings can be observed.
public water treatment infrastructure. The HAI dataset contains 1) Overall Performance: FADSD achieves the best performultiple industrial signals from pumps, valves, pressure sen- mance, followed by DCdetector, FCVAE, ATF-UAD,
sors, and other common industrial equipments. The Dodgers DIF, and DTAAD, while Optiforest, LODA, IForest,
dataset consists of traffic flow data collected by induction and PCA show the weakest performance. For examloop sensors (loop sensors) on roads near Dodger Stadium ple, on the SWAT dataset, FADSD gets an ACC of
in Los Angeles. The UCR dataset is a publicly available 0.9924 and an F1 of 0.9688, whereas PCA only scores
IIoT dataset containing only a single signal and one recorded an ACC of 0.5761 and an F1 of 0.5852.
anomaly. 2) Stability: FADSD demonstrates the most stable performance across all four metrics, with DCdetector, DIF, and
 FCVAE following closely. For instance, on the HAI and
C. Baseline, Metric, and Environment SKAB datasets, FADSD achieves three first-place
 1) Baseline: To validate the effectiveness of our FADSD and one second-place stable results.
model, we select nine representative SOTA models as competi- 3) Time and Frequency Domains: The FADSD model
tors, as listed in Table III. These baselines are chosen based on outperforms other time–frequency-based models, such
their model structure (neural-network usage) and their focus as FCVAE and ATF-UAD. On the MSL dataset, the
on the time and frequency domains. ACC is 0.9926 and the F1 is 0.9378 for FADSD,
 1) Considering network structure, DCdetector, ATF-UAD, while 0.9632 and 0.8440 for FCVAE, and 0.9223 and
 FCVAE, DTAAD, and DIF are deep neural-network- 0.7789 for ATF-UAD.
 based models with multilayer structures and numer- 4) Deep or Shallow Structures: Deep neural-networkous parameters. In contrast, IForest, PCA, Optiforest, based models (DIF, DCdetector, FCVAE, ATF-UAD,
 LODA, and FADSD are nonneural-network-based shal- DTAAD) generally outperform shallow models (IForest,
 low models. PCA, Optiforest, LODA). However, the shallow FADSD
 2) Regarding time and frequency domains, DIF, Optiforest, exceeds multiple deep models. For example, on the
 DCdetector, LODA, PCA, IFoest, and DTAAD focus SWAT dataset, FADSD achieves an F1-score of 0.9688,
 solely on the time domain for anomaly detection. And surpassing DCdetector’s 0.9649, FCVAE’s 0.9459, IFor-
 FCVAE and ATF-UAD combine time and frequency est’s 0.4182, and LODA’s 0.7469.
 domains to perform anomaly detection, while FADSD 5) In Summary: The nonneural-network FADSD shows
 exclusively uses the frequency domain. performance that demonstrates performance that rivals,
 2) Metric: To comprehensively evaluate our model, and in some cases surpasses, deep models. This is
we employ four widely recognized metrics: Accuracy (ACC), because, for sensor signals, the features of abnormal
Precision, Recall, and F1-score (F1). ACC measures the ratio patterns are easier to identify in the frequency domain
of correctly predicted samples to the total sample count. Pre- than in the time domain. In this case, FADSD using a
cision indicates the proportion of accurately predicted normal nonneural network directly in the frequency domain can
timestamps among all predicted normal timestamps. Recall achieve better accuracy than other SOTA models using
reflects the proportion of actual normal timestamps that are deep neural network in the time domain.
correctly identified. The F1 provides a balanced evaluation 1 Registered trademark.

by combining Recall and Precision. In general, these metrics 2 Trademarked.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 BASELINES

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON E IGHT II OT DATASETS

E. RQ2 (Deployability) shallow models (IForest, LODA, and Optiforest) and five deep
 To address RQ2, we conduct deployment experiments for models (DIF, DCdetector, FCVAE, ATF-UAD, and DTAAD)
ten models on two IIoT edge devices. are deployed using an offline solution, where they first are
 1) Deployment on Raspberry Pi 4b With General trained in the cloud and then are deployed on the edge device.
Resources: A Raspberry Pi 4b with a 1.5-GHz ARM Cortex- Fig. 5(a) shows the deployment results of ten models on
A72 processor and 2-GB RAM is selected as the first IIoT Raspberry Pi 4b. From the figure, two observations can be
edge device. In this experiment, two shallow models (PCA found.
and FADSD) are deployed using an online solution, where 1) Deployability: All ten models are successfully
they perform real-time anomaly detection directly without deployed. In comparison, shallow models are easier to
training and update. The other three machine leaning-based deploy.
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

Fig. 5. Deployment results on two IIoT edge devices, where (a) Raspberry Pi 4b on the left and (b) STM32 on the right.

 2) Convenience: In the IIoT environment, production pro- evaluation. They are model parameters, time for one epoch
 cesses frequently changes, causing time signals to with the same batch_size (One-epoch-time), CPU and GPU
 fluctuate dynamically. When faced with dynamically usage (CPU-GPU-Usage), RAM utilization (RAM-Usage),
 changing IIoT time signals, shallow models deployed and VGA RAM utilization (VGA-RAM-Usage). In the Rasponline can be used directly. Meanwhile, deep models berry Pi 4b environment, only three metrics are considered:
 deployed offline must be fine-tuned in the cloud and detection time for 100 timestamps (100-timestamp time), CPU
 redeployed on the edge before being reused. Moreover, usage (CPU-Usage), and RAM-Usage. Similarly, the STM32
 shallow models are usually faster and take up less environment employs three metrics: detection time for one
 resources. timestamp (1-timestamp time), CPU-Usage, and RAM-Usage.
 2) Deployment on STM32 With Little Resources: The Table V lists the comparison results of the ten models.
STM32 F407 with a 160-MHz ARM Cortex-M4 processor and 1) Timeliness: The five shallow models (IForest, PCA,
1-MB RAM is chosen as the second IIoT edge device. Due Optiforest, LODA, and FADSD) are significantly faster
to 1-MB RAM limitation, we remove dependence packages than the deep models (DIF, DCdetector, FCVAE,
exceeding 1 MB from ten models to make them deployable. ATF-UAD, and DTAAD) across all three deployment
The deployment results on STM32 are illustrated in Fig. 5(b). environments. For example, the average time for the
Some similar findings can be obtained from the figure. five shallow models in the PC environment is 81.18 s,
 1) Deployability: Only the five nonneural-network-based compared to 326.74 s for the five deep models.
 shallow models are successfully deployed since the deep 2) Computing Consumption: Shallow models exhibit
 neural-network-based models require more than 1 MB slightly higher computing resource utilization than deep
 of RAM. models. This is mainly because deep models are
 2) Convenience: The FADSD model is easier to deploy deployed offline on edge devices, and the computing
 compared to other shallow models, and it demonstrates consumption required for their training is all in the
 comparable speed and resource consumption. cloud. For example, the CPU-Usage on the Raspberry
 Pi 4b is 52% for the shallow IForest model, while 32%
 3) In Summary: The nonneural-network-based models
 for the deep ATF-UAD model.
are easier to deploy and operate on resource-limited IIoT
 3) Storage Consumption: Deep models consume signifiedge devices. Therefore, FADSD, which directly designs a
 cantly more storage resources than shallow models. For
nonneural-network solution only in the frequency domain,
 example, in the PC environment, the RAM-Usage is
is highly suitable for the resource-constrained IIoT environ-
 18.1 GB and VGA-RAM-Usage is 15.3 GB for the deep
ment and can achieve reliable and stable accuracy.
 DCdetector model, while 2.9 GB for our FADSD model.
 4) In Summary: Our FADSD model demonstrates good
F. RQ3 (Timeliness and Resource Consumption) timeliness and low resource consumption, which means
 To answer RQ3, we compare the timeliness and resource it can work well on resource-limited IIoT edge devices.
consumption of ten models across three environments: a PC
with powerful resources, a Raspberry Pi 4b with general G. RQ4 (Robustness)
resources, and an STM32 F407 with limited resources. In the To address RQ4, inspired by the latest assessment bench-
PC environment, five metrics are selected for experimental marks [30], we introduced different levels of artificial noise
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE V
 T IMELINESS AND R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION

Fig. 6. Robustness analysis on noisy datasets. (a) SWAT. (b) GECCO. (c) HAI. (d) Dodgers.

into the anomaly score calculation process to simulate a noisy 2) Considering the performance, FADSD, DCdetector,
environment. Specifically, we select four datasets (SWAT, DTAAD, DIF, and FCVAE consistently outperform other
GECCO, HAI, and Dodgers) to conduct robustness experi- models, as indicated by their higher precision scores. For
ments under noise levels of 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20%. instance, on the HAI dataset at 5% noise, the Precision
All models are tested across these five noisy environments. is 0.8425 for FADSD, 0.8652 for DCdetector, 0.8239 for
 Fig. 6 shows the performance changes of ten models. From DTAAD, 0.782 for DIF, and 0.6862 for FCVAE, with
the figure, several observations can be found. other models scoring lower.
 1) Considering the Noise Levels: As noise levels increase, 3) In summary, FADSD demonstrates more stable and
 the performance of all models deteriorates. Among superior performance across different noise environthe models, FADSD and DTAAD exhibit the greatest ments, indicating strong noise tolerance. Such perforstability. For example, on the Dodgers dataset, the aver- mance mainly lies in the distinct differences between
 age decrease in F1 is 4.67% for FADSD, 5.84% for abnormal and normal timestamps in the frequency
 DTAAD, 8%–10% for DCdetector and DIF, 10%–12% domain. Even with slight noise, its impact is insufficient
 for ATF-UAD and FCVAE, and 21.62% for Optiforest. to obscure these significant differences.
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

Fig. 7. Different frequency-domain transformation techniques. (a) Precision.
(b) Recall. (c) F1.
 Fig. 8. Amplitude or phase discrepancy-based scheme. (a) Precision.
 (b) Recall. (c) F1.

H. RQ5 (Ablation)

 To answer RQ5, three ablation experiments are conducted to
evaluate the effectiveness of each key component in FADSD.
Four IIoT datasets and three metrics (Precision, Recall, and
F1) are chosen for these experiments.
 1) Frequency-Domain Transform: FADSD initially applies
FFT to convert time-domain signals into spectral components, and then uses the spectral discrepancy to perform
timestamp-level anomaly detection. This experiment aims to
verify the impact of different frequency-domain transformation
techniques on FADSD performance. To achieve this, transformation methods are compared: FFT, Haar wavelet transform
(HWT), and Symlet wavelet transform (SWT).
 Fig. 7 presents the accuracy achieved by three
frequency-domain transformation techniques. The results
in the figure demonstrate that all three configurations exhibit
 Fig. 9. Point-level and sequence-level learnings. (a) Precision. (b) Recall.
high performance, with their performance bars showing (c) F1.
minimal variation in height. For instance, on the SWAT
dataset, the Recall score is 0.9980 for FFT, 0.9942 for
HWT, and 0.7451 for SWT. The main reason for this is Fig. 8 presents the effectiveness of three schemes. From the
that the frequency-domain transform in FADSD is only figure, several observations can be made.
responsible for converting the time signal into frequency- 1) Overall Performance: Only amplitude discrepancydomain components. The final frequency-domain features based scheme performs significantly better than the
at each timestamp are determined by the customized other two, achieving the highest performance across all
spectrum discrepancy, rather than the raw frequency-domain metrics and datasets. For example, the precision score
components. As a result, FADSD maintains robustness across is 0.948 on the SWAT dataset and is 0.933 on the
different frequency-domain transformation techniques. Dodgers dataset for the second scheme, while 0.938 and
 2) Amplitude or Phase Discrepancy-Based Scheme: 0.925 for the first scheme, and 0.911 and 0.923 for the
FADSD utilizes only spectrum discrepancy in the frequency third scheme.
domain to generate an anomaly score for each timestamp. 2) Joint of Amplitude and Phase: The combination of
However, the frequency domain usually contains two types of amplitude and phase discrepancies reduces the overall
spectrum: amplitude and phase. Therefore, this experiment is performance. On the GECCO dataset, the F1-score
designed to verify which spectrum information is more appro- is 0.796 for the third joint scheme, which is smaller
priate for anomaly detection. In this experiment, we construct than 0.809 of the second scheme but higher than 0.753 of
three competing models: only phase discrepancy-based scheme the first scheme.
(first scheme), only amplitude discrepancy-based scheme (sec- 3) In Summary: The only amplitude discrepancy-based
ond scheme), and amplitude and phase discrepancy-based scheme is more suitable for anomaly detection in the
scheme (third scheme). IIoT environment.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 10. Sensitivity for two key parameters, where (a) is α and (b) is λ.

 3) Point-Level and Sequence-Level Learnings: Point-level the sequence-level score is considered. For 0 < α < 1,
and sequence-level spectrum discrepancy calculations are two the point-level and sequence-level scores are combined
critical components of FADSD. Among them, the first one using (9). Fig. 10(a) presents the performance changes across
is designed to identify explicit anomalies, and the other five datasets under different parameter α values.
is designed for implicit anomalies. These two components 1) Overall Performance: The results display a trend of
complement each other and work together to enhance anomaly better performance at both ends and worse performance
detection accuracy. In this experiment, three configurations in the middle. For instance, on the GECCO dataset,
are compared: only point-level learning (first configuration), the trend lines for all three metrics rise, then fall, and
only sequence-level learning (second configuration), and both eventually rise again.
point-level and sequence-level learnings (third configuration). 2) Dataset Differences: All metrics for multivariate datasets
 Fig. 9 illustrates the accuracy across the three configura- (SWAT, GECCO, HAI, and SKAB) exhibit more stable
tions. compared to the univariate dataset (Dodgers). When
 1) Overall Performance: The joint point-level and α is close to 1, performance on multivariate datasets is
 sequence-level learning (third configuration) demons- better. Conversely, when α is close to 0, performance on
 trates better performance. For example, on the HAI univariate datasets is better. It means that the point-level
 dataset, the F1-score is 0.932 for the third configuration, anomaly score is more suitable for multivariate datasets,
 0.912 for the first configuration, and 0.921 for the second whereas the sequence-level anomaly score is more effecconfiguration. tive for univariate datasets.
 2) Only Comparing the First and Second Configurations: 3) In Summary: The intervals [0, 0.2] and [0.8, 1] are
 They have their own advantages in different datasets and relatively stable where our FADSD performs best.
 metrics. For instance, on the SWAT dataset, the first con-
 The parameter λ is used as a threshold to determine
 figuration has better Precision. Conversely, on the HAI
 whether a timestamp is an anomaly. When the anomaly score
 dataset, the second configuration has better Precision,
 is greater than λ, the timestamp is an anomaly. Otherwise,
 Recall, and F1. This implies that the first and second
 it is normal. Due to different characteristics of each dataset,
 configurations complement each other.
 the optimal value of the parameter λ for different datasets
 3) In Summary: Both point-level and sequence-level learnalways changes dynamically. As a result, it is difficult to
 ings contribute positively to model performance, and
 find a stable interval for the parameter λ, which is good
 their combination yields even better results.
 for different datasets. To solve this problem, the maximum
 anomaly score for each dataset is used as a benchmark,
I. RQ6 (Sensitivity) and the value of the parameter λ is determined by multi-
 To address RQ6, we evaluate the impact of two key param- plying the benchmark by a ratio. In this way, the value of
eters α and λ, which range from 0 to 1. the parameter λ is compressed to the range [0, 1], which
 The parameter α integrates point-level and sequence-level makes it easier to find stable intervals for different datasets.
anomaly scores into the final anomaly score. When α = 1, Fig. 10(b) shows the sensitivity of parameter λ across five
only the point-level score is used, and when α = 0, only datasets.
CHEN et al.: FREQUENCY-DOMAIN SPECTRUM DISCREPANCY-BASED FAST ANOMALY DETECTION 2520516

 1) Overall Performance: As parameter λ increases, the underscore the ability of FADSD to deliver high speed and
 performance of FADSD first increases, then stabilizes, low resource consumption while maintaining high accuracy.
 and finally decreases. For instance, on the SWAT dataset, Nonetheless, the performance of FADSD exhibits to paramthe F1-score increases rapidly in the interval [0, 0.75], eter α on some datasets. In the future, the main goal is to
 remains stable in [0.75, 0.9], and slowly decreases design a lightweight optimization mechanism for the proposed
 in [0.9, 1]. model to automatically select appropriate parameters for dif-
 2) Dataset Differences: The changing trends of parameter λ ferent datasets.
 on different datasets are very similar.
 3) In Summary: The intervals [0.7, 0.9] are relatively stable R EFERENCES
 for our FADSD model.
 [1] S. García-de-Villa, D. Casillas-Pérez, A. Jiménez-Martín, and
 J. J. García-Domínguez, “Inertial sensors for human motion analysis:
J. Discussion A comprehensive review,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
 pp. 1–39, 2023.
 This article aims to pursue timestamp-level anomaly detec- [2] A. Sgueglia, A. Di Sorbo, C. A. Visaggio, and G. Canfora, “A systematic
tion with high speed, high accuracy, and low resource literature review of IoT time series anomaly detection solutions,” Future
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 134, pp. 170–186, Sep. 2022.
consumption in resource-limited IIoT environments. The [3] X. Huang, F. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Lin, H. Liu, and H. Fan, “KalmanAE:
results of extensive experiments demonstrate that our FADSD Deep embedding optimized Kalman filter for time series anomaly
model achieves the expected three goals. detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
 [4] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multiview
 1) High Speed: The timeliness and deployability experi- joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
 ments show that FADSD significantly reduces detection Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–9, 2023.
 time compared to SOTA deep learning models. This [5] N. Mejri, L. Lopez-Fuentes, K. Roy, P. Chernakov, E. Ghorbel, and
 D. Aouada, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in time-series: An extenadvantage is attributed to the fact that it is a nonneural- sive evaluation and analysis of state-of-the-art methods,” Expert Syst.
 network solution. Furthermore, FADSD does not require Appl., vol. 256, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 124922.
 dynamic updates, effectively mitigating the accuracy [6] Y. Sun, T. Chen, Q. V. H. Nguyen, and H. Yin, “TinyAD: Memorydistortion problem common in neural-network-based and efficient anomaly detection for time series data in industrial IoT,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 824–834, Jan. 2024.
 machine-learning-based models. [7] G. Sivapalan, K. K. Nundy, S. Dev, B. Cardiff, and D. John, “ANNet:
 2) High Accuracy: The accuracy, robustness, ablation, and A lightweight neural network for ECG anomaly detection in IoT edge
 sensitivity experiments indicate that FADSD, leveraging sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 24–35,
 Feb. 2022.
 only frequency-domain analysis, achieves top-two detec- [8] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
 tion accuracy across eight datasets and four metrics. detection in multivariate time series data,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100,
 Additionally, it demonstrates a strong tolerance to slight Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106919.
 [9] L. Qi, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, W. Rafique, and J. Ma, “Fast anomaly
 noise. identification based on multiaspect data streams for intelligent intrusion
 3) Low Resource Consumption: Due to its nonneural- detection toward secure Industry 4.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 network design, FADSD exhibits significantly lower vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6503–6511, Sep. 2022.
 [10] C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “TFAD: A decomposition
 resource consumption than other SOTA deep learning time series anomaly detection architecture with time-frequency analymodels. This efficiency makes that it can be deployed sis,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2022,
 on resource-constrained devices such as the STM32 407, pp. 2497–2507.
 which has only 1 MB of RAM. [11] Z. Wang et al., “Revisiting VAE for unsupervised time series anomaly
 detection: A frequency perspective,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.,
 New York, NY, USA, May 2024, pp. 3096–3105.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [12] M. Thill, W. Konen, and T. Bäck, “Time series anomaly detection with
 discrete wavelet transforms and maximum likelihood estimation,” in
 This study focuses on the problem of real-time anomaly Proc. Int. Conf. Time Ser. (ITISE), vol. 2, 2017, pp. 11–23.
detection in a resource-limited environment and devel- [13] Y.-C. Park, J.-G. Jang, and U. Kang, “Fast and accurate partial Fourier
 transform for time series data,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
ops FADSD, a frequency-spectrum discrepancy-based fast Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, pp. 1309–1318.
anomaly detection model for IIoT sensor signals. FADSD [14] J. Fan, Z. Wang, H. Wu, D. Sun, J. Wu, and X. Lu, “An adversarial time–
fills the gap of not being able to perform timestamp-level frequency reconstruction network for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 Neural Netw., vol. 168, pp. 44–56, Nov. 2023.
anomaly detection only in the frequency domain by nonneural-
 [15] L. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Xie, L. Chen, and P. Dong, “TMANomaly: Timenetwork solutions. Comparative evaluations on eight IIoT series mutual adversarial networks for industrial anomaly detection,”
sensor time-series datasets demonstrate the superior per- IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2263–2271, Feb. 2024.
formance of FADSD. Specifically, timeliness and resource [16] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
consumption experiments reveal that FADSD operates 10– Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–20.
30 times faster than deep learning-based SOTA models on [17] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
a Raspberry Pi 4b. Additionally, its resource consumption is attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
only one-third of these models on the same platform. Accuracy Data Mining (KDD), New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
experiments further confirm its effectiveness, with FADSD [18] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks
achieving the highest Recall score on six datasets and the for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based
second-highest on the remaining two. Moreover, FADSD’s Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.
 [19] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly
average Recall score across all eight datasets surpasses the detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans.
second-ranked baseline (DCdetector) by 9.73%. These results Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025.
2520516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[20] H. Nizam, S. Zafar, Z. Lv, F. Wang, and X. Hu, “Real-time deep anomaly Ying Zou received the B.Eng. degree in measuredetection framework for multivariate time-series data in industrial IoT,” ment and control technology and instruments from
 IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 23, pp. 22836–22849, Dec. 2022. Central South University, Changsha, China, in 2013,
[21] C. Pascoal, M. R. de Oliveira, R. Valadas, P. Filzmoser, P. Salvador, the M.Sc. degree in instrument science and techand A. Pacheco, “Robust feature selection and robust PCA for Internet nology from Beihang University (BUAA), Beijing,
 traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Mar. 2012, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in control scipp. 1755–1763. ence and engineering from Nanyang Technological
[22] T. Pevný, “Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies,” University, Singapore, in 2020.
 Mach. Learn., vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 275–304, Feb. 2016. Since then, she has been with the School of Infor-
[23] H. Xiang et al., “OptIForest: Optimal isolation forest for anomaly mation and Electrical Engineering, Hunan University
 detection,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2023, of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China, where
 pp. 2379–2387. she is currently an Associate Professor. Her research interests include adaptive
[24] V. Shanmuganathan and A. Suresh, “LSTM-Markov based efficient control, autonomous robotic systems, intelligent systems, and distributed
 anomaly detection algorithm for IoT environment,” Appl. Soft Comput., systems.
 vol. 136, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 110054.
[25] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023.
[26] Y. Nam et al., “Breaking the time-frequency granularity discrepancy in
 time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, Jiajun Tang received the B.Eng. degree in
 NY, USA, May 2024, pp. 4204–4215. automation from Hunan Institute of Science and
[27] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised Technology, Xiangtan, China, in 2023, where he
 contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consis- is currently pursuing the master’s degree in control
 tency,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, S. Koyejo, science and engineering.
 S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., 2022, His current research interests include data-driven
 pp. 3988–4003. anomaly detection, deep learning, and fault
[28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th diagnosis.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Jul. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[29] M. Shyu, S. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. Chang, “A novel anomaly
 detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Data Mining, Jan. 2003, pp. 172–179.
[30] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and
 M. J. Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evaluation
 measure for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
 vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, Jul. 2022. Canwei Liu received the B.E. degree in computer science and technology from the School of
 Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China,
 in 2024. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in
 computer technology with the School of Computer
 Science and Engineering, Central South University,
 Changsha, China.
 Her current research interests include data mining, deep learning, time-series analysis, and medical
 image analysis.
 Lei Chen (Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
 degree in computer science and engineering and
 the Ph.D. degree in automatic control and electrical engineering from Hunan University, Changsha,
 China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
 He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 School of Information and Electrical Engineer- Bowen Hu received the B.Eng. degree in
 ing, Hunan University of Science and Technology, automation from Hunan University of Science and
 Xiangtan, China. His current research interests Technology, Xiangtan, China, in 2024, where he
 include anomaly detection, lightweight design, time- is currently pursuing the master’s degree in control
 series analysis, deep learning, information security science and engineering.
of industrial control system, and big data analysis. His current research interests include data-driven
 anomaly detection, deep learning, and fault
 diagnosis.

 Xuxin Liu received the B.Eng. degree in automation Mingyang Lv received the Ph.D. degree in confrom Hunan University of Science and Technology, trol theory and engineering from Hunan University,
 Xiangtan, China, in 2024, where he is currently Changsha, China, in 2020.
 pursuing the master’s degree in control science and He is currently a Lecturer with the School of Inforengineering. mation and Electrical Engineering, Hunan University
 His current research interests include data-driven of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China. His
 anomaly detection, deep learning, and fault research interests include image processing, modeldiagnosis. ing, fault diagnosis, and safety control for complex
 system based on machine learning and deep learning.