4532 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fuzzy State-Driven Cross-Time Spatial Dependence
 Learning for Multivariate Time-Series
 Anomaly Detection
 Kun Zhu , Pengyu Song , and Chunhui Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Cross-time spatial dependence (i.e., the interaction C1 , C2 , and C3 Desired dimensions of output channel.
between different variables at different time points) is indispens- λ1 , λ2 , λ3 Tradeoff coefficients.
able for detecting anomalies in multivariate time series, as certain
anomalies may have time delays in their propagation from one ω1 , ω2 Tradeoff coefficients.
variable to another. However, accurately capturing cross-time φscore Anomaly score.
spatial dependence remains a challenge. Specifically, real-world η Threshold to estimate anomalies.
time series usually exhibits complex and incomprehensible evo- xt Values of N variables at time point t.
lutions that may be compounded by multiple temporal states n
 x1:T Values of T time points of variable n.
(i.e., temporal patterns, such as rising, fluctuating, and peak).
These temporal states mix and overlap with each other and X 1:T Input sample sequence.
exhibit dynamic and heterogeneous evolution laws in different X̃ 1:T Reconstructed values for input sample
time series, making the cross-time spatial dependence extremely sequence.
intricate and mutable. Therefore, a cross-time spatial graph x̂ T Predicted values of time series at time
network with fuzzy embedding is proposed to disentangle latent point T.
and mixing temporal states and exploit it to meticulously learn
cross-time spatial dependence. First, considering that temporal ŷ t Anomaly label.
states are diversiform and their mixing modes are unknown, fmvnt Membership vector.
we introduce a fuzzy state set to uniformly characterize potential FEX1:T Fuzzy embedding data for input sample
temporal states and adaptively generate corresponding member- sequence.
ship degrees to depict how these states mix. Further, we propose CTSGt:t+1 Cross-time spatial graph.
a cross-time spatial graph, quantifying similarities among fuzzy
states and sensing their dynamic evolutions, to flexibly learn At:t+1 Normalized adjacency matrix.
mutable cross-time spatial dependence. Finally, we design state
diversity and temporal proximity constraints to ensure the I. I NTRODUCTION
differences among fuzzy states and the evolution continuity of
fuzzy states. Experiments on real-world datasets show that the
proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art models. M ULTIVARIATE time-series anomaly detection has been
 extensively developed and researched across diverse
 domains, aiming at finding abnormal conditions to ensure
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, cross-time spatial dependence, fuzzy state, multivariate time series, temporal state.
 system security and reduce financial loss [1]. Since anomaly
 data are rare and difficult to gather, a popular and promising
 N OMENCLATURE paradigm in multivariate time-series anomaly detection is to
 N Number of variables. leverage unsupervised methods to learn specific patterns of
 T Number of time points. time series to recognize underlying anomalies [2]. Nowadays,
 ϑ Convolution kernels. various unsupervised methods have been proposed and real-
 MFqn Membership function. ized fruitful progress, such as Gaussian mixture model [3] and
 mdnt,q Membership degree. isolation forest (IF) [4].
 µqn and σqn Center and width of membership function. However, the above methods remain limited ability because
 W, b Weight parameter and bias. they do not consider crucial spatiotemporal dependencies in
 LV State diversity constraint. multivariate time series [5], [6]. Unlike other data (e.g., image
 LC Temporal proximity constraint. and text), spatiotemporal dependencies are the distinguishing
 LR Reconstruction constraint. characteristic of multivariate time series [7]. As shown in
 LP Prediction constraint. Fig. 1(a), spatiotemporal dependencies are extremely com-
 Manuscript received 15 July 2023; revised 27 November 2023; plicated because they contain three parts, dubbed temporal
accepted 25 February 2024. Date of publication 8 March 2024; date of current dependence (cross-time interactions within the same variable),
version 1 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the National spatial dependence (interactions between different variables at
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62125306, in part by the
Zhejiang Key Research and Development Project under Grant 2024C01163, the same time point), and cross-time spatial dependence (interand in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation actions between different variables at different time points).
under Grant 2022A1515240003. (Corresponding author: Chunhui Zhao.) Vast studies have shown that accurately capturing spatiotem-
 The authors are with the College of Control Science and Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: chhzhao@zju.edu.cn). poral dependencies is vital to learning specific patterns of time
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3371109 series for detecting anomalies [8], [9].
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4533

 In comparison, state 3 (fluctuating) influences more when
 encountering unstable airflow (roughly located at t1 ). Moreover, it can also be found that temporal states exhibit dynamic
 and heterogeneous evolution laws in different time series (e.g.,
 from mixing mode 1 to mixing mode 2 in variable 1 and
 from mixing mode 3 to mixing mode 4 in variable 2), thus
 making cross-time spatial dependence complex and mutable
 and further increasing its modeling difficulty.
 In complex real scenarios, temporal states are usually
 diversiform and their mixing modes are often unknown (the
 influences from temporal states on time-series evolutions
 are difficult to quantify by precise and hard binary values).
 In light of this, we extend the analysis of time series from
 a 1-D space to a high-dimensional fuzzy space, aiming to
 construct a fuzzy state set (containing multiple fuzzy states)
 to uniformly characterize diversiform temporal states and
 generate soft membership degrees to portray their mixing
 modes. Through this manner, we can break the bottleneck of
 limited representation ability of 1-D time series and disentan-
Fig. 1. Example of complex spatiotemporal dependencies and latent temporal gle mixing temporal states, which helps to sense the mutability
states of time series. (a) Three different dependencies in spatiotemporal of cross-time spatial dependence and facilitate its fine-grained
dependencies. (b) Multiple temporal states mix and overlap with each other,
and present dynamic and heterogeneous evolution laws.
 modeling, thus boosting the ability to discover time-delay
 anomalies.
 Technically, we propose a novel cross-time spatial graph
 To this end, various deep learning-based studies have been network with fuzzy embedding (FE-CTSNet), which consists
proposed to mine spatiotemporal dependencies and gained of a fuzzy embedding method called time series to membership
remarkable momentum [10], [11]. For instance, transformer vector (TS2MVec), and a cross-time spatial graph (CTSG).
model [1], [12] and long short-term memory (LSTM) net- TS2MVec constructs multiple fuzzy states and each of them
work [13] focus on capturing temporal dependence across the represents a type of temporal state. Then, each time-series
time dimension, while graph neural network (GNN) [14], [15] data point is transformed into a membership vector containing
aims at explicitly modeling spatial dependence across the vari- a series of membership degrees, where each membership
able dimension. Unfortunately, these studies may suffer from degree indicates the degree to which the corresponding fuzzy
false negative problems as the captured temporal dependence state influences time-series evolutions. Based on the generand spatial dependence are ineffective for detecting certain ated membership degrees, CTSG can quantify the similarity
latent time-delay anomalies. In real-world industrial processes, between fuzzy states of any two time-series data points,
the time-delay phenomenon in the propagation of anomalies thereby flexibly learning cross-time spatial dependence. Moreis common because the effect of one entity (e.g., device or over, membership degrees can adaptively change along with
machine) may take a certain time to spread to another. One dynamic evolutions of time series, thereby enabling CTSG to
decent scheme for detecting time-delay anomalies is to exploit sense the mutability of cross-time spatial dependence. Finally,
the cross-time spatial dependence because it can effectively to strengthen the ability of fuzzy states to characterize potential
reflect the intervariable influences at different time points, thus temporal states, we design state diversity and temporal proxhelping to model the propagation mechanism of time-delay imity constraints, which not only make different fuzzy states
anomalies. have differences, but also ensure the evolution continuity of
 However, modeling cross-time spatial dependence is still fuzzy states.
a challenging task as its intricateness and mutability. These The main contributions of this study are threefold.
characteristics may be induced by multiple temporal states 1) We propose a TS2MVec to construct a fine-grained
hidden in time-series evolutions. Specifically, as shown in fuzzy state set to uniformly characterize latent temporal
Fig. 1(b), time series of variable 1 and variable 2 present states and adaptively generate corresponding membercomplex and incomprehensible evolutions, where multiple ship degrees to depict their mixing modes. To the best
temporal states (or referred to temporal patterns) mix and of authors’ knowledge, it is the first time to realize the
overlap with each other, e.g., state 1 (rising), state 2 (falling), disentanglement for mixing temporal states from a fuzzy
state 3 (fluctuating), and state 4 (peak) [16], [17]. It can be embedding perspective.
seen that latent temporal states show the specific mixing mode 2) We propose a CTSG to meticulously learn the cross-time
in each evolution phase of time series, in which different spatial dependence. Different from the existing graph
temporal states have different influence degrees on time-series structures, it not only realizes flexible representations
evolutions. For example, assuming that variable 1 represents for cross-time spatial dependence, but also senses its
the altitude of an airplane, state 1 (rising) may exert larger mutability by capturing dynamic evolutions of fuzzy
influences during the take-off phase (roughly located at t2 ). states.
4534 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE I spatial dependence and used it to discover anomalies, such as
 D IFFERENCES B ETWEEN FE-CTSN ET AND OTHER M ETHODS GNN-based models [26] and autoencoder-based models [27],
 [28]. Further, some other studies [29], [30], [31], [32] simultaneously considered the above two dependencies to promote
 anomaly detection results.
 However, it can be seen from Table I that the existing unsupervised studies neglect the cross-time spatial dependence,
 making it hard to discover certain latent time-delay anomalies.
 In comparison, FE-CTSNet can model complete spatiotemporal dependencies (especially, cross-time spatial dependence),
 thereby realizing satisfactory anomaly detection results.

 B. Membership Functions in Fuzzy Logic
 Fuzzy logic and probability theory are two different reasoning methods [33]. Specifically, fuzzy logic can generate
 the membership degree to represent the degree to which an
 object has an abstract attribute (i.e., state) (generally without
 randomness) [34], [35]. Probability theory can generate the
 probability value to represent the likelihood of an object
 happening (generally with randomness) [36]. For each latent
 temporal state, membership degree portrays the degree of its
 influence on time-series evolutions, while probability value
 3) We design state diversity and temporal proximity con- portrays the likelihood that it can influence time-series evostraints, which can guarantee the differences among lutions. Intuitively, fuzzy logic is more appropriate for this
 fuzzy states and the evolution continuity of fuzzy states, study since the influence of temporal states on time series has
 thereby further improving its ability to characterize actually happened and directly induced its evolutions.
 temporal states. Recently, a promising method is to combine membership
 functions in the fuzzy logic with neural networks. For example,
 II. R ELATED W ORK Deng et al. [37] used the Gaussian function as the membership
A. Multivariate Time-Series Anomaly Detection function to generate fuzzy representations, which reduced the
 uncertainties in original data and showed its superiority in
 Unsupervised paradigms have been widely studied in the
 classification tasks. Ebadzadeh and Salimi-Badr [38] introtime-series anomaly detection field. Some popular methods
 duced a shapeable membership function with an adjustable
focus on capturing complex spatiotemporal dependencies to
 shape and proposed interpretable correlated-contours fuzzy
learn specific patterns of time series and then detect latent
 rules to realize better function approximation. All these studies
anomalies. As shown in Table I, machine learning methods
 use membership functions to generate fuzzy representations
contain principal component analysis (PCA) [18], slow feature
 and automatically learn optimal parameters of membership
analysis (SFA) [19], [20], and canonical variate analysis (CVA)
 functions, which is conducive to enhancing the representation
[21]. They aim to obtain low-dimensional latent variables from
 of complex data.
multivariate time series to represent its important information
and then design customized indicators for latent variable
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
spaces to detect anomalies. Among them, PCA considers spatial dependence while SFA and CVA can exploit both spatial A. Problem Statement
dependence and temporal dependence. Although they have In this study, we focus on introducing a fuzzy state set
gained meaningful anomaly detection results, their extracted to characterize diversiform and mixing temporal states and
features are linear and thus not sufficient to perform well in exploit it to learn mutable cross-time spatial dependence for
complicated nonlinear scenarios. identifying potential time-delay anomalies. To formalize this
 At present, in unsupervised anomaly detection studies, problem, some key concepts are defined as follows.
deep learning methods have emerged frequently due to their Definition 1 (Task Description): A multivariate time series
superior ability to generate multilevel and nonlinear feature can be denoted as X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xτ } ∈ R N ×τ , where N is
representations [22], [23]. On the one hand, some models the number of variables and τ is the sequence length of X .
focused on mining temporal dependence: such as LSTM-based xt = {xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN } ∈ R N is an N -dimensional sample (i.e.,
models [24], autoencoder-based models [25], and transformer- N variable values at time point t). Our goal is to predict the
based models [1], [12]. The first two types of models anomaly label of xt , i.e., 1 (abnormal) or 0 (normal).
were only good at modeling short-range dependencies, while Definition 2 (Temporal States and Fuzzy States): We refer
transformer-based models can use self-attention to capture reli- to mixing and overlapping temporal patterns involved in
able long-range dependencies, but with higher computational time-series evolutions as temporal states. Since temporal
complexity. On the other hand, some models mainly modeled states are diversiform and their mixing modes are unknown,
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4535

Fig. 2. Overall framework of FE-CTSNet. Module A is dedicated to generating fuzzy embedding data and ensuring its diversity, modules C and D are
dedicated to using fuzzy embedding data from module A to achieve anomaly detection, and module B, as an auxiliary module, is dedicated to endowing the
fuzzy embedding data from module A with temporal dependence and further facilitating the performance of modules C and D. These modules work together
to gain the FE-CTSNet with superior performance.

we depict them by a fuzzy state set, in which each fuzzy state 3) Fuzzy Inference-Based Reconstructing Module
characterizes a type of temporal state. Then, we map each (Module C): We design a customized fuzzy inference-based
time-series data point into a membership vector (consisting of defuzzification method (containing fuzzy rule, conclusion,
multiple membership degrees), where each membership degree and defuzzification layers) for fuzzy embedding data to
indicates the degree to which the corresponding fuzzy state generate reconstructed time series as close as possible to the
influences time-series evolutions. original time series.
 The main notations in this study are summarized in 4) Spatiotemporal Dependencies Modeling Module (Module
Nomenclature. D): We propose a new CTSG to exploit fuzzy embedding
 data to learn complete spatiotemporal dependencies (i.e., spa-
B. Overall Framework tial dependence, temporal dependence, and cross-time spatial
 As shown in Fig. 2, FE-CTSNet contains four modules dependence). Moreover, we design a cross-time spatial graphand exploits a joint evolution objective to co-optimize all based network (CTSNet) adapted to CTSG, exploiting deep
the modules and guide end-to-end training. The process and hierarchical architectures to mine long-term spatiotemporal
contribution of each module are illustrated as follows. dependencies to obtain accurate forecasting results.
 1) Fuzzy Embedding Module (Module A): We propose a
new TS2MVec to build a fuzzy state set and design a new state
diversity constraint to ensure differences among different fuzzy C. Fuzzy Embedding Module
states, thereby enabling fuzzy states to characterize potential In this module, we map all time series from a
temporal states from as many perspectives as possible. Then, low-dimensional space (1-D) into a common high-dimensional
we introduce multiple membership functions to transform each fuzzy space, where each dimension corresponds to a fuzzy
time-series data point into a membership vector (containing state. Specifically, we build a fuzzy state set (containing
a series of membership degrees). Finally, we combine all some membership functions) to transform each time-series
membership vectors along the time axis to generate fuzzy data point into a series of membership degrees, and each of
embedding data to effectively describe the evolution law of them indicates the degree to which the corresponding fuzzy
time series and is used as input for modules B–D. state influences time-series evolutions. Then, all membership
 2) Global–Local Correlation-Based Refining Module (Mod- degrees of each time-series data point are concatenated to
ule B): Considering that temporal states natively have generate a membership vector representing its mixing mode
temporal dependence, we design a new temporal proxim- of fuzzy states. In addition, considering that different variables
ity constraint to endow all membership vectors in fuzzy usually exhibit heterogeneous evolution laws, we assign fuzzy
embedding data with temporal dependence, thus ensuring state sets with different initial parameter values for different
the evolution continuity of fuzzy states and improving its variables, which can make TS2MVec to capture the particular
characterization ability for temporal states. evolution law of each variable.
4536 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fig. 3. Schematic of integrating the contextual information. Each yellow
dotted box denotes a convolution kernel.

 This module contains two stages: integration of contextual
information and TS2MVec.
 1) Integration of Contextual Information: Assume that Fig. 4. Schematic of TS2MVec for nth variable. Q membership functions
X 1:T ∈ R N ×T denotes the input sample sequence, where N and can output Q membership degrees for each time-series data point to form a
 membership vector to characterize Q fuzzy states.
T are the number of variables and time points, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 3, to make the fuzzy embedding method not
be an isolated single-point embedding method, the contextual where mdnt ∈ R Q denotes the joint of membership degrees.
information along the time dimension is first integrated into fmvnt ∈ R Q denotes the final membership vector that can
each variable value characterize the mixing mode of Q fuzzy states for xtn ∈ R.
 Wtn ∈ R Q×Q and btn ∈ R Q denote the weight parameter and
 ′
 X 1:T = X 1:T ∗ ϑct (1) bias, respectively. || denotes the concatenation operation.
 ′
where X 1:T ∈ R N ×T and ϑct ∈ R1×δ×1 denote the output data Subsequently, the membership vectors corresponding to T
 n
and the contextual convolution kernel, respectively. δ denotes variable values in x1:T are concatenated together to gain the
the time span of contextual information. fuzzy embedding data fmvn1:T ∈ RT×Q for x1:T n
 , as shown in
 In particular, the padding operation is performed during the the following equation:
convolution process to ensure the size consistency between fmvn1:T = fmvn1 fmvn2 · · · fmvnT . (5)
 ′ ′
X 1:T and X 1:T . Then, X 1:T is segmented into N feature slices
x1:T , x1:T , . . . , x1:T ∈ RT along the variable dimension, and
 1 2 N Finally, the fuzzy embedding data of N feature slices
then, TS2MVec is carried out on each feature slice x1:T n
 (1 ≤
 1
 {x1:T , x1:T
 2
 , . . . , x1:T
 N
 } are concatenated together to obtain the
n ≤ N ), respectively. final fuzzy embedding data FEX1:T ∈ R N ×T×Q for the input
 2) TS2MVec: Following the classic research on fuzzy neural sample sequence X 1:T ∈ R N ×T , as shown in the following
network (FNN) [37], [39], we adopt the Gaussian function equation:
as the membership function because it has the advantages of FEX1:T = fmv11:T fmv21:T · · · fmv1:T
 N
 . (6)
differentiability and continuity. We construct different fuzzy
state sets for different variables and each fuzzy state set To make different fuzzy states that can characterize temporal
contains Q different membership functions (denoting Q fuzzy states with different semantics, we design a state diversity constates). As shown in Fig. 4, taking the nth (1 ≤ n ≤ N ) straint to guarantee parameter diversity of Gaussian functions
variable as an example, its variable values at T time points to make fuzzy states have differences. It can calculate the
 n
x1:T are all input into the nth fuzzy state set that contains Q variance values of the centers of all Gaussian functions in
membership functions, as shown in the following equation: N fuzzy state sets and maximize their sum, as shown in the
 following equation:
 mdnt,q = MFqn xtn
 
 N
 (xtn −µqn )2 1 X
 Var µn1 , µn2 , . . . , µnQ
 
 − LS = − (7)
 = e (σq ) ,
 n 2 N n=1
 1 ≤ t ≤ T, 1 ≤ q ≤ Q (2)
where xtn ∈ R denotes the time-series data point at tth time where L S and Var denote the state diversity constraint and
point. mdnt,q and MFqn denote the membership degree (i.e., the variance function, respectively.
influence degree of qth fuzzy state) and membership function,
respectively. µqn and σqn denote the center and the width of D. Global–Local Correlation-Based Refining Module
MFqn , respectively, which can be adaptively updated during Due to temporal states natively having temporal depenmodel training. dence, we design a temporal proximity constraint to make
 Then, the outputs of Q membership functions (i.e., Q fuzzy embedding data possess temporal dependence and
membership degrees) are concatenated together to constitute evolve continuously.
the membership vector for xtn ∈ R. Moreover, we use the 1) Global Perspective: As shown in the top of Fig. 2
nonlinear mapping to obtain the membership vector with (module A), the interleaved downsampling [40] is performed
stronger characterization ability, as shown in the following on fuzzy embedding data, which separates odd and even
equations: elements along the time dimension to obtain two subsequences
 mdnt = mdnt,1 mdnt,2 · · · mdnt,Q (3) FEX(odd) and FEX(even), as shown in the following equation:
 fmvnt = tanh mdnt Wtn + btn DS(FEX1:T ) = [FEX(odd), FEX(even)]
 
 (4) (8)
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4537

 and its output indicates the firing strength of the fuzzy rule
 in response to the original time-series data [35], [42]. We use
 the product T -norm operator on the fuzzy embedding data,
 as shown in the following equation:
 N
 Y
 FR1:T (q) = FEXn1:T (q), 1≤q≤Q (12)
 n

 where FR1:T (q) ∈ RT denotes the firing strength of qth neuron
 (qth fuzzy rule). FEXn1:T (q) ∈ RT denotes the membership
 vector corresponding to nth variable and qth membership
 function.
 2) Conclusion Layer: This layer normalizes the firing
Fig. 5. Fuzzy inference uses a fuzzy ruler layer, conclusion layer, and strengths of all fuzzy rules and concatenates them together,
defuzzification layer to reconstruct time series. as shown in the following equations:

where DS denotes the interleaved downsampling operation. FR1:T (q)
 FRN(q) = P Q (13)
 Then, FEX(odd) and FEX(even) are flattened to calculate i=1 FR1:T (i)
the correlation between them, as shown in the following FRNall = FRN(1)||FRN(2)|| · · · ||FRN(Q) (14)
equation:
 where FRN(q) ∈ RT denotes the normalized firing strength of
 Corglobal = Cossim(Ft[FEX(odd)], Ft[FEX(even)]) (9) qth neuron (qth fuzzy rule). FRNall ∈ RT×Q denotes the final
 firing strength matrix.
where Corglobal denotes the global correlation. Ft[·] denotes
 3) Defuzzification Layer: This layer uses the nonlinear
the flattening operation. Cossim denotes the cosine similarity.
 mapping to perform defuzzification operation for generating
 Due to the trend and closeness properties of time-series data,
 the reconstructed time-series data, as shown in the following
two subsequences obtained by interleaved downsampling still
 equation:
possess temporal dependence of original time-series data [40],
[41]. Therefore, if the global correlation between two subse- X̃ 1:T = tanh(FRNall W R + b R ) (15)
quences [i.e., FEX(odd) and FEX(even)] is higher, the stronger Q×N N
 where W R ∈ R and b R ∈ R denote the weight parameter
temporal dependence characteristic of fuzzy embedding data
 and bias, respectively. X̃ 1:T ∈ RT×N denotes the reconstructed
will be resulted.
 time series. Moreover, its shape is converted to R N ×T to ensure
 2) Local Perspective: As shown in the bottom of Fig. 2
 consistency with the shape of the original time-series data.
(module A), the cosine similarity method is used to succes-
 Finally, the loss function L R is built, which is defined by
sively calculate the correlation between fuzzy embedding data
 the following equation:
belonging to adjacent time points, as shown in the following
equation: 1 2
 LR = X 1:T − X̃ 1:T 2 (16)
 T −1 N ×T
 1 X
 Corlocal = Cossim(Ft[FEXt ], Ft[FEXt+1 ]) (10) where N and T denote the number of variables and time
 T − 1 t=1 points, respectively. X 1:T and X̃ 1:T denote the original valwhere Corlocal denotes the local correlation. FEXt denotes the ues and reconstructed values, respectively. ∥·∥2 denotes the
fuzzy embedding data at time point t. L2-norm.
 Finally, the global correlation and local correlation are synthetically considered to build the temporal proximity constraint F. Spatiotemporal Dependencies Modeling Module
LT , which is defined by the following equation: This module adopts a prediction-oriented framework, using
 the data at historical time points (1, 2, . . . , T − 1) to predict
 (Corglobal + Corlocal )
 LT = . (11) the data at future time point T , and thus, the input of this
 2 module is a partial of fuzzy embedding data, i.e., FEX1:T −1 ∈
 R N ×(T−1)×Q .
E. Fuzzy Inference-Based Reconstructing Module 1) CTSG Generation: As shown in Fig. 6, CTSG uses
 In this section, the fuzzy inference method is introduced to the membership vectors generated by TS2MVec to calculate
generate the reconstructed time series as close as possible to similarities among all time-series data points (including all
the original time series. As shown in Fig. 5, the fuzzy inference variables) across two adjacent time points. Then, all the
method contains a fuzzy rule layer, a conclusion layer, and a similarities are aggregated to explicitly represent complete spadefuzzification layer. tiotemporal dependencies (i.e., spatial dependence, temporal
 The description of them is elaborated as follows. dependence, and cross-time spatial dependence).
 1) Fuzzy Rule Layer: The number of neurons in this layer The generation process of CTSG is described as follows.
is Q, which is equal to the number of membership functions First, FEX1:T −1 is split into data slices
in a fuzzy state set. Each neuron is regarded as a fuzzy rule, FEX1:2 , FEX2:3 , . . . , FEXT −2:T −1 ∈ R N ×2×Q , and then,
4538 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fig. 6. Example of CTSG generation.

 Fig. 7. Hierarchical architecture of the proposed CTSNet. (a) CTSNet
the corresponding CTSG is generated for each data slice. For adopts S layers to extract hierarchical feature representations and uses skip
FEXt:t+1 ∈ R N ×2×Q (1 ≤ t ≤ T − 2), it is first reshaped as connection to fuse them. (b) In each layer in CTSNet, multiple mix-hop GCNs
FEXt:t+1 ∈ R2N ×Q , which contains the membership vectors are conducted parallelly and independently.
of 2N variables (N variables at time point t and N variables
at time point t + 1). Then, the generation process can be 
  At:t+1 FEXt:t+1 W1l + b1l
 
formulated by the following equation: 
 ⊙σ A
 t:t+1 FEXt:t+1 W2 + b2 , l = 1
 l l
  
 l
 Ht:t+1 =
CTSGt:t+1 (i, j) = Cossim(FEXt:t+1 (i), FEXt:t+1 ( j)) l−1
 W1l + b1l ⊙ σ At:t+1 Hil−1 W2l + b2l ,
  
 
  At:t+1 Ht:t+1
 i, j = 1, 2, . . . , 2N
 
 (17) l = 2, 3, . . . , L
 

where i and j denote ith and jth nodes in CTSG, respectively. (19)
FEXt:t+1 (i) and FEXt:t+1 ( j) denote the membership vectors of where Dt:t+1 ∈ R2N ×2N is the degree matrix of CTSGt:t+1 .
the ith and jth variables, respectively. Moreover, sparse oper- At:t+1 ∈ R2N ×2N is the normalized adjacency matrix of
ation is performed to preserve the most important correlations CTSGt:t+1 . W1l , W2l ∈ R Q×C1 , and b1l , b2l ∈ RC1 are the
to obtain the final CTSGt:t+1 ∈ R2N ×2N . parameters in the activation function GLU [43]. C1 is the
 In particular, all the membership vectors change adaptively desired output channel dimension. L denotes the number of
as the time series evolves, which endows the CTSG with the layers in mix-hop GCN. Ht:t+1l
 ∈ R2N ×C1 denotes the output
ability to learn mutable spatiotemporal dependencies (espe- of the lth layer, which contains two parts of spatiotemporal
cially, cross-time spatial dependence). In CTSG, we only dependencies features (i.e., Htl ∈ R N ×C1 at time point t and
consider the spatiotemporal dependencies within two adja- l
 Ht+1 ∈ R N ×C1 at time point t + 1).
cent time points because build larger size (e.g., 3N × 3N Next, we aggregate them to obtain a consistent representaor 4N × 4N ) to characterize longer time spans will bring tion of spatiotemporal dependencies over this time period (t
higher computational costs. Thus, we unite multiple CTSGs and t + 1)
to construct a deep hierarchical architecture (i.e., CTSNet),
 H Alt:t+1 = Agg Htl , Ht+1
 l
 
which uses the stacking of graph convolution layers to capture (20)
long-term spatiotemporal dependencies. where H Alt:t+1 ∈ R N ×C1 denotes the output. Agg(·) denote the
 2) CTSNet: As shown in Fig. 7, CTSNet possesses a elementwise addition.
deep hierarchical architecture, which contains multiple stacked To eliminate useless information and retain important inforlayers to capture long-term spatiotemporal dependencies, and mation in L layers, the max-pooling is performed, which is
employs the skip connection to obtain high-level feature formulated by the following equation:
representations. In each stacked layer, multiple independent
 H Mt:t+1 = Maxpooling H A1t:t+1 , H A2t:t+1 , . . . , H At:t+1
 L
 .
 
mix-hop graph neural networks (MHGNNs) are customized
for multiple data slices FEX1:2 , FEX2:3 , . . . , FEXT −2:T −1 , and (21)
these MHGNNs can carry out in parallel to enhance the model
efficiency. Specifically, each MHGNN exploits multiple graph Then, the outputs of all mix-hop GCNs are concatenated to
 (1)
convolutional structures to extract features and introduces form the final output UCTSN ∈ R N ×(T −2)×C1 , as shown in the
the activation function gated linear unit (GLU) to conduct following equation:
 (1)
nonlinear transformations and then aggregate the features of UCTSN = H M1:2 ||H M2:3 || · · · ||H MT −2:T −1 . (22)
all graph convolutional structures by a max-pooling layer.
 Technically, the reshaped data slice FEXt:t+1 ∈ R2N ×Q The outputs of S stacked layers are fused by the skip
and its corresponding CTSGt:t+1 ∈ R2N ×2N are input into a connection to capture long-term spatiotemporal dependencies,
mix-hop graph convolutional network (GCN), as shown in the as shown in the following equation:
following equations: S
 (s)
 X
 − 21 − 12 Uall = UCTSN ∗ ϑs (23)
At:t+1 = Dt:t+1 CTSGt:t+1 Dt:t+1 (18) s=1
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4539

 (s)
where UCTSN ∈ R N ×(T−1−s)×C1 denotes the output of the sth TABLE II
layer in CTSNet. ϑs ∈ R1×(T−1−s)×C2 denotes the sth con- DATASET S TATISTICS
volution kernel. C2 is the desired output channel dimension.
Uall ∈ R N ×C2 denotes the high-level feature representations.
 Subsequently, two fully connected layers are used to refine
the feature information in Uall and output the predicted results
x̂ T ∈ R N , as shown in the following equation:

 x̂ T = g(Uall W3 + b3 )W4 + b4 (24) H. Anomaly Inference
where W3 ∈ R C2 ×C3
 , W4 ∈ R C3 ×1
 denote the weight param- In this section, only modules C and D are used to obtain
eters. b3 ∈ RC3 , b4 ∈ R denote the biases (C3 denotes the anomaly scores because module B is an auxiliary module
number of neurons in the first fully connected layer). g denotes to improve the characterization ability of fuzzy states rather
the activation function rectified linear unit (ReLU) [44]. than to detect anomalies. The detailed process is summarized
 Finally, the loss function L P is built, which is defined by in Algorithm 1. It can be seen that each sample sequence
 +1:t = {x t−T +1 , x t−T +2 , . . . , x t } ∈ R
 test test test test N ×T
the following equation: X t−T is input into
 the well-trained modules C and D to obtain the anomaly score
 LP =
 1 2
 x T − x̂ T 2 (25) ϕ for xttest ∈ R N
 N 2 2
 φscore xttest = ω1 xttest − x̃ test + ω2 xttest − x̂ test
 
 t 2 t 2
 (27)
where N denotes the number of variables. x T and x̂ T denote
the real and predicted values at time point T , respectively. where x̃ test
 t and x̃ test
 t denote the reconstructed and predicted
 values, respectively. Hyperparameters ω1 and ω2 are used
 to tradeoff the reconstruction-oriented error and prediction-
G. Joint Evolution Objective oriented error.
 In this section, a joint evolution objective is designed to Then, peak over threshold (POT) [45] is introduced to
train the FE-CTSNet, including state diversity constraint L S , adaptively choose the threshold η. If ϕ(xttest ) > η, the anomaly
temporal proximity constraint LT , reconstruction constraint label ŷ t is assigned 1 (abnormal), otherwise 0 (normal).
L R , and prediction constraint L P , as shown in the following
equation: Algorithm 1 FE-CTSNet Anomaly Inference Process
 Input: Module C parameter PC , module D parameter P D ,
 epo epo
 λ λ abnormal and normal test set contains R sample sequences
L J = λ1 L S + 2 LT + 3 L R test
 X 1:T , X 2:T
 test
 +1 , . . . , X R:T +R−1 ∈ R
 test N ×T
 where
 2 2 epo epo 
 test
 X 1+i:T +i = x test
 1+i , x test
 2+i , . . . , x test
 T +i ∈ R N
 (0 ≤ i ≤ R − 1).
 λ2 λ
 + 1 − λ1 − − 3 LP (26) Output: All anomaly labels ŷ T +i for x Ttest +i (0 ≤ i ≤ R − 1)
 2 2 1: Calculate the threshold η through POT
 2: for i = 0 to R-1 do
 T +i ← PC (X 1+i:T +i )
where λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are the tradeoff coefficients. epo denotes 3: x̃ test test

the training epoch. 4: x̂ testT +i ← P D (X 1+i:T +i−1 )
 test
 2 2
 The joint of L R and L P can exploit the advantages of both 5: ϕ(x T +i ) ← ω1 xttest − x̃ test
 test
 t 2
 + ω2 xttest − x̂ test
 t 2
reconstruction-oriented and prediction-oriented ideas to realize 6: if ϕ(x T +i ) > η then
 test

anomaly detection. However, there exist two problems if only 7: ŷ T +i ← 1
 8: else
using L R and L P to optimize FE-CTSNet. 9: ŷ T +i ← 0
 Problem 1: Since only Gaussian functions are adopted to 10: end if
construct fuzzy states, all fuzzy states may become similar 11: end for
during training (the parameters of all Gaussian functions may 12: return all anomaly labels ŷ T +i (0 ≤ i ≤ R − 1)
converge to similar values), which is ineffective to characterize
diversiform temporal states.
 Problem 2: Since the membership degrees of fuzzy states IV. E XPERIMENTS
are randomly initialized before training, fuzzy states at adjacent time points may not have a temporal dependence, which is A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
unable to characterize continuously evolving temporal states. To verify the superior performance of FE-CTSNet, we con-
 Therefore, we add two auxiliary objectives L S and LT to ducted experiments on three public datasets, including server
solve problems 1 and 2, respectively. Specifically, L S can machine dataset (SMD) [24], application server dataset (ASD)
ensure the differences among fuzzy states to improve its ability [8], and multisource distributed system (MSDS) [12]. In parto characterize diversiform temporal states. LT can endow ticular, for SMD, we selected machines 1-1, 2-2, and 3-2 as
fuzzy states with temporal dependence to enhance their ability verification objects and reported the average results of these
to represent continuously evolving temporal states. Through three machines. For ASD, we selected servers 7, 8, and 9 as
synthetically co-optimizing L S , LT , L R , and L P , FE-CTSNet verification objects and also reported the average results of
with superior performance can be obtained. these three servers. More statistics are shown in Table II.
4540 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 Moreover, we used four metrics including precision (P), TABLE III
recall (R), F1 score (F1), and area under the receiver operating VARIANTS OF FE-CTSN ET
characteristic curve (AUC) to evaluate the effectiveness of all
models. In particular, all the experimental results in this study
were average results recorded after five executions.
 Currently, many prior studies [1], [24], [46], have calculated
the metrics based on a common strategy, i.e., point-adjust: if
at least one observation in an anomaly segment is correctly
detected as an anomaly, this whole anomaly segment will be
regarded as correctly detected. Following this paradigm, the
point-adjust strategy was also applied in this study.

B. Baseline Models In contrast, deep learning models perform better than
 1) State-of-the-Art Models: To demonstrate our superiority, machine learning models. However, the detection results
we selected 14 anomaly detection models as compari- of deep learning models show differences. Specifically,
son, including IF [4], PCA [18], SFA [20], CVA [21], DAGMM, SG-AE, GDN, OmniAnomaly, AAU-Net, and
DAGMM [27], GDN [26], SG-AE [28], OmniAnomaly [24], TranAD obtain unsatisfactory detection results because they
USAD [29], AAU-Net [25], TranAD [12], TopoMAD [32], only consider intervariable spatial dependence or intravariable
MSCRED [30], and MTAD-GAT [31]. temporal dependence. Compared to the above models, USAD,
 2) Variants of FE-CTSNet: To show the necessity of each TopoMAD, MSCRED, and MTAD-GAT gain some promising
component in FE-CTSNet, we exclude every important one to detection results, demonstrating that the importance of simulconstruct multiple variants, as shown in Table III (each tick taneously considering intervariable spatial dependence and
denotes the elimination of a component). intravariable temporal dependence. Among them, MSCRED
 is not as reliable as MTAD-GAT and TopoMAD in most
C. Model Implementation metrics because the signature matrix used in MSCRED may
 FE-CTSNet and all baseline models were implemented fail to identify subtle anomalies and model complex and
using PyTorch on a computer with NVIDIA GeForce nonlinear spatial dependence well. Though MTAD-GAT and
RTX 2080 GPU. To ensure the comparison fairness, TopoMAD use the graph structure to realize the relatively
we adopted POT to automatically select optimal thresholds great performance compared with other baseline models, it still
for FE-CTSNet and all baseline models. Moreover, we also remains suboptimal performance because it ignores cross-time
implemented the point-adjust strategy for FE-CTSNet and all spatial dependence. In summary, FE-CTSNet achieves the
baseline models. best F1 and AUC on SMD and ASD, and the best F1 and
 For FE-CTSNet, validation sets were used to select the the second-best AUC on MSDS, which illustrates the imporoptimal combination of hyperparameters. The final hyperpa- tance of disentangling mixing temporal states and capturing
rameters in FE-CTSNet were depicted by the grid search cross-time spatial dependence.
method: the length of sliding window T was 10, the size To further support the conclusion above, Fig. 8 visualizes
of ϑct was 1 × 3 × 1, and the fuzzy state dimension Q the anomaly detection results of FE-CTSNet and some deep
(the number of membership functions) was 150. The number learning models. Gray solid lines and red dashed lines repreof layers in CTSNet was 3, the number of layers in each sent anomaly scores and threshold, respectively. Blue-shaded
mix-hop GCN was 4, the channel dimension C1 was 64, the regions represent the predicted anomalies, and red-shaded
channel dimension C2 was 64, and the number of neurons in regions represent the true anomalies, which contain two
the first fully connected layer C3 was 128. λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 were types: pointwise anomalies and collectivewise anomalies. In all
0.01, 0.6, and 0.9, respectively. ω1 and ω2 were 0.2 and 0.8, models, the observations whose anomaly scores exceed the
respectively. In addition, the training epoch was set to 30 and corresponding threshold are marked as anomalies. For SMD
the batch size was set to 256. In addition, the Adam optimizer (machine 1-1), all models can identify all anomalies. However,
with a learning rate of 0.001 is used to conduct end-to-end some deep learning models present many false alarms (e.g.,
training. GDN, USAD, MTAD-GAT, and OminAnomaly), which is
 not conducive for practical scenarios. For ASD (server 7),
D. Result Discussion compared to other baseline models, FE-CTSNet can gener-
 1) Overall Performance Comparison: Table IV reports the ate higher anomaly scores for true anomalies and smoother
anomaly detection results of all models on three datasets. anomaly scores for normal moments, which demonstrates that
Among machine learning models, IF presents the inferior FE-CTSNet is more sensitive and robust to the evolution laws
performance because it neglects temporal and spatial depen- of time series.
dencies. In addition, PCA, SFA, and CVA achieve better 2) Ablation Study: This section investigates the effectiveresults due to their consideration of temporal dependence or ness of each important component in FE-CTSNet. The relevant
spatial dependence. However, these models suffer from high variants are listed in Table II, and the corresponding detection
false detection rates because their linear hypothesis may not results from dataset ASD (server 7) are shown in Fig. 9.
handle complex nonlinear scenarios well. We can draw the following conclusions.
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4541

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF FE-CTSN ET W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 8. Predicted and true anomalies on SMD (machine 1-1) and ASD (server 7). Since collectivewise anomalies is a contiguous anomaly segment, the
point-adjust method is adopted: if at least one observation in collectivewise anomalies is predicted as an anomaly, the whole collectivewise anomalies will
be regarded as correctly detected. Therefore, some observations in collectivewise anomalies with anomaly scores below the threshold are also labeled to be
anomalies. (a) SMD (machine 1-1). (b) ASD (server 7).

 1) Compare FE-CTSNet With Variants 1 and 2: The igno- 2) Compare FE-CTSNet With Variant 3: Module A
 rance of cross-time spatial dependence and temporal (fuzzy embedding module) is superior to fully condependence can both remarkably degrade the model nected layers, which indicates that using fuzzy
 performance. states to characterize latent and mixing temporal
4542 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fig. 9. Ablation study results on ASD (server 7).

 states is helpful for improving anomaly detection
 results. Fig. 10. Example of CTSG in the validation set on MSDS.
 3) Compare FE-CTSNet With Variants 4, 5, and 6: Modules
 B, C, and D are all essential for FE-CTSNet. Moreover, in abnormal time period A can be detected, FE-CTSNet will
 module D has a more significant contribution to model easily infer the time-delay anomaly in abnormal time period B.
 performance than the other two modules, illustrating the 3) Hyperparameter Test: We evaluate the sensitivities of
 potential of CTSG in capturing complete spatiotemporal some key hyperparameters in FE-CTSNet: tradeoff coefficients
 dependencies for promoting detection results. in the joint evolution objective L J , the number of layers in
 CTSNet S, and the number of fuzzy states Q.
 a) Sensitivity of λ1 and λ2 in L J : λ1 and λ2 control
E. Specific Analysis the influences of two auxiliary objectives (i.e., state diversity
 1) Effectiveness of CTSG: Fig. 10 visualizes an example of constraint and temporal proximity constraint) on L J . Too small
CTSG after training. The horizontal coordinate and vertical λ1 and λ2 may make fuzzy states lose their diversity and
coordinate in the heatmap indicate the corresponding variable evolution continuity, thus degrading the ability to characterize
indexes (ten variables at time point t1 and ten variables at time latent temporal states. Too large λ1 and λ2 may hamper the
point t2 ). A cell with a darker color indicates the stronger normal optimization of main objectives (prediction and reconinteraction between pairwise variables, while a cell with a struction for time series), leading to poor anomaly detection
lighter color indicates the opposite. As can be seen, CTSG can performance. We test λ1 with values from {0.001, 0.01, 0.1,
uniformly and flexibly characterize complete spatiotemporal 0.5, 1} and λ2 with values from {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1}. It can be
dependencies. Specifically, CTSG captures strong autocorre- found that the superior results are gained when λ1 = 0.01 and
lations of variables along the time axis (time interval 1), λ2 = 0.6 [Fig. 12(a) and (b)], which is consistent with the
as shown in the green area, which proves the effectiveness previous theoretical analysis.
of the designed temporal proximity constraint in ensuring b) Sensitivity of λ3 in L J : λ3 controls the balance
the temporal dependence of fuzzy states. Moreover, it can between the prediction task and the reconstruction task.
also capture other intervariable correlations, i.e., intervariable Fig. 12(c) shows that λ3 with large value (0.9) realizes the
correlations at the same time point in the gray area and inter- best performance, indicating that the joint evolution objective
variable correlations at different time points in the orange area. should focus more on the reconstruction module in the early
These intervariable correlations are crucial for discovering training phase.
anomalies in multivariable time series because anomalies often c) Sensitivity of S: S controls the ability of FE-CTSNet
propagate between different variables. to capture long-term cross-time spatial dependence. As shown
 2) Effectiveness of Fuzzy States: Fig. 11 provides a real in Fig. 13(a) (solid lines and shadows indicate the average
server cluster example (a server is denoted as a variable) results and the standard deviations, respectively), it is found
of how FE-CTSNet exploiting fuzzy states to detect the that S = 3 performs best in terms of all metrics, illustrating
time-delay anomaly. Specifically, the time-delay anomaly that too small S may fail to effectively capture long-term
propagates from abnormal time period A in variable 2 to spatiotemporal dependencies, while too large S may lead to
abnormal time period B in variable 8. Through FE-CTSNet, overfitting problems.
each data point in variables 2 and 8 is converted into a corre- d) Sensitivity of Q: Q controls the number of fuzzy
sponding membership vector. Apparently, membership vectors states for disentangling mixing temporal states. As shown in
exhibit difference between abnormal time points and normal Fig. 13(b), it is found that using Q = 150 obtains better
time points (e.g., membership vectors at normal time point detection results than those obtained by using other values
755 and abnormal time point 758 in variable 2), indicating that in terms of the maximum, minimum, and median of F1. This
fuzzy states have the ability to distinguish between anomaly illustrates that a certain number of fuzzy states is necessary to
and normal. Further, we find out that the membership vectors reasonably characterize latent and mixing temporal states, but
of variable 2 at anomaly time period A are quite similar to redundant fuzzy states may degrade its characterization ability.
that of variable 8 at anomaly time period B, indicating that 4) Convergence of L J : To demonstrate the reasonability
fuzzy states successfully discovers strong cross-time spatial of the optimization process in FE-CTSNet, the losses of
dependencies between them, thereby endowing FE-CTSNet L J , L S , LT , L R , and L P in the validation set are shown
with the ability to sense the time-delay anomaly propagating in Fig. 12(d). The loss of L J quickly reaches convergence
from variable 2 to variable 8. Based on it, if the anomaly with small fluctuations, which verifies that all modules of
ZHU et al.: FUZZY STATE-DRIVEN CROSS-TIME SPATIAL DEPENDENCE LEARNING 4543

 V. C ONCLUSION
 In this study, we propose a novel FE-CTSNet to realize the disentanglement for mixing temporal states from a
 fuzzy embedding perspective and exploiting it to sense the
 intricateness and mutability of cross-time spatial dependence,
 thus improving the detection performance for time-delay
 anomalies. Specifically, the proposed TS2Mvec can build
 fine-grained fuzzy states to represent latent temporal states
 and generate membership degrees to accurately reflect mixing
 modes and dynamical evolutions of temporal states. Built upon
 fuzzy states, the proposed CTSG can flexibly learn mutable
 cross-time spatial dependence. Moreover, the designed state
 diversity and temporal proximity constraints possess the great
 convergence, which can effectively ensure the differences
 among fuzzy states and the evolution continuity of fuzzy
 states, thereby further enhancing their characterization ability
Fig. 11. Five fuzzy states in the test set on ASD (server 9) are randomly for latent temporal states. Experiments on three public datasets
chosen as an example to illustrate its effectiveness. The color of each cell in
the membership vector represents the magnitude of the membership degree demonstrate the superiority of FE-CTSNet and the effective-
(a cell with a darker color indicates the larger membership degree). ness of its important components. In addition, the visualization
 of fuzzy states and CTSG illustrates the excellent potential of
 FE-CTSNet in discovering time-delay anomalies.
 Future directions will focus on distinguishing transient
 impulsive interferences and anomalies, enabling FE-CTSNet
 to achieve more fine-grained and accurate anomaly detection
 in practical industrial applications.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., 2019, pp. 3068–3075.
 [2] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
 networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 12068–12080,
 Dec. 2022.
 [3] R. Laxhammar, G. Falkman, and E. Sviestins, “Anomaly detection in
 sea traffic—A comparison of the Gaussian mixture model and the
Fig. 12. Hyperparameter test results. (a)–(c) F1 and AUC of λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 kernel density estimator,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion, Jul. 2009,
on ASD (server 7) and MSDS. (d) Convergence analysis in the validation set pp. 756–763.
on ASD (server 9). [4] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 [5] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial–temporal synchronous
 graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial–temporal
 network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34,
 no. 1, 2020, pp. 914–921.
 [6] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 [7] S. Zhang, K. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Multivariate correlation matrix-based
Fig. 13. Hyperparameter test results. (a) and (b) Sensitivity analysis of S deep learning model with enhanced heuristic optimization for short-term
and Q on ASD (server 9). traffic forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3,
 pp. 2847–2858, Mar. 2023.
 [8] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpreta-
FE-CTSNet can be co-optimized well during the training tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
iterations. Simultaneously, the losses of L S and LT rise 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
 pp. 3220–3230.
gradually at the beginning of training and then become stable, [9] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
which verifies that the L S and LT can effectively realize variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
their respective goals, that is, to enhance the diversity and series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
 pp. 3621–3633.
evolution continuity of fuzzy states; the loss of L R and L P
 [10] P. Song, C. Zhao, B. Huang, and J. Ding, “Explicit representation and
drops gradually during the training iterations, illustrating that customized fault isolation framework for learning temporal and spatial
FE-CTSNet can successfully capture complete spatiotemporal dependencies in industrial processes,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
dependencies (especially, cross-time spatial dependence) and Syst., early access, Apr. 3, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3262277.
 [11] C. Zhao, “Perspectives on nonstationary process monitoring in the
learn specific patterns of time series to reconstruct and predict era of industrial artificial intelligence,” J. Process Control, vol. 116,
time series, thereby achieving effective anomaly detection. pp. 255–272, Aug. 2022.
4544 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

[12] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [36] Q. Dai, C. Zhao, and B. Huang, “Incremental variational Bayesian
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. Gaussian mixture model with decremental optimization for distribu-
 Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, vol. 15, no. 6, 2022, pp. 1201–1214. tion accommodation and fine-scale adaptive process monitoring,” IEEE
[13] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 5094–5107, Aug. 2022.
 T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non- [37] Y. Deng, Z. Ren, Y. Kong, F. Bao, and Q. Dai, “A hierarchical fused
 parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. fuzzy deep neural network for data classification,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395. Syst., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1006–1012, Aug. 2017.
[14] L. Feng, C. Zhao, Y. Li, M. Zhou, H. Qiao, and C. Fu, “Multichannel [38] M. M. Ebadzadeh and A. Salimi-Badr, “IC-FNN: A novel fuzzy neural
 diffusion graph convolutional network for the prediction of endpoint network with interpretable, intuitive, and correlated-contours fuzzy rules
 composition in the converter steelmaking process,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. for function approximation,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 26, no. 3,
 Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–13, 2021. pp. 1288–1302, Jun. 2018.
[15] K. Zhu and C. Zhao, “Dynamic graph-based adaptive learning for online [39] G. Wang and J. Qiao, “An efficient self-organizing deep fuzzy neural
 industrial soft sensor with mutable spatial coupling relations,” IEEE network for nonlinear system modeling,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
 Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9614–9622, Sep. 2023. vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 2170–2182, Jul. 2022.
[16] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: [40] M. Liu et al., “SCINet: Time series modeling and forecasting with
 Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in sample convolution and interaction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–22. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 5816–5828.
[17] S. Liu, X. Li, G. Cong, Y. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “Multivariate time series [41] A. Liu and Y. Zhang, “Spatial–temporal interactive dynamic graph
 imputation with disentangled temporal representations,” in Proc. Int. convolution network for traffic forecasting,” 2022, arXiv:2205.08689.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–19. [42] A. Salimi-Badr and M. M. Ebadzadeh, “A novel learning algorithm
[18] H. Hotelling, “Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal based on computing the rules’ desired outputs of a TSK fuzzy neural
 components,” J. Educ. Psychol., vol. 24, no. 6, p. 417, 1933. network with non-separable fuzzy rules,” Neurocomputing, vol. 470,
[19] P. Song and C. Zhao, “Slow down to go better: A survey on slow pp. 139–153, Jan. 2022.
 feature analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, [43] Y. N. Dauphin, A. Fan, M. Auli, and D. Grangier, “Language modeling
 Sep. 7, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3201621. with gated convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
[20] L. Wiskott and T. J. Sejnowski, “Slow feature analysis: Unsupervised 2017, pp. 933–941.
 learning of invariances,” Neural Comput., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 715–770, [44] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
 Apr. 2002. Boltzmann machines,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2010,
[21] A. Norvilas, A. Negiz, J. DeCicco, and A. Çinar, “Intelligent process pp. 807–814.
 monitoring by interfacing knowledge-based systems and multivariate [45] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detecstatistical monitoring,” J. Process Control, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 341–350, tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
 Aug. 2000. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[22] Z. Chai, C. Zhao, and B. Huang, “Multisource-refined transfer network [46] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational
 for industrial fault diagnosis under domain and category inconsisten- auto-encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World
 cies,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 9784–9796, Sep. 2022. Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[23] Z. Liu, C. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, and J. Yan, “Multi-scale graph learning
 for ovarian tumor segmentation from CT images,” Neurocomputing,
 vol. 512, pp. 398–407, Nov. 2022. Kun Zhu received the M.S. degree from the
[24] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Zhejiang University of Finance and Economics,
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural Hangzhou, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data the Ph.D. degree with the College of Control Science
 Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837. and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou.
[25] B. An, S. Wang, F. Qin, Z. Zhao, R. Yan, and X. Chen, “Adversar- His research interests mainly include anomaly
 ial algorithm unrolling network for interpretable mechanical anomaly detection and deep learning.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access,
 Mar. 14, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3250664.
[26] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021,
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035. Pengyu Song received the B.Eng. degree in elec-
[27] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- tronic information engineering from the College
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University,
 pp. 1–19. Hangzhou, China, in 2020, where he is currently
[28] Z. Huang, B. Zhang, G. Hu, L. Li, Y. Xu, and Y. Jin, “Enhancing pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science and
 unsupervised anomaly detection with score-guided network,” IEEE engineering with the College of Control Science and
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jun. 7, 2023, doi: Engineering.
 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3281501. His current research interests include anomaly
[29] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, detection and root cause diagnosis.
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Aug. 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
 Chunhui Zhao (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[30] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly the Ph.D. degree from Northeastern University,
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Shenyang, China, in 2009.
 Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, no. 1, 2019, pp. 1409–1416. From 2009 to 2012, she was a Post-Doctoral
[31] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph Fellow with the Hong Kong University of Science
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), and Technology, Hong Kong, and the University
 Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850. of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA,
[32] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised USA. Since January 2012, she has been a Professor
 anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. with the College of Control Science and Engineer-
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023. ing, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. She has
[33] P. Hájek, L. Godo, and F. Esteva, “Fuzzy logic and probability,” in Proc. authored or coauthored more than 200 articles in
 Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., 1995, pp. 237–244. peer-reviewed international journals. Her research interests include statistical
[34] L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy sets,” Inf. Control, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 338–353, 1965. machine learning and data mining for industrial application.
[35] H. Nasiri and M. M. Ebadzadeh, “MFRFNN: Multi-functional recurrent Dr. Zhao has served as a Senior Editor for Journal of Process Control and an
 fuzzy neural network for chaotic time series prediction,” Neurocomput- Associate Editor of two international journals, including Control Engineering
 ing, vol. 507, pp. 292–310, Oct. 2022. Practice and Neurocomputing.