IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 279

 Global or Local Adaptation? Client-Sampled
 Federated Meta-Learning for Personalized
 IoT Intrusion Detection
 Haorui Yan, Xi Lin , Member, IEEE, Shenghong Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Hao Peng , and Bo Zhang

 Abstract—With the increasing size of Internet of Things (IoT) using information sensors and communication technologies.
devices, cyber threats to IoT systems have increased. Federated This enables IoT devices to communicate and exchange data,
learning (FL) has been implemented in an anomaly-based intru- providing services for scenarios such as smart homes, indussion detection system (NIDS) to detect malicious traffic in IoT
devices and counter the threat. However, current FL-based NIDS trial automation, smart healthcare, and smart transportation [1],
mainly focuses on global model performance and lacks person- [2], [3], [4].
alized performance improvement for local data. To address this However, serious security issues arise when IoT devices are
issue, we propose a novel personalized federated meta-learning compromised by malicious intruders and participate in data
intrusion detection approach (PerFLID), which allows multiple
 interaction and processing. Intruders can penetrate the network
participants to personalize their local detection models for local
adaptation. PerFLID shifts the goal of the personalized detection layer through which devices and external networks exchange
task to training a local model suitable for the client’s specific data, data, and threaten IoT devices that lack security defenses.
rather than a global model. To meet the real-time requirements Since 2016, the well-known Mirai botnet has initiated numerof NIDS, PerFLID further refines the client selection strategy ous large-scale distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks
by clustering the local gradient similarities to find the nodes
 against IoT devices [5]. The BlueBorne vulnerability, identithat contribute the most to the global model per global round.
PerFLID can select the nodes that accelerate the convergence of fied in 2017, affects nearly all Bluetooth-enabled devices and
the model, and we theoretically analyze the improvement in the poses a significant threat to IoT devices [6].
convergence speed of this strategy over the personalized federated Due to the limited processing power and storage capacity
learning algorithm. We experimentally evaluate six existing of many IoT device systems, sophisticated security systems
FL-NIDS approaches on three real network traffic datasets and
show that our PerFLID approach outperforms all baselines in
 are frequently feasible. As a result, intrusion detection techdetecting local adaptation accuracy by 10.11% over the state-of- niques have been employed to mitigate unknown attacks in
the-art scheme, accelerating the convergence speed under various the network [7]. However, traffic-based intrusion detection
parameter combinations. techniques have several limitations, including insufficient data
 Index Terms—Internet of Things security, personalized traf- in public traffic sets and difficulty in detecting IoT attacks such
fic intrusion detection, federated meta-learning, client selection as DDoS, exploits, reconnaissance, and worms [8]. Therefore,
aggregation. relying solely on this approach to secure IoT devices is
 unreliable. Centralized detection systems are unsuitable for
 I. I NTRODUCTION IoT architectures with a large number of distributed compo-

T HE Internet of Things (IoT) is a network system that
 connects physical devices and machines to the Internet
 nents, making it difficult to detect single points of failure
 in IoT. Additionally, detection techniques must minimize
 latency to meet the frequent data processing demands of IoT
 Received 5 April 2024; revised 5 August 2024 and 18 November 2024;
accepted 20 November 2024. Date of publication 12 December 2024; date devices, while ensuring robust data privacy. As IoT traffic
of current version 26 December 2024. This work was supported in part by continues to increase, traditional intrusion detection systems
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202302 and face significant challenges in providing fast detection due to
Grant 62372297. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was Prof. Ghassan Karame. (Corresponding their high computational overhead [9], [10]. Recent studies
author: Xi Lin.) review conventional detection methods and emphasize that
 Haorui Yan, Xi Lin, and Shenghong Li are with the the School of Cyber rapid detection has become one of the primary challenges in
Security, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China, and also
with Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for the field of network intrusion detection [11].
Information Security, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: yhr0322@sjtu.edu.cn; According to current research, federated learning (FL) based
linxi234@sjtu.edu.cn; shli@sjtu.edu.cn). intrusion detection systems (IDS) could provide a solution
 Hao Peng is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology
and Application of Zhejiang Province and the School of Computer Science to some of these issues due to their improved adaptability
and Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China (e-mail: and scalability [12]. FL schemes allow users to jointly train
hpeng@zjnu.edu.cn). detection models without sharing their private data, addressing
 Bo Zhang is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China, and also with the State Grid the problem of insufficient public data in IoT scenarios while
Smart Grid Research Institute Company Ltd., State Grid Corporation of China, protecting data privacy [13]. This contrasts with non-federated
Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: bozhangiit@sjtu.edu.cn). machine learning methods, which do not offer this level of
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2024.3516548, provided by the authors. privacy protection and may require a larger amount of data to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3516548 be effective [14], [15].
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Specifically, we sample and extract features from the traffic
 information of each edge node, treating intrusion detection as
 a feature classification task with each edge node’s detection as
 a subtask. The central server sends malicious traffic detection
 models to the edge nodes, which are then trained collaboratively using a federated meta-learning approach. During the
 training process of each subtask, the edge nodes execute the
 model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) algorithm locally to
 update parameters while retaining local feature information.
 With this approach, the global model converges with only a
 few rounds of gradient descent at the edge nodes, resulting in
 higher accuracy for personalized intrusion detection. To enable
 fast convergence during model training, we design a node
 selection strategy based on gradient feature clustering. The
 strategy clusters the edge nodes based on their gradient fea-
Fig. 1. A framework for traffic intrusion detection of IoT devices based on tures in each communication round, calculates the probability
PFL. of each node being selected based on the feature distribution,
 and samples the optimal subset of nodes participating in
 Although FL is a detection scheme for detecting various the aggregation. The representative gradient features of the
types of cyber threats to the IoT, there are still some unresolved edge nodes are preserved during the aggregation process at
problems. Li et al. [16] proposed an FL framework to build the central server, and each training round is run only once
an IoT intrusion detection model collaboratively. Chatterjee at the server, thus not introducing additional communication
and Hanawal [17] proposed an FL-based intrusion detection overhead. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
system that uses a hybrid federated averaging (FedAvg) and • We propose a Personalized Federated Learning Intrusion
noise-resistant integration framework to deal with labeling Detection Framework, enabling personalized intrusion
noise. Liu et al. [18] used blockchain technology for storing detection for IoT devices facing attacks with unknown
and sharing FL models, which is used to ensure the security traffic types. This method leverages meta-learning to
of the aggregated detection models. These studies improved develop personalized models, effectively adapting to local
the structure of the detection model by utilizing existing FL data characteristics.
algorithms and presented the application of FL to IDS in • We design a node selection strategy that selects nodes
the context of the IoT. However, it is important to note that based on the clustering results of local gradient features.
these studies assume a uniform distribution of client data, This strategy is theoretically proven to accelerate the conand the goal is to train an optimal global model. Models vergence speed during model training, thereby enhancing
trained based on this assumption lack local data adaptation. the overall efficiency of our framework.
First, the data is non-independently and identically distributed • We demonstrate that our proposed personalized traffic
(Non-IID) among clients, which is due to the fact that IoT intrusion detection framework has a convergence upper
devices are produced by different manufacturers and con- bound. Furthermore, we conduct extensive simulation
figured with different protocols, resulting in varying traffic experiments with three neural network models on three
data from different devices in different network scenarios. NIDS datasets to verify that the proposed framework
As a result, the global model obtained from training cannot achieves higher detection accuracy with local adaptation
adapt to these data. Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) and faster training convergence.
is an approach to address the problem of slow convergence The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
and poor performance on Non-IID data as well as the lack we review the related work of FL and traffic intrusion detection
of personalization of the model for local tasks or datasets and summarize the PFL approach. In Section III, we illustrate
[19]. One of the methods to achieve personalization is meta- the underlying architecture with implementation details. In
learning, which optimizes the global model to enable fast Section IV, we introduce our PerFLID workflow. In Section
convergence of user-local training by treating the training V, We perform a theoretical convergence analysis of PerFLID.
phase of FL as the training phase of meta-learning, and the In Section VI, we present and discuss our evaluation results.
personalization phase of the FL model as the testing phase of Finally, we present the conclusion in Section VII.
meta-learning [20].
 In response to this, we propose a novel framework for II. R ELATED W ORK
intrusion detection in IoT traffic, termed Personalized Federated Learning Intrusion Detection (PerFLID). To simplify the A. Federated Learning Based Traffic Intrusion Detection
description, we replace the client in FL with an IoT edge node. Nguyen et al. proposed DÏoT [15], a self-learning dis-
PerFLID enables the training of local models on edge nodes tributed system for detecting IoT devices infected with Mirai
with different traffic data distributions in the IoT. In contrast malware. This intrusion detection system uses FL methods
to global models, the locally trained models exhibit enhanced for the first time, enabling distributed learning of models
personalization, making them optimal for intrusion detection. across multiple clients. However, this method only targets
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 281

Mirai malware attacks and lacks a complete implementa- training or new clients only need to execute a few steps of
tion of the intrusion detection FL framework. Later, several gradient descent on local data. This enables adaptation to the
researchers applied different FL models to solve the IoT local dataset and ultimately yields a more personalized model.
intrusion detection problem. Mothukuri et al. [12] proposed In our paper, we address the lack of local data adaptation
an anomaly detection method with FL, which protects user in existing federated learning intrusion detection work
data privacy by training anomaly detection machine learn- by proposing a locally personalized scheme based on
ing models on IoT devices without transmitting user data federated meta-learning. We provide detailed theoretical
to a centralized server. They used long short-term memory proof to support our approach. Additionally, to expedite the
(LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) neural network deployment of federated meta-learning, we have optimized
models to train ML models on Modbus network datasets. the client aggregation strategy. This optimization accelerates
The results show the lowest error rate in predicting attacks the deployment of meta-learning without incurring additional
and fewer false alarms than centralized machine learning. resource overhead, and we have also provided theoretical
Aouedi et al. [21] implemented a semi-supervised learning proof for this improvement.
scheme for intrusion detection in FL by training a local
autoencoder (AE) to learn the features of intrusion data. Zhao III. P RELIMINARIES
et al. [22] proposed a network anomaly detection method
 A. Federated Meta Learning
based on FL and transfer learning to address the issue of
scarce training data for network anomaly detection. The model Firstly, let us briefly review the formulation of MAML. The
achieved a success rate of 97.23% in detecting vulnerability core idea of MAML is to learn an effective initial set of model
attacks on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. To quickly detect APT parameters, enabling the model to adapt quickly and perform
attacks with privacy protection, Hu et al. [23] proposed a well on new tasks with only a few gradient updates. In the
traffic detection method based on coalitional meta-learning. context of federated learning, for each participating user, if we
The method achieves a detection accuracy distribution of assume each user takes the initial point and updates it using
86.67% and 67.6% on the CIC-IDS2017 and DAPT2020 one step of gradient descent based on its own loss function,
datasets, respectively. Ding et al. [24] proposed a scalable the federated learning global optimization objective F(w) is
NIDS for large-scale IoT networks. This system leverages a defined as follows:
meta-learning framework to optimize the parallelism of GNN- 1 X
 N
based NIDS and introduces a coalition formation strategy to min F(w) := fi (w − α∇ fi (w)) . (1)
 w∈Rd N
enhance the accuracy and reduce the communication overhead i=1
of the NIDS. Here, the local dataset Di is generated by post-processing
 the traffic files sampled from IoT devices, which is then used
 to train the local model parameters wi . The individual loss
B. Personalized Federated Learning in IoT
 function is defined as fi (w), and the parameters wi are updated
 Tan et al. [19] proposed to tackle two challenges in federated via gradient descent with respect to fi . The step size α ≥ 0
learning: slow convergence and subpar performance when represents the learning rate utilized by the node for training
dealing with highly heterogeneous (Non-IID) data, as well the model.
as the absence of personalized models for local tasks or The advantage of this computational method is that both
datasets. Luca et al. [25] introduced the use of data augmen- existing and new users can adopt it by using the solution of
tation to address the issue of out-of-domain generalization the new problem as an initial point and slightly adjusting it
in federated learning. They demonstrated that suitable data based on their own data. This means that users can utilize the
augmentation could mitigate Non-IID effects in FL, thereby initialized result and then update it with their dataset Di by
enhancing FL generalization and convergence from a causal performing only one or a few gradient descent steps. Users
perspective. Fraboni et al. [26] propose a jointly learned define their metafunctions locally as follows:
client selection strategy based on cluster selection. Compared
to multinomial distribution (MD) sampling, this strategy is Fi (w) := fi (w − α∇ fi (w)). (2)
both unbiased and reduces the variance of random client Following the completion of global model aggregation by
aggregation. Implementing personalized federated learning the server, the updated model is dispatched to the node to
includes a variety of model-based approaches in addition to commence a fresh round of meta-learning training. Through
data-based approaches, one of which is meta-learning. Meta- multiple rounds of communication, the initial model F(w) is
learning aims to enable models to rapidly learn new tasks attained. A detailed discussion on the model update algorithm
based on existing knowledge. The MAML algorithm [27] will be provided in Section IV.
possesses robust generalization capabilities and can be applied
in various gradient descent methods, such as supervised learning and reinforcement learning, hence its designation as a B. Data Heterogeneity
model-independent meta-learning algorithm. Fallah et al. [28] We define the traffic dataset D = {(x, y)} as the global
proposed Per-FedAvg within FedAvg using MAML equations. dataset. Here, x represents the features extracted from network
They demonstrated that meta-learning can enhance the training traffic that includes benign traffic as well as the latest common
of shared initial global models. Participants involved in the network attacks (such as Fuzzer, Backdoor, Exploits, DDoS,
282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

etc.), including attributes such as timestamps, source and xn is sampled from the distribution Pn ∼ DP(α, G0 ). The
destination IP addresses, source and destination ports, and product xn ×|D| = {|Di |}i=1
 N
 corresponds to the local dataset size
protocol type. The label y corresponds to x, representing the for each label at a node. This paper simultaneously employs
type of network attack. Consider N IoT devices, labeled as the three aforementioned partitioning methods to divide the
C1 ,C2 , . . . ,Cn , acting as nodes. Each node has its own local traffic dataset, thereby creating local datasets for experiments
dataset, denoted as Di = {(xi , yi )}. Similarly, the label yi of and achieving a Non-IID data distribution for IoT devices.
the local data from edge IoT devices corresponds to the type
of network attack occurring within the local network of the IV. T HE P ER FLID W ORKFLOW
device. Notate the local dataset size and global P dataset size
with |Di | and |D| respectively. Here, |D| = |Di | denotes A. Architecture Design of Personalized Federated
 i∈N Meta-Learning Intrusion Detection
the total number of global samples equals the sum of local
 In the IoT scenario, the PFL framework for traffic intrusion
samples. The distribution of traffic data from real IoT devices
 detection is shown in Figure 1 and consists of three layers:
is diverse, making it challenging to construct meaningful
 the node layer, which includes IoT edge devices, security
federated traffic datasets due to privacy concerns. Following
 gateways, and firewalls; the data transmission layer, which
the suggestion by Li et al. [29], dividing the real dataset into
 mainly consists of communication base stations; and the cena distributed Non-IID dataset helps balance the local data
 tral server layer, which is usually deployed on a cloud server.
across nodes while facilitating effective FL experiments. In
 The cloud server is responsible for training and maintaining
this section, we discuss how to partition the traffic dataset.
 the global model Mg . After the training is completed, each
Initially, we assume that traffic data on any device is assodevice in the node layer then performs several rounds of
ciated with one label. We define the local data distribution
 local updates based on Mg to obtain the local personalized
P(xi , yi ) = P(xi |yi )P(yi ) or P(xi , yi ) = P(yi |xi )P(xi ). Drawing
 model PM l = {pml0 , . . . , pmlN }. The specific implementation
from Non-IID classification [30], we propose three methods
 scheme of PerFLID is shown in Figure 2, and the final trained
for partitioning federated traffic data:
 local personalized model PM l can be integrated into the traffic
 1) Label Imbalance: In most IoT devices, the types of intrusion detection tool. The final trained local personalized
attacks originating from device vulnerabilities are typically model PM l can be integrated into a traffic intrusion detection
limited, resulting in different label distributions for each node’s tool to deploy effective traffic detection locally. We categorize
dataset, i.e., the distribution P(yi ) varies across nodes. To data collection to model training into the following five steps:
quantify this, we use the matrix X ∈ RK×N as the label
 1) To identify unknown network attacks, IoT end devices
distribution matrix, where K represents the number of attack
 utilize the open-source tool CICflowmeter for trafcategories and N represents the number of nodes. Each row
 fic characterization. The tool samples traffic flowing
vector xk ∈ RN represents the probability distribution of
 through the gateway firewall, extracts feature informacategory k across different nodes, with each dimension of the
 tion from packets stored in Packet Capture (PCAP)
vector indicating the proportion of samples from category k
 data format files and builds a local dataset in Comma
assigned to different nodes. To define a random variable for
 Separated Values (CSV) format.
each category and allow for the adjustment of the distribution’s
 2) The central server employs the initialization parameter
balance, we use the Dirichlet distribution, which is suitable for
 w0 to train the initialization model, which is subsemultivariate random variables and has been widely discussed
 quently transmitted to the selected edge node via the
in studies of data heterogeneity in FL [31]. Therefore, we
 IoT. The detection local model Ml of the edge nodes is
sample from PK ∼ DP(α, G0 ) and select a random vector as
 kept the same as the central server. The task of this
the probability distribution vector xk ∈ RN for the labels. Here,
 model is to learn traffic features and perform multi-
G0 represents the base distribution for a single node, and the
 class prediction. Considering that the traffic feature data
imbalance can be adjusted through the parameter α, where
 collected by the edge devices exhibits uneven label dissmaller values of α result in greater imbalance.
 tribution, feature distribution, and volume distribution,
 2) Feature Imbalance: Abnormal activities in IoT traffic for local data adaptation, we use in Equation (2) as a
data significantly differ from normal system activities, even loss function on the edge devices. This facilitates initial
within data sampled from the same device, abnormal and model training for local traffic feature updates and model
normal traffic data possess different traits. We denote these parameters wt .
feature imbalances as P(xi ) distribution imbalances. 3) Once an edge node has updated its model parame-
 3) Quantity Imbalance: Differences in the communication ters through meta-learning, it uploads the new model
capabilities of IoT devices lead to variations in the scale of parameters wt to the central server via the base station.
their traffic data, resulting in different sizes for each node’s Subsequently, the central server performs a weighted
local dataset |Di |. Similar to label imbalance, we utilize the aggregation based on the size of each node’s data as
Dirichlet distribution to allocate varying quantities of labeled weights, resulting in new parameters wt+1 for Mg .
samples to each node. The random vector xn ∈ RN represents 4) The central server sends the aggregated parameter wt+1
the distribution of sample quantities for each category across to the selected edge nodes. The probability of each node
nodes, with each dimension of the vector indicating the being selected, determined by the gradient parameters of
proportion of samples assigned to different nodes. The vector the local model Ml uploaded to the server, is calculated
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 283

 Fig. 2. The Overview of PerFLID Framework.

 as shown in Algorithm 1. Then the edge node performs in Equation (7). Then, adding both sides of Equation (5) for
 further meta-learning training and continues the iterative 1 ≤ t ≤ τ, we note that:
 process described earlier. τ
 5) After the last round of model aggregation, the global
 X
 wik+2 = wik+1 − β k+1
 ∇Fi (wi,t−1
 e ). (6)
 model Mg is distributed to all edge nodes. Subsequently, t=1
 each edge node performs one or several rounds of
 training based on this model using the local dataset and In the final step, independent batches Di,t , D0i,t , and D00i,t are
 finally obtains the personalized model PMli . utilized to compute the stochastic gradient e∇Fi (wk+1 i,t−1 ) for all
 local iterations, as follows:

B. Meta-Learning Training in Edge Node ∇Fi (wi,t−1
 e k+1
 ) := (I − αe k+1
 ∇2 fi (wi,t−1 , D00i,t ))·
 Each device can ultimately train its personalized model ∇ fi (wk+1 − α fi (wk+1 , Di,t ), D0i,t ).
 e
 i,t−1 i,t−1 (7)
based on the initial model to address the objective function
 k+1
in Equation (2) and enable the server to discern disparities Once the local update wi,τ is completed, the edge node
between various edge node models. Algorithm 1 outlines the uploads it to the server. Subsequently, the server calculates
meta-learning training process. The initial step involves com- the global wk+1 based on the aggregated weights pki of each
puting the gradient of each edge device’s local loss function node:
 X
∇Fi (w): wk+1 = k+1
 pki wi,τ . (8)
 i∈S k
 ∇Fi (w) = (I − α∇2 fi (w))∇ fi (w − α fi (w)). (3)
 Finally, the server distributes the global model wk+1 to the
Calculating the gradient ∇ fi (w) in each round usually requires selected set of nodes Sk and initiates a new round of training.
a high computational cost. Therefore, we adopt a batch of data After a certain number of training rounds, each node locally
Di and conduct unbiased analysis e ∇ fi (w, Di ): updates its model Ml , ultimately obtaining a personalized
 1 X model PM l . Compared to Ml , the personalized model PM l
 ∇ fi (w, Di ) :=
 e ∇li (w; x, y). (4) derived from our method better adapts to local data. We will
 |Di | (x,y)∈D
 i
 theoretically and experimentally validate the effectiveness of
In this process, li (w; x, y) represents the loss function of the our method in Sections V and VI, respectively.
edge device training model. In the second part, during the kth
round of communication, the server initially selects the edge
devices for the current global model wk based on the node C. Node Selection Based on Gradient Similarity Clustering
selection strategy. Each edge device i ∈ S k then executes In FL, the global model is obtained by aggregating all nodes
τ steps of random gradient descent concerning Fi . These and performing a weighted summation of the local model
 τ
local updates generate a local sequence wk+1 i,t t = 0 , where parameters wti returned by the nodes to the server,
wi, 0k+1 = wk+1
 i and wk+1i,τ = wi
 k+2
 for 1 ≤ t ≤ τ: X
 wt = pi wti . (9)
 wk+1
 i,t i,t−1 − β∇F i (wi,t−1 ),
 = wk+1 e k+1
 (5) i∈N

S k denotes the collection of nodes participating in the iteration. Here, pi = |D i|
 |D| denotes aggregation weights of nodes partic-
β represents the learning rate of local updates, where k + 1 ipating in the iteration depend on the ratio of the number
indicates training using the meta-model parameters of the k of local samples to the number of global samples. Since the
 k+1 k+1
 ∇Fi (wi,t−1
rounds. e ) denotes the estimated value of ∇Fi (wi,t−1 ) FedAvg algorithm does not involve all nodes in each round of
284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 PerFLID Workflow selected to join the set S k and participate in the aggregation
Input: Initial iterate w0 , each user local model gradient wi , process through backdoor attacks. Once a node is subjected to
 number of node samples |Di | an untargeted backdoor attack, the task accuracy of the global
Output: Global model parameters wK , local personalization model is compromised [32]. Under such influence, the global
 model PMli model may ignore the features of some key nodes, worsening
 1: The server sends w0 to all nodes, and the nodes perform the convergence effect of the global model. Consequently, the
 one local gradient update to get wi , which is uploaded to generalization performance of the final trained initial model
 the server; will be affected, hindering the process of user-personalized
 2: for k : 0 to K − 1 do model training.
 3: The server calculates the cosine similarity based on the Several algorithms have been proposed to address the
 saved node model parameters and performs hierarchical problem of backdoor attacks in federated learning models,
 clustering, grouping them into m categories; including distance-based defense methods [33] and defense
 4: t ← 1 Start considering the first distribution {Rt (k)}; methods based on Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
 5: M ← 0 Recalculate node selection probability; and clustering [34]. Our proposed aggregation method is
 6: repeat similar to [34], however, our paper places a greater empha-
 7: for each node i = 1 to n do sis on designing a new node selection strategy for the
 8: if i in Current distribution {Rt (k)} then rapid aggregation of local personalized models. This strategy
 9: 0
 rk,i = m+1 2 |Di |, M = M + rk,i ;
 0
 must be unbiased and ensure that the total expected value
10: else of each selected node equals the global aggregation value
11: 0
 rk,i =  |D2i | , M = M + rk,i 0
 ,   m; obtained by selecting all nodes, as shown in the following
12: end if equation:
 r0
13: Selection probabilities rk,i = Mk,i ; 2 3
14: end for X X
 ES k w = ES k 4 pi wti .
  t
15: Server generates distribution {Rt (k)} based on rk,i ; p j wtj 5 := (11)
 j∈S k i∈N
 t ← t + 1;
16: until t > m, distribution set {Rt (k)}m t=1 ; In Algorithm 1, the server retains the model parameters of
17: The server selects m times according to distribution edge nodes from the previous round of model communicaset {Rt (k)}m t=1 , determine the selected node set S k . The tion. We assume that the model parameters are represented
 Server sends wk to all nodes in S k ; as vectors. Many studies have explored node clustering in
18: for all i ∈ S k do client selection, utilizing various clustering algorithms like
19: Set wki,0 + 1 = wk ; DBSCAN [35], hierarchical clustering [26], and K-means [36].
20: for t : 1 to τ do Due to the large size of local models and the presence of
21: Compute the stochastic gradient high-dimensional features in the models, some have proposed
 ∇ fi (wki,t−1 + 1, Dti ) using dataset Dti ;
 e their distance metrics [33]. In our approach, we measure the
22: Set e wk+1i,t = wk+1 i,t−1 − α∇ fi (wi,t−1 , Di );
 e k+1 t
 similarity of node models using cosine similarity and then clas-
23: Set k+1
 wi,t = wi,t−1 − β(I −
 k+1
 sify the node models using Arccos and hierarchical clustering.
 αe∇2 fi (wk+1 i,t−1 , D 00 e
 i,t ))∇ f (wk+1
 i i,t−1 , D 0
 i,t );
 The server then measures the similarity between each pair of
24: end for client model parameters using the cosine similarity, which is
25: node i sends wk+1 i,τ back to server;
 calculated as follows:
26: end for A·B
27: Server updates its model by averaging over selected cosine similarity(A, B) = . (12)
 ||A|| · ||B||
 models;
28: end for
 where A · B is the dot product of vectors A and B, and ||A|||
29: Nodes perform several rounds of gradient updates locally
 and ||B||| are the modes of vectors A and B, respectively. Next,
 based on wK to get PMli ; the cosine similarity is converted to an angle using the inverse
30: return: Initialize global model parameters wK , local percosine function (Arccos) to better represent the differences
 sonalization model PMli . between the vectors, which is calculated as:

 θ = arccos cosine similarity(A, B) .
 
 (13)

aggregation, but randomly selects m = rN nodes based on the where θ is the angle between the vectors A and B. Then
ratio r, the final global model with weights is: calculate the angle between the gradients of each node to get
 X X the angle matrix Θ. Finally, select a clustering algorithm (such
 wt = pi wti + i .
 pi wt−1 (10) as K-means, hierarchical clustering, etc.) to cluster the angle
 i∈S k i<S k
 matrix Θ and obtain m categories.
 In Equation (10), the set of nodes S k is randomly selected Note that the number of clusters should match the number
by the server. However, this random selection strategy poses of nodes sampled by the server to ensure unbiased selection.
potential security risks in real-world federated intrusion detec- Subsequently, the probability of each node being selected for
tion scenarios. If a malicious node exists, it may be randomly each selection is calculated based on the number of samples in
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 285

the cluster, generating m independent probability distributions Assumption 3: For every node i ∈ {1, . . . , N}, the Hessian of
{Rt (k)}m
 t=1 . function fi is ρi -Lipschitz continuous, i.e.,
 Although our gradient clustering-based node selection
method is not specifically designed for backdoor attack sce- ∇2 fi (w) − ∇2 fi (u) ≤ ρi kw − uk ∀w, u ∈ Rd . (15)
narios, it can still screen out malicious nodes by leveraging A significant disparity in loss between nodes and the server
the gradient differences between nodes. This capability enables can hinder model convergence in each communication round.
it to be combined with other secure aggregation methods to Therefore, we make the following similar assumptions about
defend against backdoor attacks in each round of federated their gradients.
learning, thereby circumventing security risks during the training of personalized NIDS models. Assumption 4: The gradient of local functions Fi (w) is at
 We will prove our algorithm satisfies the assumption of most B-locally dissimilar from F(w) for each node i, i.e.,
unbiased selection in Section V. Although Algorithm 1 k∇Fi (w)k ≤ Bi k∇F(w)k. We expect both sides of the equation
requires execution in each round of communication, it does not to get Ei [k∇Fi (w)k2 ] ≤ k∇F(w)k2 B2 .
incur additional communication overhead, and our experimen- In the remainder of this paper, we define ρ := max ρi
tal results in Section VI also demonstrate a faster convergence and L := max Li , which can be regarded as bounds in each
during training. assumption.
 Assumption 5: The variance of the difference between the
 V. C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF P ER FLID local and global model parameters is limited for all nodes i
 In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis of how at any local update time t, i.e.,
PerFLID improves the convergence speed of federated learn- " n #
 1X k 2
ing. This includes the model assumptions used to analyze E wi,t − wkt ≤ β2 tτσ2w f or any 0 ≤ t ≤ τ. (16)
the convergence of federated meta-learning in Section V-A, n
 i=1
as well as an analysis of how meta-learning with randomly The discrepancies in gradients and Hessians between nodes
participating nodes in aggregation affects convergence, as dis- and the server during each training round are influenced
cussed in Section V-B. Furthermore, we present a theoretical by the participating training datasets Di , D0i , and D00i . We
examination of the strategy for selecting sets for updates make assumptions about the differences in gradients and
based on node gradient clustering in each training round. We Hessians.
demonstrate that this strategy leads to a more effective lower
bound for aggregation selection, as shown in Section V-C and Assumption 6: The gradient estimate e ∇Fi (w) in (7) which is
Section V-D. computing by using Di , D0i andD00i is close enough to the true
 value,i.e.,
 ≤ σ2ϕD := ϕ(Di ),
  
A. Modeling Assumptions E e ∇Fi (w) − ∇Fi (w)
 h 2
 i
 We concentrate on non-convex settings and delineate the E e ∇Fi (w) − ∇Fi (w) ≤ σ2φD := φ(Di , D0i , D00i ). (17)
communication between the server and nodes in two consecutive rounds to ensure that the anticipated decrease in the global
loss function satisfies E[F(wk+1 )] − E[F(wk )] ≤ ε. For the B. Meta-Learning With Random Node Selection
theoretical analysis of PerFLID, several standard assumptions As discussed in Section IV-B, when there are numerous
are typically made on the FML models (refer to e.g., [28], nodes, the standard federated meta-learning algorithm ran-
[37], [38]). We will utilize the following assumptions in our domly selects m nodes as set S k to perform local training in
analysis: each communication round. The enhancement of the global
 Assumption 1: The gradient of functions fi is bounded by a model by nodes in each round of updates is influenced
nonnegative constant Ui , i.e., k∇ fi (w)k ≤ Ui by the distribution of each node’s data. Therefore, random
 selection cannot consistently pick the nodes that contribute
 Assumption 2: Function fi is twice continuously differ- optimally to global updates. To prove this point, we first
entiable and Li -smooth for every node i ∈ {1, . . . , N}, i.e., need to establish the intermediate result that, under Algorithm
k∇ fi (w) − ∇ fi (u)k ≤ Li kw − uk ∀w, u ∈ Rd . The gradient Assumptions 1 to 3, the local meta-function Fi (w) defined by
Lipschitz assumption also implies that fi satisfies the following Equation (2) Pand the average of each node’s meta-function
 N
conditions for all w, u ∈ Rd : F(w) = (1/N) i=1 Fi (w) are both smooth.
 Lemma 1: If Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold, then Fi in
 Li
 | fi (w) − fi (u) − h∇ fi (u), (w − u)i| ≤ kw − uk2 . (14) Equation (2) with α ∈ [0, 1/L] is smooth with parameter
 2 L := 4L + αβU. Hence, the F(w) is also smooth with
As discussed in Section IV-B, the update rules in Algorithm 1 parameter L.
involve the second derivatives of all nodes’ loss functions. Second, we use the B-locally similarity in Assumptions 4
Therefore, it is necessary to impose positive definiteness to derive the difference between the local loss Fi (w) and the
assumptions on the Hessian matrices of all fi . global F(w).
286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 τ
 Lemma 2: When B-locally dissimilar in Assumptions 4 1 XX
 q = A+ B+C + ∇Fi (w̄kt−1 ), (23)
follows that: B ≤ 1 + σB . Then the true rather than
 2 m i∈S
 k t=1
estimated bounded variance in Assumptions 6 holds, i.e., We will separately bound the terms in the above formula in
Ei [k∇Fi (w) − ∇F(w)k2 ] ≤ σ2B . the Supplementary Material, and thus, by Equations (58), (60),
Using Lemmas 1, and 2, we analyze the expected reduction (62) and (63), we have
of the target when executing a step of Algorithm 1 with nodes
 τ 2
randomly selected. 1 X Xe h 2
 i
 Theorem 1: Consider the objective function F defined in E ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) ≤ 4τE ∇F(wkt−1 )
 m i∈S
Equation (1) for the case that α ∈ [0, 1/L]. Suppose that k t=1

the conditions in Assumptions 1 to 4 and 6 are satisfied, and + 4τσ2φ + 8τσ2B + 4τ(τ − 1)σ2w L2 β2 . (24)
recall the definitions of L from Lemma 1. Consider running
 Now, we lower bound the term
Algorithm 1 with the randomly selected set S k for K rounds
 τ
 "* +#
with τ local updates in each round and with β ≤ 1/(10τL). k 1
 XX
 E ∇F(w ), ∇Fi (wi,t−1 ) .
 e k
 (25)
The expected decrease in the global loss function satisfies m i∈S
 k t=1
 3τβ 2
 F(wk+1 ) ≤ F(wk ) − ∇F(wk ) We will separately bound the terms in the above formula in
 10 the Supplementary Material, by (54), we have
 + τβ (2Lβσ2φD − σ2ϕD ) + 2(2Lβ − 1)σ2B
  
 τ
 "* +#
 + τβ 2(τ − 1)L2 β2 (Lβ − 1) . k 1
   XX
 (18) E ∇F(w̄ ), k
 ∇Fi (wi,t−1 )
 e
 m i∈S
 k t=1

 Proof: We define the average of randomly selected nodes τ
 "* !+#
 1 XX
in the k-th round of updates as w̄k = 1/m S k wki . By = E ∇F(w̄ ), A + B + C +
 k k
 P
 ∇Fi (w̄i,t−1 )
 m i∈S
Lemma 1, we know F(w̄) is smooth therefore by Assumption k t=1
 τ
 "* +#
2, F(w̄) also satisfies the radient Lipschitz assumption, thus we 1 XX
 k k
have ≥ E ∇F(w̄ ), ∇Fi (w̄i,t−1 )
 m i∈S
 k t=1

 F(w̄k+1 ) ≤ F(w̄k ) + ∇F(w̄k ), w̄k+1 − w̄k
 ˝ ˛
 − E ∇F(w̄k ), A − E ∇F(w̄k ), B + C .
 ˝ ˛ ˝ ˛
 (26)
 L k+1 2
 + w̄ − w̄k , (19) By plugging Equations (68) to (70) in Equation (26) implies
 2
 τ
 "* +#
recall the equality (6) 1 XX
 E ∇F(w̄k ), ∇Fi (wki,t−1 )
 e
 τ m i∈S
 k t=1
 τ
 X
 wk+1 − wk = −β ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ), (20) k 2
 ∇F(w ) − τσ2ϕD − 2τσ2B − 2τ(τ − 1)L2 β2 σ2w . (27)
 e
 i ≥
 t=1 2
due to Due to randomly selecting nodes to participate in aggrega-
 Assumption 5, for the nodes selected to participate in the tion, we have ES k [F(w̄k )] = F(wk ). Substituting Equation (27)
aggregation, sum the two sides of the equation (20) separately, and Equation (25) in Equation (22) implies
we obtain 
 1
 
 2
 τ
 F(w ) ≤ F(w ) − τβ
 k+1 k
 − 2Lβ ∇F(wk )
 β X Xe 2
 w̄k+1
 − w̄ = −
 k
 ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) (21a) + τβ(2Lβσ2φD + σ2ϕD ) + 2τβσ2B (2Lβ + 1)
 m i∈S
 k t=1
 τ 2 + 2τ(τ − 1)L2 β3 σ2w (Lβ + 1)
 k 2 β X Xe
 w̄k+1 − w̄ = ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) . (21b) ≤ F(wk ) −
 3τβ
 ∇F(wk )
 2
 m i∈S 10
 k t=1
 + τβ (2Lβσ2φD + σ2ϕD ) + 2σ2B (2Lβ + 1)
  
Put (21a), (21b) into (19) and take expectation from both sides
 + τβ 2(τ − 1)L2 β2 (Lβ + 1) .
  
 (28)
 E F(w̄k+1 ) ≤ E F(w̄k )
    
 "* τ
 +# The last inequality is obtained using β ≤ 1/(10τL), which
 k 1 gives us the desired result. 
 XX
 − βE ∇F(w̄ ), k
 ∇Fi (wi,t−1 )
 e
 m i∈S Theorem 1 shows a dependency on parameters L, B, β, τ of
 k t=1
 2
 2
 3 the FML model. Note that σ2ϕD , σ2φD is not a constant, and as
 τ
 L 2 4 1 X Xe expressed in Assumption 5, we can make it arbitrarily small
 + βE ∇Fi (wi,t−1 ) 5 .
 k
 (22)
 2 m i∈S by choosing batch sizes D, D0 and D00 large enough. Once
 k t=1
 again, we focus on special cases to examine the tightness of
Next, note that our results. Let σ2ϕD = σ2φD = 0, and τ = 1. In this case,
 τ reduces to stochastic gradient descent, where the only source
 1 X Xe of stochasticity is the batches of gradient. The second term
 ∇Fi (wki,t−1 )
 m i∈S
 k t=1
 on the right-hand side in Equation (18) reduces to O(β2 LB2 ).
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 287

This is the classic result for stochastic gradient descent for D. Meta-Learning With Clustering-Based Node Selection
nonconvex functions, and we recover the lower bounds [39]. In Theorem V.1 we prove an upper bound on the convergence of meta-learning for random node selection satisfying
C. Clustering-Based Node Selection Assumptions 1 to 3. In Proposition 1 we show that node
 selection based on cluster sampling has the same bound on
 Algorithm 1 states that the node with the highest contribu- FL convergence as MD-based selection. We now combine the
tion to the global model in each communication round is most two conclusions to prove an upper bound on the convergence
probably selected as the solution to the gradient difference of the node selection strategy using meta-learning with clusterbetween nodes. The contribution of each node to the global based in Theorem V.2:
model is represented by hierarchically clustering the gradients Theorem 2: Consider the objective function F defined in (1)
uploaded by the nodes and generating independent distribu- for the case that α ∈ [0, 1/L]. Suppose that the conditions
tions {Rt (k)}m
 t=1 . Selection based on the clustering results can in Assumptions 1–5 are satisfied, and recall the definitions of
speed up the convergence of the model compared to randomly L from Lemma 1. Consider running Algorithm 1 along with
selecting nodes. This point is supported by [40] theoretical its node selection strategy. Then obtain the selected set S k
proof of convergence of the Multinomial Distribution (MD) for K rounds with τ local updates in each round and with
Selection section. First, we give Proposition V.1. β ≤ 1/(10τL). We have the following expected decrease in the
 t global objective
 Proposition 1: The probability rk,i of clustered selection from
 m
the distribution {Rt (k)}t=1 in Proposition 1 satisfies Equation 3τβ 2
(29) the following property as a sufficient condition for unbi- F(wk+1 ) ≤ F(wk ) − ∇F(wk )
 10
ased selection:
 + τβ (2Lβσ2φD − σ2ϕD ) + 2p(2Lβ − 1)σ2B
  
 N
 + τβp 2(τ − 1)L2 β2 (Lβ − 1) .
  
 X (32)
 ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , m} , t
 rk,i = 1,
 i=1
 m
 Proof: We now prove the convergence of Algorithm 1, FML
 X |Di | using our node selection strategy. Similarly, We define the
 ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n} , t
 rk,i =m . (29)
 t=1
 |D| P of selected
 average nodes in the k-th round of updates as w̄k =
 k
 1/m S k0 wi . To distinguish it from the set of randomly chosen
 Proof: By Equation (29), when selecting one node from one nodes, according to Algorithm 1, we denote by S k0 the set of
of the m distributions Rt (k), we have: nodes chosen and ES k0 [F(w̄k )] as the expectation of the global
 2 3
 n loss, for the subsequent proofs. By Lemma 1 and Equation
 (22), we have
 X X
 ERt (k) 4 p j (Rt (k)) wkj 5 = t
 rk,i wki .
 j∈Rt (k) i=1
 ES k0 F(w̄k+1 ) ≤ ES k0 F(w̄k )
    

Due to the linear relationship of the expected values, the
 2* +3
 τ
 1 XX
expected new global model is the average of the weighted − βE 4 ∇F(w̄k ), ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) 5
 e
models obtained for each distribution {Rt (k)}m m 0
 t=1 according to i∈S k t=1
Equation (30). 2 23
 τ
 L 2 4 1 X Xe
   X m n
 1X t k X
 n
 + βE ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) 5 . (33)
 ES k wk = rk,i wi = pi wki , (30) 2 m 0
 i∈S k t=1
 m
 k=1 i=1 i=1

which means that our theory is valid.  We will prove Theorem V.2 along the same lines as we proved
 Theorem V.1. Note that
We demonstrate our cluster selection, as described in Proposi- τ
tion V.1, satisfies Lemma V.3. Additionally, the MD selection 1 X Xe
 ∇Fi (wki,t−1 )
method has similar bounds, indicating that using the FedAvg m i∈S
 k t=1
aggregation algorithm exhibits identical asymptotic behavior τ
 1 XX
when using our proposed clustering and MD selection. = A0 + B0 + C 0 + ∇Fi (w̄kt−1 ). (34)
 Lemma 3: Suppose C1 , C2 , . . . , Cm are the index of sampled m i∈S
 k t=1
nodes. We have
 2 3 Based on our assumptions and Lemma 2, the upper bounds
 1 X m X n
 |Di | of A0 and B0 remain constant in the above equation. Next, we
 ES k 4 wC j =
 5 wi , demonstrate the impact of the choice strategy on C 0 .
 m
 j=1 i=1
 |D|
 0 1
 2
 2
 3 τ
 n 2
 X 1 X 2
 1 X X 2 C0 ≤ ∇Fi (wkt−1 ) − ∇Fi (w̄kt−1 ) A
 wki − wk 5 ≤ pi wki − wk .
 @
 E4 (31) m 0
 m i∈S t=1 i∈S k
 k i=1
 τ X
 2 X
 L 2
We will analyze the convergence of node-sampled federated ≤ wkt−1 − w̄kt−1
 m
meta-learning in the next subsection. t=1 i∈S k0
288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 τ
 = L2
 X
 wkt−1 − w̄kt−1 .
 2
 (35) Second, we have
 E ∇F(w̄k ), A0 = E ∇F(w̄k ), E A0
 ˝ ˛ ˝  ˛
 t=1

Based on the conclusion in Lemma 3 to bound C 0 , taking the τ 2
 ≤ E∇F(wk ) + τσ2ϕD , (43)
mathematical expectation for both sides of Equation (35). 4
 " τ
 where the last inequality follows from
 #
 h i 2
 0 2
 X
 2 k k
 E C ≤L E E wt−1 − wt−1 Assumption 5. Last, we use the fact that
 t=1 τ h 2
 i
 E ∇F(w̄k ), B0 + C 0 ≤ E ∇F(wk )
 ˝ ˛
 τ h i
 X 2 4
 = L2 wkt−1 − wkt−1 h
 2
 i h
 2
 i
 t=1 + 2E B0 + 2E C 0 .
 τ X
 n
 X 2 (44)
 ≤ L2 pi wki,t−1 − wkt−1
 t=1 i=1 Plugging Equations (68) to (70) in Equation (26) implies
 ≤ pL β τ(τ − 1)σ2w .
 2 2
 (36) "* τ
 +#
 k 1
 XX
 k
 E ∇F(w̄ ), ∇Fi (wi,t−1 )
 e
Then, we bound the last term of Equation (34), and we have m i∈S
 k t=1
 τ
 2 3
 2 2
 1 X h 2
 i ≥ ∇F(wk ) − τσ2ϕD − 2τσ2B − 2pL2 β2 τ(τ − 1)σ2w . (45)
 E4 ∇Fi (w̄kt−1 ) 5 ≤ E ∇F(wkt−1 ) + pσ2B . (37) 2
 m i∈S
 k Due to randomly selecting nodes to participate in aggrega-
Note that, by Equation (64), we have tion, we have ES k [F(w̄k )] = F(wk ). Substituting Equation (27)
 2 and Equation (25) in Equation (22) implies
 τ
 1 X Xe 2 2 2
 ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) ≤ 4 A0 + 4 B0 + 4 C0
  
 1 2
 ES k0 F(wk+1 ) ≤ F(wk ) − τβ − 2Lβ ∇F(wk )
  
 m i∈S
 k t=1 2
 τ 2
 1 XX + τβ(2Lβσ2φD + σ2ϕD ) + 2τβσ2B (2Lβ + 1)
 +4 ∇Fi (w̄kt−1 ) ,
 m i∈S + 2τ(τ − 1)L2 β3 σ2w (Lβ + 1)
 k t=1
 (38) 3τβ 2
 ≤ F(wk ) − ∇F(wk )
 10
and thus, by Equations (58), (60), (62) and (63), we have
 + τβ (2Lβσ2φD + σ2ϕD ) + 2p(2Lβ + 1)σ2B
  
 τ 2
 + τβp 2(τ − 1)L2 β2 (Lβ + 1) .
  
 1 X Xe h 2
 i (46)
 E ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) ≤ 4τE ∇F(wk )
 m i∈S
 k t=1 The last inequality is obtained using β ≤ 1/(10τL), which
 + 4τσ2φ + 4τ(1 + p)σ2B + 4L2 β2 τ(τ − 1)σ2w . (39) gives us the desired result. 
 Theorem V.2 differs from Theorem V.1 in that it concludes
 Next, we lower bound the term that the upper bound on convergence decreases each round
 τ
 "* +#
 k 1
 XX with the addition of client selection strategies. This bound is
 E ∇F(w ), ∇Fi (wi,t−1 ) .
 e k
 (40) now limited to the maximum probability of being selected,
 m i∈S
 k t=1 p. In general, p ≤ 1/m < 1, which inevitably results in
By (34), we have a lower upper bound on convergence, thus speeding up the
 2*
 τ
 +3 convergence of the model during training. Let σ2ϕD = σ2φD = 0,
 1 XX and τ = 1. In this case, the second term on the right-hand
 E 4 ∇F(w̄k ), ∇Fi (wki,t−1 ) 5
 e
 m 0 side in Equation (32) reduces to O(pβ2 LB2 ), which is similar
 i∈S k t=1
 2* +3 to complexity in Theorem V.1, but with a new constraint
 τ
 1 XX term.
 ≥ E 4 ∇F(w̄k ), ∇Fi (w̄ki,t−1 ) 5
 m 0
 i∈S k t=1
 VI. E VALUATION
 − E ∇F(w̄ ), A0 − E ∇F(w̄k ), B0 + C 0 .
 k
 ˝ ˛ ˝ ˛
 (41)
 A. Experimental Settings and Datasets
We bound the terms of the above inequality separately. First 1) Environmental Setup: In this study, both our global
note that and local models utilize three different deep learning neural
 2* +3
 τ networks for three different datasets.1 Note that the model
 1 XX
 E 4 ∇F(w̄k ), ∇Fi (w̄ki,t−1 ) 5
 m 0 1 The CNN for UNSW-NB15 dataset has 7 layers with the following
 i∈S k t=1
 2* 2 3+ 3 structure: 3×3×16 Convolutional → 2×2 MaxPool → 3×3× 32 Convolutional
 → 2 × 2 MaxPool 3 × 3 × 64 Convolutional → 2× 2 MaxPool → z × 11 Fully
 1 X
 = τE 4 ∇F(w̄k ), E 4 ∇Fi (w̄ki )5 5 connected. The LSTM for BoT-IoT dataset has 6 layers with the following
 m 0 structure: (z, 15) LSTM → 20×60 Fully connected → 60×80 Fully connected
 i∈S k → 80 × 90 Fully connected → 90 × 4 → softmax, where z depends on the
 2 number of input features. The CNN-BiLSTM for CIC-IDS2017 has 11 layers
 = τE ∇F(w ) . k
 (42) and its structure is in the link: https://github.com/fisher85/ml-cybersecurity
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 289

structure was adjusted to fit the various datasets while main- attack types (including normal traffic) and their sample counts
taining uniformity across different comparison methods. The are as follows: Normal 637 (63.89%), Backdoor 16 (1.61%),
model and the PFL framework were implemented using DoS 163 (16.35%), Exploits 86 (8.63%), Reconnaissance 88
PyTorch 1.13.1. Experiments were conducted on the Ubuntu (8.83%), Worms 7 (0.70%). For each round of experiments,
20.04.3 LTS platform with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080TI training and test data are randomly selected based on the
GPU. aforementioned ratio, with the experiment repeated ten times,
 2) Dataset Description and Preprocessing: In this paper, and the average value serving as the experimental result.
we conducted experiments using three widely-used IoT traffic 5) Evaluation Metrics: Given that each edge node in our
intrusion detection datasets: the UNSW-NB15 dataset [41], PerFLID model may encounter n (where n ≥ 3) unknown types
the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [42], and the BoT-IoT dataset [43]. of attacks, we evaluate the performance of our model using
The UNSW-NB15 dataset was generated by the UNSW Cyber accuracy, false alarm rate, and macro-F1 score as evaluation
Range Laboratory, combining real-world benign traffic with metrics. The calculation of these metrics is as follows:
modern, synthetic attack behaviors. The CIC-IDS2017 dataset Accuracy rate: the proportion of correctly classified traffic
includes both benign and various common attack types, pro- samples (including normal traffic and abnormal traffic) to the
viding raw traffic data as well as network traffic analysis total samples.
results, which include timestamps, source and destination TP + TN 1 X T Pi + T Ni
IPs, ports, protocols, and attack labels. The BoT-IoT dataset Accuracy = = . (47)
 T P + T N + FP + FN N i∈N |Di |
contains over 72 million records, covering a wide range of
attacks including DDoS, DoS, OS scanning, service scanning, Recall: the true positive rate, represents the proportion
keystroke logging, and data exfiltration. These datasets have of normal traffic samples incorrectly identified as abnormal
been widely used to evaluate intrusion detection systems, and among all samples.
their generation methods are well-documented in the respec-
 TP
tive publications, ensuring a diverse and representative set of Recall = . (48)
attack scenarios and network conditions. Our preprocessing T P + FN
of this three dataset involves three steps: (1) conducting Macro F1-score: Considering the large difference in the
dimensionality reduction (PCA) on the three-column feature number of attack samples for each type of traffic at edge nodes,
variables of character types and applying one-hot encoding calculate the Macro F1-score. The calculation formula for the
to ensure uniqueness; (2) segregating the merged character Macro F1-score is:
variables and other features from the label class; (3) filling in K
 1 X Precisioni · Recalli
missing data and performing reselection and feature normal- Macro F1-score = 2· . (49)
ization operations according to the Non-IID settings. K Precisioni + Recalli
 i=1
 3) Baselines: We selected four state-of-the-art federated where K is the total number of classes, The Macro F1-score
intrusion detection models: Deepfed [16], FSLAD [21], Fed- measures the performance of a multi-class classification model
ANIDS [44], and SSFL [45] as baselines. These methods by averaging the F1-scores of each class.
showcase significant advancements in federated learning for
intrusion detection over the past four years. Our method,
PerFLID, is designed to adapt to local data distributions. B. The Performance of Personalization in PerFLID
Additionally, unlike these models, our approach introduces Capability testing of different federated learning distribution
a novel node selection mechanism to accelerate federated parameter models involves allocating training data based on
learning. the three imbalances discussed in Section III-B. The allocation
 4) Dataset Partitioning: We utilize the Non-IID data par- method utilizes the label Dirichlet selection technique, where
titioning strategy mentioned in Section III-B to segment the traffic data labels are distributed according to the parameter
three datasets and create local traffic datasets for each node. α, controlling the level of data heterogeneity. For all three
The specific process is as follows: we allocate 80% of the datasets, we set the same parameters α to [0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5, 10].
dataset for training nodes, reserving the remaining 20% for Similarly, the test node’s data follows the distribution with
testing nodes. Regardless of being a training or testing node, the same parameters. By training our model under different
the dataset adheres to imbalances in attack type distribution, parameters, we aim to evaluate the model’s accuracy when
data characteristics, and quantity, aligning with the heterogene- tested on various edge nodes. The results are illustrated in
ity of real IoT data. Using the UNSW-NB15 dataset as an Figure 3 and according to Figure 3, we evaluate the personalexample, this dataset includes nine types of attacks, forming ization performance from accuracy:
nine labels. We divide these labels among a specified number 1) Accuracy: Personalized traffic intrusion detection modof nodes based on a Dirichlet distribution, ensuring that each els are expected to demonstrate high accuracy in local
label’s probability for a node is a sample from the Dirichlet detection tasks [19]. We measure the degree of personalization
distribution. Then, we calculate the number of attack types by the average improvement in the classification accuracy
each node contains based on this probability (excluding attack of unknown types of traffic of the edge node’s personalized
types with fewer than 5 samples). Finally, we ensure each node model before and after training. According to Figure 3a, where
has at least one attack type but no more than five. When the α = 0.1 represents the highest data heterogeneity, PerFLID
number of training nodes =100, at a certain node, the major achieved the most significant personalization improvement of
290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 3. Comparison results of the model accuracy in detecting unknown attacks with varied data distribution variance parameters α on UNSW-NB15, CIC-
IDS2017, BoT-IoT datasets under localized personalized updates. (Since multiple nodes were tested, the shaded portions of the graph represent confidence
intervals for the accuracy, which is the same in Figure 4).

34.5%, compared to 30.1% with Fed-ANIDS and 18.7% with networks achieve local personalization improvements in edge
Deepfed models. Table I presents specific experimental results, devices. Although the LSTM network exhibits higher test
comparing precision, recall, and macro-F1 scores obtained by accuracy than CNN (1.4%-2.9% improvement), the relative
PerFLID, FSLAD, Fed-ANIDS, SSFL, and Deepfed models performance of the same network remains consistent.
when federated training to meet various personalized needs.
Notably, at α = 0.1, our method achieves precision, recall, and C. The Performance of Global Model Test
macro-F1 scores of 79.6%, 74.5%, and 75.5%, respectively,
 After investigating PerFLID’s personalization following
on the UNSW-NB15 dataset, 82.5%, 77.4%, and 78.7% on the
 several rounds of local learning, we conducted additional
CIC-IDS2017 dataset, and 90.5% 89.9% 90.3% on the Bot-IoT
 experiments to determine whether PerFLID’s global model
dataset.
 can handle complex global scenarios during the training phase.
 Several observations can be made from Figure 3: First, for
 Using the same three datasets, we tested the accuracy of the
low personalization needs (α = 10), all federated learning
 global model and compared it with the latest meta-learning
models achieved 90% classification accuracy, as shown in
 methods [46], the results are shown in Table II.
Figure 3d. However, only PerFLID performed well under
strong personalization requirements (α = 0.1), achieving
79.6% accuracy in classifying unknown attacks using the CNN D. The Verification of Node Selection Strategies
network. Second, the accuracy before personalized training on This experiment is used to evaluate the effectiveness of the
the new test node ranges from 45% to 55%. This discrepancy key component of PerFLID, i.e., to demonstrate that a node
is due to the suboptimal use of the global model as the initial selection strategy based on cluster selection accelerates the
model for the edge node, which is addressed through person- convergence of the model. We trained using a dataset with
alized training. As the demand for personalization decreases, 120 nodes, with a data distribution parameter of α = 0.1 and
the global model approaches the optimal solution, leading other parameters identical to those in Section VI-A. To validate
to an increase in test accuracy after personalized training, the generality of our node selection strategy, we compare
from 79.6% to 90.3%. Finally, the experiment results in three approaches to achieve intrusion detection: federated
Table I demonstrate that the CNN, LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM meta-learning [23], federated learning [45], and PerFLID. The
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 291

 TABLE I
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON ACCURACY R ESULTS OF G LOBAL M ODEL
 ON T HREE DATASETS

experiments aim to evaluate the local adaptation and runtime
of the trained models. The results of the experiments are shown
in Table III, where the average running time of the algorithms
intuitively shows that our approach runs faster while achieving
similar detection accuracy. Thus, our model exhibits faster
convergence compared to the other two methods, requiring
only 4−10 epochs of personalized training to converge for each
node with different data distributions. This observation aligns Fig. 4. The impact of additional participant nodes C in federated training test
with our theoretical analysis, indicating efficient convergence on UNSW-NB15 dataset.
without additional overhead. The last two columns of Table III
present the experimental results of applying our node selection
strategy to PFTD based on federated meta-learning and SSFL 1) Impact of Additional Participant Nodes: The average
based on federated learning. It is evident that our node accuracy of the personalized model increases with the number
selection strategy significantly accelerates the training speed of edge nodes. This is because with more edge nodes, the
of each model, while also enhancing global accuracy and global model can access a greater number and variety of
improving adaptation to local data. sample features. However, this improvement is not infinite and
 may even become counterproductive. When the total number
 of nodes reaches 500, the accuracy of our model plateaus,
E. The Additional Participant Scenario Test while the accuracy of PFTD drops by 5.42%. We believe that
 Since different federated learning parameters affect the when the edge nodes cover a sufficient number of samples
model training effect, for the presence of additional nodes of all types, the model accuracy reaches its peak. Further
involved in training, we compared the impact of different increasing the number of edge nodes only increases storage
numbers of edge nodes on the model training accuracy when overhead and model aggregation delay at the central server.
the node data heterogeneity parameter α = 0.5. The experi- Moreover, without a node selection strategy, increasing the
mental results are shown in the Figure 4. We also increased number of edge nodes may result in certain types of samples
the learning rate and conducted tests after enough rounds of not being selected for aggregation, thereby reducing model
personalized training. Two conclusions can be drawn: accuracy.
292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE III
 ACCURACY FOR THE E XPERIMENTS OF THE G LOBAL AND L OCAL S CENARIO

 2) Local Personalization: For the globally learned model, [5] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the Mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th
conducting multiple epochs (more than 20) of local personal- USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1093–1110.
 [6] B. Seri and A. Livne. (2019). Exploiting Blueborne in Linuxization is meaningless. Our proposed model quickly converges Based Iot Devices. [Online]. Available: https://media.armis.com/pdfs/
locally during personalized training on edge devices. Addi- wp-exploiting-blueborne-in-linuxbased-iot-devices-en.pdf
tional rounds of learning do not significantly improve model [7] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion
 detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for
accuracy and may lead to overfitting, consuming local device protecting network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things
resources unnecessarily. J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2018.
 [8] M. F. Umer, M. Sher, and Y. Bi, “Flow-based intrusion detection:
 VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS Techniques and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 70, pp. 238–254, Sep.
 2017.
 A novel personalized federated learning framework, Per- [9] E. Aydin and S. Bahtiyar, “OCIDS: An online CNN-based network
FLID, was proposed for detecting traffic intrusion in IoT intrusion detection system for DDoS attacks with IoT botnets,” in Proc.
 14th Int. Conf. Secur. Inf. Netw. (SIN), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–8.
nodes. Using meta-learning, the central model learns data [10] S. Seth, G. Singh, and K. Kaur Chahal, “A novel time efficient learningcharacteristics from edge devices to create adaptive models, based approach for smart intrusion detection system,” J. Big Data,
enabling personalized intrusion detection against unknown vol. 8, no. 1, p. 111, Dec. 2021.
 [11] C. Zhang, D. Jia, L. Wang, W. Wang, F. Liu, and A. Yang,
traffic attacks. To accelerate deployment, we designed a node “Comparative research on network intrusion detection methods
selection strategy based on local gradient feature clustering, based on machine learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, Oct. 2022,
theoretically proving it speeds up convergence and improves Art. no. 102861.
 [12] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
efficiency. We demonstrated the framework’s convergence and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT
upper bound and conducted extensive simulations with var- security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
ious neural network models on three NIDS datasets. Results Feb. 2021.
 [13] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
show the personalized model has local adaptability and faster “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentraining convergence. Experiments confirm that our personal- tralized data,” Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 3, pp. 1273–1282,
ized federated learning intrusion detection framework achieves May 2017.
 [14] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and
state-of-the-art performance in federated machine learning P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on
scenarios, meets the personalized needs of edge devices, learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3,
and maintains optimal local attack detection in distributed pp. 2671–2701, 3rd Quart., 2019.
 [15] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan,
environments. and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DIoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
 Currently, PerFLID primarily addresses conventional IoT system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst.
threats, but detecting advanced persistent threats (APTs) in IoT (ICDCS), May 2019, pp. 756–767.
 [16] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federenvironments remains a challenge due to their time-sensitive ated deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial Cyber–Physical
and covert nature. Future research will focus on enhancing our systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624,
federated learning framework to address APT characteristics Aug. 2021.
 [17] S. Chatterjee and M. K. Hanawal, “Federated learning for intrusion
by developing new detection methods, incorporating time detection in IoT security: A hybrid ensemble approach,” Int. J. Internet
series analysis techniques, and improving real-time detection Things Cyber-Assurance, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 1, 2023.
capabilities to ensure timely responses. [18] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative
 intrusion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
 R EFERENCES [19] A. Z. Tan, H. Yu, L. Cui, and Q. Yang, “Towards personalized fed-
 [1] B. L. R. Stojkoska and K. V. Trivodaliev, “A review of Internet of Things erated learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 3, no. 1,
 for smart home: Challenges and solutions,” J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 140, pp. 1–17, Apr. 2022.
 pp. 1454–1464, Jan. 2017. [20] V. Kulkarni, M. Kulkarni, and A. Pant, “Survey of personalization
 [2] H. Boyes, B. Hallaq, J. Cunningham, and T. Watson, “The industrial techniques for federated learning,” in Proc. 4th World Conf. Smart
 Internet of Things (IIoT): An analysis framework,” Comput. Ind., Trends Syst., Secur. Sustain. (WorldS4), 2020, pp. 794–797.
 vol. 101, pp. 1–12, Oct. 2018. [21] O. Aouedi, K. Piamrat, G. Muller, and K. Singh, “Federated
 [3] M. M. Islam, A. Rahaman, and M. R. Islam, “Development of smart semisupervised learning for attack detection in industrial Internet of
 healthcare monitoring system in IoT environment,” Social Netw. Com- Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 286–295,
 put. Sci., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 1–11, May 2020. Jan. 2023.
 [4] M. Humayun, N. Jhanjhi, B. Hamid, and G. Ahmed, “Emerging smart [22] R. Zhao, Y. Yin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “Intelligent intrusion detection
 logistics and transportation using IoT and blockchain,” IEEE Internet based on federated learning aided long short-term memory,” Phys.
 Things Mag., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 58–62, Jun. 2020. Commun., vol. 42, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 101157.
YAN et al.: GLOBAL OR LOCAL ADAPTATION? CLIENT-SAMPLED FEDERATED META-LEARNING 293

[23] Y. Hu, J. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, and J. Cheng, “Privacy-preserving few-shot [35] J. Wolfrath, N. Sreekumar, D. Kumar, Y. Wang, and A. Chandra,
 traffic detection against advanced persistent threats via federated meta “HACCS: Heterogeneity-aware clustered client selection for accelerated
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560, federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Parallel Distrib. Process. Symp.
 May 2024. (IPDPS), May 2022, pp. 985–995.
[24] H. Ding, L. Chen, S. Li, Y. Bai, P. Zhou, and Z. Qu, “Divide, [36] K. Muhammad et al., “FedFast: Going beyond average for faster training
 conquer, and coalesce: Meta parallel graph neural network for IoT of federated recommender systems,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 intrusion detection at scale,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2020, pp. 1234–1242.
 pp. 1656–1667. [37] H. T. Nguyen, V. Sehwag, S. Hosseinalipour, C. G. Brinton, M. Chiang,
[25] A. Back de Luca, G. Zhang, X. Chen, and Y. Yu, “Mitigating data and H. Vincent Poor, “Fast-convergent federated learning,” IEEE J. Sel.
 heterogeneity in federated learning with data augmentation,” 2022, Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 201–218, Jan. 2021.
 arXiv:2206.09979. [38] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
[26] Y. Fraboni, R. Vidal, L. Kameni, and M. Lorenzi, “Clustered sam- “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. Mach.
 pling: Low-variance and improved representativity for clients selection Learn. Syst., vol. 2, pp. 429–450, May 2020.
 in federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, [39] Y. Arjevani, Y. Carmon, J. C. Duchi, D. J. Foster, N. Srebro, and
 pp. 3407–3416. B. Woodworth, “Lower bounds for non-convex stochastic optimization,”
[27] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for Math. Program., vol. 199, nos. 1–2, pp. 165–214, May 2023.
 fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., [40] J. Wang, Q. Liu, H. Liang, G. Joshi, and V. H. Poor, “Tackling the objecvol. 70, Aug. 2017, pp. 1126–1135. tive inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization,” in
[28] A. Fallah, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar, “Personalized federated Proc. NIPS, 2020, pp. 7611–7623.
 learning: A meta-learning approach,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07948. [41] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
[29] Q. Li, Y. Diao, Q. Chen, and B. He, “Federated learning on non-IID network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
 data silos: An experimental study,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Eng. (ICDE), May 2022, pp. 965–978. [42] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
[30] S. Moon and W. H. Lee, “Privacy-preserving federated learning in a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 Healthcare,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron., Inf., Commun. (ICEIC), 2023, in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, May 2018, pp. 108–116.
 pp. 1–4. [43] N. KoronIoTis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
[31] T.-M. Harry Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Measuring the effects of the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for
 non-identical data distribution for federated visual classification,” 2019, network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput.
 arXiv:1909.06335. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019.
[32] X. Gong, Y. Chen, Q. Wang, and W. Kong, “Backdoor attacks and [44] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-ANIDS: Federated learning for anomaly-based
 defenses in federated learning: State-of-the-art, taxonomy, and future network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234, Dec.
 directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 114–121, 2023, Art. no. 121000.
 Apr. 2023. [45] R. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Xue, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and G. Gui,
[33] S. Huang, Y. Li, C. Chen, L. Shi, and Y. Gao, “Multi-metrics adaptively “Semisupervised federated-learning-based intrusion detection method
 identifies backdoors in federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 4629–4639. pp. 8645–8657, May 2023.
[34] Y. Wang, D. Zhai, and Y. Xia, “SCFL: Mitigating backdoor attacks in [46] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 federated learning based on SVD and clustering,” Comput. & Secur., detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forenvol. 133, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103414. sics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.