IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 10977

 GNN-Enhanced Traffic Anomaly Detection for
 Next-Generation SDN-Enabled
 Consumer Electronics
 Guan-Yan Yang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Farn Wang , Member, IEEE,
 and Kuo-Hui Yeh , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Consumer electronics (CE) connected to the Inter- Index Terms— Consumer electronics, compute first networknet of Things are susceptible to various attacks, including DDoS ing, cyberattack, graph neural networks, Internet of Things,
and web-based threats, which can compromise their function- intrusion detection, network anomaly, next-generation netality and facilitate remote hijacking. These vulnerabilities allow working, denial-of-service attack, cyberattack, cybersecurity,
attackers to exploit CE for broader system attacks while enabling software-defined networking.
the propagation of malicious code across the CE network,
resulting in device failures. Existing deep learning-based traffic
anomaly detection systems exhibit high accuracy in traditional I. I NTRODUCTION
network environments but are often overly complex and reliant
on static infrastructure, necessitating manual configuration and
management. To address these limitations, we propose a scalable network model that integrates Software-defined Networking
 T HE rapid expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT)
 has seamlessly integrated consumer electronics (CE)
 devices—such as smartphones, smartwatches, and laptops—
(SDN) and Compute First Networking (CFN) for next-generation into our daily lives, enabling remote access and connectivity
CE networks. In this network model, we propose a Graph across diverse sectors like e-healthcare, smart cities, and
Neural Networks-based Network Anomaly Detection frame- intelligent transportation [1]. The CE market is projected to
work (GNN-NAD) that integrates SDN-based CE networks and
 reach 2.873 billion users by 2025, driven by the capacity of
enables the CFN architecture. GNN-NAD uniquely fuses a static,
vulnerability-aware attack graph with dynamic traffic features, nearly every device to generate and share data [2], [3].
providing a holistic view of network security. The core of the CE networks, composed of heterogeneous devices from
framework is a GNN model (GSAGE) for graph representation various manufacturers, present unique challenges due to
learning, followed by a Random Forest (RF) classifier. This design large-scale deployment, high device diversity, and limited
(GSAGE+RF) demonstrates superior performance compared to
existing feature selection methods. Experimental evaluations on
 computational resources [1], [4]. Unlike traditional IT net-
CE environment reveal that GNN-NAD achieves superior metrics works, CE devices such as smart home appliances and
in accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score, even with small wearables require lightweight, secure, and low-latency comsample sizes, exceeding the performance of current network munication [5]. Their traffic is often encrypted, intermittent,
anomaly detection methods. This work advances the security and and follows irregular patterns, complicating the task of netefficiency of next-generation intelligent CE networks.
 work anomaly detection (NAD) [6]. Security breaches in CE
 can have severe consequences, including privacy invasion,
 Received 23 June 2025; revised 1 August 2025 and 8 September 2025; financial loss, and physical safety risks, and compromised
accepted 6 October 2025. Date of publication 10 October 2025; date of devices can be conscripted into botnets for large-scale attacks
current version 8 December 2025. This work was supported in part by Taiwan
Academic Cybersecurity Center, National Taiwan University of Science like DDoS campaigns [7], [8], [9].
and Technology; in part by the National Science and Technology Council While existing machine learning (ML) and deep learning
(NSTC) under Grant 114-2221-E-002-217, Grant 114-2622-E-A49-022, Grant (DL) methods for NAD have shown promise, they often
114-2221-E-A49-210, Grant 114-2634-F-011-002-MBK, and Grant 114-2923-
E-194-001-MY3; in part by National Taiwan University (NTU) and the NTU suffer from time-consuming feature extraction processes and
Core Consortium Project as part of the Higher Education Sprout Project require extensive manual configuration, making them ill-suited
by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan under Grant NTU-CC-114L895501 for the dynamic nature of CE networks [10]. To overcome
and Grant NTU-G0647; in part by the Department of Industrial Technology,
Ministry of Economic Affairs, through the “2025 ITRI Advanced Research these limitations, advanced architectures like Compute First
Program,” under Grant 114-EC-17-A-21-0337; in part by the Hon Hai Networking (CFN) and Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
Research Institute, Taipei, Taiwan, under Project 114UA90042; and in part by are gaining traction. CFN integrates cloud, edge, and end-user
the Industry-Academia Innovation School, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung
University (NYCU), Taiwan, under Project 113UC2N006. (Corresponding computing resources to optimize performance [11], [12], while
authors: Kuo-Hui Yeh; Farn Wang.) SDN centralizes network control, providing a global view
 Guan-Yan Yang and Farn Wang are with the Department of Electrical essential for robust security management [13]. The synergy
Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106319, Taiwan (e-mail:
f11921091@ntu.edu.tw; farn@ntu.edu.tw). between SDN and GNN-NAD is particularly powerful; once
 Kuo-Hui Yeh is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence Innovation, an anomaly is detected, the SDN controller can be pro-
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300093, Taiwan, and grammed to automatically install new flow rules to isolate
also with the Department of Information Management, National Dong Hwa
University, Shoufeng, Hualien 974301, Taiwan (e-mail: khyeh@nycu.edu.tw). a malicious device, thus creating a closed-loop system that
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3620095 moves seamlessly from detection to response.
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
10978 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 This paper introduces a novel GNN-based Network represents a critical gap, as the distributed and dynamic nature
Anomaly Detection (GNN-NAD) framework designed for of CFN introduces unique security challenges that traditional
SDN-enabled CE networks. The core novelty of our work methods may not adequately address.
lies in its holistic approach. Most NAD systems analyze only
traffic statistics (the “how” of an attack), while traditional B. Traditional and ML-Based NAD
vulnerability analysis focuses only on static configurations
 Traditional NAD methods often rely on statistical fea-
(the “what”). Our framework uniquely combines both: we
 tures extracted from network flows. Vinayakumar et al.
construct a static, vulnerability-aware attack graph that models
 [25] employed Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on the CICpotential exploit paths (the “what”) and enrich it with real-
 IDS2017 dataset, showing strong performance. Ning et al. [26]
time, dynamic traffic data (the “how”). This synthesis of
 improved cross-domain generalization through the integration
static posture and dynamic behavior allows for a far more
 of semi-supervised learning, transfer learning, and domain
comprehensive and accurate security assessment than either
 adaptation, validated on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. Anbalapproach could achieve alone.
 agan et al. [27] developed an intelligent intrusion detection
 The key contributions of this work are as follows:
 system for 5G vehicular networks, employing enhanced con-
 • We propose a novel GNN-NAD framework that integrates
 volutional neural networks and hyperparameter optimization
 a static attack graph with dynamic traffic features. Our on simulated traffic. Huang et al. [28] proposed a two-stage
 specialized GNN model, GSAGE, is tailored to learn multi-label network attack detection method validated on the
 rich representations from this combined graph structure, UNSW-NB15 dataset, demonstrating enhanced accuracy over
 outperforming standard GNN models. existing techniques. Nie et al. [29] examined abnormal traffic
 • We benchmark GNN-NAD against state-of-the-art
 fluctuations in the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) by analyzing
 (SOTA) NAD approaches, demonstrating its superior roadside units (RSUs), validated through self-simulated traffic
 accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. anomalies. Other notable works in CE network include SEMI-
 • Through robustness analysis at various data sampling
 GRU [30], which used a semi-supervised GRU for vehicular
 rates, we validate that our framework is highly effective
 networks, and the work by Javeed et al. [31], which develfor early detection, maintaining high accuracy even with
 oped a CUDA-optimized BLSTM (Cu-LSTM) for SDN-based
 limited data. Representing our work is probably widely
 cyberattack detection.
 used for real-world CE and IoT scenarios.
 While effective, these approaches primarily analyze traf-
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II fic statistics in isolation, ignoring the underlying network
reviews related work. Section III details the network model. topology and device vulnerabilities. They can struggle to
Section IV introduces the GNN-NAD framework. Section V detect sophisticated attacks that mimic normal traffic patterns.
presents the experimental setup, evaluation metrics, and detec- Furthermore, many require extensive, well-labeled datasets for
tion performance. Finally, Section VI concludes the study and training, which are not always available in real-world CE
outlines directions for future research. environments.

 II. R ELATED W ORKS
 C. GNN-Based and Advanced NAD
 This section reviews prior work in CFN security and
 To overcome the limitations of traditional methods,
network anomaly detection, creating a foundation for our
 researchers have turned to Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
proposed framework by identifying existing research gaps.
 which can naturally model the relational structure of networks.
 Deng et al. [32] proposed a traffic graph with interval con-
A. Security in CFN and Intelligent IoT straints and a spatial attention mechanism for label-limited
 Current research in Compute First Networking (CFN) intrusion detection, validated on three public datasets. Chang
primarily addresses integration architectures, resource schedul- and Branco [33] addressed class imbalance by enhancing
ing, and security [12], [14], [15]. Resource scheduling has GraphSAGE and GAT algorithms with residual connections,
been explored through centralized and decentralized man- showing effectiveness on UNSW-NB15 and CIC-IDS2017.
agement [16], microservice-based models [17], prioritization Reference [34] developed a GNN-based method for NAD that
strategies [18], and cloud-edge frameworks [19]. Recent work constructs host connection graphs using traffic flow features,
in the broader field of AIoT has also addressed resource though it faces high computational costs due to reliance on
allocation challenges; for instance, Li et al. [20] proposed aggregated observations and traditional statistical features.
an AI-driven task scheduling mechanism to manage compu- This approach was validated on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset.
tational resources in dynamic vehicular networks for smart Golchin et al. [35] achieved 96.54% accuracy on the CICwarehousing, demonstrating the growing trend of integrating IDS2017 dataset, while Li et al. [36] attained 99.9% accuracy
intelligence into resource management. and a 95% weighted recall rate by integrating contrastive
 Security in CFN has been advanced through mechanisms learning with CNN and GRU models. Despite these promising
like the CFN Watchdog for fault detection [21], federated results, a well-documented limitation of contrastive learning is
learning for secure operations [22], and blockchain for data its high computational overhead, which stems from the need
integrity [23]. However, as noted in [24], dedicated research on for a large number of negative samples during training [37].
NAD specifically for CFN environments is still lacking. This Huang et al. [28] proposed a two-stage multi-label network
YANG et al.: GNN-ENHANCED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR NEXT-GENERATION SDN-ENABLED CE 10979

attack detection method validated on the UNSW-NB15 dataset,
demonstrating enhanced accuracy over existing techniques.
Zeng et al. [38] presented a “Human-in-the-Loop” framework
that incorporates human expertise for intrusion detection,
achieving 99.16% accuracy with 28,100 manually labeled
samples on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset. Tran and Park [39]
developed a hybrid model integrating GCN and SAGEConv for
graph-based feature learning, surpassing previous methods in
accuracy and other performance metrics on the CIC-IDS2017
dataset. Recent related research by Islam et al. [40] introduces
an explainable AutoML-driven scheme for intrusion prevention in Zero-Touch Networks, highlighting the trend towards
automated and transparent security solutions. In 2025, Fu et al.
[41] presented a GNN that uses flow interaction relationships
for intrusion detection on consumer electronics within smart
home networks. Concurrently, Pei et al. [42] proposed an
edge intelligence-enabled network intrusion detection system
tailored for Compute First Networking, emphasizing the move
towards decentralized and resource-aware security architectures. Later, we introduced GSL-IDS [43], a graph structure
learning-based method for enhancing network resilience with Fig. 1. Our Network Model.
network intrusion detection, which provides strong resilience
against model adversarial attacks.
 In our model, CE devices (such as smart TVs, wearables,
 home gateways, IoT sensors) are directly represented as nodes
D. Research Gap Summary
 in the network, each with unique resource constraints and
 The existing literature reveals a clear gap: a lack of NAD communication patterns. The SDN/CFN architecture enables
frameworks that holistically integrate static vulnerability infor- dynamic, centralized management of these heterogeneous
mation with dynamic traffic analysis in a computationally devices, supporting the specific needs of CE networks such as
efficient manner suitable for CE networks. Our GNN-NAD seamless device onboarding, real-time anomaly detection, and
framework directly addresses this gap by creating a unified adaptive resource allocation. Our anomaly detection framegraph representation that captures both the “what” (vulnera- work is designed to operate efficiently in such environments,
bilities) and the “how” (traffic patterns) of network security. considering the limited typical capabilities of CE devices.
 As illustrated in Figure 1, our model positions the proposed
 III. O UR N ETWORK M ODEL GNN-NAD framework within the CFN Control Plane. This
 The CFN is gaining recognition as an effective strategy for placement is strategic: the control plane, managed by an SDN
developing converged networks. Its architecture is defined by controller, has access to all network statistics and can dynamthe separation of four key components: the computing resource ically manage network elements. This allows GNN-NAD not
pool (infrastructure), the routing plane, the control plane only to detect threats but also to orchestrate an immediate,
(orchestration and management layer), and the service plane automated response. For example, upon detecting a malicious
(application layer). This separation ensures both simplicity and device, the framework can instruct the SDN controller to install
flexibility. In contrast, traditional networks are limited because flow rules that isolate the device, effectively closing the loop
each router can only perceive the status of its local network, from detection to mitigation.
lacking a comprehensive view of the entire network. This Integrating CE, CFN, and SDN offers a streamlined solution
limitation creates significant challenges in developing robust for monitoring network traffic, enhancing the detection of
defense mechanisms against network threats. attacks and suspicious activities. CFN and SDN provide a
 Integrating CFN with SDN gives the network a global per- cohesive view of all devices and network elements, signifspective and centralized control capabilities. This combination icantly improving the ability to monitor traffic and identify
facilitates easier access to network statistics. Within the CFN potential threats, attacks, and adverse events. Thus, CFN
framework, the service plane offers computational services to and SDN represent a promising direction for advancing CE
users, enabling consumer electronics (CE) applications like networks.
smart homes, intelligent transportation systems, and mobile
computing. The control plane handles routing, data trans- IV. P ROPOSED GNN-NAD F RAMEWORK
mission, and traffic monitoring through advanced application This section proposes a network anomaly detection method
technologies. The routing plane consists of numerous CE based on graph neural network embeddings (GNN-NAD),
switches and routers, while the computing resource pool as illustrated in Figure 2. We first introduce the key
includes various CE devices, such as smart devices, sensors, components of GNN-NAD, including graph construction,
and other wireless technologies. GNN-based graph representation learning, and classification.
10980 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 Algorithm 1 Encode Attack Graph
 Require: nodes V , edges E, statements {Sv | ∀v ∈ V }
 Ensure: Encoded attack graph S AG = (V, E, F)
 1: Initialize C set
 2: for v ∈ V do
 3: for w ∈ Sv do
 4: Add w to Cset
 5: end for
 6: end for
 7: Convert C set to a list C
 8: Create an index map map ← {C[i] → i}
 9: Let D ← |C|
 10: Initialize a feature matrix F[n][D] with zeros
 11: for v ∈ V do
 12: for w ∈ Sv do
 13: i ← map[w]
 14: F[v][i] ← 1
 15: end for
 16: end for

Fig. 2. Our Proposed Detection Framework.

 • Network Assets: Includes the hostnames, IP addresses,
A. Graph Construction interface names, target network IP addresses, and subnet
 1) Static Attack Graph: An attack graph (AG) is a directed masks, as well as source and destination IPs and ports
acyclic graph (DAG) that represents the potential attack paths along with their associated transport protocols.
an adversary might exploit within a network by leveraging • Network Hosts: Captures the interface names,
vulnerabilities [44]. Based on network security analysis, sev- IP addresses, and their corresponding relationships
eral attack graph models have been proposed [45], [46], [47]. with LAN/WAN connections.
The Multi-host, Multi-stage Vulnerability Analysis Language • Network Vulnerabilities: Identifies potential CVEs col-
(MulVAL) approach [48] stands out for its scalability and lected from the National Vulnerability Database (NVD).
low computational complexity. As a result, we employ Mul- 2) Dynamic Traffic Data: Dynamic measurements are typ-
VAL for AG generation and then design the AG encoding ically presented in time series format, which is crucial for the
method to get a static attack graph (SAG) in our pro- real-time dynamic analysis of complex CE networks. In GNNposed GNN-based Network Attack Detection (GNN-NAD) NAD, we have multiple actions, each representing either an
framework. attack or a benign action. We represent dynamic measurements
 We encode this logical AG into a Static Attack Graph (SAG) at time t as RDMt , the real-time dynamic measurements of a
for our GNN. The SAG is represented as SAG = (V, E, F), network are expressed as:
where V is the set of nodes, E is the set of edges, and F ∈
Rn×D is the node feature matrix. The features are derived from
 t
 RDMt = {xaction , ∀action ∈ actions}.
the text statements associated with each MulVAL node (such t
 Here, xaction ∈ R K and K is the number of measured variables.
as ‘execCode(webServer,_)’). As detailed in Algorithm 1, These measurements are aggregated over discrete time winwe use a bag-of-words approach to create a one-hot encoded dows. Let t be a continuous time index. We aggregate features
vector fv for each node v, where the vocabulary C is built over a time window [t1 , t2 ]. Specifically, the k-th measurement
from all unique tokens (words, predicates, parameters) across at time t can be calculated using the following formula:
all node statements. t1 t2
 While more complex node embedding techniques like
 t
 xaction,k = AGG(xaction,k , . . . , xaction,k ), t1 ≤ t ≤ t2 .
Word2Vec were considered, we chose the bag-of-words After a number of these aggregation rounds, indexed by
method for its simplicity, direct interpretability, and potential k, we can set X dyn [action] = xaction , i.e., obtain the final
computational efficiency. This is a critical design choice for dynamic feature vectors for each observed action (such as
ensuring the framework remains lightweight and suitable for a network flow). For clarity, t refers to the fine-grained
resource-constrained CE environments. Our experiments con- timestamp of a raw data point, while k refers to the discrete
firm that this straightforward encoding is highly effective for update cycle or round in which aggregated data is processed.
this task.
 Since our focus is on generating a SAG, we collect the B. Integrating Static and Dynamic Features
following types of static information: This step is crucial for fusing the “what” (static vul-
 • Network Configuration: Includes the IP ranges, subnets, nerabilities) with the “how” (dynamic traffic). Dynamic
 IP addresses, subnet masks, and gateway addresses of the traffic features, which are flow-based (such as containing
 covered network segments. source/destination IPs and ports), are mapped onto the nodes
YANG et al.: GNN-ENHANCED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR NEXT-GENERATION SDN-ENABLED CE 10981

of the static graph. A dynamic feature vector from a specific In the global pooling layer, we combine node embeddings
traffic flow is mapped to a node i in the SAG if the statement into a single graph embedding:
Si of that node contains corresponding network identifiers. n
 For example, a dynamic flow log showing traffic between 1 X (L)
 h graph = hi
IP ‘172.30.211.20’ and ‘172.30.211.24’ would have its feature n
 i=1
vector (such as packet count, byte count) mapped to the
specific nodes in the SAG that represent these two hosts. This where n is the number of nodes and L is the final layer.
is achieved by searching for the IPs in the node statements. Moreover, the graph representation learning objective func-
The initial feature vector for each node i is then formed by tion uses cross-entropy loss. After learning, the system will
concatenating its static feature vector F[i] with its mapped run the next phase, i.e., classification.
dynamic feature vector X dyn [i]: D. Classification
 (0)
 hi ← Concat(F[i], X dyn [i]), ∀i ∈ V For our classification task, we chose to use the random
 (0) forest algorithm. Random forest is a highly effective classifier
This integrated feature vector h i serves as the input for the
 known for its exceptional accuracy and strong ability to
GNN.
 generalize. By combining predictions from multiple decision
C. GNN-Based Representation Learning trees, it reduces the risk of overfitting, making it particularly
 suitable for high-dimensional data. Additionally, random forest
 To learn a comprehensive representation of the entire graph,
 includes an inherent feature selection mechanism. It also
we use our custom GNN model, GSAGE. As demonstrated
 performs well with imbalanced datasets by adjusting sample
in Figure 2, the GNN-NAD framework defines GSAGE as
 weights to improve classification performance. Its strong resisa model composed of three SAGE Convolution (SC) layers,
 tance to noise further minimizes the impact of outliers on the
each followed by a ReLU activation and a Dropout layer
 model. For these reasons, we have selected the random forest
for regularization. This learned representation is then passed
 classifier for this study.
through a global pooling layer to produce a single embedding
for the entire graph. V. E XPERIMENT
 The distinction between our GSAGE model and a baseline
 This section presents the experiments and evaluation of the
GraphSAGE lies in its specific, streamlined architecture. While
 performance of our proposed GSAGE model. We detail the
GraphSAGE is a general framework, GSAGE is an implemenexperimental setup, evaluation metrics, and discuss the results.
tation optimized for our specific task. Key differences include:
 Specifically, we investigate the effect of the number of samples
 • Architecture: GSAGE uses a 3-layer stack with 256 hidused to update the graph on our detection performance of
 den units, a configuration found to be optimal for GSAGE. We also highlight the advantages of GSAGE in netcapturing complex patterns in our vulnerability-traffic work traffic feature extraction. Furthermore, we demonstrate
 graphs without overfitting. the performance of GNN-NAD in comparison to the SOTA
 • Efficiency: The architecture is intentionally lean to ensure
 NAD approach.
 fast processing on resource-aware CE hardware. It is
 designed to handle the sparse but high-dimensional fea- A. Dataset and Preparation
 ture vectors generated by our graph construction process
 The CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [49] is one of the most widely
 effectively.
 utilized NAD datasets in recent years. It includes attack
 The propagation rule for each SC layer l is: and benign traffic data collected over five days under sim-
 (l+1) (l) (l)
   
 hi = σ W (l) · AGGR {h i } ∪ {h j , ∀ j ∈ N (i)} ulated network conditions. For data preprocessing, we first
 removed all rows containing missing or non-numeric values,
where the propagation of features occurs across layers, with as these could negatively impact the model’s performance.
 (l)
each node i represented by its feature vector h i at layer Given the imbalance in sample distribution, certain categories,
l. The transformation of these features relies on the train- such as infiltration and Heartbleed attacks, contained fewer
able weight matrix W (l) specific to that layer. To effectively samples. To address this imbalance, we excluded these minorcapture information from neighboring nodes, the aggregation ity categories from our experiments. We randomly selected
function denoted as AGGR is employed, which can take the 1,000 traffic samples from each remaining category. To better
form of mean or sum, depending on the desired outcome. reflect real-world scenarios where benign traffic predominates,
Subsequently, an activation function σ , such as the ReLU we randomly selected 9,000 benign samples, which reprefunction, is applied to introduce non-linearity, facilitating sent approximately 56% of the total dataset. Furthermore,
complex pattern recognition within the graph. Furthermore, we applied min-max normalization to the data before updating
the set of neighbors for any given node i is represented by the graphs.
N (i), which plays a crucial role in the aggregation process.
 For other layers, Dropout regularization is applied to node
 B. Environment
representations:
 The proposed model is implemented using Python
 h (l) = Dropout(h (l) ; p) 3.8.20 and trained with PyTorch. All experiments are run on
where p is the dropout probability. Docker. The experimental environment has been specifically
10982 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 PARAMETER OF O UR M ODELS

Fig. 3. Topology for our experiment. (Screenshot from Onos Controller.) where TP, FP, TN, and FN represent true positives, false
 positives, true negatives, and false negatives, respectively.

designed to reflect the proposed CFN architecture using lowpower, accessible hardware. The entire SDN topology is D. Model Parameters
constructed using three Raspberry Pi computers. This setup We randomly partition the dataset by allocating 80% of the
provides a cost-effective yet powerful platform for emulating samples to the training set, while reserving the remaining 20%
a CE network. for the test set. Each experiment is repeated ten times to obtain
 The roles of the Raspberry Pi devices are distributed as average results. The parameters for the GSAGE, DNN, and
follows: GNN models are presented in Table I. For the parameters of
 • Raspberry Pi 5 with 16GB RAM (Controller & NAD): SOTA methods, we follow the settings in their article.
 Hosts the ONOS SDN controller and runs the GNN-NAD
 detection framework. It manages the network and per-
 E. Experimental Methods
 forms the data analysis.
 • Raspberry Pi 5 with 16GB RAM (SDN Switch): Config- For our experiment, we first examined the effectiveness of
 ured with Open vSwitch to act as the forwarding element GSAGE+RF in traffic feature extraction and classification by
 in the routing plane. It connects the traffic-generating contrasting it with a non-graph statistical flow feature method.
 device to the network and communicates with the ONOS We selected representative models from deep learning as comcontroller via the OpenFlow protocol. parison benchmarks. Additionally, we compared GSAGE+RF
 • Raspberry Pi 4 with 8GB RAM (CE Device): Represents against two prominent GNN models to establish its superiority
 the CE devices in the “CFN Service Plane,” such as smart in classification contexts.
 TVs, wearables, or IoT sensors. It serves as the traffic Furthermore, we evaluated GSAGE+RF against
 source, generating diverse traffic patterns that simulate advanced NAD methods, including DNN, SEMI-GRU,
 real-world CE device usage. As a node in the CFN Com- Cu-LSTM, GNN-NIDS, FN-GNN, GSL-IDS, FIR-GNN, and
 puting Resource Pool, its traffic patterns and resource NAAE-GCN. The first three utilize traditional approaches
 constraints are designed to be representative of typical based on traffic statistical features, while the latter five
 CE devices. It is used to replay the attack and benign incorporate structural features and statistics. We also
 scenarios from the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset. investigated the influence of sampling rate on detection
 This physical topology, with the controller’s view cap- performance by systematically reducing the sample set of
tured in Figure 3, allows us to evaluate the effectiveness CICIDS2017, selecting 20% of samples from each category.
and efficiency of our anomaly detection framework under
conditions that closely resemble real-world, resource-aware F. Results
CE deployments. The traffic patterns and attack scenarios are
designed to reflect typical CE network usage, including bursty 1) Compare With Representative Models: We first comtraffic and the introduction of malicious data flows, providing pared our graph-based approach (GSAGE+RF) against several
a robust testbed for our system. baselines. This includes models using traditional statistical
 features extracted by CICFlowMeter (denoted with “CIC”) and
 models using our graph construction method.
C. Metrics
 As shown in Table II, our proposed GSAGE+RF model
 We evaluate GNN-NAD based on the following metrics: significantly outperforms all other configurations, achieving an
 TP +TN accuracy of 99.69%. Notably, when using statistical features
 Accuracy = ,
 T P + T N + FP + FN from CICFlowMeter, our GSAGE model architecture still
 TP performs better than other model architectures (NN, GCN,
 Recall = ,
 T P + FN GraphSAGE). This indicates the robustness of the GSAGE
 TP architecture itself. However, the most significant performance
 Precision = , lift comes from combining GSAGE with our novel graph
 T P + FP
 Recall × Precision construction method, demonstrating the superiority of learning
 F1-score = 2 × , from integrated static and dynamic graph features.
 Recall + Precision
YANG et al.: GNN-ENHANCED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR NEXT-GENERATION SDN-ENABLED CE 10983

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R EPRESENTATIVE M ETHODS

 Fig. 5. Compare Testing Time with Baseline methods.

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS

Fig. 4. Compare with widely used NN and GNN models with different
sample rates with our graph classification method.

 To further assess model performance under different data
conditions, we trained models using various sampling rates,
with accuracy results shown in Figure 4. GSAGE+RF consistently outperformed baseline methods across all sampling
rates, achieving an accuracy of 98.85% even at a 10% sampling rate.
 We also analyzed model testing time, defined as the execution time on a pre-constructed graph or pre-processed
features (Figure 5). The results show two key trends. First,
our graph-based methods are substantially more efficient than
the CICFlowMeter-based approaches. For instance, inference Fig. 6. Compare with SOTA NAD methods with different sample rates.
with our GSAGE model took 2.25s, a marked improvement
over the 7.07s for GraphSAGE with CICFlowMeter features.
Second, among the different architectures, NN-based models surpassing 90% accuracy. In contrast, GSAGE+RF achieved
were the fastest, and GSAGE was consistently quicker than the 98.85% accuracy and consistently outperformed other methods
standard GraphSAGE model. Moreover, the initial static graph across all sampling rates. These results demonstrate that our
construction is a one-time offline cost (taking 4.12 seconds GNN-NAD approach, powered by GSAGE+RF, can effecin our experiments) and is not included in this recurring tively detect network traffic anomalies with minimal training
testing time, making our overall approach highly efficient data.
for consumer electronic networks that require lightweight and
high accuracy. VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 2) Compare With SOTA NAD: We evaluated the perfor- In this paper, we introduced GNN-NAD, a novel network
mance of GSAGE+RF against various SOTA methods in anomaly detection framework tailored for next-generation
traffic feature extraction and graph classification. As shown SDN-enabled CE networks. Our approach formulates NAD
in Table III, GSAGE+RF outperformed all SOTA approaches as a graph classification problem by uniquely fusing a static
across four key metrics. Additionally, we trained our model attack graph, which captures network vulnerabilities (the
on datasets sampled at different rates, with accuracy results “what”), with dynamic traffic data (the “how”). The core
illustrated in Figure 6. When the sample size was limited of our framework, a combination of a streamlined GSAGE
(10%), most SOTA methods struggled to achieve satis- model and a Random Forest classifier, proved highly effecfactory performance, with only simple models like DNN tive. Experiments conducted on a realistic testbed of CE
10984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

devices demonstrated that GNN-NAD achieves state-of-the- [6] M. Adil, M. K. Khan, A. Farouk, M. A. Jan, A. Anwar, and Z. Jin, “AIart performance, maintaining exceptional accuracy even with driven EEC for healthcare IoT: Security challenges and future research
 directions,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 39–47,
limited training data. This makes it a practical and powerful Jan. 2024.
solution for securing heterogeneous and resource-constrained [7] S. Rani, D. Gupta, S. Garg, M. J. Piran, and M. S. Hossain, “Con-
CE environments. sumer electronic devices: Evolution and edge security solutions,” IEEE
 Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 15–20, Mar. 2022.
 This work opens several exciting avenues for future [8] G.-Y. Yang, K.-H. Yeh, and L.-F. Lee, “Towards a novel interoperability
research. management scheme for cross-blockchain transactions,” in Proc. IEEE
 • Proactive and Predictive Defense: The static attack
 10th Global Conf. Consum. Electron. (GCCE), Oct. 2021, pp. 942–943.
 [9] R. Rajesh, S. Hemalatha, S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. Omar,
 graph contains rich information about potential attack and A. K. Bashir, “Threat detection and mitigation for tactile internet
 paths. This could be leveraged not just for detection driven consumer IoT-healthcare system,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Elecbut for proactive defense, such as identifying critical tron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4249–4257, Feb. 2024.
 [10] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. Khan, and I. Ahmad, “A hybrid deep learningvulnerabilities to patch to disrupt the most likely attack driven SDN enabled mechanism for secure communication in Internet
 chains. of Things (IoT),” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, p. 4884, Jul. 2021. [Online].
 • Federated and Online Learning: To enhance privacy Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/14/4884
 and adaptability, a federated version of GNN-NAD could [11] Y. Cui, Y. Li, J. He, L. Geng, P. Liu, and Y. Cui, “Framework of
 compute first networking (CFN),” Internet Engineering Task Force, p.
 be developed to train models across multiple CE networks 14, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draftwithout sharing raw data. Furthermore, transitioning to an li-rtgwg-cfn-framework/00/
 online learning model would allow the system to adapt [12] X. Tang et al., “Computing power network: The architecture of convergence of computing and networking towards 6G requirement,” China
 to new threats continuously without the need for periodic Commun., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 175–185, Feb. 2021.
 offline retraining. [13] J. C. C. Chica, J. C. Imbachi, and J. F. B. Vega, “Security in SDN:
 • Explainable AI (XAI): A major challenge with GNNs A comprehensive survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 159, Jun. 2020,
 Art. no. 102595.
 is their “black box” nature. Integrating XAI techniques, [14] X. Gong, C. Bai, S. Ren, J. Wang, and C. Wang, “A survey of compute
 such as GNNExplainer, would provide invaluable insights first networking,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Commun. Technol.
 into why the model flags certain activities as malicious, (ICCT), Oct. 2023, pp. 688–695.
 making the system more transparent and trustworthy for [15] X. Wang, X. Ren, C. Qiu, Y. Cao, T. Taleb, and V. C. M. Leung, “Netin-AI: A computing-power networking framework with adaptability,
 security analysts. flexibility, and profitability for ubiquitous AI,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35,
 By pursuing these directions, we can further enhance the no. 1, pp. 280–288, Jan. 2021.
 [16] K.-H. Yeh, G.-Y. Yang, C. Butpheng, L.-F. Lee, and Y.-H. Liu, “A secure
security, intelligence, and autonomy of future CE networks. interoperability management scheme for cross-blockchain transactions,”
 Symmetry, vol. 14, no. 12, p. 2473, Nov. 2022.
 [17] Z. Yu, Y. Jiang, X. Liu, Y. Shi, C. Jiang, and L. Kuang, “Microservice
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT deployment in space computing power networks via robust reinforce-
 The authors would like to express their gratitude for ment learning,” 2025, arXiv:2501.06244.
 [18] G.-Y. Yang et al., “TPSQLi: Test prioritization for SQL injection
the financial support. Thanks to the editors and the anony- vulnerability detection in web applications,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 18,
mous reviewers for their valuable comments. They appreciate p. 8365, Sep. 2024.
the technical support from the Speech AI Research Center, [19] X. Zhou and Z. Li, “Cloud-edge-end collaborative scheduling technol-
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Guan-Yan Yang ogy for computing power network,” ZTE Technol. J., vol. 29, no. 4,
 pp. 32–37, 2023.
is grateful to the National Science and Technology Council [20] Y. Li et al., “AIoT-enhanced outlier-resilient SLAM for smart warehous-
(NSTC), Taiwan, for the graduate research fellowship (NSTC- ing in dynamic environments,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 19,
GRF) and to Prof. Hung-Yi Lee for co-hosting his Ph.D pp. 39505–39518, Oct. 2025.
 [21] H. Liang, L. Feng, F. Xu, G. Li, J. Xu, and Y. Chen, “A
research project. novel CFN-watchdog protocol for edge computing,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 113, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 107873. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S156849462100795X
 R EFERENCES
 [22] L. Zhao, X. Tang, Z. You, Y. Pang, H. Xue, and L. Zhu, “Operation and
 [1] C. K. Wu, C.-T. Cheng, Y. Uwate, G. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and K. F. Tsang, security considerations of federated learning platform based on compute
 “State-of-the-art and research opportunities for next-generation con- first network,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC
 sumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, Workshops), China, Aug. 2020, pp. 117–121.
 pp. 937–948, Nov. 2023. [23] X. Xu, X. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Xue, L. Qi, and W. Dou, “BeCome:
 [2] Statista. (2024). Consumer Electronics. Accessed: Mar. 2025. Blockchain-enabled computation offloading for IoT in mobile edge
 [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ecommerce/ computing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4187–4195,
 electronics/consumer-electronics/worldwide Jun. 2020.
 [3] M. Ibrar, L. Wang, G.-M. Muntean, J. Chen, N. Shah, and A. Akbar, [24] S. Yukun et al., “Computing power network: A survey,” China Commun.,
 “IHSF: An intelligent solution for improved performance of reliable vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 109–145, Sep. 2024.
 and time-sensitive flows in hybrid SDN-based FC IoT systems,” IEEE [25] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran,
 Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3130–3142, Mar. 2021. A. Al-Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach
 [4] D.-J. Kim, N. G. B. Amma, and V. Sarveshwaran, “A novel for intelligent intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
 split learning-based consumer electronics network traffic anomaly pp. 41525–41550, 2019.
 detection framework for smart city environment,” IEEE Trans. Con- [26] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation
 sum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4197–4204, Feb. 2024, doi: and ladder network for secure industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
 10.1109/TCE.2024.3367330. Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022.
 [5] J.-H. Syu, J. C.-W. Lin, G. Srivastava, and K. Yu, “A comprehensive [27] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
 survey on artificial intelligence empowered edge computing on con- “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
 sumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
 pp. 1023–1034, Nov. 2023. no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
YANG et al.: GNN-ENHANCED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR NEXT-GENERATION SDN-ENABLED CE 10985

[28] Y. Huang, J. Gou, Z. Fan, Y. Liao, and Y. Zhuang, “A multi-label net- [48] X. Ou, S. Govindavajhala, and A. W. Appel, “Mulval: A logic-based
 work attack detection approach based on two-stage model fusion,” J. Inf. network security analyzer,” in Proc. 14th Conf. USENIX Secur. Symp.,
 Secur. Appl., vol. 83, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103790. [Online]. Available: 2005, pp. 113–128.
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214212624000930 [49] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
[29] L. Nie, Z. Ning, X. Wang, X. Hu, J. Cheng, and Y. Li, “Data- a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 driven intrusion detection for intelligent Internet of Vehicles: A deep in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 convolutional neural network-based method,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
 Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2219–2230, Oct. 2020.
[30] G. Almahadin et al., “VANET network traffic anomaly detection using Guan-Yan Yang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 GRU-based deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., received the bachelor’s degree from the Department
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–4555, Feb. 2024. of Information Management, National Dong Hwa
[31] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir, University, Hualien, Taiwan, in 2022. He is currently
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913, Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University,
 Nov. 2023. Taipei, Taiwan. In 2023, he was a Software Engi-
[32] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow neer at the Design Technology Platform, Research
 topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection and Development Division, Taiwan Semiconductor
 in label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., Manufacturing Company. Since 2024, he has been
 vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023. a Researcher at Taiwan Academic Cybersecurity
[33] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Embedding residuals in graph-based solutions: Center and the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan.
 The E-ResSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms. A case study in intrusion His research interests include security, safety, deep learning, generative AI,
 detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 6025–6040, Apr. 2024. the Internet of Things, formal verification, and software testing. He is a
 member of the IEEE Computer Society, the IEEE Reliability Society, the
[34] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Suarez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and IEEE Communication Society, the IEEE Consumer Technology Society, and
 P. Barlet-Ros, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks SEAT. In 2024, he received a scholarship from the Norman and Lina Chang
 for robust intrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., Foundation, USA. In 2024, he was awarded the Graduate Research Fellowship
 vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jun. 2022. from the National Science and Technology Council in the information security
[35] P. Golchin, N. Rafiee, M. Hajizadeh, A. Khalil, R. Kundel, and category. Additionally, he won the 7th and Taiwan Star Award (First Place in
 R. Steinmetz, “SSCL-IDS: Enhancing generalization of intrusion detec- Taiwan) in the World Security Competition HITCON CTF.
 tion with self-supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf.
 (IFIP Netw.), Jun. 2024, pp. 404–412.
[36] L. Li, Y. Lu, G. Yang, and X. Yan, “End-to-end network intrusion Farn Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 detection based on contrastive learning,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 7, degree in electrical engineering from National
 p. 2122, Mar. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424- Taiwan University in 1982, the M.S. degree in
 8220/24/7/2122 computer engineering from National Chiao-Tung
[37] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple University in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. science from The University of Texas at Austin
 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [Online]. in 1993. He is currently a Full Professor with
 Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html the Department of Electrical Engineering, National
[38] Z. Zeng, B. Zhao, H.-C. Chao, I. You, K.-H. Yeh, and W. Meng, Taiwan University. His research interests include for-
 “Towards intelligent attack detection using DNA computing,” ACM mal verification, model-checking, software testing,
 Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 19, no. 3s, pp. 1–27, security, verification automation, AI, and language
 Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1145/3561057. models. He is a Founding Member and the Chairperson of the Steering
[39] D.-H. Tran and M. Park, “FN-GNN: A novel graph embedding approach Committee of the International Symposium on Automated Technology for
 for enhancing graph neural networks in network intrusion detection Verification and Analysis (ATVA) from 2003 to 2022. He has served on
 systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 16, p. 6932, Aug. 2024. [Online]. the ATVA Advisory Committee since 2022. He was an Associate Editor of
 Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/16/6932 International Journal on Formal Methods in System Design (FMSD, Springer-
[40] A. Islam, H. Karimipour, and T. R. Gadekallu, “An explainable AutoML- Verlag). He has been named as the World’s Top 2% Scientists in a career-long
 driven meta-learning scheme for intrusion prevention in zero-touch list by Stanford University since 2020.
 networks within carbon intelligent IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 vol. 12, no. 17, pp. 34731–34742, Sep. 2025.
[41] M. Fu, P. Wang, S. Liu, X. Chen, and X. Zhou, “FIR-GNN: A Kuo-Hui Yeh (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 graph neural network using flow interaction relationships for intrusion the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in information mandetection of consumer electronics in smart home network,” IEEE Trans. agement from the National Taiwan University of
 Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4892–4902, May 2025. Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2005 and
[42] X. Pei, J. Song, Q. Yang, S. Tian, L. Yu, and G. Chen, “Edge 2010, respectively. He is currently a Professor
 intelligence-enabled network intrusion detection in compute first net- with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence Innovaworking,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Aug. 5, 2025, tion, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.3595881. Hsinchu, Taiwan. Prior to this appointment, he was
[43] G.-Y. Yang, J.-N. Chen, F. Wang, and K.-H. Yeh, “Enhancing a Professor at the Department of Information Manresilience for IoE: A perspective of networking-level safeguard,” 2025, agement, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien,
 arXiv:2508.20504. Taiwan, from February 2012 to January 2024. He has
 contributed over 150 articles to esteemed journals and conferences, covering
[44] A.-M. Konsta, A. L. Lafuente, B. Spiga, and N. Dragoni, “Survey:
 a wide array of research interests, such as the IoT security, blockchain,
 Automatic generation of attack trees and attack graphs,” Comput. Secur.,
 NFC/RFID security, authentication, digital signatures, data privacy, and
 vol. 137, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103602.
 network security. Furthermore, he plays a pivotal role in the academic
[45] B. Wang and N. Z. Gong, “Attacking graph-based classification via community, serving as an Associate Editor (or Editorial Board Member)
 manipulating the graph structure,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGSAC Conf. for several journals, including Journal of Information Security and Appli-
 Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), London, U.K., 2019, pp. 2023–2040. cations (JISA), Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences (HCIS),
[46] K. Durkota, V. Lisý, B. Bošanský, and C. Kiekintveld, “Optimal network Symmetry, Journal of Internet Technology (JIT), and Computers, Materials
 security hardening using attack graph games,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2015, and Continua (CMC). In the professional realm, he holds memberships with
 pp. 7–14. ISC2, ISA, ISACA, CAA, and CCISA. His professional qualifications include
[47] A. Presekal, A. Ştefanov, V. S. Rajkumar, and P. Palensky, “Attack certifications, like CISSP, CISM, Security+, ISO 27001/27701/42001 Lead
 graph model for cyber-physical power systems using hybrid deep Auditor, IEC 62443-2-1 Lead Auditor, and ISA/IEC 62443 Cybersecurity
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 4007–4020, Expert, covering fundamentals, risk assessment, design, and maintenance
 Sep. 2023. specialties.