6990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 Graph Anomaly Detection in Time Series: A Survey
 Thi Kieu Khanh Ho , Ali Karami , and Narges Armanfard

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—With the recent advances in technology, a wide range Time-Series Anomaly Detection (TSAD), the process of deof systems continue to collect a large amount of data over time and tecting unusual patterns that do not conform to the expected
thus generate time series. Time-Series Anomaly Detection (TSAD) behavior, has been widely studied [2]. The unusual patterns can
is an important task in various time-series applications such as
e-commerce, cybersecurity, vehicle maintenance, and healthcare be found in many real-world applications such as ecosystem
monitoring. However, this task is very challenging as it requires con- disturbances in earth sciences, structural defects in jet turbine
sidering both the intra-variable dependency (relationships within a engineering, suspicious activities in surveillance videos, heart
variable over time) and the inter-variable dependency (relationships failure in cardiology, or seizures in brain activity. Most existing
between multiple variables) existing in time-series data. Recent TSAD algorithms are designed to analyze time-series data as
graph-based approaches have made impressive progress in tackling
the challenges of this field. In this survey, we conduct a compre- a univariate modality [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
hensive and up-to-date review of TSAD using graphs, referred to [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] or as multiple individual modalas G-TSAD. First, we explore the significant potential of graph ities (variables) [18], [19], [20], [21], [21], [22], [23], [24]. In
representation for time-series data and and its contributions to other words, these algorithms only consider the intra-variable
facilitating anomaly detection. Then, we review state-of-the-art
 information.
graph anomaly detection techniques, mostly leveraging deep learning architectures, in the context of time series. For each method, In many practical systems, a more proper and reliable syswe discuss its strengths, limitations, and the specific applications tem modeling can be obtained if the data are considered as
where it excels. Finally, we address both the technical and appli- multiple related modalities (variables) that are influenced by
cation challenges currently facing the field, and suggest potential each other. Specifically, a comprehensive anomaly detection
future directions for advancing research and improving practical
 (AD) algorithm carefully shall model the variables’ interacoutcomes.
 tion over time, i.e., the inter-variable dependencies, as well as
 Index Terms—Time-series anomaly detection, graphs, deep the intra-variable dependencies. Explicit consideration of the
learning, time-series signals, dynamic social networks, videos. inter-variable dependencies allows capturing a system’s spatial
 dependencies across variables. Examples of systems, which
 I. INTRODUCTION exhibit spatial dependencies, are the brain where the recording
 TIME series is defined as an ordered sequence of values sensors are placed across the brain, and each sensor is considered
A that represent the evolution of one variable, aka univariate,
or multiple variables, aka multivariate, over time [1]. Timeas a variable; in a single time-series signal where every sample
 (feature) or time-interval (window) is considered as a variable;
series data is also referred to as time-stamped data, i.e., each and in a video-based system where a variable can be assigned
data point or each observation corresponds to a specific time to every frame.
index. As time is a constituent of everything that is observable, While many TSAD algorithms have addressed intra-variable
time-series data can be found everywhere on the Earth, such as in dependencies, capturing inter-variable dependencies remains
nature (e.g., the wind speed, the temperature), in marketing and under-explored in existing studies. In recent years, graph-based
industrial activities (e.g., the stock price), in medicine (e.g., the methods have gained popularity in TSAD due to their ability to
heart and brain activity), and in surveillance and security (e.g., represent complex data structures inherent in time-series data.
video streams, network traffic logs). Therefore, time-series data Unlike traditional tabular representations, graphs have demonand its analysis have attracted significant interest in the past strated superior performance in AD by modeling inter-variable
decade. dependencies, where each variable is represented as a graph
 node and the interactions between variables are depicted as
 Received 28 April 2024; revised 26 March 2025; accepted 29 April 2025. graph edges [25], [26]. This property is valuable for TSAD. For
Date of publication 2 May 2025; date of current version 3 July 2025. This work
was supported in part by the Natural Sciences, Engineering Research Council
 instance, if one variable experiences a change, related variables
of Canada (NSERC), in part by Fonds de recherche du Quebec, in part by are likely to exhibit similar changes as well. This enables the
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, in identification of anomalies that may not be evident through
part by Calcul Quebec, and in part by the Compute Canada. Recommended for
acceptance by B. Rosenhahn. (Corresponding author: Thi Kieu Khanh Ho.)
 conventional TSAD methods.
 The authors are with McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada, This survey explores TSAD using graph-based approaches. It
and also with Mila-Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, QC H2S 3H1, Canada categorizes existing research based on the types of constructed
(e-mail: thi.k.ho@mail.mcgill.ca; ali.karami@mail.mcgill.ca; narges.armanfard
@mcgill.ca).
 graphs, the nature of graph-based anomalies in time-series data,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3566620 the detection methods employed, and the application domains.

 0162-8828 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 6991

 TABLE I social networks or images) and do not provide comprehensive
 COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING SURVEYS WITH OURS
 reviews on the methods that are able to capture the intra-variable
 dependencies existing in time-series data. Meanwhile, TSAD
 surveys [2], [43], [44], [45], [46] focus on methodologies for detecting anomalies within time-series signals, disregarding other
 data types of the time series such as dynamic social networks and
 videos. Additionally, existing TSAD surveys show the ability of
 non-graph deep learning methods to detect anomalies only based
 on the intra-variable dependencies, ignoring the inter-variable
 dependencies; this is while both intra- and inter-variable dependencies are crucial for TSAD.
 The contributions of this survey are as follows:
 r The first survey in G-TSAD. To the best of our knowledge,
 this is the first survey that reviews the state-of-the-art
 graph-based techniques for TSAD. Our primary goal of
 this survey is to showcase how anomaly detectors, which
 leverage graphs, detect anomalies in time-series data. Until
 now, all the relevant surveys focus on either GA, TSAD, or
 GAD. There is no dedicated and comprehensive survey on
 G-TSAD. Our work bridges this gap, and we expect that
 such structured and comprehensive survey helps to push
 forward the research in this active area.
 r A new perspective. We introduce new concepts in the
 field of G-TSAD, such as the intra- and inter-variable
 dependencies, and constructed graphs for time-series data.
 Paper Organization. Section II presents an overview of ex- Such concepts would pave the road for future research to
isting surveys in the literature and our contributions. Section III provide well-structured and easy-to-understand G-TSAD
outlines the challenges in time-series data. Sections IV and V algorithms.
 r A detailed overview of G-TSAD. We discuss the key chalprovide foundational insights into graphs, common types of
anomalies within graphs, and how the graph-based methods lenges in TSAD, the core motivations of employing graph
can address the time-series challenges. Section VI introduces representation for time-series data and its role in facilitating
our unified taxonomy for TSAD using graphs. Within each anomaly detection, and the various types of anomalies in
category, we discuss the strength of each method in addressing graphs.
 r A systematic and comprehensive review. We conduct a
the challenges outlined in Section III, as well as its applications
and technical drawbacks and how the subsequent methods mit- comprehensive and up-to-date review of the state-of-the-art
igate these shortcomings. Section VII summarizes widely used on G-TSAD methods, primarily leveraging deep learning
datasets and their real-world applications. Section VIII discusses architectures, and categorize them into four groups to
employed evaluation metrics in the field. Section IX discusses improve their clarity and accessibility. These categories
the current research challenges and promising directions for include Autoencoder (AE)-based methods, Generative
future research. Finally, we conclude our paper in Section X. Adversarial Network (GAN)-based methods, predictivebased methods, and self-supervised methods. For each
 category, we describe technical details, highlight their ad-
 II. OVERVIEW OF RELATED SURVEYS vantages and disadvantages, and compare them.
 Although graphs have proven effective and yielded state-of- r Outlook on future directions. We point out both technical
the-art results in TSAD, as summarized in Table I, none of and application limitations of the current studies and sugexisting surveys have focused on the emergence and applications gest promising directions for future works on G-TSAD.
of graphs for detecting anomalies in time-series data, referred
to as G-TSAD. For instance, Graph-based Approaches (GA) III. TIME-SERIES CHALLENGES
surveys [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34],
[35] cover a broad range of graph structure learning techniques In general, a K-variable time series dataset can be defor various tasks such as classification, clustering, and predic- noted by X = (x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(K) ), where each x(i) =
 (i) (i) (i)
tion, without focusing specifically on AD. On the other hand, (x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ), X ∈ RK×N ×m , x(i) ∈ RN ×m , K is the
Graph Anomaly Detection (GAD) surveys [36], [37], [38], [39], number of variables, N is the number of observations, and m is
[40], [41], [42] provides a comprehensive review of graph- the feature length, representing the number of features in each
 (i)
based methods for detecting various types of abnormal graph observation. Each xj , j ∈ {1, . . . , N } and i ∈ {1, . . . , K}, is
objects. However, both GA and GAD surveys solely review an m dimensional vector corresponding to a recording at the jth
the graph-based methods applicable to static data (e.g., static time interval and the ith variable. For example, in Fig. 1 (Left),
6992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 underlying relationship patterns that exist between different
 variables; a useful property for TSAD. For example, if two
 variables are correlated, a change in one variable can be used to
 predict changes in another variable. Another example is the case
 if individual variables have fairly normal behavior, but when all
 (or a subset) of variables and their interactions are considered
 together, an anomaly can be caught. Hence, employing graphs
 that can capture complex relationships between variables would
 be a great tool for TSAD.
 Non-stationarity. It is important to consider trends, seasonality, and unpredictability. Although the trend is known as an
 average tendency of the series, the trend itself may vary over
 different time intervals. Seasonality presents the variations of
 repeating short-term cycles in the series, which causes a change
Fig. 1. An example of anomaly detection in a multivariate time-series signal
data to show the difference between TSAD (Block 1) and G-TSAD (Block 2). of variance over time. Unpredictability occurs randomly that are
The inputs are three successive time intervals (S: Sensor). In the constructed neither systematic nor predictable. Such properties influence the
graphs, the solid and dash lines, respectively, indicate the inter-variable and variables statistical properties such as mean, variance, etc. Thus,
intra-variable dependencies, m = 3, and the edge features are not shown for
simplicity. Normal and abnormal cases are respectively shown in black and red time-series data is said to be non-stationary, which may easily
colors. G-TSAD has the potential to detect anomalous sensors, local-relations, mislead an AD method as anomalies at certain observations
regions, and time intervals. may not be true anomalies [9]. Methods that can adapt to the
 changes in the data structures require a large number of training
 data.
the raw input data of three intervals of a dataset X consisting Dimensionality. The current advances in technology allow
of five variables (sensors) is shown. The raw interval at the ith us to record a large amount of time-series data to capture
variable is encoded by m = 3 features, as depicted on the top of the intra-variable and inter-variable dependencies. Existing of
each sensor in Block 2 of Fig. 1. Hence, X can be represented such rich datasets allows us to design time-series analyses that
as X = (x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(5) ), where X ∈ R5×3×m , x(i) = are consistent and reliable across various datasets. Looking
 (i) (i) (i) (i) (i)
(x1 , . . . , xj−1 , xj , xj+1 , . . . , xN ), x(i) ∈ R3×m . Note that at the raw data, every data sample in every variable can be
one may directly use the raw values as features; e.g., if an considered as one dimension; hence we are dealing with the
observation consists of 100 samples, then m = 100. Similarly, curse of dimensionality challenge. Therefore, there is a need
a video sequence can be considered as either univariate or to develop algorithms that can handle such complicated and
multivariate data. For univariate data, one may consider every high-dimensional data.
frame or a subset of frames as one observation of that single Noise. It is important to make a distinction between noise
variable, and use the raw pixel values of the frame(s) or their and anomalies. Noise is the random, unwanted variation that
corresponding features. In the multivariate case, each pixel can degrades the data quality. In contrast, an anomaly is an unbe considered as a variable. In this context, an observation of usual entity with respect to a set of pre-established normal
a variable can be obtained from a single frame or a subset of observations. Therefore, AD algorithms explicitly designed to
frames. distinguish noise from anomalies are more robust when dealing
 Working with time-series data requires careful consideration with contaminated data; however, various types of noises may
of several factors, which are discussed below in detail. happen depending on the operational environment, recording
 Intra-variable dependency. Observations available in one sensor types, etc., that a researcher may not be aware at the
variable depend on each other, i.e., there exist dependencies problem onset. Hence, it is critical to understand the nature of
of the jth observation and a lagged version of itself in the noise in every application and apply appropriate noise modith variable. Positive dependencies indicate that an increase (or eling/reduction techniques to not mix them with the anomaly
decrease) in the jth observation is likely caused by an increase concept.
(or decrease) in the previous observations and to be followed In the subsequent sections, we will delve into graph-based
by an increase (or decrease) in the subsequent observations techniques and their effectiveness in tackling individual chalof the ith variable. In contrast, negative dependencies suggest lenges or combinations thereof present in time-series data, hence
an inverse relationship. However, in practice, one of the main enhancing our understanding of their applicability and utility in
obstacles is dealing with the non-linear complex dependen- real-world scenarios.
cies present within a variable. In fact, the mutual relationship
between observations is not straightforward, and the effect of IV. WHY GRAPHS?
the future/past observations on the current one may vary over
time. This makes it difficult to determine the appropriate lags A. Graph-Based Solutions for TSAD Challenges
for consideration, as different lags may have different levels of 1) Capturing Intra- and Inter-Variable Dependencies: Many
significance. TSAD studies have shown superior performance when em-
 Inter-variable dependency. It is important to capture the ploying graphs. This is because many real-world systems can
inter-variable dependency as it can provide insights into the be represented as graphs, and graphs can inherently capture
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 6993

intra- and inter-variable dependencies. We define a graph set hand. By focusing on a reduced set of features, dimensionality
representing a time-series data as: can be effectively managed while maintaining the predictive
  j,j  ∈{1,...N } power of the data. Another strategy is to project the graph
 G = Gj , Sim{Gj , Gj  } 
 , (1) elements onto the graph embedding space using techniques
 j=j
 such as node2vec [54] or graph neural networks [27], which
where Gj = {Mj , Aj } is a graph representing the jth ob- can map high-dimensional data into a lower-dimensional space
servation, Mj is the K × m node-feature matrix, Aj is the while preserving the structure and relationships encoded in the
K × K × m edge-feature matrix representing the relationships graph. Lastly, graph-based regularization techniques [55], [56],
across nodes (variables) in the jth observation, m and m respec- [57], [58] can be applied to impose constraints on the model
tively denotes the number of features representing the nodes and parameters during the graph learning process. This ensures that
their relations. Sim{·, ·} defines the relation between two graphs. the learned graphs exhibit desirable properties or structures of
The Sim{·, ·} goal is to capture the intra-variable dependen- the graphs such as smoothness, where features should change
cies between two observations. This can be defined as a func- smoothly between neighboring nodes, or sparsity, to prevent
tion of node-features and edge-features, i.e., Sim{Gj , Gj  } = overly connected graphs.
F{Mj , Mj  , Aj , Aj  }. The literature identifies two types of 4) Mitigating Noise in Time-Series Data: Graph regularizaconstructed graphs: static and dynamic, which are described as tion techniques can also mitigate the effect of noise in the
below. data [59], [60], [61]. For example, smoothness regularization
 Dynamic Graphs. G is trained dynamically if either of Gj encourages gradual changes in signal values between neighboror Sim{·, ·} has learnable parameters; e.g., an encoder network ing nodes, effectively filtering out high-frequency noise comwith a set of parameters ξ1 can be used to provide Mj and Aj ponents [62]. Moreover, many methods have been developed
from the raw data that forms the jth observation [48], [49], or to minimize the impact of noisy data when learning the graph
a network with a set of trainable parameters ξ2 can used as F structure [63], [64], [65]. These algorithms leverage robust opti-
[50], [51]. mization techniques to handle noise, resulting in more accurate
 Static Graphs. If there are no learnable parameters assigned to graph representations that are less susceptible to noise.
Gj and/or Sim{Gj , Gj  }, we are dealing with static graphs [52]. In
other words, a static graph is built using a set of pre-defined node
features and edges obtained from the jth observation of the K B. Graph Representations Across Different Time-Series
variables. For example, with prior knowledge about the sensors’ Domains
locations in a K-variable sensory system, a static graph at the jth Fig. 1 visualizes G-TSAD versus the non-graph approach
observation is constructed where nodes are sensors and edges (i.e., TSAD). Fig. 1 (Left) shows raw signals from three time
are defined by the euclidean distance between sensors. Note that intervals of a multivariate system with five sensors, each recordin some algorithms, the relations across static graphs are learned ing different types of data with varying ranges and characimplicitly through employing a temporal-based network such as teristics. Each sensor is then represented as a 3-dimensional
recurrent neural networks [53]. Notably, [53] has been shown to feature vector, shown in both Blocks 1 and 2. Block 1 illustrates
be the first in the G-TSAD field to incorporate a predefined non-graph TSAD methods, where each interval is depicted as a
Sim{·, ·}, as an additional form of supervision within their rectangle containing data from all sensors. A key limitation of
model. This study demonstrates that utilizing Sim{·, ·} improves these conventional methods is their inability to explicitly model
model performance compared to approaches that do not make inter-sensor relationships. That is, they simply concatenate the
use of this measure. sensor data, train the model based on this concatenated input,
 2) Handling Non-Stationarity in Time-Series Data: In many and aim to detect only interval-level anomalies. This diminishes
real-world applications, dynamically learning graphs is crucial their ability to detect anomalies at a finer-grained level, such as
since dynamic graphs allow for the adaptation of relationships abnormal sensors, abnormal sensor interactions (aka relations),
between variables as the underlying data distribution changes. or anomalies involving multiple sensors (aka regions).
For example, in financial markets, the correlations between Moreover, Fig. 1 (Left) shows that the recording of Sensor #4
assets (variables) may fluctuate over time due to shifting mar- during the jth interval is abnormal. While, as shown in Block
ket conditions. By dynamically updating the graph edges and 1, TSAD methods fail to identify the location of the anomaly,
Sim{·, ·} to reflect these changing relationships, dynamic graphs G-TSAD methods can localize such node anomalies by analyzcan effectively capture the non-stationarity inherent in time- ing each sensor individually, shown in Block 2. In contrast, the
series data. recordings of Sensors #3 and #4 during the j + 1 th interval
 3) Addressing High Dimensionality: Graphs have also do not exhibit significant anomalies detectable by non-graph
demonstrated their capability to address other challenges such TSAD methods. However, a well-designed G-TSAD method
as dimensionality [34]. One approach is to construct the static can identify these anomalies by considering node relationships
graphs based on prior knowledge [52], incorporating informa- within and between intervals through edges and Sim{·, ·}, as
tion such as the distance, correlations and similarity measures discussed in Section IV.
between variables. Based on their relevance and importance As depicted in Fig. 1, graphs hold potential to detect variin the graph structure, graph-based methods can select fea- ous types of anomalies in a sensory multivariate system. One
tures that are most discriminative or relevant for the task at may wonder whether graphs can be applied to an univariate
6994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 Fig. 3. Example of node-level, edge-level, sub-graph-level, graph-level, and
 Sim{·, ·}-level anomalies in a graph set G with three successive observations.
 In each graph G, m = 4 and m = 1.

 a stream of time-evolving object-level graphs, where an object
 (e.g., a human body joint, an object in the scene) is considered
 as a graph node and edges represent the nodes relation within a
 video frame. Fig. 2(b) shows an example of anomalous activity
 detection where a node is assigned to every body joint – any
 unexpected joint movements shall be detected as anomalies.
 In summary, we have shown the capability of graphs in addressing various challenges present in time-series data described
 in Section III. More technical insights into methods specifically
 tailored to address individual challenges or combinations thereof
 are provided in Section VI.
Fig. 2. Examples of time-series data and the corresponding constructed
graphs. Each example is shown with three consecutive observations. The top
figures show the original data and the bottom figures show the constructed V. ANOMALIES IN GRAPHS
graphs. In the constructed graphs, the solid and dash lines, respectively, indicate
the inter-variable and intra-variable dependencies, m = 3, and the edge features As illustrated in Section IV, there are many types of anomalies
are not shown for simplicity. Normal and abnormal cases are respectively shown in time-series data. For instance, anomalies may manifest as
in black and red colors. anomalous sensors, local relationships between sensors, regions,
 and time intervals within a sensory multivariate signal system. In a univariate time-series system, anomalies can take the
time-series signal system, where there is only a single senform of point-level, contextual-level, and trend-level anomalies.
sor used to record the signals, in order to detect various
 Dynamic social networks may feature abnormal users (nodes)
anomaly types such as point-level, contextual-level and trendand relationships between users (edges) as anomalies. In video
level anomalies defined in [44]. Constructing graphs that repstreams, unusual object movements can be regarded as anomaresent the relationships between data points, short/long time
 lies. To provide a general categorization applicable to most of
intervals, with each denoted as a variable, can be beneficial. By
 time-series data, we categorize anomalies that can be observed
analyzing the level of connectivity within the graph, anomalies
 in graphs into five groups, namely anomalous nodes, edges,
can be identified as data points or time intervals that have few or
 sub-graphs, graphs and Sim{·, ·}. They are, respectively, known
weak connections to neighboring points, contexts, or patterns.
 as variables, the local relations between variables, small sets
 Graphs also present a capability in other time-series doof variables and their corresponding connections, the full set
mains. Fig. 2 shows two additional examples of time-series
 of variables and their corresponding connections at the jth
data and their constructed graphs by which both the intraobservation, and the global relations between observations. Note
and inter-variable information are captured. Note that the three
 that detecting anomalous objects in constructed graphs is much
successive observations at the j − 1, j, and j + 1 intervals,
 more challenging than other graph types due to the dynamic
shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b) respectively, correspond to three
 variations of nodes and edges [25].
successive snapshots of a social network and three successive
 Fig. 3 shows
   three successive observations,
 a graph set with
frames of a video. In social networks, the users are considered as
graph nodes, and the users’ interactions as edges. Most normal i.e., G = Gj , Sim{Gj , Gj  } 
 . The five anomaly types are
 j=j
nodes have reasonable number of connections, which indicates illustrated in the figure. In the first observation, all nodes and
the user has an ordinary social network activity. A node with edges are normal. However, in the second observation, one
an exceptionally high number of connections can be defined anomalous node, two anomalous edges, and one anomalous
as an abnormal user. An abnormal node may represent a sub-graph are appeared. In an anomalous sub-graph, each node
celebrity, an influential person, or a leader within the network and edge might look normal; however, if they are considered as
(Fig. 2(a)). In video applications, a video can be modeled as a group, an anomaly can be detected. As sub-graphs vary in size,
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 6995

 TABLE II
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE AE-BASED METHODS

as well as node and edge level properties, detecting anomalous static graphs do not involve learnable parameters as node, edge
sub-graphs is more challenging than nodes and edges. Regarding and Sim{·, ·} features are predefined. A third taxonomy relates
graph-level anomalies, they are defined as abnormal graphs in to the types of anomalies that G-TSAD methods aim to dea graph stream – specifically, given a sequence of graphs, an tect, including node, edge, subgraph, graph-level, and Sim{·, ·}
anomalous graph at the third observation can be distinguished anomalies. In this paper, we adopt a coarser taxonomy that
from other graphs based on their unusual evolving pattern of encompasses all existing taxonomies mentioned above, based on
nodes, edges and corresponding features. the type of loss function minimized during training. Specifically,
 Lastly, anomalous Sim{·, ·} occurs when there are unusual we group methods into four categories: AE-based, GAN-based,
relationships between graphs (aka observations). As Sim{·, ·} predictive-based, and self-supervised methods. This high-level
can capture both short-term and long-term relations across ob- classification is elaborated in Sections VI-A through VI-D.
servations, anomalous Sim{·, ·} can be detected by analyzing the Within each of these categories, we further provide fine-grained
evolution of the graphs and their relationships over time. Assume classifications in Tables II–V, which summarize the type of
that the three observations in Fig. 3 correspond to the monthly constructed graphs (static or dynamic), learning tasks (node,
stock market; short-term variations, modeled by Sim{Gj−1 , Gj } edge, or Sim{·, ·} learning), and the types of anomalies (node,
and Sim{Gj , Gj+1 }, may represent a small price change. edge, subgraph, graph, or Sim{·, ·}).
These small variations can be considered normal. However, a First, in AE-based methods, the reconstruction loss is the core
longer relationship presented in Sim{Gj−1 , Gj+1 } may raise an mechanism. The model is trained to minimize the difference
abnormality. between the input data and its reconstruction using an encoder-
 In general, given a graph G, the goal of an ideal anomaly de- decoder architecture. The goal is for the model to accurately
tector system is to produce a learnable anomaly scoring function reconstruct the normal samples, resulting in a low reconstruction
f (·) that assigns an anomaly score to nodes, edges, sub-graphs, error for normal data. In the test phase, anomalies are detected
and graphs at every observation, and Sim{·, ·} at the coarse level. based on the reconstruction error.
The larger f (·) is, the higher the probability of the graph object Second, GAN-based methods operate with a more complex
being abnormal. mechanism, consisting of a generator and a discriminator. The
 We introduce G-TSAD methods capable of detecting individ- generator inputs both noises and real samples to reduce the
ual graph-based anomaly types or their combinations throughout randomness issue. It aims to generate fake samples that are
Section VI. Note that although five types of graph anomalies are as realistic as the real samples, so the generator loss is the
observed in the example shown in Fig. 3, currently, there is reconstruction loss to minimize the difference between the fake
no study that targets detecting all types of anomalies. None of and real samples. Meanwhile, the discriminator uses the crossthe existing methods target to detect anomalous Sim{·, ·} and entropy loss to classify the real samples as real and the generated
very few works could simultaneously detect multiple anomalous samples as fake. The generator and discriminator losses together
objects in graphs. This will be further discussed in Section IX. provide a richer training loss, distinguishing them from pure
 reconstruction-based AE methods. In the test phase, the losses
 of both components can be used as an indicator for anomaly
 VI. CATEGORIZATION OF G-TSAD METHODS scores.
 Existing G-TSAD methods can be categorized according Third, unlike the other categories that only consider the curto several taxonomies. One taxonomy is based on the type rent and past data for loss calculation during training, predictiveof constructed graphs: static and dynamic, as discussed in based methods aim to forecast future values based on historical
Section IV-A1. A second taxonomy considers the trainable data. The loss function is the prediction error, which measures
parameter perspective, i.e., for dynamic graphs, methods can be the difference between the predicted and actual future values.
further categorized into node, edge, and Sim{·, ·} learning. In the While this prediction error can be commonly viewed as a form
literature, no studies have explored Sim{·, ·} learning. Note that of reconstruction error — since the model aims to reconstruct
6996 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 where the reconstruction loss Lrec is often the mean squared
 error (MSE) or the cross entropy (CE) loss [67].
 DeepSphere [68] is the first AE-based approach for G-TSAD.
 It incorporates an LSTM-AE with hypersphere learning to capture both intra- and inter-variable dependencies in dynamic
 networked graphs. It uses adjacency matrices available in these
Fig. 4. Overall framework of AE-based methods. The input is a graph G with networked graphs to reconstruct normal patterns. The idea of
three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features are not employing AE is that AE has a strong capability in learning
shown for simplicity.
 non-linear patterns. Such high-quality non-linear representation
 supports the hypersphere learning – the hypersphere boundary
 is trained to enclose the normal data in the representation space.
the next time steps based on past data — the focus of predictive The node-level objects lying outside the hypersphere tend to
methods is on forecasting future values rather than reconstruct- be anomalous. DeepSphere has proven effective in detecting
ing the given input data. Note that predictive-based methods, anomalies in traffic networks and social media scenarios.
though capable of incorporating AE, GAN, or self-supervised The main challenge of this vanilla AE framework is the
approaches, are focused on forecasting future values rather than non-regularized latent space i.e., no specific constraints are
reconstructing input data. A sample is flagged as anomalous if imposed on the latent space during training. Hence, the reconthe model fails to accurately predict the desired future values. struction process is done by sampling the data points from the
 Lastly, self-supervised methods are a subgroup of unsuper- non-regularized latent space. This could limit the model’s ability
vised learning methods where there is no label for the train- to reconstruct valid inputs in the test phase since AE may simply
ing data. Compared to the three categories discussed above, memorize to perfectly reconstruct the input data during training.
self-supervised methods aim to derive more meaningful rep- Variational autoencoders (VAE) [69] come into the picture to
resentations from the data by incorporating pretext tasks specif- address this issue. VAE maps the inputs to a distribution in the
ically designed for the unlabeled data. Their self-supervised loss latent space rather than vectors as done by the vanilla AE. This
functions are designed to minimize the difference between the means instead of learning a single encoding for each input, VAE
model’s predictions and the predefined outputs associated with learns a distribution for the data. VAE imposes a constraint by
these pretext tasks. which the latent space has a normal distribution; this constraint
 Note that all method categories share common elements of guarantees that the latent space is regularized. With such a
deep feature learning [66], as their training involves proxy distribution, VAE allows to represent the input with some degree
tasks that enhance representation learning. Additionally, most of uncertainty, i.e., a more generalized data representation is
of the existing methods employ a notion of encoder and decoder learned.
when developing their algorithm. Furthermore, most of existing Recognizing the potential of VAE, many algorithms have been
studies train on only normal data, while the test set additionally developed to improve G-TSAD performance. GReLeN [70]
includes anomalous data to verify the methods’ detection per- integrates VAE and a Graph Neural Network (GNN) with a graph
formance. We refer to methods that only have access to normal structure learning for AD in multivariate time-series signals, coldata during training as unsupervised AD. Further details will lected from the server and water systems. Specifically, the latent
be described in the following sub-sections. Each begins with an space in VAE serves as the module for feature extraction, while
overview of the corresponding method category and concludes GNN with the self-attention mechanism [71], which assigns the
with a summary highlighting key takeaways. Accordingly, we attention weights to the edge weights in the graph, captures
retain the “Overview” and “Summary” labels to enhance read- the between-sensor dependency. Each sensor (node) is then
ability. assigned an anomaly score based on the reconstruction error.
 GreLeN addresses the importance of learning the inter-variable
 dependency between sensors by its graph-based module, as well
A. AE-Based Methods as the intra-variable dependency learned implicitly by its VAE.
 Overview. Fig. 4 and Table II illustrate the overall framework Deep Variational Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
and representative methods in the AE-based category. In the (DVGCRN) [72], another VAE-based method, was proposed to
literature, the AE-based methods take the full graph at every capture both intra- and inter-variable dependencies, as well as
observation as the input and aim to reconstruct its components: the stochasticity present in the multivariate time-series signals,
nodes/edges features and the adjacency matrices. The origin of collected from the server machines and satellite monitoring
these methods can be traced back to vanilla AE, an encoder- systems. DVGCRN includes three components: a stacked graph
decoder framework, where the encoder network Eθ (parameter- convolutional recurrent network to model the multilevel intraized by θ) learns to compress graph data into low-dimensional variable dependency; a Gaussian-distributed channel embedembeddings, and the decoder network Dφ (parameterized by φ) ding module to characterize the similarity and stochasticity of
aims to reconstruct the input. This can be formulated as: different sensors by computing graph edges through the inner
 product of sensor embeddings; and a deep embedding-guided
 probabilistic generative network to model the non-deterministic
 θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lrec (Dφ (Eθ (G)), G) , (2)
 θ,φ inter-variable dependency in the latent space; hence it can
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 6997

capture multilevel information at the different layers. Note that
DVGCRN captures multi-level information since it extends the
model into a multi-layer network. The reconstruction error is
assigned for each sensor (node) as an anomaly score.
 Although VAE can map the input to a distribution in the latent
space to learn generalized representations of data, VAE may
struggle to model high-dimensional distributions with complex
structures. Thus, VAE may not reconstruct the samples that are
as realistic and high-quality as the original data. Moreover, VAE
models are sensitive to the hyperparameter choice and require Fig. 5. Overall framework of GAN-based methods. The input is a graph G
careful tuning to achieve good performance. To tackle these is- with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features are
 not shown for simplicity.
sues, few recent studies, leveraging Normalizing Flow (NF) [73],
[74], have developed and yielded superior performance as NF
can model complex distributions in the latent space; hence, on reconstruction scores used to detect graph-level anomalies in
high-quality samples can be reconstructed. NF is a statistical both industrial and biomedical multivariate signal domains.
method using the change-of-variable law of probabilities to Note that TSAD-C employs a diffusion model - a type of
transform a base distribution into a target distribution. generative models [78], [79], in its Decontaminator. However,
 A recent novel NF-based method, called GANF [48] learns similar to the drawbacks of NF, training a diffusion model can be
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) inside a continuous flow model, computationally expensive, especially for large datasets. It also
allowing for an explicit representation of sensor dependencies demands large memory resources during training when storing
in sensory systems, such as highway traffic, water systems intermediate data representations. Moreover, diffusion models
and power grids. Specifically, in addition to learning the intra- usually rely on various hyperparameters, including learning
variable dependency by an LSTM model, GANF includes a rates, batch sizes, and model architecture, which can signifigraph-based dependency encoder to capture inter-variable in- cantly influence performance. Effectively tuning these hyperformation in DAG. Note that DAG is a bayesian network in parameters can be challenging and time-consuming, requiring
which a node is conditionally independent of its non-parents. NF extensive experimentation.
is included to learn DAG by modeling the conditional density Summary. Many studies in the AE-based methods, ranging
of each node in DAG, i.e., NF expresses the density of each from vanilla AE, VAE to NF, have shown promising results in
node through successive conditioning on historical data and uses G-TSAD. However, designing a model that can capture both
conditional flows to learn each conditional density. Unlike Om- intra- and inter-variable dependencies requires careful considniAnomaly [74], which uses the reconstruction error for anomaly eration of multiple factors. Large amounts of data and computascores, GANF employs density estimation, identifying nodes in tional resources for training are required to produce satisfactory
low-density regions of the data distribution as anomalies. results, which can be expensive and time-consuming for many
 However, there are several major issues with the NF-based time-series applications. Also, interpretability are necessary to
methods in G-TSAD. NF can be computationally expensive, understand the model’s behavior with the detection outcomes.
especially for modeling complex distributions for large datasets This ensures that the model makes unbiased decisions on desince each transformation in the flow requires computing invert- tecting anomalies. Moreover, most of the AE-based methods
ibility and the determinant of the Jacobian matrix. Moreover, the limit their applications to only time-series signal systems while
resulting NF models may not be highly interpretable for high- there are many other data types such as videos, social networks,
dimensional data as it is difficult to understand the relationships and edge streams, which are common in real-world scenarios.
between the input variables and the generated samples in such This restricts the adaptability and applicability of AE-based
complex data. approaches to a wider variety of time-series contexts.
 The above unsupervised methods assume that the training data must be clean. However, in real-world applications, B. GAN-Based Methods
collecting clean data poses significant challenges due to its
time-consuming, costly, and labor-intensive nature. Moreover, Overview. Fig. 5 and Table III provide the concept map and
anomalies often sneak into normal data, regarded as contami- representative methods in the GAN-based category. Overall,
nated data, that come from the data shift or human error [77]. parameters of the two components of GAN, i.e., the generator
Consequently, existing unsupervised methods, which exten- and the discriminator, can be found as below:
sively train on normal data to model its behavior, would mis-
 θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lgen (Dφ (Eθ (G, z)), G) , (3)
detect anomaly samples encountered during training in the test θ,φ
phase. To address such challenges, [76] introduced an approach,   
called TSAD-C. TSAD-C comprises three modules: a Decon- ψ ∗ = argmin Ldisc Dψ G , G , (4)
 ψ
taminator, aimed at eliminating abnormal patterns; a Long-range
Variable Dependency Modeling, designed to capture long-range where z is the random noise vector, D is the discriminator
intra- and inter-variable dependencies, where graphs are learned network (parameterized by ψ), G is the fake set of graph samples
through a self-attention mechanism with the attention weights generated by the generator. The generator loss Lgen is often MSE,
assigned for the edges’ weights; and Anomaly Scoring based and the discriminator loss Ldisc is often CE.
6998 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE III
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GAN-BASED METHODS

 Recent studies have applied GAN to G-TSAD. For exam- and external features; and a discriminator to distinguish the real
ple, [80] proposed Cross-Correlation Graph-Based Encoder– samples from the fake samples. STGAN calls its components,
Decoder GAN (CCG-EDGAN) for unsupervised AD in multi- respectively, spatiotemporal generator and spatiotemporal disvariate signals, collected from satellite, wind turbine monitoring, criminator since both are based on graph convolutional gated
and power consumption systems. CCG-EDGAN consists of recurrent unit that explores the intra- and inter-variable correthree modules: a preprocessing module to transform signals into lations among neighboring nodes. Anomaly score is computed
predefined correlation graphs; a generator to generate the fake based on the performance of both the generator and discrimdata via the encoder-decoder-encoder structure, which captures inator. While the generator detects sudden changes in traffic
the features in the correlation graphs; and a discriminator to networks, the discriminator detects traffic anomalies such as
classify the real from reconstructed data. Note that the input abnormal times and locations.
includes both noise and real data to help the generator improve While HAD-MDGAT can overcome the first challenge and
the reconstructed samples’ diversity and avoid the mode collapse STGAN can tackle both challenges seen in CCG-EDGAN, the
problem, which refers to the situation that the generator can major issue of both HAD-MDGAT and STGAN methods is
only produce the fake samples that look similar to each other that, unlike CCG-EDGAN that uses both noises and the real
but are not diverse enough to represent the full range of possible data as the input to improve the generated samples diversity
samples. The anomaly score assigned for each node is computed and unlike any GAN-based methods applied on images that use
by the reconstruction error. only noises as the input, HAD-MDGAT and STGAN set only
 CCG-EDGAN encounters two limitations. First, it could only the real data as the input and no noise is used to generate fake
handle the inter-variable dependency through the correlation samples. This potentially leads to the mode collapse problem
graphs, while the intra-variable dependency could not be cap- in the GAN framework.
tured by the GAN module. Second, its anomaly score com- Summary. Although GAN-based methods have made imporputation is only based on the reconstruction error obtained by tant contributions to the G-TSAD field, they still have some chalthe generator, ignoring the discriminator’s potential in detecting lenges that require further research. Many GAN-based methods
anomalies. To overcome the first limitation, HAD-MDGAT was suffer from the mode collapse problem when the generator can
proposed [81]. Unlike CCG-EDGAN, which relies on prede- not produce a wide range of samples since taking only the real
fined correlation graphs, HAD-MDGAT uses a graph attention data as the initial input can make the generator create the same
network to learn graphs dynamically from attention weights, or very similar samples. Moreover, as the generator and the
allowing it to capture inter-sensor correlations. A GRU net- discriminator constantly compete against each other, the training
work is used to capture the intra-variable patterns. Node-level process could be unstable and slow. Also, GAN-based methods
anomalies are detected by a reconstruction scheme via GAN. are sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters; hence, carefully
HAD-MDGAT also compares the performance between GAN choosing them to avoid unstable training, mode collapse, and
and vanilla AE and confirms that GAN achieves a better recon- poor-quality generated samples is needed. Importantly, it is esstruction and could solve the overfitting problem of vanilla AE. sential to design a GAN that can properly combine the detection
Despite the ability to tackle the first limitation of CCG-EDGAN, ability of both the generator and discriminator. Lastly, to date,
HAD-MDGAT could not tackle the second issue, i.e., HAD- there are only a few GAN-based methods applied to G-TSAD,
MDGAT only uses the anomaly scores obtained by the generator. and their applicability is largely limited to time-series signal data
HAD-MDGAT shows its applications in satellite monitoring and from traffic or sensory systems. Exploring effective GAN-based
soil moisture signal systems. methods that can be adapted to other data types, such as videos
 Several recent methods address both limitations, i.e., captur- and dynamic social networks, would be a valuable direction for
ing both intra- and inter-variable information, as well as using future research.
both the generator and discriminator for computing the anomaly
score. STGAN [50] was proposed to detect node-level anomalies
in the traffic networks. STGAN first constructs graphs for the C. Predictive-Based Methods
traffic network, with edge weights calculated using the euclidean Overview. Fig. 6 and Table IV illustrate the overall framework
distance between nodes. STGAN then includes two components: and representative methods in the predictive-based category.
a generator to model intra- and inter-variable patterns, trend, As mentioned earlier, predictive methods are different from
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 6999

 TABLE IV
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE PREDICTIVE-BASED METHODS

 learning the past. This helps detect sensor (node) anomalies
 that deviate from their expected behavior. An anomaly score
 for each sensor at each time step is computed using the absolute error value. Normalization is then applied to all anomaly
 scores across all time steps for each sensor. Importantly, the
 obtained attention weights are used to provide explainability for
Fig. 6. Overall framework of Predictive-based methods. The input is a graph the detected anomalies. GDN addresses very important issues
G with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features in G-TSAD research, i.e different sensors may have different
are not shown for simplicity. behaviors and properties (e.g., some sensors measure the water
 pressure while others measure the flow rate). However, existing
other categories as they aim to predict future values based on GNN-based methods use the same set of model parameters
current and past values. A sample is detected as an anomaly for all sensors. Moreover, many of them pre-define the graph
if the model can not provide accurate time-series forecasting. nodes/edges/adjacency matrices. Though using the pre-defined
Specifically, at each observation j, a predictive-based approach matrices results in a more stable training phase, defining the
calculates an expected graph Ḡj+1 . The anomaly score is then matrices themselves requires prior knowledge about the dataset,
computed as the difference between the expected graph Ḡj+1 which may not be reachable in many applications. In spite of the
and the actual graph Gj+1 . The time-series prediction problem is GDN’s great capability to address real-world issues, its limitadifficult, as learning the long-distance intra-variable complexity tion is that it detects anomalies mainly based on inter-variable
of observations is necessary. As a result, in addition to the dependencies; the intra-variable relations across different time
features of nodes/edges, and the connectivity patterns between steps are ignored.
nodes represented by the adjacency matrices, other important To overcome the limitations of GDN, MTAD-GAT [83] was
properties, such as the node degree, shall be considered – this proposed. It leverages the graph attention network for learning
enables better capturing of the long-distance dependencies. the graphs and capturing both inter-, and intra-variable depen-
This framework can be defined as follows: dencies. The key ingredient in MTAD-GAT is that there are
 two graph attention layers with respect to the inter- and intra-
 θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lpred (Dφ (Eθ (G)), Gj+1 ) , (5) variable information: the feature-oriented graph attention layer
 θ,φ
 to capture the relations between sensors and the time-oriented
where the prediction loss Lpred is often MSE, Root MSE graph attention layer to capture the dependency among observa-
(RMSE), or CE. The first term in the loss represents tions. MTAD-GAT jointly trains a forecasting-based module, for
Ḡj+1 . single-observation prediction with RMSE, and a reconstruction-
 Many recent studies have shown the potential of GNN with based VAE module, for capturing the data distribution of the
a graph attention network in detecting anomalies in the future. entire time series. Although MTAD-GAT could address the issue
For example, [49] proposed Graph Attention-based Forecast- in GDN studies, its graph attention module could not provide
ing (GDN) to dynamically learn the graph by an attention interpretability on the characteristics of different sensor types,
mechanism with attention weights assigned for edge weights, present in the multivariate sensory systems, as done by other
then predict the behavior of each sensor at each time step by GDN works [49], [84].
7000 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 As seen from the above studies, a graph structure learning on anomaly scores. SEDANSPOT designs an anomaly scoring
strategy (i.e., learning the features of nodes/edges and adjacency function that gives a higher score to an edge if adding it to a
matrices) via attention mechanisms is important and commonly sample of edges produces a large change in distance between
used in many time-series applications. This is because, with its incident nodes. Midas computes the Gaussian likelihood of
limited prior knowledge, it is difficult to pre-define the graph the number of edge occurrences in the current timestamp and
structure that can carry comprehensive information about the declares an anomaly if the likelihood is below an adjustable
graph. Meanwhile, uncovering the important patterns in graphs threshold, which is to guarantee low false positive probability.
is possible through learning with GNN. However, many existing Not limited to node and edge AD in the context of time-series
methods learn the adjacency matrices in the sensor embedding data, several predictive-based studies show the interesting task
space by defining measurement metrics such as the cosine sim- of detecting anomalous sub-graphs. As mentioned in Section V,
ilarity or top-k nearest neighbors (kNN) [93]. Cosine similarity, detecting abnormal sub-graphs is much more difficult than abwhich computes the dot product of all sensor embeddings, results normal nodes and edges since abnormal sub-graphs vary in size
in a fully connected graph, leading to quadratic time and space and inner structures. It is even more difficult when individual
complexity with respect to the number of sensors. top-kNN is nodes/edges are normal but abnormal when considered as a
another approach based on a similarity metric, such as cosine group of nodes/edges.
similarity, Gaussian similarity, or euclidean distance, that se- Series2Graph [90] tackles these problems by proposing a
lects only the top-k neighboring nodes, which can not entirely novel idea for detecting anomalous sub-graphs with varying
underline the strong and wide-spread connections among sensor sizes in the graphs, which are constructed from multivariate
embeddings. time-series signals, collected from both industrial and biomed-
 To overcome this challenge, GTA [88] presents the connec- ical domains. Specifically, Series2Graph first extracts subtion learning policy based on the Gumbel-softmax sampling sequences (aka time intervals) from the time series using a slidapproach. This is to learn bi-directed edges between sensors, ing window technique. It then projects the sub-sequences onto
thereby avoiding the issue of selecting node neighbors by the top- a two-dimensional embedding space. The graph is constructed
kNN method. GTA also handles the intra-variable dependency by considering the densest regions in the two-dimensional
from the graph sequence by a transformer-based graph convolu- embedding space, where a notable concentration of projected
tion network. Moreover, to tackle the quadratic complexity, GTA sub-sequences is observed. These dense regions are selected
proposes a multi-branch attention mechanism to substitute the as nodes, which serve as summaries of the repetitive patterns
original-head self-attention method. A forecasting-based strat- observed in the data, indicating normal behavior. To create
egy is then adopted to predict the graph at the next time step and the edges, Series2Graph determines the edge weights based
return an anomaly score assigned for each graph by MSE. GTA on the frequency of occurrences of one sequence immediately
demonstrates its effectiveness in multivariate sensory systems, following another in the input time series. If there is a transition
such as water and satellite monitoring systems. between two nodes, they are connected by an edge; otherwise,
 In contrast to detecting abnormal sensors (nodes) of the graph no edge is created. Series2Graph determines the abnormality
in many multivariate signal systems, several studies show an in- level of the sub-graphs using the node degree (aka the number
terest in detecting abnormal edges (e.g., the unexpected interac- of connected edges to the node) and the edge weights (aka the
tions between sensors or the anomalous edges in an edge stream). number of consecutive occurrences of two sequences).
SEDANSPOT [85] considers an AD problem in an edge stream, Existing predictive-based methods have shown the capability
where the edge anomalies tend to connect parts of the graph that to deal with many time-series applications, ranging from timeare sparsely connected or occur as bursts of activity. An example series signals, edge streams to social networks. However, none
of a burst is an occasion (e.g., a burst of longer-than-usual phone of these approaches are applicable to videos in which a video
calls during festivals). SEDANSPOT exploits these abnormal is a sequence of image frames indexed in time. GCLNC [86],
behaviors by proposing a rate-adjusted sampling technique that WAGCN [51], and WSANV [94] are some of the earliest
downsamples edges from bursty periods of time and employs a G-TSAD studies working on real-world surveillance videos.
holistic random walk-based edge anomaly scoring function to While most of the existing studies use only normal data during
compare incoming edges and the whole graph. This approach their training phase, these three studies have taken advantage of
is applied in traffic networks, co-authorship analysis, and social weakly-supervised labels (e.g., include noisy labels as wrong
media scenarios. annotations of normal graphs) during training to improve the
 Midas [87] also tackles the same problem in detecting anoma- detection of abnormal graph-level frames in videos. As a video
lous edges in an edge stream, particularly for cybersecurity sequence has temporal evolution between frames, these methods
and social media applications. However, unlike SEDANSPOT, construct graphs, where each frame is modeled as a graph node,
which identifies individual abnormal edges, Midas aims to de- and the adjacency matrices are computed based on not only
tect microcluster anomalies, which are the sudden appearing the similarity metric of the inter-variable features but also the
bursts of activity sharing many repeated edges. Midas provides intra-variable proximity, i.e., the short-distance intra-variable
explanations on the false positive rate and is also an online dependency to capture relationships among frames. Note that
method that processes each edge in constant time and mem- instead of pre-defining the adjacency matrices, they adjust them
ory, while SEDANSPOT does not address these issues. More- as the model is trained. A computed anomaly score based on CE
over, SEDANSPOT and Midas propose different hypotheses is then assigned for each frame.
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 7001

 TABLE V
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE SELF-SUPERVISED METHODS

 applications. For example, in medical systems, it is difficult to
 obtain sufficient patient data that covers all types of diseases
 and rare conditions due to privacy concerns and limited access
 to patients over time.

 D. Self-Supervised Methods
 Overview. Fig. 7 and Table V provide a visualization of
 the overall framework and representative methods in the self-
Fig. 7. Overall framework of Self-supervised methods. The input is a graph supervised category. Self-supervised learning (SSL), a subset
G with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features of unsupervised methods [96], has provided novel insights into
are not shown for simplicity.
 training without annotated labels [97]. Similar to other fields,
 SSL has demonstrated its effectiveness in graph-based learning
 Despite the capability of these methods on videos, they only methodologies [25]. The intuition of SSL is to learn transferable
consider frame-level graphs, hence, the relationships between knowledge from massive unlabeled data with well-designed
frames are captured. However, in practice, it is essential to model pretext tasks and then generalize the learned knowledge to the
a video as a stream of time-evolving object-level graphs, where downstream tasks [98]. In the SSL-based G-TSAD research, a
a node is an object and edges represent the relationships among sub-group of SSL methods, called contrastive learning (CL),
objects. Object-level graphs can help to determine the abnormal has been used so far. CL aims to learn useful representations
changes in actions/movements of an object across frames in a of data by contrasting positive and negative pairs, i.e., CL is
video. trained to create an embedding space that pulls positive (similar)
 Summary. Predictive-based methods have shown great poten- samples close together and pushes negative (dissimilar) samples
tial in various time-series applications, from time-series signals, far apart. To achieve this, a contrastive loss function is defined
edge streams, social networks to videos. Interestingly, many to encourage the model to maximize the similarity between pospredictive-based methods integrate the reconstruction and pre- itive samples while minimizing the similarity between negative
diction tasks to yield more accurate anomaly scores. However, samples. This approach can be formally described as:
several challenges still remain unsolved. While existing methods   
have shown their effectiveness in building graphs to capture θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lcon Dφ Eθ (G(1) ), Eθ (G(2) ) , (6)
 θ,φ
inter-variable information, one of the biggest challenges of these
methods is modeling the long-term intra-variable dependency, where Lcon is the contrastive loss, G(1) and G(2) are two different
which is required to effectively perform time-series forecasting sets of graph samples, Dφ is the discriminator that estimates the
tasks [95]. For example, existing methods only consider the similarity between these two sets of graph samples. In unsuintra-variable dependency in a short-term period where obser- pervised AD, data augmentation is essential to create negative
vations close to each other in the time series are expected to be samples/pairs while every two normal samples can potentially
similar. However, as mentioned in Section III, trend, seasonality, form a positive pair. Applying augmentation on graphs is chaland unpredictability patterns are, in nature, always available lenging compared to other data types; this will be discussed in
in time-series data. Hence, forecasting future values simply Section IX.
based on near-distance past values is problematic. Plus, a large AddGraph [99] is an unsupervised anomalous edge detection
amount of data with a diversity of patterns is required during technique that has access to only normal edges during training.
training for the forecasting tasks, but in practice, having access It employs CL to train its graphs obtained from social networks,
to a comprehensive dataset is very difficult in many time-series where the positive samples are all the available normal edges
7002 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

while negative samples are generated by applying the Bernoulli just a transformation of normal data, not an actual abnormal
distribution to the normal edges. AddGraph employs a temporal sample.
graph convolutional network with an attention-based GRU to EEG-CGS [52] introduces a sub-graph sampling technique
learn long and short-term temporal patterns of the nodes. The for the epilepsy application of detecting abnormal channels
hidden state of the nodes at each time step is used to compute the and regions in the brain using multivariate time-series signals.
anomaly scores for all edges. As the generated negative edges EEG-CGS first represents the signals as static graphs, conmay have a possibility of being normal, it is inappropriate to use structed based on the euclidean distance or correlation matrices,
a strict loss function such as CE; hence, AddGraph proposes a to capture the relations between sensors. It then proposes a local
margin-based pairwise loss to distinguishes the positive edges sub-graph sampling strategy to sample contrastive pairs. For
from the generated negative ones. each target node, a positive sub-graph is sampled by closely
 Another CL study aiming to detect abnormal edges in social connected nodes based on controlling the radius of surrounding
networks and cyber security systems, called TADDY [100], nodes, while a negative sub-graph is sampled by finding the
also assumes that all normal edges are positive during training, farthest nodes using the same radius. By sampling positive and
similar to AddGraph. However, TADDY proposes a different negative pairs based on the knowledge of local sub-graphs, EEGnegative sampling strategy. Given positive pairs, TADDY ran- CGS overcomes the issues of the random selection technique
domly generates candidate negative pairs with a number equal to seen in TADDY.
the number of positive pairs. It then checks these candidates to Similar to EEG-CGS, mVSG-VFP [53] incorporates the reensure that they are different from the existing normal edge set. construction and contrastive modules to detect vehicle failures.
Then, TADDY develops a framework with four components: an However, its module design differs from EEG-CGS. mVSGedge-based substructure sampling to sample the target nodes and VFP first uses a sliding window to generate segments in the
the surrounding nodes; a node encoding component to generate time-series vehicle data and then builds mini-batches of segthe node embeddings in both intra- and inter-variable spaces; a ments. Each segment is represented as a static graph, where
graph transformer to extract the intra- and inter-variable knowl- each sensor is a node, and edges are predefined using Mutual
edge of edges; and a discriminative anomaly detector based on Information between sensor pairs, measuring the statistical de-
CE to calculate anomaly scores for all edges. pendence between two sensors. Regarding the reconstruction
 Although TADDY demonstrates its effectiveness on six real- module, mVSG-VFP masks a segment of one sensor at a time
world graph datasets, while AddGraph uses only two social and encourages the GNN-AE module to reconstruct it. Regardnetwork datasets, TADDY still remains several issues. First, ing the contrastive module, unlike other CL methods that positive
TADDY implements a random selection technique for generat- and negative samples are created through a contrastive pair
ing negative samples, but it does not ensure that they do not be- sampling strategy, mVSG-VFP leverages a unique characteristic
long to the normal set. Hence, its negative sampling approach is in their vehicle data, i.e., time-series segments recorded during
less reliable than AddGraph. Second, given the random selection a trip (aka a continuous recording of sensors) are more similar
technique of TADDY, the bias can easily occur when the negative compared to those that are produced during another trip. This
sample set is not sufficient to represent the full distribution acts as a predefined Sim{·, ·}, providing an additional layer
of negative pairs; hence, additional sampling techniques are of insight. While not learnable, this Sim{·, ·} operates at the
required. Lastly, it employs a CE loss to distinguish normal edges segment-label level by utilizing prior knowledge about whether
from negative edges; however, as denoted in AddGraph, since it segments belong to the same vehicle trip.
is not guaranteed that all generated negative samples are actual Given this unique property, adjacent segments in the mininon-normal, using a strict loss (e.g., CE) is inappropriate. batch are considered as positive samples, and the remaining seg-
 The major challenge of both AddGraph and TADDY is that ments in the same mini-batch are denoted as negative samples.
they consider the generated negative samples as actual abnor- Then, a contrastive loss is applied to pull adjacent segments
mal samples since there is no access to the actual abnormal closer and push them away from the rest of the mini-batch.
data during training, and the generated negative samples are mVSG-VFP uses the reconstruction error to detect anomalous
created based on the given normal data. This limits the methods’ graph-level segments. Due to the data’s property, a detected
performance as the generated negative samples might be just a abnormal segment can imply that its adjacent segments are
variation of the normal data or a subset of the possible abnormal also anomalies. As such, mVSG-VFP addresses both intra- and
distribution, resulting in biased representation learning for the inter-variable dependencies, while EEG-CGS only considers the
actual abnormal data. latter. mVSG-VFP also demonstrates superior performance by
 Very recent studies [52], [53] have addressed these challenges leveraging Sim{·, ·}, compared to other graph-based methods
by recognizing that the negative samples generated based on the like GDN that do not utilize it. The main challenge of mVSGnormal data may differ from the actual abnormal data that will VFP is that the way of generating contrastive pairs is only
be observed in the test phase. These methods demonstrate that applicable to a data compound of operational blocks like vehicle
discriminating the positive and negative pairs during training trips, a property that is not available for many applications where
through minimizing the contrastive loss is just for providing using the knowledge of adjacent segments is meaningless.
a less noisy and more reliable representation space for the CL has also been successfully applied for detecting anomalies
normal data as all the negative samples are created from nor- in videos. Many existing studies such as CFRAD [101] overlook
mal data – in other words, the generated negative samples are the important matter of developing models with interpretability
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 7003

that can interpret the causes of anomalies. An important appli- VII. DATASETS AND APPLICATIONS
cation of video AD is to understand and take appropriate actions
 In this section, we present commonly used datasets related to
whenever an anomaly occurs. A response to an abnormal event time-series signals, social networks, and videos that have been
in a video is usually dependent on its severity, which cannot be
 widely adopted in G-TSAD research. Table VI summarizes these
easily understandable without having an interpretable model. To
 datasets based on their type, characteristics, specific anomalies,
address this, IVAD [103] proposes a dual-monitoring approach and application domains.
that monitors individual objects (aka local object monitoring),
and their interactions with other objects present in the scene (aka
global object monitoring) in surveillance videos. A. Time-Series Signals
 In the local branch, each object is monitored independently to Numerous existing G-TSAD studies have trained models
determine if its action (e.g., body movement) is anomalous. An using popular benchmark time-series signal datasets, such as
anomaly score for each frame, based on reconstruction loss, is Yahoo S5 [105], NASA [106], SWaT [107], WADI [108],
computed by a GRU-AE. In the global branch, the relationships SMAP [74], and SMD [74]. However, it has been highlighted
between objects (e.g., a human, a predicate, and a bike) within a in recent literature that these benchmarks possess various flaws,
frame are monitored. This creates a scene graph where objects including mislabeled ground truth, triviality, unrealistic anomaly
and predicates (i.e., words that relate two objects) are respec- density, and run-to-failure bias [8], [126], [127]. This rentively defined as nodes and edges. CL is adopted in this global ders them unsuitable for the robust evaluation and comparison
branch. Positive pairs are selected from the normal training set, of G-TSAD algorithms. Therefore, improving benchmarking
while negative pairs are randomly generated and verified to practices is crucial to ensure a more accurate assessment of
ensure that they do not belong to the positive set. A contrastive G-TSAD methods. [8] has introduced The UCR Time Series
loss is employed to minimize the euclidean distance between Anomaly Archive, designed for evaluating and benchmarking
positive samples and maximize the distance between positive AD algorithms. [109] has also introduced The UCI Machine
and negative samples. This loss is also used as an anomaly Learning Repository, which contains datasets that cover a broad
score for each object in a frame. Finally, an in-depth analysis range of domains such finance, healthcare, biology, and social
on both branches is performed to interpret the root cause of sciences. Additionally, [110] has recently introduced the vorausanomalies. If the cause of an anomaly is from the global branch, AD dataset for robotic applications. These datasets serve as
it is interpreted that the edge-level anomaly is caused due to a valuable resources for testing and developing TSAD algorithms.
previously unseen relationship between objects. Otherwise, if Moreover, recent studies [76], [128], [129] have showcased
the source of an anomaly is from the local branch, it is caused the superiority of their proposed TSAD methods on several
due to an anomalous object action in the graph. reliable alternatives collected from biomedical domains such
 Summary. Existing SSL studies have shown interesting ideas as The PhysioNet [111], The European ST-T database [112],
and addressed some problems seen in the other three categories PTB-XL [113], ICBEB [114], and TUSZ [115].
of G-TSAD methods. For example, SSL methods incorporate
a variety of pretext tasks, such as CL and masked reconstruction, to enhance the representation of normal data. These pre- B. Social Networks
text tasks allow SSL to better learn complex patterns, leading As clarified in Section IV-B and Fig. 2(a), social networks,
to improved AD performance. Additionally, unlike predictive which are represented as dynamic graphs, are also considered as
methods, which focus on modeling each frame in video data as time-series data. This is because there are always fresh persons
a graph node, SSL methods can go beyond this limitation by who enroll in the community network every day/month/year,
constructing object-level graphs. This allows SSL methods to hence, the relationship between individuals is changing overcapture detailed interactions between objects within the data. time. Detecting anomalies in these dynamic social networks
However, as SSL is a new topic to G-TSAD, it has not yet gains significant attention in G-TSAD research. Various datasets
confirmed its effectiveness in a variety of applications compared on social networks have been used. For instance, UCI Mesto predictive methods. Moreover, it is suggested that different sages [116] is a social network dataset constructed into dynamic
effective graph augmentations for positive and negative sample graphs, where each node represents a user, and each edge indigeneration be employed to improve performance. cates a message exchange between two users. Email-DNC [117]
 In conclusion, while there may be some overlap in the deep is network of emails, where each node indicates a person in the
feature learning mechanisms and the use of loss functions, such United States Democratic Party, and each edge denotes an email
as reconstruction losses, shared across all method categories, the sent from one person to another. Digg [118] is a network dataset
key distinction lies in the specific losses each category minimizes collected from a news website, where each node represents a
during training. AE-based methods focus purely on reconstruc- website user, and each edge indicates that one user replies to
tion error of the previous or current input data. GAN-based another user. Bitcoin-Alpha and Bitcoin-OTC [119], [120] are
methods minimize both generator and discriminator losses. two “who-trusts-whom” networks of bitcoin users engaged in
Predictive-based methods minimize prediction errors rather than trading on the Internet platforms, where each node denotes
merely reconstructing the input data, and self-supervised meth- a user, and an edge is present when one user rates another
ods minimize pretext-based losses. on the platform. AS-Topology [121] is a network connection
7004 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE VI
 SUMMARY OF COMMONLY USED DATASETS IN G-TSAD RESEARCH

dataset collected from autonomous Internet systems, where each an anomaly, the entire segment is then considered to be correctly
node denotes an autonomous system, and each edge indicates a detected as an anomaly. Consequently, this practice leads to high
connection between two autonomous systems. F1 scores, yet it results in a high possibility of overestimating the
 model performance. [9] conducted experiments demonstrating
C. Videos that without PA, the performance of existing methods yields no
 significant improvement over the baseline. Note that the baseline
 As illustrated in Section IV-B and Fig. 2(b), video data is conis simply a randomly initialized reconstruction model, such as
sidered as the time series as it is a sequence of frames captured
 an untrained autoencoder that consists of a single-layer LSTM.
over time. The frames are arranged sequentially to create the illu-
 To address this issue, [9] proposed a new evaluation protocol,
sion of motion when played back at a rapid pace. This sequential
 named PA%K, where K denotes the threshold, to mitigate the
nature of video data, where each frame depends on the preceding
 overestimation effect of PA. The concept behind PA%K is to
and succeeding frames, makes it inherently a time-series data.
 apply PA to a segment only if the ratio of the number of correctly
Various video datasets have been used in G-TSAD research such
 detected anomalies within that segment to its length exceeds the
as UCF-Crime [122], Xd-Violence [123], ShanghaiTech [124],
 threshold K. Note that K can be selected manually based on prior
and UCSD-Peds [125]. Specifically, UCF-Crime is a large-scale
 knowledge.
dataset that consists of 13 types of anomalies captured by CCTV
 While PA%K can address the PA issue, selecting a decision
camera indoors and outdoors during day and night scenarios.
 threshold remains non-trivial in TSAD research. There are four
Xd-Violence is a large-scale dataset composed of violent videos
 scenarios for threshold finding. The first scenario is a common
from diverse scenarios recorded from CCTV cameras. Shangpractice where the threshold is selected directly on the labeled
haiTech is a medium-scale dataset recorded by a CCTV camera
 test set [72], [132], [133], which can lead to biased and unfair
in an outdoor location. UCSD-Peds is a small-scale dataset
 evaluations. In the second scenario, the threshold is selected
acquired by a camera to record pedestrian walkways.
 based on a labeled validation set that yields the best F1 score. The
 selected threshold is then applied to the test set [49]. However,
 VIII. EVALUATION METRICS the first two cases may not align with real-world unsupervised
 Evaluation metrics play a crucial role in assessing the per- applications where labeled data is unavailable. To tackle this
formance of G-TSAD algorithms. This section presents the limitation, the third scenario advocates for using an unlabeled
commonly used evaluation metrics, and discusses several issues validation set to select the threshold, which is then applied to
of evaluation protocols and potential solutions. the test set [76].
 In the domain of time series signals, several metrics such as F1 The issue of the above threshold-dependent scenarios lies in
score (F1), Precision (Pre), and Recall (Rec) are commonly used. their evaluation of the model’s performance at a single threshold,
However, it is important to highlight that recent critiques [9] which may not capture the model’s behavior across all possible
have raised concerns about the evaluation protocol employed thresholds. Hence, several methods in the domains of time-series
in many studies [20], [130], [131]. Specifically, these existing signals, as well as social networks and videos [48], [51], [99],
studies compute F1 score after applying a peculiar evaluation [100], [101], [103], [128] have adopted the fourth scenario,
protocol, called point adjustment (PA). Generally, PA considers employing the threshold-independent metrics such as Area Unthat if at least one point within an anomaly segment is detected as der the Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) [134],
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 7005

[135], and Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (APR) [136]. are many image augmentation methods in the literature [98].
This offers a comprehensive assessment of the model’s perfor- However, due to the dynamic nature of graphs (e.g., intramance by considering multiple thresholds, which allows for a variable complexity, non-euclidean structure), it is not approprideeper understanding of the trade-offs between Prec and Rec, ate to directly apply image-based augmentations to the graphs.
facilitating better decision-making for a given application. Most existing SSL studies only consider random sampling tech-
 Overall, depending on the specific applications at hand and niques, sub-graph sampling, or graph diffusion for augmentation
the goals of the evaluation, it is essential to use an appropriate – this may provide limited diversity and uncertain invariance.
method for selecting threshold as different scenarios may neces- Having additional yet effective augmentation techniques such
sitate different approaches, such as supervised, semi-supervised as feature-based (e.g., masking a portion of node/edge feaor unsupervised approaches, to ensure accurate and fair eval- tures), edge-based (e.g., adding or removing portions of edges),
uations. Moreover, it is advisable to employ a combination sampling-based (e.g., sampling nodes and their connected edges
of evaluation metrics to comprehensively assess the model’s using importance sampling or knowledge sampling), and adapperformance. tive augmentations (e.g., using learned attention schemes) [26]
 would be promising directions for G-TSAD studies.
 Detection of Multiple Types of Graph Anomalies. Most of
 IX. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS existing methods could only detect either anomalous nodes,
 Although G-TSAD is a new topic, it has been rapidly growing edges, sub-graphs, or graphs. However, in many real-world sysin popularity, as can be inferred by the number of studies pub- tems, different observations can have different anomaly types;
lished in the prestigious Artificial Intelligence venues described e.g., in some observations, only a single sensor is anomalous,
in Section VI. However, detecting anomalies in graphs with but in other observations, a group of sensors is anomalous.
evolving graph features and adjacency matrices is challenging, Moreover, although few studies [53] use Sim{·, ·} to facilitate
leading to several major concerns in the existing studies. In detecting anomalous nodes, edges, sub-graphs, and graphs, there
this section, we analyze these challenges and pinpoint potential is no study that targets to detect anomalous Sim{·, ·}. Since
directions for future studies. Sim{·, ·} presents both short-term and long-term relationships
 Theoretical Foundation and Explainability. Despite its great across observations, analyzing Sim{·, ·} can be beneficial for
success in various time-series applications, most existing G- understanding the underlying dynamics of time-series, e.g., any
TSAD methods are designed and evaluated by empirical exper- anomalous Sim{·, ·} can be considered as an unexpected shift
iments without sufficient theoretical foundations to prove their of time-series dynamics. Thus, having a model that can detect
reliability. Plus, they ignore the explainability of learned repre- multiple anomaly types, including Sim{·, ·}, would be a very
sentations and predicted results – e.g., what are the important interesting research line.
features of nodes and edges, and adjacency matrices in graphs? Broader Scope of Methodology. Each category in the G-
Is the output (e.g., anomaly score) sufficient to conclude the TSAD studies has its own strengths and drawbacks. AE-based
abnormality of graph objects? These are important concerns for and predictive-based methods are simple to implement as the
interpreting the model behavior. Therefore, we believe that in losses are easy to build, but recovering the input and learning
addition to the empirical design, providing a solid theoretical long-term dependencies is a challenging task to realize. Meanfoundation and a deep analysis of the learned representations to while, GAN-based methods are difficult to implement due to
improve the model’s generalization and robustness are crucial. the adversarial training process that needs a careful selection of
 On Equivalence between Intra-variable and Inter-variable hyperparameters, the network architecture, and the optimiza-
Dependencies. Capturing both intra- and inter-variable depen- tion algorithm. SSL methods have shown promising results
dencies in time-series data is very important for effective AD. but designing the frameworks, augmentation techniques, and
However, many existing methods could not handle this problem. loss functions heavily relies on empirical experiments. These
Regarding intra-variable dependency, time-series data often in- disadvantages may cause poor AD performance. To improve
volve long-term intra-variable correlations, yet many existing overall AD accuracy, leveraging the complementary strengths
studies could not tackle this issue. Regarding inter-variable of these approaches is important. For example, we can integrate
dependency, it is difficult to pre-define the graph features and the AE-based and predictive-based models to detect a wider
adjacency matrices for many time-series systems due to the range of anomalies. While the AE-based detects anomalies that
limited prior knowledge of the developer. Recent studies have occur in the current/past time, the predictive-based model can
shown that without pre-defined graphs, graph structure learn- detect anomalies that occur in the future.
ing techniques [93] can learn the graph information, i.e., the Another example is a hybrid SSL method, e.g., combining
node/edge features and adjacency matrices, which dynamically the predictive SSL and contrastive SSL modules to achieve
evolves over time. This provides a better capturing of the sys- better generalization of the learned representations. Moreover,
tem’s underlying mechanism. Hence, a proper integrating of this combined approach can be adapted to different anomaly
both graph learning techniques and deep sequence models is types; e.g., the contrastive SSL module learns to detect sudden
essential to provide more accurate AD. spikes in the time series, while the predictive SSL module can
 Graph Augmentation Strategy. Augmenting graphs is crucial be trained to detect future abnormal trends unseen in the training
for SSL methods, e.g., generating positive and negative pairs is data. Overall, the hybrid SSL approach can benefit from multiple
required in CL-based methods discussed in Section VI-D. There pretext tasks of the different SSL modules, yet it is important
7006 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

to design an effective joint learning framework to balance each However, in their approach, Sim{·, ·} is predefined based on
component in the model [25]. Given its great potential, hybrid their given vehicle dataset’s characteristics; the definition may
methods would be interesting for further G-TSAD studies. not be applicable to other real-world datasets. The result of
 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics. As emphasized in this study confirms the potentials of employing Sim{·, ·} in
Section VII, acknowledging the limitations of current bench- improving AD. Developing methods that can either learn or
mark TSAD datasets is crucial for advancing the field. It is adapt Sim{·, ·} for various applications would offer new research
important to invest efforts in curating high-quality benchmark directions for improving graph-based TSAD techniques.
datasets that reflect real-world scenarios and challenges. Moreover, as discussed in Section VIII, the existing challenges with
 X. CONCLUSION
evaluation protocols and metrics underscore the need for a
comprehensive evaluation approach. It is essential to employ This paper conducts a comprehensive survey of G-TSAD.
a combination of evaluation metrics to thoroughly assess model First, we introduce new concepts in G-TSAD, the major chalperformance for an accurate and fair comparison between meth- lenges of time-series data, as well as the advantage of representods while improving reproducibility. ing them as graphs in the context of AD. Then, we present a
 Limitations of Graph-based Methods to Real-world Scenar- systematic taxonomy that groups G-TSAD methods, primarily
ios. As discussed earlier, most existing methods assume that leveraging deep learning architectures, into four categories:
only normal samples are available during training. Graphs, while AE-based, GAN-based, predictive-based, and self-supervised
effective in capturing the underlying normal patterns of data, methods. For each category, we discuss the technical details
face difficulties in scenarios where this assumption does not of the methods, their strengths and weaknesses, as well as comhold. For instance, in open-set scenarios where only a limited parisons between them. A wide range of practical time-series
amount of labeled anomalous data is available during train- applications are also introduced. Finally, we point out several
ing [137], graph-based methods may struggle in learning the data limitations from both technical and application perspectives of
patterns due to insufficient abnormal samples. Recent open-set the current research and suggest promising directions for future
studies [128] have shown that their non-graph-based method can works. We hope this survey will serve as a useful reference for
outperform graph-based methods [83], which assumes that the follow-up researchers to explore more research in this field.
training data should contain only normal samples.
 In contaminated datasets, where anomalies sneak into the REFERENCES
normal training data and both the labels and positions of these
 [1] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
anomalies are unknown [77], conventional graph-based methods series: A comprehensive evaluation,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
can become ineffective. Recent studies dealing with contami- no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, 2022.
nated data [76] have compared their method with state-of-the-art [2] A. Blázquez, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
graph-based methods [49]. [76] showed that naively applying no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
graph-based methods to contaminated data leads to inaccurate [3] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsuresults, as these methods typically assume that the training data pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018, pp. 1–19.
contains only normal samples and is free from noise or anoma- [4] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
lies. In [76], the challenge of data contamination is addressed by Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019,
incorporating a decontamination phase before the graph learning pp. 3009–3017.
 [5] T. Kieu, B. Yang, C. Guo, and C. S. Jensen, “Outlier detection for time
process. series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
 Another limitation arises with highly complex and stochastic Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2725–2732.
signals, such as brain or vehicle systems’ signals, which are [6] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time
 series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. 35th Conf.
often noisy and unpredictable due to variabilities in brain states, Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2021, pp. 1–13.
environmental variabilities, drive behavior, and mechanical wear [7] Q. Rebjock, B. Kurt, T. Januschowski, and L. Callot, “Online false
and tear on top of the common sensor and measurement noise. discovery rate control for anomaly detection in time series,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 26487–26498.
In such scenarios, the recent methods presented in [52], [53] [8] R. Wu and E. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
suggest constructing static graphs using predefined adjacency are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
matrices. Their experiments show the superior performance of Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 [9] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
static graphs compared to state-of-the-art dynamic graphs [49]. evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
This improved performance could be due to the current limita- Intell., 2022, pp. 7194–7201.
tions of graph learning techniques or the insufficient availability [10] A. Deng, A. Goodge, L. Y. Ang, and B. Hooi, “CADET: Calibrated
 anomaly detection for mitigating hardness bias,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
of training data to properly train these more complex methods. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2002–2008.
Further exploration of these areas remains a promising direction [11] H. Hojjati and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised acoustic anomaly detecfor future research in the field of G-TSAD. tion via contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
 Signal Process., 2022, pp. 3253–3257.
 Finally, the use of Sim{·, ·} as an additional layer of supervi- [12] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
sion remains an underexplored area. To the best of our knowl- “Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
edge, there is only one study, i.e., [53], that leverages Sim{·, ·} videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
 pp. 11996–12004.
in this way. [53] demonstrates that incorporating Sim{·, ·} [13] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance selfcan enhance model performance compared to other graph- training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
based approaches [49] that do not make use of this measure. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14009–14018.
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 7007

 [14] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and [38] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin, and
 M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multi-task H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly detection
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 1,
 pp. 12742–12752. pp. 1–20, Jan. 2024.
 [15] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial net- [39] J. Ren, F. Xia, I. Lee, A. Noori Hoshyar, and C. Aggarwal, “Graph learnworks for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. ing for anomaly analytics: Algorithms, applications, and challenges,”
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–29, 2023.
 [16] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive [40] T. Bilot, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, and A. Zouaoui, “Graph neublock for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. ral networks for intrusion detection: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 13576–13586. pp. 49114–49139, 2023.
 [17] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Self- [41] P. B. Lamichhane and W. Eberle, “Anomaly detection in graph structured
 supervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. data: A survey,” 2024, arXiv:2405.06172.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745. [42] O. A. Ekle and W. Eberle, “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs: A
 [18] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly comprehensive survey,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 18, no. 8,
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI pp. 1–44, 2024.
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416. [43] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
 [19] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. Int. pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439. [44] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
 [20] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access,
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
 in Proc. 26th SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, [45] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivaripp. 3395–3404. ate time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion,
 [21] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly vol. 91, pp. 93–102, 2023.
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data [46] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,”
 [22] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn- ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, 2024.
 chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” [47] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2,
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
 pp. 2485–2494. [48] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 [23] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and inter- detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representapretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data tions, 2022, pp. 1–16.
 Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230. [49] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 [24] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” pp. 4027–4035.
 2022, arXiv:2201.07284. [50] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional adversar-
 [25] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. ial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023. Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
 [26] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning on [51] C. Cao, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive graph
 graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data convolutional networks for weakly supervised anomaly detection in
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023. videos,” 2022, arXiv:2202.06503.
 [27] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A [52] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised learning for anomalous
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural channel detection in EEG graphs: Application to seizure analysis,” in
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 7866–7874.
 [28] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised [53] H. Hojjati, M. Sadeghi, and N. Armanfard, “Multivariate time-series
 learning of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans. anomaly detection with temporal self-supervision and graphs: Applica-
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429, tion to vehicle failure prediction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Princ.
 Feb. 2023. Pract. Knowl. Discov. Databases, 2023, pp. 242–259.
 [29] Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, X. Huang, S. Hao, D. Li, and J. Zhao, “Graph neural [54] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for netnetworks: Taxonomy, advances, and trends,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. works,” in Proc. 22nd SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 Technol., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2022. 2016, pp. 855–864.
 [30] M. M. Li, K. Huang, and M. Zitnik, “Graph representation learning [55] X. Zhu, C. Lei, H. Yu, Y. Li, J. Gan, and S. Zhang, “Robust graph
 in biomedicine and healthcare,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 6, no. 12, dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018,
 pp. 1353–1369, 2022. pp. 3257–3263.
 [31] X. Liu et al., “Survey on graph neural network acceleration: An al- [56] H. Qu, L. Li, Z. Li, and J. Zheng, “Supervised discriminant isomap with
 gorithmic perspective,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, maximum margin graph regularization for dimensionality reduction,”
 pp. 5521–5529. Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 180, 2021, Art. no. 115055.
 [32] C. Zhang et al., “Few-shot learning on graphs: A survey,” in Proc. Int. [57] H. Yang, K. Ma, and J. Cheng, “Rethinking graph regularization for graph
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 5662–5669. neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4573–4581.
 [33] C. Gao et al., “A survey of graph neural networks for recommender sys- [58] I. Ahmed, T. Galoppo, X. Hu, and Y. Ding, “Graph regularized autems: Challenges, methods, and directions,” ACM Trans. Recommender toencoder and its application in unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
 Syst., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–51, 2023. Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4110–4124,
 [34] S. Khoshraftar and A. An, “A survey on graph representation learning Aug. 2022.
 methods,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–55, [59] J. Zeng, J. Pang, W. Sun, and G. Cheung, “Deep graph Laplacian
 2024. regularization for robust denoising of real images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 [35] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series: Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2019.
 Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” IEEE [60] S. Rey and A. G. Marques, “Robust graph-filter identification with graph
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10466–10485, denoising regularization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
 Dec. 2024. Process., 2021, pp. 5300–5304.
 [36] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection [61] X. Li, H. Fan, and J. Liu, “Noise-aware clustering based on maximum corwith deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, rentropy criterion and adaptive graph regularization,” Inf. Sci., vol. 626,
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. pp. 42–59, 2023.
 [37] H. Kim, B. S. Lee, W.-Y. Shin, and S. Lim, “Graph anomaly detection [62] S. Tang et al., “Modeling multivariate biosignals with graph neural
 with graph neural networks: Current status and challenges,” IEEE Access, networks and structured state space models,” in Proc. Conf. Health,
 vol. 10, pp. 111820–111829, 2022. Inference, Learn., 2023, pp. 50–71.
7008 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

 [63] Z. Kang, H. Pan, S. C. Hoi, and Z. Xu, “Robust graph learning from noisy [87] S. Bhatia, B. Hooi, M. Yoon, K. Shin, and C. Faloutsos, “MIDAS:
 data,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1833–1843, May 2020. Microcluster-based detector of anomalies in edge streams,” in Proc. AAAI
 [64] P. Berger, G. Hannak, and G. Matz, “Efficient graph learning from noisy Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3242–3249.
 and incomplete data,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 6, [88] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
 pp. 105–119, 2020. structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detec-
 [65] X. Du et al., “Noise-robust graph learning by estimating and leveraging tion in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J.„ vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 pairwise interactions,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023. [Online]. Avail- Jun. 2022.
 able: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r7imkFEAQb [89] T. Zhao, B. Ni, W. Yu, Z. Guo, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “Action sequence
 [66] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for augmentation for early graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 2668–2678.
 pp. 1–38, 2021. [90] P. Boniol and T. Palpanas, “Series2graph: Graph-based subsequence
 [67] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for training anomaly detection for time series,” 2022, arXiv:2207.12208.
 deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [91] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–temporal
 Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 8792–8802. graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion,
 [68] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere: vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023.
 Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in [92] A. Karami, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Graph-jigsaw conditioned
 Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 2724–2730. diffusion model for skeleton-based video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 [69] M. J. Kusner, B. Paige, and J. M. Hernández-Lobato, “Grammar IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2025, pp. 4237–4247.
 variational autoencoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, [93] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and
 pp. 1945–1954. opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1–10.
 [70] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “Grelen: Multivariate time series [94] N. Li, J.-X. Zhong, X. Shu, and H. Guo, “Weakly-supervised anomaly
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in detection in video surveillance via graph convolutional label noise clean-
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397. ing,” Neurocomputing, vol. 481, pp. 154–167, 2022.
 [71] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [95] Z. Chen, M. Ma, T. Li, H. Wang, and C. Li, “Long sequence time-series
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010. forecasting with deep learning: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 97, 2023,
 [72] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep Art. no. 101819.
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time [96] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
 pp. 3621–3633. pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.
 [73] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, “Normalizing flows: An [97] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxonintroduction and review of current methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. omy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3964–3979, Nov. 2021. vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
 [74] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly [98] H. Hojjati, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural detection in computer vision and beyond: A survey and outlook,” Neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Netw., vol. 172, 2024, Art. no. 106106.
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [99] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
 [75] F. Xia, X. Chen, S. Yu, M. Hou, M. Liu, and L. You, “Coupled attention in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. Int.
 networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
 Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 240–253, Jan./Mar. 2024. [100] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
 [76] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Contaminated multivariate time-series IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
 anomaly detection with spatio-temporal graph conditional diffusion mod- Dec. 2023.
 els,” 2024, arXiv:2308.12563. [101] D. Purwanto, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang, “Dance with self-attention: A
 [77] X. Jiang et al., “Softpatch: Unsupervised anomaly detection with new look of conditional random fields on anomaly detection in videos,”
 noisy data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 173–183.
 pp. 15433–15445. [102] S. Chang, Y. Li, J. S. Shen, J. Feng, and Z. Zhou, “Contrastive atten-
 [78] Y. Tashiro, J. Song, Y. Song, and S. Ermon, “CSDI: Conditional score- tion for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24,
 based diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proc. pp. 4067–4076, 2022.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 24804–24816. [103] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “Towards interpretable video anomaly de-
 [79] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive tection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2023,
 denoising diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series pp. 2655–2664.
 forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8857–8868. [104] H. Chen, X. Mei, Z. Ma, X. Wu, and Y. Wei, “Spatial–temporal graph
 [80] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly attention network for video anomaly detection,” Image Vis. Comput.,
 detection and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation vol. 131, 2023, Art. no. 104629.
 graph-based encoder–decoder gan,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, [105] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and Y. Billawala, “S5-A labeled anomaly
 2022, Art. no. 3504210. detection dataset, version 1.0 (16M),” 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
 [81] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead //webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/catalog.php
 dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE [106] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
 Access, vol. 10, pp. 40967–40978, 2022. “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic
 [82] D. Guo, Z. Liu, and R. Li, “Regraphgan: A graph generative adversarial thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 network model for dynamic network anomaly detection,” Neural Netw., Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
 vol. 166, pp. 273–285, 2023. [107] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 [83] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyberattention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, Physical Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
 pp. 841–850. [108] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribu-
 [84] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations tion testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986. pp. 25–28.
 [85] D. Eswaran and C. Faloutsos, “Sedanspot: Detecting anomalies in edge [109] S. D. Bay, D. Kibler, M. J. Pazzani, and P. Smyth, “The UCI KDD archive
 streams,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 953–958. of large data sets for data mining research and experimentation,” ACM
 [86] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 81–85, 2000.
 convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier [110] J. T. Brockmann, M. Rudolph, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “The vorausfor anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern AD dataset for anomaly detection in robot applications,” IEEE Trans.
 Recognit., 2019, pp. 1237–1246. Robot., vol. 40, pp. 438–451, 2024.
HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY 7009

[111] A. L. Goldberger et al., “Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet: [134] H. Zhang, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Prototypical resid-
 Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,” ual networks for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, 2000. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 16281–16291.
[112] A. Taddei et al., “The European ST-T database: Standard for evaluating [135] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary
 systems for the analysis of ST-T changes in ambulatory electrocardiog- guided semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly deraphy,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 13, pp. 1164–1172, 1992. tection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023,
[113] P. Wagner et al., “PTB-XL, a large publicly available electrocardiography pp. 24490–24499.
 dataset,” Sci. Data, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 154. [136] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall and
[114] F. Liu et al., “An open access database for evaluating the algorithms ROC curves,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 233–240.
 of electrocardiogram rhythm and morphology abnormality detection,” J. [137] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
 Med. Imag. Health Inform., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1368–1373, 2018. Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Com-
[115] V. Shah et al., “The temple university hospital seizure detection corpus,” put. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7388–7398.
 Front. Neuroinform., vol. 12, 2018, Art. no. 83.
[116] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2009.
[117] R. Rossi and N. Ahmed, “The network data repository with interactive
 graph analytics and visualization,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015,
 pp. 4292–4293.
[118] M. De Choudhury, H. Sundaram, A. John, and D. D. Seligmann, “Social Thi Kieu Khanh Ho received the MSc degree from
 synchrony: Predicting mimicry of user actions in online social media,” the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Eng., 2009, pp. 151–158. in 2020. She is working toward the PhD degree
[119] S. Kumar, F. Spezzano, V. Subrahmanian, and C. Faloutsos, “Edge weight with iSMART Lab, Department of Electrical and
 prediction in weighted signed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Computer Engineering, McGill University and Mila-
 Data Mining, 2016, pp. 221–230. Quebec AI Institute. From 2017 to 2018, she was
[120] S. Kumar, B. Hooi, D. Makhija, M. Kumar, C. Faloutsos, and V. Subrah- a research assistant with Seoul National University
 manian, “REV2: Fraudulent user prediction in rating platforms,” in Proc. Hospital. From 2020 to 2021, she was a researcher
 11th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2018, pp. 333–341. with the Korea National University of Transportation.
[121] B. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Massey, and L. Zhang, “Collecting the Internet Her research focuses on time-series anomaly detecas-level topology,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 35, tion, graph anomaly detection, and self-supervised
 no. 1, pp. 53–61, 2005. learning.
[122] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[123] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence
 detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 2020, pp. 322–339.
[124] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly Ali Karami received the BSc degree in electrical
 detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. engineering from the University of Tehran, Iran, in
 Vis., 2017, pp. 341–349. 2021. He is working toward the master’s degree with
[125] W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly detection and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engilocalization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., neering, McGill University. He is also affiliated with
 vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 18–32, Jan. 2014. Mila-Quebec AI Institute. His research interest in-
[126] D. Wagner, T. Michels, F. C. Schulz, A. Nair, M. Rudolph, and M. Kloft, cludes graph learning, anomaly detection, and self-
 “TimeSeAD: Benchmarking deep multivariate time-series anomaly supervised learning.
 detection,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=iMmsCI0JsS
[127] A. Koran, H. Hojjati, and N. Armanfard, “Unveiling the flaws: A critical analysis of initialization effect on time series anomaly detection,”
 2024, arXiv:2408.06620.
[128] T. Lai, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Open-set multivariate timeseries anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024,
 pp. 2003–2010. Narges Armanfard received the PhD degree in arti-
[129] E. C. Erkus and V. Purutcuoğlu, “A new collective anomaly detection ap- ficial intelligence from McMaster University and the
 proach using pitch frequency and dissimilarity: Pitchy anomaly detection postdoctoral degree in artificial intelligence from the
 (PAD),” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 102084. University of Toronto. She is the founder and prin-
[130] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- cipal investigator with iSMART Lab. She holds the
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide position of associate professor with the Department
 Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill Uni-
[131] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using versity, and with Mila-Quebec AI Institute. She is also
 temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. affiliated with McGill Centre for Intelligent Machines
 Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 13016–13026. (CIM), McGill initiative in Computational Medicine
[132] C. U. Carmona, F.-X. Aubet, V. Flunkert, and J. Gasthaus, “Neural (MiCM), and McGill Institute for Aerospace Engicontextual anomaly detection for time series,” in Proc. 31t Int. Joint neering (MIAE). Her research focus lies in developing innovative algorithms
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2843–2851. for various domains such as time-series analysis, computer vision, reinforce-
[133] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series ment learning, and representation learning for tasks including data clustering,
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in classification, and anomaly detection.
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.