IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025 485

 Graph Anomaly Detection via Multiscale
 Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
 From Local to Global
 Xiaofeng Wang , Shuaiming Lai , Shuailei Zhu , Yuntao Chen , Laishui Lv , and Yuanyuan Qi

 Abstract—Graph anomaly detection is a challenging task in in graph anomaly detection. Recently, graphs have emerged as a
graph data mining, aiming to recognize unconventional patterns universal data structure for modeling diverse complex systems.
within a network. Recently, there has been increasing attention Consequently, anomaly detection on graphs has garnered growon graph anomaly detection based on contrastive learning due to
its high adaptability to the sample imbalance problem. However, ing attention [2]. Graph anomaly detection techniques have
most existing work typically focuses on the contrast of local found application in diverse fields, including fraud detection
views while neglecting global comparison information, leading [3], social network analysis [4], recommendation systems [5],
to suboptimal performance. To address this issue, we introduce and network security [6]. In these domains, graph anomaly
a new multiscale contrastive self-supervised learning framework detection plays a crucial role in informing decision-making
for graph anomaly detection (GADMCLG). Our approach incorporates local-level contrasts involving node–node and node– processes and facilitating effective problem-solving endeavors.
subgraph contrast, and global-level subgraph–subgraph contrast. Traditional anomaly detection approaches face challenges in
The former mines localized abnormal information, while the lat- effectively addressing this issue due to the intricate nature of
ter is intended to capture global anomalous patterns. Specifically, on-Euclidea graph-structured data [1]. Specifically, graphs emour proposed subgraph–subgraph contrast adopts the h-order phasize the complex structural relationships between objects,
neighbor subgraph sampling instead of augmented subgraphs
through edge perturbation. This sampling strategy ensures a which provides valuable auxiliary information for anomaly decomprehensive observation of the neighborhood surrounding the tection. In online social networks, malicious social bots usually
target node, thereby mitigating the introduction of extraneous build relationships with a large number of normal users to
noise and providing interpretability for the detected results. obtain user privacy information and can also disguise them-
Furthermore, we incorporate a subgraph centralization tech- selves by imitating the behavior of normal users [7]. In such
nique to reduce the bias caused by the absolute position of
subgraphs in the attribute space, which enhances the model’s cases, traditional techniques may not be able to distinguish
ability to identify anomalies at different scales. Extensive ex- between fake users and normal users based solely on attribute
perimental results on six real-world datasets demonstrate the information. Furthermore, the differences in topology and ateffectiveness of our method and its superiority compared with tributes give rise to two principal categories of graph anomalies:
state-of-the-art approaches. structural anomalies and attribute anomalies [8] in Fig. 1. Nodes
 Index Terms—Contrastive learning, graph anomaly detec- A and C are identified as attributed anomalies, while nodes A
tion, multiscale framework, subgraph centralization, subgraph and B are identified as structural anomalies. The former refers
sampling.
 to nodes within the graph that exhibit dissimilar interaction
 behaviors in comparison with other nodes, signifying disparities
 I. INTRODUCTION in the structural connectivity of the network. The latter involves
 interconnected nodes that exhibit unusual node attributes, high-
G RAPH anomaly detection is one of the most important
 tasks in graph machine learning, which seeks to identify
atypical graph patterns, including anomalous nodes, edges, and
 lighting the inconsistency of node attributes.
 Over the past decade, numerous graph anomaly detection
 methods have been proposed. Early work such as LOF [9],
subgraphs in a given graph [1]. Node anomaly detection focuses
 AMEN [10], and ANOMALOUS [11] primarily utilized speon exploring individual data instances within the graph that decific domain knowledge on graphs to identify anomalies, reviate from expected patterns, making it the most prevalent task
 lying on manual feature engineering and statistical models.
 These conventional approaches fail to capture the nonlinear
 characteristics of nodes and scale to large-scale graphs. To
 Received 12 January 2024; revised 10 July 2024; accepted 6 September address these limitations, deep learning has been introduced
2024. Date of publication 30 September 2024; date of current version
3 April 2025. This work was supported by the “Leading Goose” R&D to uncover anomalous graph patterns, leveraging its success
Program of Zhejiang Province under Grant 2024C01107. (Corresponding in representation learning and pattern recognition [12]. Deep
author: Xiaofeng Wang.) neural networks with nonlinearity exhibit significant advan-
 The authors are with the School of Information Engineering, China Jiliang
University, Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: xfwang@cjlu.edu.cn). tages in handling large-scale data and learning distributed rep-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3457161 resentations for uncovering anomalies [13]. To capture more

 2329-924X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
486 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 h-order neighbor subgraph sampling strategy. Different from
 the existing method [27] that relies on edge modification to
 (b) construct subgraph–subgraph contrast, our approach ensures a
 comprehensive observation of the neighborhood of the target
 node from local to global perspectives, thereby mitigating the
 introduction of extraneous noise. Furthermore, we perform subgraph centralization on all subgraphs to reduce the deviation
 (a) caused by their absolute position in the attribute space. Finally,
 (c) we design a multiscale contrastive learning framework by combining both local and global-level contrasts to identify poten-
Fig. 1. Toy example of two basic types of graph anomalies. tial abnormal nodes. The main contributions are summarized
 as follows.
 1) We propose a novel graph anomaly detection method
discriminated information in graph data for anomaly detection, that leverages the synergy between local and global congraph representation learning techniques have been widely ex- trastive patterns to effectively identify node anomalies in
ploited [14], [15], [16]. For example, Hu et al. [17] proposed an attributed graphs.
effective embedding approach to identify structural anomalies 2) We investigate the effects of various subgraph sampling
by analyzing the relationship between nodes and communities. methods on contrastive learning and conclude that the
Moreover, many typical shallow models for graph embedding h-order neighborhood subgraph sampling strategy is the
such as DeepWalk [18] and node2vec [19] have been used for most suitable for the graph anomaly detection task.
generating node representations in graph anomaly detection. 3) Extensive experiments on six real-world datasets demon-
 Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been in- strate the effectiveness of the proposed method and its
troduced to graph anomaly detection, attracting increasing advantages compared to state-of-the-art baselines.
attention due to their highly expressive capability in graph The rest of the sections of this article are organized as folrepresentation learning [8]. As a pioneering work, DOMINANT lows. In Section II, we provide a general review of related
[20] utilizes a graph auto-encoder (GAE) based on a graph work. Section III introduces fundamental concepts employed
convolutional network (GCN) to identify anomalies in an unsu- in this work and outlines the task objective of anomaly detecpervised setting, where anomaly scores for nodes are calculated tion on attributed networks. We provide a detailed presentation
by leveraging the reconstruction errors of node attributes and of the proposed method in Section IV. Section V evaluates
graph structure. Subsequently, some variants were proposed, and analyzes the experimental results conducted across varsuch as SpecAE [21], ALAMR [22], and ComGA [23]. GAE- ious datasets. Finally, Section VI presents the conclusion of
based methods do not directly identify anomalous targets, mak- our work.
ing it difficult to fully utilize the rich information present in the
attribute network [8]. Moreover, based on the self-supervised II. RELATED WORK
learning paradigm, CoLA [24] introduces a novel approach by
 Our work addresses the issue of graph anomaly detection
combining contrastive learning with GNNs, which identifies
 using graph contrastive learning in attributed graphs. In this
anomalies by measuring the consistency between a target node
 section, we first review the primary methods of graph anomaly
and its neighboring nodes. On this basis, ANEMONE [25]
 detection and then introduce the pertinent work on graph concaptures more subtle abnormal information by building additrastive learning.
tional contrast between the target node and its masked nodes.
Furthermore, GCAD [26] identifies anomalies by comparing
 A. Graph Anomaly Detection
the similarity between subgraphs. However, these methods typically employ a local contrastive mode or a single-scale contrast, Graph anomaly detection is a crucial topic in graph data
while ignoring potential global anomaly information in com- mining, primarily employed to identify patterns that deviate
plex graph-structured data. from the majority within a graph. Much early work has been
 To address this issue, we propose a novel graph anomaly proposed to identify node anomalies. Breuning et al. [9] indetection method via multiscale contrastive self-supervised troduced a density-based local method LOF, which identifies
learning from local to global, denoted as GADMCLG. It in- anomalous nodes by comparing the attribute characteristics of
tegrates the local- and global-level contrasts to comprehen- their neighboring nodes. AMEN [10] focuses on identifying
sively detect anomalies in attributed graphs. Specifically, the anomalous entities based on their local connectivity within the
local-level contrasts include node–node and node–subgraph graph. Additionally, ANOMALOUS [11] utilizes a joint framecontrasts. We utilize the node–subgraph contrast to capture work to leverage both structural properties and node attributes
potential matching patterns between each normal node and to reveal inherent patterns and identify anomalies. These traits corresponding neighbor subgraph sampled through random ditional approaches primarily utilized specific domain knowlwalk (RW). Moreover, the node–node contrast is used to mine edge on graphs to identify anomalies but failed to capture the
more subtle local abnormal information. For the global-level nonlinear features of nodes, lacking deeper insight into graph
contrast, we propose a subgraph–subgraph contrast based on the data [1].
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 487

 GNNs have emerged as an effective tool for graph represen- and introduces a new graph convolutional network to inductation learning, with the ability to extract complex nonlinear in- tively learn node embeddings. Different from these methods,
formation. Consequently, numerous GNN-based methods have recent work has shifted toward exploring more intricate semanbeen proposed to uncover graph anomalies by learning expres- tic information by employing graph augmentation techniques.
sive and informative node representations. DOMINANT [20] GRACE [34] leverages node feature masking and edge dropfirst introduces an anomaly detection approach based on GAE, ping to create two contrastive views, bringing closer represenwhich uncovers node anomalies by reconstructing both graph tations of the same node in different views. Moreover, GCA
structure and node attributes in a supervised manner. SpecAE [35] introduces the adaptive augmentation of graph-structured
[21] utilizes GAE to extract low-dimensional embedding and data based on the underlying graph properties, enriching the
performs anomaly detection via density estimation. Further- semantic information. On the other hand, graph-level methods
more, ComGA [23] proposes a community-aware structure en- utilize similar augmentation techniques and contrastive framecoder and integrates a customized deep graph convolutional works and employ readout functions on node representations
network to address the challenge of over-smoothing in GNNs. to learn graph-level embeddings. JOAO [36] introduces a joint
Moreover, AEGIS [28] extends GAE to the inductive setting, augmentation optimization strategy, cohesively optimizing augaccommodating scenarios where previously unseen anomalies mentation selection and contrastive objectives. Besides, CSSL
may be present. Despite the remarkable performance achieved [37] is constructed upon the foundation of MoCo [38] and
by these methods in anomaly detection, it is noteworthy that reduces model overfitting via graph-level contrastive learning.
they do not explicitly frame anomaly detection as a dedicated The cross-scale approaches for contrastive learning emphatask, leading to suboptimal performance. size the global comparison of views at different scales. As the
 Recent studies have demonstrated that graph contrastive pioneering work, DGI [39] proposes a patch-global contrast
learning benefits graph-based machine learning tasks [29]. Con- that contrasts node-level embeddings with graph-level represequently, the combination of graph contrastive learning for sentations to maximize the MI between these distinct scales of
anomaly detection has received increasing attention. As a local representation so as to aid the graph encoder in capturing both
contrastive learning method, CoLA [24] identifies anomalies localized and global semantic information. Furthermore, HDGI
by calculating the consistency between the target node and [40] extends DGI to heterogeneous graphs by aggregating node
its neighboring nodes. Furthermore, SL-GAD [30] develops representations on various meta paths to calculate the final node
both generative attribute regression and contrastive learning representation. Moreover, EGI [41] captures advanced transferframework to detect graph anomalies. ANEMONE [25] further able graph knowledge by forcing node features to maintain a
combines the node–node contrast with the node–subgraph con- consistent distribution with graph structure and then maximizes
trast and focuses on mining the local anomalous information. the MI between node embeddings and their surrounding ego-
Moreover, GCAD [26] introduces a method based on global graphs. From the perspective of context-global contrasts, BiGI
contrastive learning, which adopts subgraph–subgraph contrast [42] learns the graph-level representation of the input graph by
to mine global anomaly information but ignores local anomaly aggregating two types of node embeddings in a bipartite graph,
patterns. GCCAD [31] designs a context-aware GNN encoder to as well as learning the local context representation of the target
learn both node and context representations, detecting abnormal edge between two nodes over the sampled original graph. Beinformation through the similarity between them. sides, HTC [43] maximizes the MI between the representation
 of the entire graph and the contextual embedding calculated
 through aggregated sampling graphs.
B. Graph Contrastive Learning
 As one of the most crucial paradigms in graph self-supervised
 III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
learning, graph contrastive learning extracts supervised signals
for downstream tasks without explicit labels by maximizing the In this section, we introduce the task of graph anomaly demutual information (MI) between instances possessing simi- tection in attributed networks and provide an overview of the
lar semantic information [29]. Graph contrastive learning has notations used throughout this work. Table I summarizes the
gained popularity for its ability to capture complex relationships key notations used in this article.
and structures in graph-structured data. Considering the scale Attributed Networks: For the given attributed network G =
differences in MI between instances, the existing work on graph (V, E), V = {v1 ,v2 , . . . ,vN } denotes the node set with N nodes,
contrastive learning can be mainly divided into two types: same- and E indicates the edge set with M edges. Moreover, the
and cross-scale contrastive learning [32]. adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n and feature matrix X ∈ Rn×d rep-
 The same-scale contrast approaches for contrastive learning resent the graph-structured information and the node-attribute
can be further divided into node- and graph-level contrasts. information, respectively. It notes that Aij = 1 indicates that
The underlying assumption of node-level contrastive learning there is an edge between node vi and node vj , otherwise
is that nodes with similar contextual information should have Aij = 0.
similar representations. Early methods such as DeepWalk [18] Graph Anomaly Detection: The task of graph anomaly detecand Node2Vec [19] utilize RW to extract contextual details sur- tion is to learn an anomaly scoring function f (·), which comrounding target nodes in unattributed networks. Furthermore, putes the anomaly score for each node. The higher value of the
GraphSAGE [33] further extends RW to attribute networks score indicates a greater likelihood that the node is anomalous.
488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed GADMCLG. (a) Instance pair sampling module. (b) Multi-scale contrastive learning module. (c) Anomaly scoring
module.

 TABLE I A. Contrastive Instance Pair Sampling
 NOTATIONS AND DESCRIPTION TO GADMCLG
 To comprehensively capture local and global anomalous in-
Notation Description formation, GADMCLG employs contrastive learning across
G Attributed network. various scales. In the context of graph contrastive learning,
V Node set of G. contrastive instance pair sampling involves selecting pairs of
E Edge set of G. nodes or subgraphs in a graph, where positive pairs might be
A ∈ Rn×n Adjacency matrix of G.
X ∈ Rn×d Attribute matrix of G.
 nodes that are close in proximity or share similar attributes,
 
 and negative pairs are nodes that are far apart or have distinct
H() ∈ Rn×d  − th layer hidden embedding matrix. features. It notes that the effectiveness of contrastive learning
  
W() ∈ Rd ×d  − th layer network parameters.
 methods heavily depends on the definition of the contrastive
φ(vi ) Final node embedding of node vi . instance pairs. In this article, we adopt the RWR and h-order
Zvi WL-embedded vector of the entire subgraph with
 Node vi as the source node. neighbor sampling strategy instead of random sampling by edge
 perturbation to construct two different subgraph sample pools
f (vi ) Final anomaly score of node vi .
 for local and global contrasts, respectively.
 First, we define the node–subgraph contrast and node–node
 contrast to capture the local distribution pattern of nodes within
 the graph. Specifically, for the node–subgraph contrast, a tar-
 IV. METHODOLOGY
 get node needs to be selected first, and then the contrastive
 In this section, we introduce the proposed method GADM- subgraphs of the target node are sampled by RWR and form
CLG, and its overall framework is shown in Fig. 2. GADM- contrastive positive pairs with the target node. In particular, to
CLG consists of three main components: an instance pair prevent the information leakage of the initial node of RWR
sampling module, a multiscale contrastive learning module, during the contrastive learning process, we substitute the atand an anomaly scoring module. Specifically, in the instance tribute vector with a zero vector to mask its node attribute.
pair sampling module, we first adopt random walk with restart Subsequently, the node–node contrast is composed of the target
(RWR) [44] and h-order neighbor sampling strategy to construct node and masked initial node of RWR, which can mine more
two different subgraph sample pools for local- and global-level potential local anomalous information. It notes that positive
contrasts, respectively. Subsequently, the multiscale contrastive and negative instance sampling strategies need to be adopted in
learning module extracts local anomalous information within local-level contrasts. For positive instance pairs, the initial node
local-level node–subgraph and node–node contrasts while si- of the RWR corresponds to the target node, while for negative
multaneously capturing global anomalous information through instance pairs, the initial node is randomly selected from all
subgraph–subgraph contrast. Finally, the anomaly scoring mod- nodes except the target node.
ule calculates the final anomaly score for each node in the graph, Moreover, to establish the global connection between all
which is obtained through the weighted aggregation of anomaly the subgraphs, we define the subgraph–subgraph contrast that
scores derived from the three distinct contrastive mechanisms. compares the structural similarity between different subgraphs
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 489

 matching patterns between each normal node and its corresponding neighbor subgraph sampled through RWR. Node–
 subgraph contrast follows the assumption that normal nodes
 should maintain a high degree of consistency with their neighboring nodes, while abnormal nodes should be the opposite.
 To calculate the consistency between the target node and its
 contrastive subgraph, we initially utilize a GNN encoder with a
 GCN layer [GNN encoder 1 in Fig. 2(b)] to map node attributes
 in the subgraph to the embedding space. The subgraph hiddenlayer representation can be expressed as
  
 (+1) −1 −1 ()
 Hi = σ D̃i 2 Ãi D̃i 2 Hi W() (1)

Fig. 3. Process of subgraph centralization.
 where Hi () denotes th layer hidden representation of ith sub-
 −(1/2) −(1/2)
 graph, D̃i Ãi D̃i is the normalized adjacency matrix
 ()
 of ith subgraph, W indicates the trainable weight parameters
globally. Different from the approach of subgraph sampling in th layer network, and σ(·) is the nonlinear activation funcfor the local contrasts, for subgraph–subgraph contrast, the tion such as ReLU. We utilize a Readout function to calculate
subgraph of the target node is obtained by the h-order neighbor the final representation zi of ith subgraph. The Readout function
sampling strategy. Specifically, this sampling strategy extracts can be denoted as follows:
the adjacent nodes directly connected to the target node at a 
 ni
specified depth h. (Hi )j
 zi = Readout(Hi ) = (2)
 j=1
 ni

B. Subgraph Centralization where Hi is the embedding of the ith subgraph after GCN
 As previously mentioned, subgraph–subgraph comparison mapping, and ni is the number of all nodes in the ith subgraph.
involves comparing the structures of individual h-subgraphs. Since the target node vi lacks structural information, we
These structures are determined by the relative positions of utilize a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to obtain its embedding
nodes in the h-subgraph but are independent of the absolute so that it can be contrasted with its contrastive subgraph in the
positions of nodes in the node vector space. It notes that the same attribute space. The MLP hidden layer is defined as
absolute positions of subgraphs in the attribute space may cause
 hi (+1) = σ(hi () W() ) (3)
bias in the similarity calculation between subgraphs. To address
this issue, we perform attribute centralization on all subgraphs where W() is the weight matrix shared with GCN layer. ei is
to generate the relative positions of all subgraphs. Specifically, the final embedding of the target node. After that, we adopt a
we map all target nodes to the origin of the node-attribute space, bilinear model to calculate the similarity si of the target node
and accordingly, other nodes in the corresponding subgraph are and its contrastive subgraph
transformed to the same degree as their target nodes being transformed to the origin. This process is described in Fig. 3, where si = Bilinear(zi , ei ) = σ(zi Wei T ). (4)
subgraphs G  (v1 ) and G  (v2 ) represent the state of subgraphs
G(v1 ) and G(v2 ) after subgraph centralization. It notes that the target node and its contrastive subgraph tend
 to be similar in positive pairs, while in negative pairs, they
 should be dissimilar. Therefore, based on this observation, we
C. Multiscale Contrastive Learning Module
 employ binary cross entropy (BCE) loss to train the contrast
 After the instance pair sampling process, a multiscale contrastive learning module is used to capture robust and discrim- 
 N
 LN S = − (yi log(si ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − si )) (5)
inative feature representations in attributed graphs for anomaly
 i=1
detection in a self-supervised manner. Contrastive learning has
proven to be effective for graph anomaly detection. However, where the value of yi is 1 in positive pairs and 0 in negative
most approaches rely on local- or single-scale contrast, which pairs.
may limit their capability to capture comprehensive anomalous 2) Node–Node Contrast: Similar to the node–subgraph coninformation. In this work, we construct a multiscale graph trast, node–node contrast focuses on capturing the local anomacontrastive learning module, including local- and global-level lous information at the node level. It notes that the representacontrast. Specifically, this module consists of three compo- tion of the masked initial node of RWR is aggregated from the
nents: node–subgraph contrast, node–node contrast, and global other nodes present in the subgraph. We establish a positive pair
subgraph–subgraph contrast. between the target node and its masked node while forming a
 1) Node–Subgraph Contrast: To capture local anomalies, negative pair between the target node and other masked nodes
we first utilize the node–subgraph contrast to capture potential that are not target nodes. After that, an additional GNN model
490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

with a GCN layer [GNN encoder 2 in Fig. 2(b)] is employed D. Anomaly Scoring Module
to learn the representation of the subgraph After completing the training process in the multiscale con-
  
 (+1) − 1 − 1 ()
 Hi = σ D̃i 2 Ãi D̃i 2 Hi W() (6) trastive learning module, the anomaly scoring module is used
 to calculate the node’s anomaly score. For different contrasts,
 () normal nodes typically exhibit obvious similarities or dissimwhere Hi denotes th layer hidden representation of ith sub-
 −(1/2)  −(1/2) ilarities when compared to instances in positive and negative
graph, D̃i Ãi D̃i is the normalized adjacency matrix
of ith subgraph, and W() indicates the parameter matrix. pairs. However, abnormal nodes are not distinguishable from
 (+1) positively and negatively aligned instances. Here, we compute
hi  (+1) = Hi [1, :] is the representation of the masked
initial node vi  of RWR in the ( + 1)th hidden layer and ui the final anomaly score of each node from both local and
is the final embedding of vi  . We leverage MLP to transform global perspectives.
the target node attribute to the same embedding space as the 1) Local Anomaly Score: Local-level contrast consists of
masked target node node–subgraph and node–node contrasts. A normal node ex-
   hibits similarity to its contrastive subgraph with it as the source
 (+1) ()
 hi = σ hi W() (7) node in positive pairs, while exhibiting dissimilarity in its negative pair. So that the anomaly score of the target node vi can
where W() is the same parameter matrix in Eq. (6). After MLP be calculated as follows:
ei  is the final embedding of the target node.
 p
 i = si − si
 sns n
 Similarly, we utilize a Bilinear model to calculate the similarity si  between ei  and ui . Subsequently, the loss associated snn n
 i = si − si
 p
with node–node contrast can be computed as follows:
 si = βsi + (1 − β)snn
 nns ns
 i (12)
 
 N
 LN N = − (yi log(si ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − si )) (8) where sns i and snn
 i denote the anomaly score to the node–
 i=1 subgraph and node–node contrast, respectively, sni and spi repwhere the value of yi  is 1 in positive pairs and is 0 in negative resent the similarity to the node–subgraph contrast in negative
pairs. and positive pairs, respectively, si n and si p represent the sim-
 3) Subgraph–Subgraph Contrast: Intuitively, each node in ilarity to the node–node contrast in negative and positive pairs,
the network is more susceptible to the influence of its directly respectively, and β is the balance parameter of node–subgraph
connected neighboring nodes. Therefore, abnormal nodes can and node–node contrast. snnsi is the anomaly score of the local
often be represented through abnormal subgraphs. To capture contrast after balancing the scores of node–subgraph and node–
global-level abnormal nodes, we score every node by calculat- node contrast. It notes that the subgraph obtained from one
ing the similarity between all n subgraphs. The node vi will RWR will lead to an incomplete observation of anomalous
have a higher anomaly score if its subgraph with vi as the source information. To this end, we conduct multiround detections,
node is different from most other subgraphs in the network. and the anomaly score of the target node vi can be represented
 Before calculating the similarity between subgraphs, we use as follows:
Weisfeiler–Lehman (WL) [45] to learn subgraph embeddings.
 1  nns(r)
 R
Specifically, we use the average neighborhood information of s̄i = s
nodes to iteratively update their vectors. The iterative updating R r=1 i
 
process of node vi can be expressed as  R  
 1 
  si = s̄i + 
 nns(r)
 1 1 nns
 si − s̄i (13)
 Xk (vi ) = (Xk−1 (vi ) + X k−1 (w)) (9) R r=1
 2 deg(vi )
 w∈N (vi )
 k where s̄i is the mean from multiround detections, and R is the
where X (vi ) denotes the vector of the node vi in the kth
 total rounds of anomaly detection.
iteration, deg(vi ) indicates the degree of node vi , and N (vi ) is
 2) Global Anomaly Score: After the WL-embedded vectors
the set of one-hop neighbors of node vi in the target subgraph.
 of all the subgraphs are computed, a point anomaly detector
It notes that the final node embedding φ(vi ) of node vi is the
 based on Euclidean distance is trained from them and produces
concatenation of vector from each iteration
 an anomaly score s for the node vi , which is the source
 φ(vi ) = [X0 (vi ), . . . , Xk (vi )]T . (10) node of the ith subgraph. Given that the depth of subgraphs
 may be greater than 1, a depth-based weighted anomaly score
 Therefore, the WL-embedded vector zvi of the entire target is introduced for further improvement of anomaly detection.
subgraph with the node vi as the source node can be calculated Specifically, for the target node vi , its anomaly score sss
 i is the
as follows: weighted score between all the source nodes and a larger weight
 1 
 zv i = φ(u) (11) will be given to sss
 j if the node vj is closer to node vi
 |Vsub_vi |
 u∈Vsub_vi  (vj ,vi ) 
 v ∈V λ s j
where Vsub_vi indicates the subgraph with the node vi as the si = j
 ss
 (v ,v
 (14)
 i)
 vj ∈V λ
 j
source node.
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 491

where V is the set of all score nodes, λ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the Algorithm 1 The Overall Procedures of GADMCLG.
weight to anomaly score sj , and (vj , vi ) indicates the number Input: An attributed network G = (V, E); number of training
of hops from node vj to node vi . epoches T ; batch size B; subgraph depth h.
 Finally, the anomaly score of the target node vi can be de- Output: Anomaly scoring function f (·).
noted as follows: 1: for t ∈ T do
 f (vi ) = snns
 i + γsss
 i (15) 2: Build positive and negative subgraph sample pools via
where γ is the balance parameter between the local anomaly RWR in G.
score derived from node–subgraph and node–node contrasts 3: Randomly divide V into batches of size B.
and the global anomaly score from subgraph–subgraph contrast. 4: for b ∈ B do
 5: In node-subgraph contrast, calculate the embedding
E. Loss Function similarity si of the target node vi and the subgraph
 with vi as the source node in positive and negative
 As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed GADMCLG model is pairs via Eq. 4.
divided into three phases: contrastive instance pair sampling, 6: In node-node contrast, calculate the embedding simmultiscale contrastive learning, and anomaly scoring. For the ilarity si  of the target node and the masked initial
anomaly detection task, the entire model is first trained with node of RWR in positive and negative pairs like nodesampled instance pairs in an unsupervised manner, and then the subgraph contrast.
inference process is performed to obtain the anomaly score of 7: Calculate the joint loss L of node-subgraph and nodeeach node. To combine the benefits of different contrasts, we node contrasts via Eq. 16.
optimize the joint loss function: 8: Backpropagation and update the trainable parameters
 L = βLN S + (1 − β)LN N (16) of our model.
where β ∈ (0, 1) is the balance parameter of node–subgraph 9: end for
 10: end for
and node–node contrast. It should be noted that, owing to the
 11: Calculate the joint anomaly score snns of node-subgraph
utilization of the WL propagation scheme in learning subgraph
representations, the subgraph–subgraph contrast does not par- and node-node contrasts via multi-round detections.
 12: for v ∈ V do
ticipate in joint training of node–subgraph and node–node contrasts. The overall procedures of our proposed GADMCLG are 13: Sample subgraphs with depth h.
depicted in Algorithm 1. 14: Perform subgraph centralization on all subgraphs and
 Embed them to vectors via WL.
 V. EXPERIMENTS 15: end for
 16: Get the set Zall of all subgraph vectors.
 In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on nine
 17: for v ∈ V do
real-world graph datasets to demonstrate the excellent perfor-
 18: Calculate anomaly score si  for zi with a point detector.
mance of GADMCLG. First, we provide an overview of the
 19: end for
datasets and experimental setup. Then, we validate the effec-
 20: Calculate the weighted scores sss via Eq. 14.
tiveness of the proposed method and evaluate the experimental
 21: Calculate the final anomaly score f of all nodes.
results in a comparative view.

A. Datasets
 We first estimate the performance of GADMCLG and its TABLE II
baseline methods on six injected anomaly graph datasets, which DETAILS OF DATASETS
include two social network datasets (BlogCatalog and Flickr
[46]) and five citation network datasets (ACM [47], Cora, Dataset Nodes Edges Features Anomalies
Citeseer, Pubmed [48], and ogbn-arxiv [49]). Note that the BlogCatalog 5196 171 743 8189 300
ogbn-arxiv dataset, sourced from the open graph benchmark Flickr 7575 239 738 12 407 450
 ACM 16 484 71 980 8337 597
(OGB), is a large-scale graph dataset comprising over 169 000 Cora 2708 5429 1433 150
nodes and 1.1 million edges. Since these datasets lack ground- Citeseer 3327 4732 3703 150
truth anomalies, we completely followed the anomaly injection Pubmed 19 717 44 338 500 600
 ogbn-arxiv 169 343 1 166 243 128 6000
method in [11] and [14] to generate graph anomalies. Further-
 Amazon 1418 3695 28 28
more, to estimate the effectiveness of GADMCLG in real-world Enron 13 533 176 987 20 5
scenarios, we use two real-world anomaly graph datasets used
in [23] and [50]. Among the real-world anomaly graph datasets,
Amazon [51] represents a copurchase network in which nodes
 B. Experimental Settings
labeled as “amazonfail” are identified as abnormal, and Enron [52] is an email network where spammers are marked as In this section, we describe the experimental settings, encomabnormal nodes. Detailed information about these datasets is passing the baseline methods for comparative analysis, evaluaprovided in Table II. tion metrics, and parameter settings for our model.
492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 1) Baselines: To verify the effectiveness and advantage of To reproduce the results of other baseline methods, we adhere
our proposed GADMCLG, we compare GADMCLG with six to the parameter settings specified in the respective publicastate-of-the-art baseline methods. tions. In cases where specific datasets do not have specified
 a) DOMINANT [20]: DOMINANT is a typical method parameters, we employ a grid search to select the best parambased on deep learning, which utilizes a GAE to calculate eters for optimal performance. Specifically, for DOMINANT,
 the reconstruction error of graph structure and node at- the balance parameters of attribute reconstruction error and
 tributes, thereby detecting anomalies from both structural structure reconstruction error on BlogCatalog, Flickr, ACM,
 and attribute perspectives simultaneously. Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed datasets are set to 0.4, 0.7, 0.5,
 b) CoLA [24]: CoLA adopts a local contrastive self- 0.4, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively. For CoLA, the subgraph size,
 supervised learning approach, leveraging a GNN-based embedding dimension, and sampling round are configured to
 encoder model to identify anomalies through an eval- 4, 64, and 256 for each dataset. In SL-GAD, the weight of the
 uation of the concordance between each node and its contrastive scores across all datasets is set to 1, with the weights
 neighboring subgraph. of the generative scores being 0.6, 0.6, 0.7, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.4,
 c) SL-GAD [30]: SL-GAD integrates generative modeling respectively. For ComGA, the balance parameters of attribute
 and contrastive self-supervised learning in graph anomaly reconstruction error and structure reconstruction error are set
 detection. to 0.4, 0.4, 0.2, 0.2, 0.1, and 0.1, respectively. For GRADATE,
 d) ComGA [23]: ComGA introduces a community-aware the balance parameters of importance between the original view
 structure encoder and integrates a customized deep graph and the second view obtained through edge modification are
 convolutional network to address the challenge of over- 0.9, 0.5, 0.9, 0.9, 0.3, and 0.3, respectively. The balance pasmoothing in GNNs. rameters between subgraph- and node-level anomaly scores are
 e) GCAD [26]: GCAD is a global contrastive learning 0.9, 0.3, 0.5, 0.3, 0.3, and 0.9. Last, the depth of subgraphs in
 method for graph anomaly detection, calculating the sim- GCAD for each dataset is set to 1.
 ilarity of subgraphs to dig global anomalous information.
 f) GRADATE [27]: It constructs a multiscale contrastive
 C. Result Analysis
 learning network frame with an augmented view.
 2) Metrics: To evaluate the performance of GADMCLG In this section, we evaluate the performance of GADMCLG
and the baseline methods, we utilize the extensively adopted in anomaly detection by comparing it with six state-of-themetric in anomaly detection, namely AUC-ROC. The ROC art baselines. Fig. 4 illustrates the comparison of ROC curves.
curve illustrates the graphical representation of the true posi- Moreover, the AUC and AUPR scores on the injected graph
tive rate (accurate identification of anomalous nodes) plotted datasets and real-world anomaly graph datasets are presented in
against the false positive rate (misidentification of normal Tables III and IV, respectively. Based on the results, we make
nodes as anomalies). Moreover, the AUC value, ranging from the following observations.
0 to 1, quantifies the area under the ROC curve. A higher 1) On the first six injected anomaly graph datasets, our pro-
AUC value signifies better anomaly detection performance posed method GADMCLG outperforms all the baseline
exhibited by the model under evaluation. Furthermore, the methods in terms of AUC. Specifically, GADMCLG ob-
AUPR score serves as an extra evaluative metric for anomaly tains notable AUC gains of 1.67%, 0.77%, 4.24%, 3.80%,
detection, particularly effective in contexts characterized by 2.46%, and 2.77% compared to the second-best perforimbalanced data distributions. AUPR quantifies model per- mance on BlogCatalog, Flickr, ACM, Cora, Citeseer, and
formance by computing the area under the precision-recall Pubmed, respectively. Simultaneously, the AUPR results
curve across varying decision thresholds. Higher AUPR scores demonstrate that GADMCLG significantly enhances posindicate superior model capability in correctly identifying itive sample detection relative to its baseline methods
positive samples. on most datasets, particularly achieving an approximate
 3) Parameter Settings: For GADMCLG, the subgraph size 23.13% increase in AUPR on the Citeseer dataset. These
is fixed to 4 for both node–subgraph contrast and node–node results suggest that GADMCLG exhibits superior overcontrast. Both GNN models employ a single GCN layer and all performance and can effectively accommodate the
adopt ReLU as the activation function. Besides, the embedding varying requirements of different scenarios. The primary
dimension of both the target node and its contrastive subgraph reason for the results is that our anomaly detection model
is set to 64. During the training phase, the batch size B, the based on multiscale contrastive learning can effectively
learning rate α, and the total training epoch T for all datasets capture both local and global anomaly information in the
are set to 300, 0.001, and 400, respectively. During the inference network simultaneously.
phase, we conduct 256 round detections to ensure accurate 2) GADMCLG is successfully expanded to the large-scale
detection results for each dataset. The balance parameter β network dataset ogbn-arxiv, overcoming a significant
between node–subgraph and node–node contrast is set to (0, 1). limitation of many baseline methods that are unable
For subgraph–subgraph contrast, it adopts WL to embed all to perform anomaly detection due to extensive memthe subgraphs, and the depth h of the extracted subgraph for ory requirements. Although GADMCLG can also scale
each dataset is set to 1. Moreover, the balance parameter γ to even larger datasets, it necessitates increased combetween local contrasts and the global contrast is set to (0, 1). putational time. This advantage is attributable to the
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 493

 (a) (b) (c)

 (d) (e) (f)

 (g) (h) (i)

Fig. 4. ROC curves comparison on nine benchmark datasets. (a) BlogCatalog. (b) Flickr. (c) ACM. (d) Cora. (e) Citeseer. (f) Pubmed.

 TABLE III
 AUC AND AUPR VALUES COMPARISON ON THE INJECTED ANOMALY GRAPH DATASETS

 BlogCatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed ogbn-arxiv
 methods
 AUC AUPR AUC AUPR AUC AUPR AUC AUPR AUC AUPR AUC AUPR AUC AUPR
 DOMINANT(2019) 0.7667 0.3071 0.7563 0.1534 0.7608 0.1036 0.8336 0.3354 0.8282 0.3500 0.8143 0.1023 OOM OOM
 CoLA(2021) 0.7780 0.3278 0.7522 0.2733 0.8151 0.3177 0.8911 0.4390 0.8877 0.4387 0.9495 0.4080 0.8171 0.2318
 SL-GAD(2021) 0.8047 0.4387 0.7898 0.4463 0.8221 0.4179 0.9058 0.5707 0.9184 0.5510 0.9588 0.6009 OOM OOM
 ComGA(2022) 0.8008 0.3327 0.7768 0.3550 0.8210 0.1071 0.8643 0.2250 0.9054 0.1921 0.9159 0.1768 OOM OOM
 GRADATE(2023) 0.7190 0.1666 0.7370 0.2795 0.8817 0.3286 0.9075 0.5481 0.8601 0.2116 0.9279 0.3931 OOM OOM
 GCAD(2023) 0.7512 0.3630 0.7409 0.4017 0.8448 0.1853 0.9174 0.5323 0.9475 0.5345 0.9160 0.1813 0.8223 0.1712
 GADMCLG(ours) 0.8214 0.4036 0.7975 0.3999 0.9241 0.4647 0.9554 0.7417 0.9721 0.7823 0.9865 0.7631 0.9238 0.4421

Note: The best performance on each dataset is highlighted in bold, and the second-best performance is marked underlined.

 spatial complexity of GADMCLG being entirely inde- 3) As demonstrated in Table IV, GADMCLG achieves supendent of the number of nodes. Furthermore, GADM- perior anomaly detection performance in terms of AUC
 CLG shows significant performance advantages, with on two real-world anomaly graph datasets, Amazon and
 AUC and AUPR increased by 10.15% and 21.03%, re- Enron, with improvements of 3.1% and 9.88% over the
 spectively, compared to suboptimal performance. suboptimal performance, respectively. Nevertheless, the
494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE IV impacts on AUC. Both of these two hyperparameters are tuned
 AUC AND AUPR VALUES COMPARISON ON THE REAL-WORLD within the range from 0 to 1 at intervals of 0.1. The experimental
 ANOMALY GRAPH DATASETS
 results on the six benchmark datasets are shown in Fig. 5.
 Amazon Enron As depicted in Fig. 5, the hyperparameters β and γ are found
 methods
 to be effective in enhancing the performance of the proposed
 AUC AUPR AUC AUPR
 model across all datasets. With the increase in parameter values,
 DOMINANT(2019) 0.6348 0.1168 0.6363 0.0008
 CoLA(2021) 0.4705 0.0232 0.4721 0.0004
 AUC has improved to varying degrees, especially on the Cite-
 SL-GAD(2021) 0.5717 0.0251 0.5815 0.0005 seer and Pubmed datasets. The above experimental observations
 ComGA(2022) 0.6401 0.0333 0.6021 0.0004 indicate that for BlogCatalog, Flickr, ACM, Cora, Citeseer, and
 GRADATE(2023) 0.6003 0.0256 0.5671 0.0005
 GCAD(2023) 0.6510 0.0146 0.5855 0.0005
 Pubmed datasets, setting β to 0.2, 0.3, 0.3, 0.4, 0.8, and 0.6,
 GADMCLG(ours) 0.6820 0.0452 0.7351 0.0011 respectively, alongside setting γ at 0.9, 0.2, 0.7, 0.8, 0.6, and
 0.5, our proposed GADMCLG exhibits optimal performance
 Note: The best performance on each dataset is highlighted in bold, and
 the second-best performance is marked underlined. for anomaly detection.

 E. Ablation Study
 significant imbalance between real anomalies and normal
 nodes in the Amazon and Enron datasets poses substan- In this section, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed
 tial challenges for all methods in accurately identify- multiscale contrastive strategy employed in GADMCLG and
 ing anomalies. This can be observed from the relatively examine the influence of various subgraph sampling strategies
 low evaluation scores, especially in AUPR. GADMCLG on anomaly detection performance.
 achieved the highest AUPR score on Enron, but it per- 1) Multiscale Contrastive Strategy: To validate the effecformed lower than DOMINANT on Amazon. Addressing tiveness of our proposed GADMCLG based on multiscale conthis limitation will be a key focus of our future research. trastive learning, we perform an ablation study on the six
 4) The GAE-based methods, DOMINANT and ComGA, datasets and evaluate the performance in terms of AUC. In this
 cannot achieve satisfying results through network recon- experiment, we define three variants: GADMCLG w/o ns,
 struction error. The reason is that they do not directly GADMCLG w/o nn, and GADMCLG w/o ss. Specifically,
 consider anomaly detection as a specific task leading to GADMCLGw/o ns represents the variant of GADMCLG withsuboptimal performance. In contrast, GADMCLG adopts out the node–subgraph contrast, GADMCLG w/o nn is its varia contrastive learning-based approach by assessing the ant that excludes the node–node contrast, and GADMCLG w/o
 consistency among nodes or subgraphs, thereby enabling ss indicates only the node–subgraph and subgraph–subgraph
 the direct detection of graph anomalies and providing contrasts are used for detecting anomalies. The performance
 more reasonable explanations for detected anomalies. variance results are presented in Table V.
 5) The contrastive learning methods, CoLA, GCAD, and The experimental results indicate an insightful observation
 GADMCLG, exhibit improved performance compared that node–subgraph contrast manifests a more significant imto GAE-based methods. This suggests that contrastive pact on the performance of anomaly detection in comparison
 learning methods more effectively identify anomalies by with node–node contrast. This is because, for node–node concapturing the information consistency differences in at- trast, we construct the comparison between the target node and
 tributes and structures within the network. Furthermore, the initial masked node of RWR. However, it notes that the
 compared to GADMCLG based on multiscale contrastive representation of the masked initial node is generated by aglearning, the other two methods only utilize single-scale gregating its neighboring attribute information. Consequently,
 contrast, resulting in incomplete capture of anomalous node–node contrast essentially constitutes an alternative maniinformation and, therefore, lowering performance. festation of node–subgraph contrast. Moreover, compared with
 6) Compared to another multiscale contrastive learning GADMCLG w/o ss, GADMCLG achieves significant performethod GRADATE, GADMCLG achieved an average mance improvement because subgraph–subgraph contrast cap-
 7.11% performance improvement in terms of AUC met- tures important global anomaly information in the network
 ric. The reason is that GADMCLG adopts the h-order by calculating the anomaly score of their central nodes based
 subgraph sampling strategy, while GRADATE uses edge on the similarity between subgraphs. Therefore, the multiscale
 modification to generate contrast pairs within subgraph– contrastive strategy that combines local and global abnormal
 subgraph contrast. This type of graph augmentation has information leads to the best performance.
 the potential to introduce additional noise interference, 2) Subgraph Centralization: The calculation of subgraph
 consequently impeding the efficacy of anomaly detection. similarity is a complex problem, and its accuracy is affected by
 the relative positions between subgraphs. To verify the impact
 of the subgraph centralization technique we used on the perfor-
D. Parameter Analysis
 mance of graph anomaly detection, we remove this technique
 In this section, we explore the hyperparameter sensitivity of from the global comparison and define the variant as GADMtwo important balance parameters β and γ, and the performance CLG w/o sc. The experimental results on six datasets are shown
of the proposed model. In this experiment, we investigate their in Fig. 6.
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 495

 (a) (b) (c)

 (d) (e) (f)

Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis for the balance parameters β and γ w.r.t AUC. (a) BlogCatalog. (b) Flickr. (c) ACM. (d) Cora. (e) Citeseer. (f) Pubmed.

 TABLE V
 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT CONTRASTIVE STRATEGIES W.R.T AUC

 Methods BlogCatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed
 GADMCLG w/o ns 0.7697 0.7882 0.8789 0.9300 0.9601 0.9771
 GADMCLG w/o nn 0.8118 0.7802 0.9077 0.9461 0.9631 0.9796
 GADMCLG w/o ss 0.7976 0.7584 0.8730 0.9113 0.9105 0.9548
 GADMCLG 0.8214 0.7975 0.9241 0.9554 0.9721 0.9865

 Note: The best performance on each dataset is highlighted in bold.

 GADMCLG experienced a significant performance decline on
 all six datasets. This indicates that subgraph centralization technology is very necessary for graph anomaly detection.
 3) Subgraph Sampling Strategy: To investigate the impact of different subgraph sampling strategies on subgraph–
 subgraph contrast in graph anomaly detection, we compare
 the h-order sampling with two additional sampling strategies:
 RWR and intracommunity RW [53]. Correspondingly, we combine these two sampling strategies with multiscale contrastive
 learning and then define two variants GADMCLG-RWR and
 GADMCLG-CW, respectively. The comparative results are
 shown in Fig. 7.
 It can be observed that the proposed GADMCLG per-
Fig. 6. Effect of subgraph centralization on the performance of GADMCLG. forms best across all datasets compared to GADMCLG-RWR
 and GADMCLG-CW. This result demonstrates that the h-
 Based on the above experimental results, we found that sub- order neighbor subgraph sampling strategy is more suitable for
graph centralization greatly affects the final anomaly detection subgraph–subgraph contrast than the other two sampling strateperformance of our model. Without this important component, gies. Further analysis reveals that RWR introduces a significant
496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 [2] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin,
 and H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly
 detection in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
 no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2024.
 [3] L. Zheng, G. Liu, C. Yan, and C. Jiang, “Transaction fraud detection
 based on total order relation and behavior diversity,” IEEE Trans.
 Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 796–806, Sep. 2018.
 [4] A. Dey, B. R. Kumar, B. Das, and A. K. Ghoshal, “Outlier detection
 in social networks leveraging community structure,” Inf. Sci., vol. 634,
 pp. 578–586, 2023.
 [5] J. Meira et al., “Anomaly detection on natural language processing to
 improve predictions on tourist preferences,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 5,
 p. 779, 2022.
 [6] B. Alwasel, A. Aldribi, M. Alreshodi, I. S. Alsukayti, and M. Alsuhaibani, “Leveraging graph-based representations to enhance machine
 learning performance in IIoT network security and attack detection,”
 Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 13, p. 7774, 2023.
 [7] Q. Guo, H. Xie, Y. Li, W. Ma, and C. Zhang, “Social bots detection
Fig. 7. Effect of different subgraph sampling strategies w.r.t. AUC. via fusing BERT and graph convolutional networks,” Symmetry, vol. 14,
 no. 1, p. 30, 2021.
 [8] H. Kim, B. S. Lee, W.-Y. Shin, and S. Lim, “Graph anomaly detection
degree of randomness, making it unable to fully capture the with graph neural networks: Current status and challenges,” IEEE
entire neighborhood observation related to the target node. Be- Access, vol. 10, pp. 111820–111829, 2022.
 [9] M. M. Breunig, H. P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
sides, intracommunity RW focuses on capturing the community density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manag.
structure of the target node, ignoring anomalous attribute in- Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 [10] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
formation. However, the h-order neighbor subgraph sampling neighborhoods,” in Proc. 16th SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining (SDM),
strategy simultaneously captures the subgraph structure and 2016, pp. 207–215.
neighbor node-attribute information. Consequently, subgraph– [11] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS:
 A joint modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed netsubgraph contrast for graph anomaly detection depends on a works,” in Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), Jul. 2018,
comprehensive observation of the target node’s neighborhood. pp. 3515–3519.
 [12] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–
 VI. CONCLUSION 38, 2021.
 [13] S. Bandyopadhyay, L. N, S. V. Vivek, and M. N. Murty, “Outlier resis-
 In this article, we proposed a graph anomaly detection model tant unsupervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,”
 in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Jan. 2020, pp. 25–33.
via multiscale contrastive self-supervised learning, navigating [14] P. Cui, X. Wang, J. Pei, and W. Zhu, “A survey on network embedding,”
from local to global contexts. To uncover underlying anomaly IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 833–852, May 2019.
nodes in attributed networks, we incorporate local-level contrast [15] J. Zhu, J. Wang, Y. Shan, S. Yu, G. Chen, and Q. Xuan, “DeepInsight:
 Topology changes assisting detection of adversarial samples on graphs,”
and global-level contrast to enhance the model’s capability to IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 76–88, Feb. 2024.
discern anomalous patterns across different scales, contributing [16] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
to a more comprehensive and effective detection of anomalies comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
within graph-structure data. Moreover, we introduce the sub- [17] R. Hu, C. C. Aggarwal, S. Ma, and J. Huai, “An embedding approach
graph centralization strategy to mitigate the influence of the to anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), May
 2016, pp. 385–396.
absolute position of subgraphs in the attribute space on global [18] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of
subgraph contrast, thereby enhancing the detection accuracy of social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
the proposed model. The effectiveness of the proposed approach Discov. Data Mining, Aug. 2014, pp. 701–710.
 [19] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
has been validated on six real-world benchmark datasets, and networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
experimental results demonstrate its superiority over competi- Mining, Aug. 2016, pp. 855–864.
tive counterparts. [20] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
 on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining (SDM),
 Furthermore, since subgraph contrast relies on global ob- May 2019, pp. 594–602.
servations of the target node’s neighborhood, the size of its [21] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “SpecAE: Spectral
 autoencoder for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th
neighbor subgraphs exhibits diversity. This diversity makes it Int Conf Inf Knowl. Manage., Nov. 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
challenging to employ subgraph embedding methods with the [22] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view
same contrast as the local contrasts, rendering them unable to framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022.
participate in joint training. In the future, we will try to solve this [23] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
problem. Moreover, the interpretability of the results constitutes detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining
a crucial concern in graph anomaly detection. We will extend (WSDM), Feb. 2022, pp. 657–665.
 [24] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly degraph contrastive learning to enhance the interpretability of tection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
graph anomaly detection models. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol.33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
 Jun. 2022.
 [25] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE: Graph
 REFERENCES anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. 30th
 Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
 [1] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection [26] Z. Zhang, K. Ting, G. Pang, and S. Song, “Subgraph centralization:
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, A necessary step for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf.
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. Data Mining (SDM), 2023, pp. 703–711.
WANG et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 497

[27] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive [53] P. Pham, L. T. Nguyen, B. Vo, and U. Yun, “Bot2Vec: A general
 learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. approach of intra-community oriented representation learning for bot
 Intell., vol. 37, no. 6, Jun. 2023, pp. 7459–7467. detection in different types of social networks,” Inf. Syst., vol. 103, 2022,
[28] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection Art. no. 101771.
 on attributed networks,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Jan. 2021, pp. 1288–1294. Xiaofeng Wang received the Ph.D. degree in in-
[29] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised learning formation and communication engineering from
 of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai,
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429, Feb. 2023. China, in 2017.
[30] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, He is currently a Lecturer with the College of
 “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly Information Engineering, China Jiliang University,
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220– Hangzhou, China. He served as a Postdoctoral
 12233, Dec. 2023. Fellow in computer science with SJTU, and as a
[31] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive coding for anomaly detec- Visiting Scholar with Concordia University, Montion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051, treal, Canada. His research interests include network
 Aug. 2023. science, graph neural networks, data mining, and
[32] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. machine learning.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
[33] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation Shuaiming Lai received the B.S. degree in eleclearning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., tronic science and technology from Suzhou City
 vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1025–1035. University, Suzhou, China, in 2021. He is currently
[34] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph working toward the M.S. degree in artificial intelcontrastive representation learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04131. ligence with China Jiliang University, Hangzhou,
[35] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive China.
 learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. WWW, Apr. 2021, His research interests include graph anomaly
 pp. 2069–2080. detection, graph neural networks, social network
[36] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Shen, and Z. Wang, “Graph contrastive learnanalysis, and machine learning.
 ing automated,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2021,
 pp. 12121–12132.
[37] J. Zeng and P. Xie, “Contrastive self-supervised learning for graph
 classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 12, May Shuailei Zhu received the B.S. degree in com-
 2021, pp. 10824–10832. munication engineering in 2021 from the College
[38] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast of Modern Science and Technology, China Jiliang
 for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. University, Hangzhou, China, where he is currently
 Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738. working toward the M.S. degree in communication
[39] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D. engineering.
 Hjelm, “ Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341. His research interests include community detec-
[40] Y. Ren, B. Liu, C. Huang, P. Dai, L. Bo, and J. Zhang, “Heterogeneous tion, graph neural networks, and machine learning.
 deep graph infomax,” 2019, arXiv:1911.08538.
[41] Q. Zhu, C. Yang, Y. Xu, H. Wang, C. Zhang, and J. Han, “Transfer learning of graph neural networks with ego-graph information maximization,”
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 1766–1779. Yuntao Chen received the B.S. degree in com-
[42] J. Cao, X. Lin, S. Gao, L. Liu, T. Liu, and B. Wang, “Bipartite graph munication engineering in 2021 from the College
 embedding via mutual information maximization,” in Proc. WSDM, of Modern Science and Technology, China Jiliang
 Mar. 2021, pp. 635–643. University, Hangzhou, China, where he is currently
[43] Z. Liu, C. Wang, C. Han, and T. Guo, “Learning graph representation working toward the M.S. degree in communication
 by aggregating subgraphs via mutual information maximization,” Neu- engineering.
 rocomputing, vol. 518, 2023, Art. no. 126392. His research interests include signal graph clas-
[44] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart sification, graph neural networks, and machine
 and its applications,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), learning.
 Dec. 2006, pp. 613–622.
[45] M. Togninalli, E. Ghisu, F. Llinares-López, B. Rieck, and K. Borgwardt,
 “Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 6439-6449. Laishui Lv received the Ph.D. degree in computer
[46] L. Tang and H. Liu, “Relational learning via latent social dimensions,” science and technology from Nanjing University of
 in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2021.
 Jun. 2009, pp. 817–826. He is currently a Lecturer with the College of
[47] J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su. “ArnetMiner: Information Engineering, China Jiliang University,
 Extraction and mining of academic social networks,” in Proc. 14th Hangzhou, China. His research interests include
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Aug. 2008, artificial intelligence, complex networks, statistical
 pp. 990–998. analysis, and nonlinear optimization.
[48] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassi-
 Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag., vol. 29, no. 3,
 p. 93, 2008.
[49] W. Hu et al. “Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on Yuanyuan Qi received the Ph.D. degree in inforgraphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 22118– mation and communication engineering from Bei-
 22133, 2020. jing University of Posts and Telecommunications
[50] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN: (BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2021.
 Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on at- She is currently a Lecturer with the College of
 tributed networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 519–541, 2022. Information Engineering, China Jiliang University,
[51] E. Müller, P. I. Sánchez, Y. Mülle, and K. Böhm, “Ranking outlier Hangzhou, China. She served as a Postdoctoral
 nodes in subspaces of attributed graphs,” in Proc. 29th ICDEW, 2013, Fellow in computer science with Zhejiang Normal
 pp. 216–222. University, Hangzhou, China, and a Visiting Scholar
[52] V. Metsism, I. Androutsopoulos, and G. Paliouras, “Spam filtering with with York University, Toronto, Canada. Her research
 Naive Bayes—Which naive Bayes?” in Proc. CEAS, vol. 17, 2006, interests include information retrieval, graph neural
 pp. 28–69. networks, data mining, and machine learning.