IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025 2059

 GSA-DT: A Malicious Traffic Detection Model
 Based on Graph Self-Attention Network
 and Decision Tree
 Saihua Cai , Member, IEEE, Han Tang, Jinfu Chen , Member, IEEE, Tianxiang Lv,
 Wenjun Zhao, and Chunlei Huang

 Abstract—Malicious attack has shown a rapid growth in recent risks, it is crucial to promptly detect the malicious attacks.
years, it is very important to accurately detect malicious traffic to Malicious attacks will generate malicious traffic, therefore,
defend against malicious attacks. Compared with machine learn- accurately detecting malicious traffic can find hidden attack
ing and deep learning technologies, graph convolutional neural
network (GCN) achieves better detection results of malicious behaviors, which can defend against network intrusion [1].
traffic due to additional consideration of the correlation between Previously, researchers mainly used statistics-based [2],
network traffic features. However, existing GCN-based detection port-based [3], signature-based [4] and other methods to
models suffer from fixed weight assignment, only focusing on detect malicious traffic. However, these methods show great
local features, lack the ability to model graph structure and limitations in face of unknown types of malicious traffic.
relationships as well as having gradient disappearance. To solve
these problems, this paper proposes the GSA-DT model based Among them, statistics-based approaches have difficulty to
on graph self-attention network and decision tree. GSA-DT first identify malicious traffic that does not fit a known model or
preprocesses the original network traffic to obtain better traffic preset thresholds; Port-based approaches become ineffective
features and labels, and then uses GCN to extract the topological due to the absence of fixed port numbers; Signature-based
structure of network traffic as well as capture the correlation methods achieve low detection accuracy and robustness due
relationships among traffic features, where the ReLU activation
function is replaced by LeakyReLU to overcome the problems of to the use of techniques such as mutation, encryption and
neuron “death” and gradient disappearance during the training obfuscation in malicious attacks.
process; It also introduces the self-attention mechanism into In recent years, machine learning (e.g., support vector
GCN to assign larger weights to the key features to reduce the machine [5], KNN [6], etc.) methods have been widely used
interference of redundant features. Finally, GSA-DT uses decision in the field of malicious traffic detection, but the use of
tree to perform the detection of malicious traffic. Experimental
results on four network traffic datasets show that GSA-DT model machine learning models has the following limitations: (1)
improves the detection accuracy over 1% on average than seven It is very difficult in effectively identifying the complex
advanced malicious traffic detection models, and it also performs patterns and nonlinear relationships in network traffic [7];
better in F1-measure, TPR, FPR as well as stability. (2) It relies on additional preprocessing to deal with the
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, graph self-attention problems included in complex network such as packet loss,
network, decision tree, LeakyReLU, deep learning. retransmission and reordering [8]; (3) It has weak ability to
 recognize unknown attack types in complex tasks, has poor
 generalization ability and weak feature expression ability [9].
 Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 learning has stronger ability to handle the complex network
 N RECENT years, malicious attacks show a rapid growth
I trend, leading to severe service disruptions, thereby impacting the daily life of people. To mitigate the escalating security
 traffic, stronger end-to-end learning ability, stronger ability
 to capture nonlinear relationships and can provide more
 robust and reliable detection results, therefore, deep learning
 Received 26 April 2024; revised 4 October 2024 and 16 December 2024; techniques have gained widespread attention in recent years.
accepted 16 January 2025. Date of publication 12 February 2025; date However, traditional deep learning models (e.g., TCN, LSTM,
of current version 22 April 2025. This work was partly supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62202206,
 RNN, etc.) do not consider the correlation between the features
U1836116, 62172194), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant of network traffic in the model training process. In the network
no. 2023T160275), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant activities, the source IP and destination IP addresses as well
no. BK20220515), and the Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
 as the source port and destination port have tight correlations,
was M. Sayıt. (Corresponding author: Jinfu Chen.) therefore, analyzing and modeling the correlation can improve
 The authors are with the School of Computer Science the detection ability.
and Communication Engineering, and the Jiangsu Provincial
Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security Technology, As a powerful deep representation learning method, GCN
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China (e-mail: caisaih@ can learn node representation vectors that contain the
ujs.edu.cn; 2222208016@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn; information about nodes’ own features and associations with
2222008039@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; 2222208077@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
2232208014@stmail.ujs.edu.cn). other nodes [10]. GCN shows remarkable performance in
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3531885 network analysis through constructing network traffic topology
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

graphs as well as performing message passing and node II. R ELATED W ORKS
updating on the graphs to capture the complex correlations Malicious traffic detection is a technique to effectively
among network traffic. For this reason, GCN models have distinguish the malicious traffic from normal traffic, thereby
been introduced in recent years for malicious traffic detection. maintaining the security of cyberspace. Initially, scholars used
However, existing GCN model [11] still has some shortcom- statistical-based [2], port-based [3], and signature-based [4]
ings: (1) Assigning same weight to all features of network techniques to detect malicious traffic, but these traditional
traffic, resulting in unable distinguish feature importance; detection methods are difficult to effectively deal with increas-
(2) Only focusing on local features while ignoring global ingly sophisticated and stealthy network attacks, as well as
contextual information, resulting in cannot adequately capture difficult to adapt to new and unknown malicious attacks. With
the global dependencies of network traffic; (3) Lacking the the rapid development of artificial intelligence, machine learnability to model graph structure and relationships, resulting ing and deep learning techniques are widely used to effectively
in cannot well capture the dynamic nature in graph structure detect malicious attacks (including denial-of-service (DoS)
and complex relationships; (4) Having the problem of gradient attacks, malware infections, unauthorized access attempts, etc.)
disappearance due to using ReLU activation function, resulting through learning their features.
in have limitation in nonlinear representation capability as
well as capture the complex graph structure. These limitations Machine learning-based methods construct the machine
affect the detection accuracy of GCN model. learning models via learning the features of normal traffic and
 In this paper, we propose a malicious traffic detection model malicious traffic. Subsequently, the trained machine learning
called GSA-DT based on graph self-attention network and models are used to classify the collected network traffic,
decision tree to solve these problems. The main contributions thereby effectively detecting malicious traffic and discovering
can be summarized as follows: malicious attacks. Wang et al. [5] proposed a cloud-based
 • We combine the GCN model with self-attention mechintrusion detection system called SCAEPSVM-IDS, but this
 anism to achieve accurate detection of malicious traffic, algorithm lacks a detailed parameter optimization strategy.
 this combination not only helps the detection model Machine learning-based methods usually require manually
 better learn the relationship between the features through extracting the effective features from complex and variable
 GCN, but also helps extract the important features network traffic; In addition, they cannot effectively extract the
 through self-attention mechanism and assign larger relevant features, resulting in a serious impact on the detection
 weights to them. In addition, we replace the ReLU accuracy.
 activation function in the GCN model with nonlinear Unlike machine learning-based methods that require manactivation function LeakyReLU, which solves the gra- ual extracting the features, deep learning-based models have
 dient disappearance and neuron “death” problems of been widely studied in recent years due to their ability to
 ReLU through its non-zero slope, thereby improving automatically learn the features of network traffic and capture
 the detection performance. the complex patterns and rules associated with malicious
 • We leverage the interpretability of decision tree to behavior. For example, Haghnegahdar and Wang [12] proposed
 improve the transparency of the model’s predictive rea- a model called WOA-ANN that uses artificial neural network
 soning; In addition, we utilize the strong generalization to determine the optimal weights, it overcomes the drawcapability of decision tree to effectively handle the backs of tendency to fall into local minimal value, but this
 nonlinear relationships among network traffic features, method suffers from high time complexity. Kan et al. [13]
 thereby achieving the superior detection performance in proposed an adaptive particle swarm optimized convolutional
 complex network traffic environment. neural network (APSO-CNN) for IoT intrusion detection,
 • We introduce the Gini coefficient as a replacement for it used particle swarm algorithm to optimize the structural
 entropy in the decision tree and use it as the feature parameters of a 1-D CNN by adaptive inertia weights, but
 selection metric to measure the importance of features, its heuristic optimization algorithm had a long search time
 thereby selecting the features much faster and further for offline models and redundant instances. Chiba et al. [14]
 reducing the computation time; In addition, we also introduced a backpropagation neural network (BPNN)-based
 replace the Focal loss function in the decision tree optimization method and constructed an effective network
 with Cross-Entropy loss function to automatically pay intrusion detection system to effectively improve the detection
 more attention on a small number of hard-to-distinguish accuracy, but these two methods can not effectively handle the
 malicious traffic samples, thereby improving the detection temporal and sequential information. Chang and Branco [15]
 performance. proposed two new graph neural network models called E-
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II ResSAGE and E-ResGAT, which can significantly improve
provides an overview of related works. Section III detailed the detection accuracy on minority classes of data samples
describes the malicious traffic detection model called GSA- when dealing with class imbalance problem; However, these
DT based on GCN and decision tree. Section IV gives two models require higher computational complexity and
and analyzes the experimental results. Section V discusses training time. Huda et al. [16] introduced a fuzzy aggregation
the potential threats that may affect the detection results. method using a modified density peak clustering algorithm
Finally, the whole paper is summarized and the future research (MDPCA) and deep belief network (DBN), it could adapt
directions are discussed in Section VI. to dynamic changes of new malware,but it had a large time
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2061

 TABLE I
complexity. Chen et al. [17] proposed a bi-directional temporal C OMPARISON OF M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC D ETECTION M ETHODS
convolutional network-based malicious traffic detection model
called BiTCN, it addressed the limitations of existing models
and obtained high detection accuracy and better stability,
but the bidirectional operation increases the training time
of the model, especially on large-scale datasets. Venturi et
al. [18] proposed a network intrusion detection system called
ARGANIDS based on adversarial regularized graph selfencoder, it uses a GNN to capture the topology and traffic
features, and adopts the adversarial training to make the model
more robust to noisy and sparse data, thereby further improving the detection efficiency on complex network attacks;
However, ARGANIDS relies on constructing detailed graph
structures of network topologies, which may not be suitable for
network environments with fast changing dynamics and large
traffic sizes. Lin et al. [19] proposed a new multi-modal deep
learning framework, it used raw byte and length sequences
as the inputs and used a self-attention mechanism to learn
the deep relationships between network packets in a stream.
However, traditional deep learning models do not consider the
correlations between the features of network traffic as well as
ignore the topological information and contextual relationships
of network traffic, as well as cannot fully consider the temporal
and dynamically changing characteristics of data, resulting in
a limited ability to process sequential data.
 To solve the problems of traditional deep learning-based Fig. 1. The framework of GSA-DT model.
methods, scholars tried to introduce GCN models for malicious
traffic detection. For example, Lan et al. [20] proposed a
GraphSAGE-based model called E-minBatch GraphSAGE, it and decision tree from six aspects, including the general
took the source ports of application layer and source IP introduction of GSA-DT model, the traffic preprocessing, the
addresses as source nodes, as well as the target ports of construction of traffic topology relationships, the use of GCN
application layer and target IP addresses as target nodes, model, the feature selection based on self-attention mechanism
and the remaining traffic information as edge information to and the detection of malicious traffic based on decision tree.
complete the construction of graph structure, but this model is
limited in detecting industrial Internet traffic. Jiang et al. [21]
designed a new trust assessment framework called GATrust A. General Introduction of GSA-DT Model
based on the graph attention network, it assigned different The GSA-DT first combines the GCN and self-attention
attention coefficients to multifaceted attributes in the online mechanism to learn the complex relationship and feature repsocial networks, thereby improving the prediction accuracy of resentation of network traffic, and then combines the decision
social trust assessment, but its generality on graph structure tree for malicious traffic detection. As shown in Fig. 1, the
data has not been tested. Zheng et al. [22] proposed an GSA-DT includes pre-processing phase, traffic topology relaencrypted malicious traffic detection method called GCN-ETA tionship construction phase, GCN model construction phase,
based on graph convolutional neural network, it integrated self-attention mechanism-based feature selection phase and
a new traffic representation and an association construction decision tree-based detection phase.
scheme of network traffic; However, the flow direction of (1) In the pre-processing phase, the process of traffic
network traffic and the weights of different association types analysis, traffic cleaning, information extraction and traffic
were not considered; In addition, this model also did not labeling provide accurate training samples and labels for
address the feature redundancy problem. malicious network traffic detection and analysis.
 To solve these problems in existing GCN-based methods, (2) In the traffic topology relationship construction phase,
this paper proposes the GSA-DT method based on graph self- the address information is used to construct the relationship
attention network and decision tree to accurately detect malicious between traffic nodes and transform them into traffic adjacency
traffic. A comparison of the proposed GSA-DT and some matrix and traffic diagonal matrix.
reviewed malicious traffic detection methods is shown in Table I. (3) In the GCN construction phase, the topological structure
 information of network traffic graph is extracted to capture the
 feature relationships between network traffic; In addition, the
 III. GSA-DT M ODEL LeakyReLU activation function is used to solve the gradient
 In this section, we describe the malicious traffic detection disappearance problem and neuron “death” problem of ReLU
model called GSA-DT based on graph self-attention network activation function.
2062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE II
 (4) In the self-attention mechanism-based feature selection A N E XAMPLE OF N ETWORK T RAFFIC
phase, we assign different weights to the features with correlations, this process ignores the features that contribute less to
the correlation information of nodes and gives large weight to
the features with stronger importance.
 (5) In the decision tree-based detection phase, the filtered
correlation features are classified to quickly and accurately
detect malicious traffic.

B. Data Pre-Processing
 The original network traffic is mostly in PCAP type,
therefore, the original network traffic needs to be processed to
make it suitable for GSA-DT model. In this paper, we process
the original traffic through traffic analysis, traffic cleaning,
information extraction and traffic labeling.
 Fig. 2. The traffic topology relationships diagram.
 (1) The traffic analysis phase calls the Wireshark tool to
analyze the original network traffic, thereby obtaining the
statistical information of network traffic, such as the number
 network and extract relevant features to describe the properties
of packets, source IP and destination IP statistics, protocol
 and behaviors of the nodes and edges, but these methods lack
distribution, etc.
 classification by nodes, and thus cannot capture the differences
 (2) The traffic cleaning phase calls the statistical information
 and correlations between the network traffic generated by difas well as removes the empty and duplicate information, thus
 ferent nodes. For this reason, we improve it through classifying
improving the generalization ability of the model.
 network traffic in the graph by node and treating the network
 (3) The information extraction phase mainly extracts the
 traffic generated by same node as the same traffic type, thus
feature information in network traffic, including: source IP
 transforming the problem of malicious traffic detection into
address, destination IP address, incoming and outgoing traffic
 malicious node detection. Specifically, when constructing a
packet size, incoming and outgoing traffic packet number,
 network traffic graph, each node represents a network entity,
traffic packet number, port number and other information. We
 such as an IP address or a device. In order to better detect
select these features because empirical analysis shows that
 malicious traffic, we add labels representing the traffic type
in malicious behavior detection, the abnormal IP addresses,
 of each node. By adding labels to the nodes, the model can
unconventional port usage, and a large number of small traffic
 easily distinguish traffic and identify different types of attacks.
packets may indicate the malicious activities. And then, the
 Among them, the traffic label of each node can be set based
string information is segmented using Pandas library and
 on its communication behavior and specific features, and the
written the traffic information in the form of Dataframe.
 label can cover different types of malicious traffic, thus, the
 (4) The traffic labeling phase aims to label the traffic
 traffic type is identified by adding an attribute to each node.
detection information (including: normal traffic, malicious
 Taking the network traffic shown in Table II as an examtraffic, and malicious traffic categories) according to the traffic
 ple. Assuming that source IP 10.0.2.15 is node 1 (as
type, thereby providing accurate training samples and labels
 marked in the parentheses), and its destination IPs are
for malicious traffic detection and analysis. In addition, the
 173.194.10.145 (noted as node 2) and 216.58.211.3
obtained traffic information is stored in the form of tables to
 (noted as node 3), there is an association between node 1 and
obtain the suitable form for detection model.
 nodes 2 and 3 in the topology, as illustrated by the traffic
 topology in Fig. 2. In this network traffic graph, each node
C. Constructing Traffic Topology Relationships (such as nodes 1, 2 and 3) represents a network entity.
 In the phase of constructing traffic topology relations, it To improve the detection accuracy of malicious traffic, we
is necessary to construct traffic tables that have undergone assign specific traffic type labels rather than general “malipreprocessing operations to obtain traffic topology maps, cious” or “benign” label to each node to represent different
thereby facilitating the detection of malicious traffic. After types of traffic. For example, if node 1’s behavior resembles
obtaining the traffic information, different nodes are connected normal communication patterns, it can be labeled as “benign
with the source IP address as starting point and the destination traffic”; However, if node 2 shows the characteristics of a
IP address as ending point. At the same time, each different DDoS attack, it would be labeled as “DDoS”, and if node 3’s
IP node is numbered to form the network topology. The traffic matches the patterns of malware distribution, it would
information carried by connected edges on the graph is the be labeled as “malware”. These specific labels not only help
characteristic information, including: source IP address, des- the model distinguish between benign traffic and malicious
tination IP address, traffic packet size, traffic packet number, traffic, but also identify the exact type of malicious behavior,
port number, etc. such as DDoS, phishing, malware, etc.
 The traditional methods mainly construct graph structures After constructing the traffic topology, the adjacency matrix
based on the relationship between nodes and edges in the B and diagonal matrix D are obtained according to the
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2063

 Equation (2), where σ denotes the activation function and θ1
 is the initial weight matrix.
 H1 = σ(S θ1 ). (2)
 The features of network traffic often show the complex
 nonlinear patterns, retaining the nonlinear mapping capabilities
 can help to better capture these complex nonlinear patterns,
Fig. 3. The adjacency matrix and diagonal matrix of network traffic. thereby improving the detection accuracy. Therefore, it is
 required to use activation function with stronger nonlinear
 expressivity to better fit such nonlinear features. GCN usually
constructed diagram of traffic topology relationships. The uses ReLU activation function, but use of ReLU has the
value of Bi,j in B is 0 or 1, where 0 means there is no following problems: (1) The output is zero when the input is
connection between two nodes and 1 means two nodes have negative (that is, appearing neuron “death” problem), resulting
network communication. Take node 1 as an example, it has in some neurons being unable to update the corresponding
network communication with node 2 and node 3, then B1,2 , weights during the training process due to the cessation of
B2,1 , B1,3 and B3,1 are recorded as 1. Because there is no learning; (2) Leads to the problem of gradient disappearconnection between node 1 and node 4, B1,4 and B4,1 are ance, especially the gradient may become very small in the
recorded as 0. Matrix D is used to represent the number of backpropagation process. To solve these problems, scholars
neighboring nodes connected with each node, and the number replaced it with Sigmoid [25], ELU [17] and Tanh [26] in
of neighboring nodes is added 1 when there is a network recent years. In contrast, the LeakyReLU activation function
communication between node, where Di,i denotes the number retains the linear properties of ReLU at positive inputs, which
of neighboring nodes connected to node i. Since node 1 is effectively avoids the problem of gradient vanishing; It is also
adjacent to node 2 and node 3, D1,1 is recorded as 2. The final able to maintain a more stable gradient update rate, avoiding
adjacency matrix B and diagonal matrix D obtained from the almost no effective gradient update in the first few layers like
network traffic listed in Table II are shown in Fig. 3. Tanh. These advantages of LeakyReLU motivate us to use it
 instead of ReLU to achieve better detection result.
 After acquiring the features, the deep features are obtained
D. Graph Convolutional Neural Network by stacking multiple convolutional networks to get a larger
 After obtaining the adjacency matrix and diagonal matrix, it perceptual field. For the k th convolutional layer, its features
is necessary to construct a structure to process them. Currently, Hk are nonlinearized from the features obtained from previous
the GIN [23], GraphSAGE [20] and GCN [24] are often used (k − 1) layer using LeakyReLU. The details are shown in
as the backbone of the model. Among them, a key property of Equation (3).
GIN model is that the aggregation of node features is invariant, Hk = σ(SHk −1 θk ). (3)
but network traffic is the packets transmitted from one place
to another over a period of time, this process is dynamic, thus, During the training process of GCN model, the graph
GIN model is not applicable to our scenario; GraphSAGE association relationship representation is achieved by learning
only considers the aggregation between nodes and neighboring its association relationship to obtain the feature information
nodes but ignores the internal correlation between the features, of different nodes with their neighbor nodes and edge
resulting in not being able to capture the global topology information. At the same time, with the help of sharing same
information well. Compared with these two models, GCN can network node structure information, the features of each node
better learn the information of neighboring nodes around each for each global inter-neighbor node are obtained under the
node, can learn the parameters for different node locations in a action of multi-layer convolution, thereby obtaining the spatial
single training through parameter sharing, as well as can better structure characteristics of network traffic.
balance the computational complexity and expressive power
by means of feature propagation and convolutional operations. E. Self-Attention Mechanism
Therefore, we choose GCN as the backbone of the model. Although GCN has strong ability in feature learning of
 GCN is a multi-layer convolutional neural network, it learns network traffic, but it does not give more attention to the
from the attributes between the nodes in the established features that reflects malicious traffic, which leads to unstable
graph and the neighboring nodes to obtain a new feature detection result, it is necessary to assign different weights
representation for each node. To improve the computational to the features according to their importance in the feature
efficiency, matrixs B and D need to be normalized using screening process. The self-attention mechanism reduces the
Equation (1) to obtain the normalization matrix S. impact of unimportant and redundant features [27], [28], [29]
 on malicious traffic detection by assigning larger weights to
 S = D −1/2 BD −1/2 . (1) the features that have a greater impact on malicious traffic
 detection and smaller weights to these unimportant features.
 After sending S as input to 1-D convolutional network, Based on the advantage of self-attention mechanism, this
the first-order neighbor association feature H1 is learned by paper improves the GCN model via adding the self-attention
2064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

mechanism layer, thereby further improving the detection interpretability of the predictive reasoning process. Compared
ability of GCN model. with other machine learning models, decision tree has the
 The self-attention mechanism obtains the relevance of advantages of small computational effort, easy transformation
different traffic inputs through computing the attention of classification rules, high accuracy and strong generalizacoefficients on different relevant inputs, and then assigns the tion [30], where the internal nodes represent the characteristic
low weights to the irrelevant features to retain important vector features of network traffic and the leaf nodes represent its
features. The overall structure of self-attention mechanism traffic classification labels.
is shown in the upper right corner of Fig. 1, it is mainly In the detection phase, the obtained associated traffic feacomposed of Query, Key and Value. Firstly, it inputs the n tures are input and the loss value is calculated via loss
feature vectors h obtained by GCN into self-attention model, function, thereby obtaining the parameters according to this
and then obtains the traffic feature matrix L through stitching value. Currently, the commonly used loss functions include:
the features via the input layer. The specific process is shown mean square error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE), focal
in Equation (4). loss and cross-entropy loss. The malicious traffic detection
 belongs to multi-classification research, it requires GSA-DT
 L = [h1 , h2 , . . . , hn ]. (4)
 model to be able to automatically detect malicious traffic by
 Meanwhile, L is input into the embedding layer to map it learning the features of network traffic, therefore, focal loss is
to three different spaces to obtain Q, K and V matrices. This not suitable due to the need of manually adjusting the weight
process is shown in Equation (5), where WQ , WK and WV parameters and the lack of automation capability. In addition,
represent the randomly obtained space matrices, respectively. the scale of malicious traffic generated by malicious attacks is
 much smaller compared to that of normal traffic generated by
 Q = WQ ∗ L, K = WK ∗ L, V = WV ∗ L. (5) normal accesses, i.e., there is a data imbalance in the network
 After obtaining three different spatial matrices, the similar- traffic, which leads to the fact that both MSE and MAE are
ity between each query vector qi and each different traffic not suitable for our research scenario due to their excessive
vector is calculated to obtain the linkage score (recorded as focus on the main category (normal traffic). Compared with
Score). The used similarity measure is shown in Equation (6), these commonly used loss functions, the cross-entropy loss
where the Score is obtained by calculating the product of each can automatically focus the attention on a small number of
vector’s own q and k and then summing them. Finally, the hard-to-distinguish malicious traffic samples, which improves
weight relationship matrix A of L is obtained by stitching the the detection ability of the model. For this reason, it is chosen
Score, which is shown in Equation (7). as the loss function in the decision tree model. The loss
 function of cross-entropy is shown in Equation (10), where
 n
  pi represents the probability vector of predicted classification
 Scorei = qi ∗ ki . (6)
 results, yi represents the label category of actual samples.
 i=1
 Finally, the corresponding parameters are updated through
 A = [Score1 , Score2 , . . . , Scoren ]. (7)
 backward derivation.
 And then, the Softmax function is used to normalize A to K
obtain similarity matrix A , thus reducing the computational 
 Loss = − yi log(pi ). (10)
difficulty, which is shown in Equation (8).
 i=1
 e si
 A = Softmax(A) = n sj . (8) Both Gini coefficient and entropy are commonly used
 j =1 e feature selection metrics to measure the importance of features
 Finally, the attention output matrix O is calculated by and they have different properties in decision trees. The
weighting and summing the key value matrix V based on A , Gini coefficient is a measure of impurity that measures the
which is shown in Equation (9). probability that two samples are randomly selected from a
 dataset and their category labels do not match. The smaller
 O = V ∗ A . (9) Gini coefficient indicates the lower impurity of the dataset
 and the higher importance of the feature. The process of Gini
F. Decision Tree coefficient calculation does not involve logarithmic operations,
 After getting the feature vector O, it is required to use thus, the computation is more efficient. Entropy is another
feature vector to determine whether the network traffic is commonly used feature selection metric, which measures the
malicious traffic. For the detection of malicious traffic, the degree of information clutter in a dataset. The calculation
interpretability is very important, but it is a common problem of entropy requires logarithmic operations, which requires
encountered by deep learning models. The introduction of more computational time compared to the Gini coefficient. In
GCN allows the model to learn more informative and dis- the case of large-scale datasets and complex feature spaces,
criminative features that can be used to improve the detection the Gini coefficient can perform feature selection faster and
accuracy. To enhance the interpretability of detection models, reduce the computation time. Therefore, we use the Gini
it is better to integrate a machine learning model to provide coefficient (shown in Equation (11)) as a feature selection
a transparent and interpretable framework for distinguishing function, where k represents the number of traffic categories
malicious traffic from normal traffic, thereby facilitating the and pi represents the probability that the traffic belongs to i th
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2065

category. The classification result is measured by the value
of Gini coefficient, and the classification of network traffic is
performed based on the rank of calculated Gini coefficients.
 k
  k
 
 Gini(D) = pi (1 − pi ) = 1 − pi 2 . (11)
 i=1 i=1
 In general, the proposed GSA-DT model uses GCN network
as the main body to fully consider the correlation features of
 Fig. 4. The flowchart of GSA-DT model.
network traffic as well as adopts the LeakyReLU activation
function to solve the neuron “death” problem of ReLU and Algorithm 1 GSA-DT
thus improving the expressiveness of GCN model. And then, Input:
it uses a self-attention mechanism to provide larger weight Network traffic NT, learning rate, hidden, epoch, dropout
for important features as well as reduce the influence of Output:
redundant features; In addition, it uses decision tree to classify Detection result R
the network traffic, thus improving the detection accuracy of 1: preprocess NT to obtain features X
 2: Initialize parameters (learning rate, hidden, epoach, dropout)
malicious traffic while providing the model a stronger gen- 3: construct traffic topology relationships G
eralization capability. With these improvements, the proposed 4: G→ GCN model
GSA-DT model can effectively capture the features of global 5: for each epoch in R do
network traffic by learning the differences and correlations 6: for each hidden in R dataset do
between different types of network traffic, thereby accurately 7: extract traffic features according to learning rate and
 dropout
detecting malicious traffic. 8: classification result←label
 In summary, our model utilizes the GCN and self-attention 9: calculate loss function
mechanism to effectively enhance the feature representation, 10: renew weight W
which in turn achieves interpretability through decision tree. 11: obtain traffic correlation feature H
Such integration aims to ensure effective detection of mali- 12: end for
 13: assign features’ weight W  using self-attention mechanism
cious traffic while balancing performance and interpretability. 14: end for
 15: R = DT (H , W  )
G. The Workflow of GSA-DT Model 16: return R

 The flowchart of GSA-DT is shown in Fig. 4, it is composed
feature pre-processing phase, feature extraction phase and
malicious traffic detection phase. traffic is preprocessed and the relationship between network
 (1) In the feature pre-processing phase, network traffic traffic node is constructed using the address information of
will undergo a series of operations including traffic analysis, traffic to get the key information and feature annotations
cleaning and labeling to ensure that it can be used in the of network traffic. Based on the obtained network traffic
correct format and structure for subsequent analysis; One of information, the contained address information is extracted and
the key tasks in this phase is to construct the topology of the traffic topology relationship graph is constructed based
network traffic using the source and destination IP addresses, on the source IP address and destination IP address and
and then generate the adjacency and diagonal matrices to better other information, thereby obtaining the adjacency matrix and
represent the relationships between traffic nodes. diagonal matrix of network traffic. And then, the features
 (2) In the feature extraction phase, GCN is used to extract are extracted using GCN for the constructed network traffic
the topological structure of network traffic, allowing the model graph structure, and the features with stronger correlation are
to capture the intrinsic correlations between the features; And obtained by giving large weight to the important traffic features
then, the LeakyReLU is adopted to replace the traditional and ignoring the features that contribute less to the node
ReLU to solve the gradient vanishing and “neuron death” correlation information through self-attention mechanism. In
problems. In addition, the model also introduces a self- addition, the ReLU activation function in the GCN model is
attention mechanism to focus on the key features and assign replaced by the LeakyReLU, thus improving the expressivelarge weights to important features, thereby reducing the ness of the model as well as making the model to have better
impact of redundant features. These improvements improve the properties when handling negative anomalies and preserving
model’s ability to distinguish between normal and malicious negative gradients. Next, the filtered correlated features are
traffic. classified in combination with the decision tree, thus detecting
 (3) In the malicious traffic detection phase, the decision tree malicious traffic more accurately. Finally, the test set is input
with Gini coefficient as feature evaluation index is used to to the GSA-DT model to verify its detection effect.
classify the extracted features, thereby efficiently and accurately detecting malicious traffic while reducing false positive IV. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
and false negative rates, and providing good interpretability. We compare GSA-DT model with seven malicious traffic
 The detailed process of malicious traffic detection using detection models on four network traffic datasets to test its
GSA-DT model is shown in Algorithm 1. Firstly, the network efficiency. Experiments are conducted on a Linux 64-bit OS
2066 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

with Intel Xeon Gold 5218R CPU and NVIDIA GeForce RTX (2) FPR (False Positive Rate): It indicates the number of
3090 GPU, using Python (Python version 3.8) as the AI library. mis-detected malicious network traffic to the total number
 of normal network traffic samples, which is calculated by
 Equation (13).
A. Description of Network Traffic Datasets
 FP
 To verify the detection efficiency of GSA-DT model, we FPR = (13)
use four network traffic datasets (USTC-TC2016, Stratosphere, (TN + FP )
CTU and UJS-IDS2024) in the experiments, the distribution (3) F1_measure: It is the harmonic mean of precision and
of these network traffic datasets is shown in Table III, where recall with a maximum of 1 and a minimum of 0, which is
all normal network traffic are classified into “Normal”. calculated by Equation (14).
 (1) USTC-TFC2016 [31] contains ten types of malicious TP TP
traffic and one normal traffic (composed of ten categories of 2 × TP+FP × (TP+TN)
 F 1_measure = TP TP
 (14)
 TP+FP + (TP+TN)
normal traffic) collected by the simulated devices from 2011
to 2015, the format is pcap file and the labels of traffic types
are provided. (4) Accuracy: It indicates the ratio of the number of accu-
 (2) Stratosphere [32] is a network traffic dataset with a rately detected network traffic samples to the total number of
mixture of encrypted and non-encrypted traffic, it includes a network traffic samples, which is calculated by Equation (15).
series of network IPS/IDS traffic, such as Zeus and botnets. TP + TN
Because the scale of malicious traffic is large than normal Accuracy = (15)
 TP + FP + TN + FN
traffic in this dataset, we integrated some normal traffic in
CTU-13 dataset into this dataset to balance the scale of C. Baselines
network traffic. To evaluate the efficiency of GSA-DT model, seven base-
 (3) CTU [33] is a network traffic dataset collected by the lines are used in the experiments.
devices from 2016 to 2019, it contains ten types of malicious (1) E-minBatch GraphSAG [20]: It is a graph neural
network traffic and one type of normal network traffic. network for malicious traffic detection, it represents the asso-
 (4) UJS-IDS2024 is a network traffic dataset collected by ciation relationships between the features of network traffic by
multiple normal software and malware in the real environment constructing a graph structure and performs malicious traffic
by the Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security detection by aggregating the information of neighboring nodes.
Technology of Jiangsu University from March 5, 2024 to April (2) GATrust [21]: It is a graph neural network model based
18, 2024. on graph attention mechanism, it integrates multiple attributes
 In the experiments, we follow the 90%/10% ratio to divide (including user context-specific information, network topology
each network traffic dataset into a training set and a testing information and locally generated social trust relationships)
set, where 90% of the data is used to train the model and of users, and assigns different attention coefficients to the
the remaining 10% is used to evaluate the performance of attributes of users in online social networks, thereby improving
the model. This segmentation method ensures that the model the prediction accuracy.
can be trained on sufficient data, while also evaluates its (3) GCN-ETA [22]: It is an encrypted malicious traffic
generalization ability through unseen data. detection model based on GCN, it improves the traditional
 GCN by considering the statistical features of network flows
B. Evaluation Metrics (internal information) and the structural information between
 In order to evaluate the efficiency of GSA-DT model, we network flows (external connections), thereby effectively
use four widely used evaluation metrics including TPR, FPR, improving the detection efficiency.
F1_measure and Accuracy in the experiments [17], [19], [34], (4) TCN [36]: It is a malicious traffic detection model based
[35], they are calculated as shown in Equations 12 to 15. These on temporal convolutional network, it extracts the key features
four metrics can well evaluate GSA-DT model from different using the features of byte sequences in network traffic packets
perspectives. Among these equations, TP (True Positive) is the as well as avoids neurons “death” by changing the ReLU to
number of malicious traffic correctly identified by GSA-DT, ELU, thereby obtaining high detection performance.
FP (False Positive) is the number of normal traffic incorrectly (5) XGBoost [37]: It is an ensemble malicious traffic
identified as malicious by GSA-DT, FN (False Negative) is detection model based on gradient boosting decision tree, it
the number of malicious traffic not correctly identified by also uses WOA (Whale Optimization Algorithm) to seek for
GSA-DT, TN (True Negative) is the number of normal traffic the best parameters.
correctly identified by GSA-DT. (6) BiTCN [17]: It is a malicious traffic detection model
 (1) TPR (Ture Positive Rate): It indicates the number of based on bidirectional temporal convolution network (BiTCN),
correctly-detected malicious network traffic to the total number it uses TCN model to better grasp the sequence characteristics
of malicious network traffic samples, which is calculated by of network traffic as well as improves the original one-way
Equation (12). model to a two-way model to capture more characteristics of
 network traffic.
 TP (7) PENA [19]: It is a packet-level end-to-end attentive
 TPR = (12)
 (TP + FN ) network, it treats original byte and length sequences as inputs
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2067

 TABLE III
 T HE I NTRODUCTION OF O RIGINAL N ETWORK T RAFFIC

and uses the self-attention mechanism to learn the deep datasets and compared the results with seven state-of-the-art
relationships between network packets. models. The average experimental result is shown in Table IV.
 The experimental results in Table IV show that on the
D. The Selection of Parameters USTC-TFC2016 dataset, GSA-DT has better performance than
 seven compared models, and its average detection accuracy
 For the proposed GSA-DT model, the parameters including
 can reach to 99.96%, while the GCN-ETA model has the worst
the number of hidden units, dropout and epoch number will
 performance of 97.50%. In contrast, the TCN and XGBoost
affect its detection efficiency. To obtain better detection accuonly consider the attribute statistical features of network traffic
racy, we test the efficiency of GSA-DT under these parameters
 without considering the relationship between network traffic,
on three widely used public network traffic datasets, where the
 thus, their detection accuracy is slightly lower than that of
used loss function is LeakyReLU. The experimental results
 GSA-DT model. Compared with GATrust, a graph-based maliare shown in Fig. 5-Fig. 7.
 cious traffic detection model with better detection results, the
 As can be seen from Fig. 5 that GSA-DT has best
 GSA-DT model has improved the detection accuracy by about
performance and smoother fluctuations when the number is
 1.54%, TPR by about 1.89%, and F1-measure by about 1.92%,
selected as 16 on three datasets. When the number is select
 and decreased the FPR by about 0.36%. In addition, the GSAless than 16, the performance is worse; With the increase
 DT model has the least fluctuation in detection efficiency.
number of hidden units, the performance of GSA-DT shows
 For the Stratosphere dataset that contains encrypted network
a decrease trend, which is caused by the overfitting. After
 traffic, the detection effectiveness of all eight models shows
a comprehensive comparison, the number of hidden units is
 a decrease trend, but GSA-DT still performs best among all
chosen to be 16. As is shown in Fig. 6 that on USTC-TC2016
 models, which can reach to about 98.49%, while the accuracy
and Stratosphere datasets, the performance of GSA-DT is
 of other detection models is 96.5% on average. Because
low when the dropout is chosen as less than 0.05, it is
 the encrypted traffic hides the attack information through
owing to that the lower dropout causes the model to be
 encryption protocols, it is difficult to extract the statistical
overly dependent on specific neurons, making the network
 features of network traffic, which leads to the poor detection
less expressive and prone to overfitting. In contrast, when the
 performance of TCN and XGBoost models because they do
dropout is chosen as 0.06 and 0.07, the performance is lower
 not use relevant features. Compared with them, three graphthan that when it is chosen as 0.05, the reason is that large
 based detection models (including GCN-ETA, E-minBatch
dropout causes many neurons to be randomly discarded, thus
 GraphSAGE and GATrust) improve the detection efficiency
losing a large amount of information. On the CTU dataset, the
 in some metrics, but they have lower TPR due to the fact
performance of GSA-DT model is higher when the dropout
 that not use a self-attention mechanism to assign larger weight
is chosen as 0.05. After a comprehensive comparison, the
 to important features. Compared with GCN-ETA, E-minBatch
dropout is chosen as 0.05. As is shown in Fig. 7 that compared
 GraphSAGE and GATrust, GSA-DT has improved accuracy by
with seven detection models, GSA-DT has the best detection
 about 0.98%, 2.18% and 2.15%, TPR by about 2.67%, 1.41%
accuracy at different epochs, this is because it considers the
 and 0.96%, F1-measure by about 1.35%, 1.58% and 1.38%.
correlation between traffic features and combines self-attention
 The experimental results show that GSA-DT performs well
mechanism to better capture the features. It can be seen from
 on the encrypted network traffic via learning the correlation
Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b) that when the epoch number is less than
 relationships and assigning differential weights to features.
5, GSA-DT shows a growth trend as epoch number increases,
 The experimental results on CTU dataset show that GSAbut there is a significant decline with the further increase of
 DT has better performance than the compared models. In the
epoch number. When the epoch number is larger than 8, GSAmetrics of accuracy, TPR and F1-measure, GSA-DT improves
DT has stable trend, and it has better performance when the
 about 3.03%, 3.92% and 3.4% over E-minBatch GraphSAGE
epoch number is set to 10. Therefore, the epoch number is
 model, about 1.69%, 2% and 2.02% over GATrust model,
chosen as 10.
 about 3.84%, 2.92% and 2.46% over GCN-ETA model, about
 0.92%, 1.29% and 1.09% over TCN model, about 1.5%, 2.83%
E. Detection Results of GSA-DT Model and 2.41% over XGBoost model. Compared with BiTCN and
 To validate the performance of GSA-DT model, we con- PENA, GSA-DT has improved accuracy by about 0.76% and
ducted a large number of experiments on four network traffic 0.35%, TPR by about 0.73% and 0.51%, F1-measure by about
2068 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 5. The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different number of hidden units.

Fig. 6. The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different dropout.

Fig. 7. The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different epoch number.

 TABLE IV
 AVERAGE D ETECTION E FFICIENCY OF E IGHT M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC D ETECTION M ODELS (%)

0.84% and 0.52% respectively, and decreased the FPR by the correlation between features, and the traditional graphabout 0.74% and 0.2%. On the UJS-IDS2024 dataset, the based detection models improve the detection accuracy due to
GSA-DT model improved about 5.04%, 4.07% and 4.66% they learn more features through the additional consideration
over EminBatch GraphSAGE, about 0.4%, 0.32% and 0.22% of correlation between traffic features. However, graph-based
over GATrust in terms of accuracy, TPR and F1-measure. models do not perform well in detecting small classes of
In summary, the traditional deep learning-based detection malicious traffic. Compared with seven baselines, the proposed
models have relative low performance for not considering GSA-DT model exhibits excellent performance and achieves
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2069

 TABLE V
 T IME C OST OF GSA-DT M ODEL U NDER D IFFERENT S IZES OF sizes of network traffic are selected in the experi-
 UJS-IDS2024 DATASET ( SEC .) ments. Each experiment is conducted for 30 times, and
 the average time cost is calculated and shown in
 Table V.
 It can be seen from Table V that the time cost of our
 proposed GSA-DT model is slightly longer than that of the
 TCN, XGBoost and BiTCN models when processing different
 sizes of network traffic, which is less than three graph-based
significant improvements in all evaluation metrics, which can detection models of E-minBtach GraphSAGE, GATrust and
be attributed to the following factors: (1) The introduction of GCN-ETA. For the proposed GSA-DT model, its time cost
self-attention mechanism makes it assigning large weights to is mainly concentrated in the model training phase, which
the important features, which leads it to reduce the impact is mainly due to the fact that the training process of the
of redundant features on malicious traffic detection; (2) The model needs to transform the original network traffic into
use of decision tree makes GSA-DT having the advantages a suitable traffic topology graph to capture more correlation
of good multi-classification capability, robustness to missing information, and this complex process will consume more
data and outliers, and efficient feature selection and training; time than traditional deep learning models (e.g., TCN). Once
(3) The use of LeakyReLU solves the neuron “death” problem the GSA-DT model is trained, utilizing it to detect malicious
and gradient disappearance problem of ReLU. traffic will consume much less time. Therefore, the proposed
 GSA-DT model has the strong scalability than other graph-
F. Stability Analysis of GSA-DT Model based malicious traffic detection models.
 In addition to the detection efficiency, the stability of
detection model is another important index. In this subsection, H. Ablation Experiments
we compare the stability of GSA-DT with seven detection
 To verify the role of each module in the GSA-DT model,
models on four network traffic datasets, and the experimental
 we conducted a series of ablation experiments and the experresult is shown in Fig. 8.
 imental results are shown in Table VI. GCN indicates the
 As is shown in Fig. 8 that on these datasets, GSA-DT model
 original GCN model; GCN-SA indicates that self-attention
has highest detection accuracy, TPR and F1-measure as well as
 mechanism is added to the original GCN model; GCN-SAlowest FPR compared with seven detection models, and it also
 LR indicates that LeakyReLU is used in the GCN-SA model;
has no outlier in detection results as well as has minimal gap
 GCN-DT indicates that decision tree is used in the GCN
between the upper and lower quartiles. In contrast, the machine
 model; GCN-DT-LR indicates that LeakyReLU is used in
learning-based XGBoost model has many outliers due to it
 the GCN-DT model; GCN-SA-DT indicates that self-attention
tends to overfit the real data as well as ignores the correlation
 mechanism and decision tree are added to the original GCN
between the contexts of network traffic. Because TCN model
 model.
considers the temporal characteristics of network traffic during
 It can be seen from the results that removing or replacing any
the training process, it shows higher performance in terms
 module including LeakyReLU, decision Tree or self-attention
of accuracy, but it ignores the correlation between features
 mechanism will lead to a decrease performance. Among these
during the training process, resulting in a large gap between
 modules, self-attention mechanism plays the most critical
the upper and lower quartiles. Compared with XGBoost and
 role. As can be seen from Table VI that the introduction of
TCN models, the graph-based detection models GCN-ETA, Eself-attention mechanism significantly improves the detection
minBatch GraphSAGE, and GATrust have larger differences
 accuracy, which is due to that it has the ability to adaptively learn
between the upper and lower quartiles but with few outliers,
 the correlation and importance between network traffic features,
which is largely due to the fact that these graph-based models
 as well as enable the model to flexibly select features by learning
consider the correlation of features. However, compared with
 the weights between different features, thereby providing the
GSA-DT model, these three graph-based detection models do
 model a good generalization ability and reducing the redundancy
not assign different weights to the features, which leads them
 of features. In addition, the change of activation function from
facing feature redundancy problem and thus having relatively
 the original ReLU to LeakyReLU can solve the neuron “death”
low detection efficiency. For the PEAN method, it has the
 problem as well as reduce the risk of gradient disappearance.
higher accuracy, TPR and F1-measure than other six methods
 Especially on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset that contains many
except for GSA-DT method.
 attack types with detailed attack labels, the optimization of
 Overall, the proposed GSA-DT model has the highest detecactivation function can achieve good result. Moreover, the use
tion performance, and its detection results are concentrated in
 of decision tree makes GSA-DT having the advantages of easy
smaller boxes as well as has no outlier, which indicates that
 interpretation, good multi-classification capability, robustness
GSA-DT model has good detection stability.
 to missing data and outliers, and efficient feature selection and
 training, which can improve the detection performance of GSA-
G. Scalability of GSA-DT Model DT model. The experimental results in Table VI show that the
 To test the scalability of GSA-DT model, we use the proposed GSA-DT model achieves the best detection results
UJS-IDS2024 dataset in the experiments, where different with better generalization ability on all four network traffic
2070 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 8. The stability of eight malicious detection models.

 TABLE VI
 AVERAGE D ETECTION ACCURACY OF D IFFERENT M ODULES ON GSA-DT method show improvements in terms of accuracy,
 M ALICIOUS D ETECTION M ODELS (%) F1-measure, FPR, TPR and stability.
 For the proposed GSA-DT method, it can achieve better
 detection accuracy due to it constructs a graph representation
 to capture richer interdependencies among the features of
 network traffic, but this process consumes much time. That
 is, GSA-DT method improves the detection accuracy by consuming more time, which is similar with deep learning-based
 TABLE VII malicious traffic detection methods. We can improve the time
T IME C OST OF GSA-DT W ITH G INI C OEFFICIENT AND E NTROPY ( SEC .)
 efficiency of GSA-DT using the following potential strategies:
 (1) Optimize the GCN using pruning and quantization techniques to remove the neurons and connections that contribute
 less to the detection results, thus reducing the computational
datasets, which indicates that these improvements in GSA- cost. (2) Incorporate the operation of sparsifying the adjacency
DT are very effective in improving the detection of malicious matrix before using normalization method, thus effectively
traffic. reducing the memory usage and computational complexity.
 In addition, we also add the experiments to verify that the (3) Use the parallel computing and distributed processing to
use of Gini coefficient consumes less time than entropy, and accelerate the model’s inference speed, thereby achieving the
the experimental results are show in Table VII. GSA-DT-Gini real-time processing.
means the GSA-DT model with Gini coefficient and GSA-DT- There are several practical considerations that need to
entropy means the GSA-DT model with entropy. be considered when deploying GSA-DT model in real-
 It can be seen from Table VII that the time cost of GSA- world network environments: (1) Integration with existing
DT model with the use of Gini coefficient is shorter than that network infrastructure: GSA-DT model utilizes GCN and
with the use of entropy, which is due to the fact that the self-attention mechanism to improve the detection accuracy,
computing of Gini coefficient only involves the Gini impurity it has a relatively high demand on computational resources,
of each feature, whereas the computing of entropy needs to thus, it is necessary to evaluate the availability of sufficient
consider the information of each feature. Experimental results computational power in the existing network infrastructure
demonstrate the use of Gini coefficient reducing the time cost to support real-time operation. (2) Handling live traffic:
in large-scale and complex network traffic. GSA-DT model performs malicious traffic detection through
 graph structure construction and feature extraction, which may
 lead to processing delays, therefore, the inference speed of
I. Discussion the model needs to be optimized when deploying GSA-DT
 model in high-traffic environments, e.g., reducing the depth of
 Extensive experimental results show that the proposed GSA- network layers or parallelizing the processing to reduce the
DT model can effectively solve the problems of existing computational latency. (3) Maintaining system performance
malicious traffic models. For the GSA-DT model, it first under varying conditions: The performance of GSA-DT
performs pre-processing operations on original network traffic model may vary under different network conditions, especially
to obtain better network traffic and their labels, and then uses encountering novel cyber-attack patterns, thus, it is necessary
GCN to extract the topological structure of network traffic to retrain and update periodically to make it adapt to new
as well as capture the correlation relationships among traffic network environment.
features. In the GSA-DT model, the commonly used ReLU
activation function is replaced with LeakyReLU to overcome
the problems of neuron “death” and gradient disappearance. V. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In addition, GSA-DT model also introduces the self-attention In Section VI, extensive experimental results demonstrate
mechanism in the GCN model to assign larger weights to the the effectiveness of GSA-DT model. However, our findings
key features, thereby reducing the interference of redundant still present two major threats in the following areas.
features. Finally, GSA-DT uses decision tree to perform Internal validity: We consider many parameters (including
the detection of malicious traffic. These improvements make epoch number, dropout, number of hidden units, etc.) under
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2071

different situations, but not consider the parameters such great risks to individuals, organizations and society. Therefore,
as the number of network layers and filter settings, the it is very crucial to accurately detect malicious traffic generated
changes of these different parameter combinations leave many by network attacks to maintain network security. To achieve
possibilities. In this paper, we verify the effectiveness of better detection performance, this paper proposes a malicious
GSA-DT by changing several parameters and finally select traffic detection model called GSA-DT. It first analyzes the
the parameter with better experimental results as the final IP information between different network nodes such as user
parameter, although this manner leads to better experimental communication and transaction. And then, it uses GCN to
results, but it does not guarantee that the selected parameters capture the topology in the network traffic from the associated
are optimal. In addition, the used preprocessing methods features in network traffic; It also uses self-attention mechainclude traffic analysis, traffic cleaning, information extraction nism to assign larger weights to the key features. Finally, it
and traffic labeling, but different preprocessing can lead to uses a decision tree to detect malicious traffic. In addition, the
differences and eventually lead to changes in the experimental ReLU is replaced by LeakyReLU to overcome neuron “death”
results, therefore, whether there is a better preprocessing problem and gradient disappearance, thereby improving the
method remains to be investigated. Moreover, we compare detection performance. Extensive experimental results on four
the models of GATrust [21], GCN-ETA [22], E-minBatch network traffic datasets show that GSA-DT has better TPR,
GraphSAG [20], TCN [36], XGBoost [37], BiTCN [17] and FPR, F1-measure and accuracy on most types of malicious
PEAN [19] in this paper, but we do not get the full details of traffic compared with seven state-of-the-arts, and it also has
the model, therefore, the experimental results may have errors. better stability.
 External validity: External validity threats are mainly The proposed GSA-DT model has the following drawbacks:
caused by the used network traffic datasets, where experiments (1) Its time cost in the training phase is still relatively long,
are conducted using four datasets that contains various mali- which is mainly due to that long time need to be spent in
cious traffic to validate the detection efficiency of GSA-DT, processing the features of network traffic. (2) The use of
but there are more categories of malicious traffic in real life, self-attention mechanism may focuses excessively on specific
and the used datasets are only a small fraction of the categories features while neglecting others, leading to biased detection
of intrusion traffic in real cyberspace, therefore, there is no results. (3) It is unable to handle the data imbalance problem
guarantee that GSA-DT model can maintain a high detection and this problem is indeed a highly publicized and important
accuracy for all malicious traffic in practical applications. In challenge in malicious traffic detection.
the future, we need to conduct experiments on more datasets to In the future, we would like to do the following researches
further validate the efficiency of GSA-DT model. In addition, to improve the detection of malicious traffic: (1) The specific
the current study targets unencrypted or mixed (containing research directions: (I) Further optimize the efficiency of
both encrypted and unencrypted traffic) malicious traffic, while GSA-DT model in handling real-time network traffic, espethe performance of GSA-DT model on encrypted network cially in large-scale network environments; (II) Explore the
traffic is not yet known. model compression techniques, feature selection optimization
 The attacker may attack model by analyzing the model’s and more efficient GCN models to improve the real-time detecclassification logic and generating traffic specifically designed tion performance; (III) Explore the cross-domain applications
using adversarial sample generation, which may cause the of GSA-DT model in different network environments and
model to misreport normal traffic as malicious or misreport different types of malicious traffic detection, and study how
some malicious traffic. Therefore, the robustness of model to maintain efficient and accurate performance in IoT device
can be improved against such adversarial attacks from the networks, enterprise intranets and public cloud environments.
following perspectives: (1) Enhance the model by adversarial (2) The potential improvements in model architecture:
training and use adversarial generation network to construct (I) Introduce a more complex attention mechanism such as
simulated adversarial traffic as well as integrate them into adaptive attention models to capture more complex feature
training process, thereby improving the model’s capability of relationships; (II) Combine the GSA-DT with other detection
detecting unknown adversarial traffic; (2) Use the idea of models (e.g., deep learning models or rule-based models) to
model stacking to integrate multiple models, so that even one form a hybrid detection system; (III) Study how to efficiently
model is successfully breached other models can still function, deploy the GSA-DT models on distributed network environthus improving robustness of the model; (3) Take necessary ments or edge devices. All these improvements lead GSA-DT
measures (e.g., encryption, code obfuscation, etc.) from the model achieve high detection accuracy, low-latency and highsystem level to prevent the model from being easily accessed, throughput of malicious traffic detection.
thus making it more difficult for attackers to reverse the model;
(4) Use the online learning approach to optimize and update
the model instead of using a fixed offline training model, thus R EFERENCES
improving the model’s adaptability to emerging attacks.
 [1] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learning for
 encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102542.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [2] V. C. Cunha, A. Z. Zavala, D. Magoni, P. R. M. Inácio, and M. M. Freire,
 “A complete review on the application of statistical methods for evalu-
 With the popularity of Internet and the advent of digital age, ating internet traffic usage,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 128433–128455,
the number of network attacks are increasing, which brings 2022.
2072 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 [3] A. Blaise, M. Bouet, V. Conan, and S. Secci, “Detection of zero-day [27] Y. Qu, R. K. Baghbaderani, H. Qi, and C. Kwan, “Unsupervised
 attacks: An unsupervised port-based approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 180, pansharpening based on self-attention mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107391. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3192–3208, Apr. 2021.
 [4] H.-Y. Kwon, T. Kim, and M.-K. Lee, “Advanced intrusion [28] Y. Ding, M. Jia, Q. Miao, and Y. Cao, “A novel time–frequency
 detection combining signature-based and behavior-based detection meth- transformer based on self–attention mechanism and its application in
 ods,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 6, p. 867, 2022. fault diagnosis of rolling bearings,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 168,
 [5] W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intrusion Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108616.
 detection method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and sup- [29] M.-H. Guo, Z.-N. Liu, T.-J. Mu, and S.-M. Hu, “Beyond self-attention:
 port vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3, External attention using two linear layers for visual tasks,” 2021,
 pp. 1634–1646, Jul.–Sep. 2022. arXiv:2105.02358.
 [6] A. I. Saleh, F. M. Talaat, and L. M. Labib, “A hybrid intrusion detection [30] V. G. Costa and C. E. Pedreira, “Recent advances in decision trees: An
 system (HIDS) based on prioritized k-nearest neighbors and optimized updated survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 4765–4800, 2023.
 SVM classifiers,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 51, pp. 403–443, Mar. 2019. [31] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 [7] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2017, pp. 712–717.
 heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, [32] 2015, “Stratosphere laboratory Datasets,” Dataset, Stratosphere, Mar. 13,
 vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-
 [8] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted overview
 traffic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE [33] O. Roques, S. Maffeis, and M. Cova, “Detecting malware in TLS
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 3, 2023, traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw. 30th Anniv. (LCN),
 doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134. 2019, pp. 1–77.
 [9] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: [34] K. Sood, M. R. Nosouhi, D. D. N. Nguyen, F. Jiang, M. Chowdhury, and
 Robust malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and R. Doss, “Intrusion detection scheme with dimensionality reduction in
 confidence mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
 pp. 6871–6885, 2024. pp. 965–979, 2023.
[10] M. Chen, Z. Wei, Z. Huang, B. Ding, and Y. Li, “Simple and deep graph [35] H. Xu, S. Han, X. Li, and Z. Han, “Anomaly traffic detection based
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, on communication-efficient federated learning in space-air-ground intepp. 1725–1735. gration network,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 12,
[11] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. M. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating botnet detection pp. 9346–9360, Dec. 2023.
 with graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06344. [36] J. Chen, S. Yin, S. Cai, C. Zhang, Y. Yin, and L. Zhou, “An efficient
[12] L. Haghnegahdar and Y. Wang, “A whale optimization algorithm-trained network intrusion detection model based on temporal convolutional
 artificial neural network for smart grid cyber intrusion detection,” Neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. Softw. Qual., Rel. Security
 Comput. Appl., vol. 32, pp. 9427–9441, Jul. 2020. (QRS), 2021, pp. 768–775.
[13] X. Kan et al., “A novel IoT network intrusion detection approach [37] Y. Song, H. Li, P. Xu, and D. Liu, “A method of intrusion detection
 based on adaptive particle swarm optimization convolutional neural based on WOA-XGBoost algorithm,” Discr. Dyn. Nat. Soc., vol. 2022,
 network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 568, pp. 147–162, Aug. 2021. no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 5245622.
[14] Z. Chiba, N. Abghour, K. Moussaid, A. El Omri, and M. Rida,
 “A novel architecture combined with optimal parameters for back
 propagation neural networks applied to anomaly network intrusion
 detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 75, pp. 36–58, Jun. 2018.
[15] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Embedding residuals in graph-based solutions:
 The E-ResSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms. A case study in intrusion
 detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, pp. 6025–6040, May 2024.
[16] S. Huda, S. Miah, J. Yearwood, S. Alyahya, H. Al-Dossari, and R. Doss,
 “A malicious threat detection model for cloud assisted Internet of Things
 Saihua Cai (Member, IEEE) received the
 (CoT) based industrial control system (ICS) networks using deep belief
 Ph.D. degree from the College of Information
 network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 120, pp. 23–31, Oct. 2018.
 and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural
[17] J. Chen, T. Lv, S. Cai, L. Song, and S. Yin, “A novel detection model for
 University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently
 abnormal network traffic based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
 an Associate Professor with the School of Computer
 network,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 157, May 2023, Art. no. 107166.
 Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu
[18] A. Venturi, M. Ferrari, M. Marchetti, and M. Colajanni, “ARGANIDS:
 University, Zhenjiang, China. He has published
 A novel network intrusion detection system based on adversarially
 more than 90 papers in some famous journals
 regularized graph autoencoder,” in Proc. 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl.
 or conferences, including ACM Transactions on
 Comput., 2023, pp. 1540–1548.
 Privacy and Security, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
[19] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
 ON R ELIABILITY , ASE, and ISSRE. His major
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
 research interests include malicious traffic detection, outlier detection, and
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
 software testing. He is a member of ACM, and a Senior Member of the
[20] J. Lan et al., “E-minBatch GraphSAGE: An industrial internet attack
 China Computer Federation.
 detection model,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, Jul. 2022,
 Art. no. 5363764.
[21] N. Jiang, J. Wen, J. Li, X. Liu, and D. Jin, “GATrust: A multi-aspect
 graph attention network model for trust assessment in OSNs,” IEEE
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5865–5878, Jun. 2023.
[22] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, and T. Feng, “GCN-ETA: High-efficiency encrypted
 malicious traffic detection,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, Jan. 2022,
 Art. no. 4274139.
[23] J. Xiao, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Graph isomorphism network for materials property prediction along with explainability analysis,” Comput. Han Tang received the B.E. degree in software engi-
 Mater. Sci., vol. 233, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 112619. neering from Pujiang College, Nanjing, China, in
[24] L. Zhao et al., “T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for 2022. She is currently pursuing the master’s degree
 traffic prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 9, in computer technology with Jiangsu University,
 pp. 3848–3858, Sep. 2020. Zhenjiang, China. Her research interest includes
[25] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based malicious traffic detection.
 robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[26] T.-Y. Kim and S.-B. Cho, “Web traffic anomaly detection using C-LSTM
 neural networks,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 106, pp. 66–76, Sep. 2018.
CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL 2073

 Jinfu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. Wenjun Zhao received the B.E. degree in software
 degree in computer science and technology from the engineering from Yancheng Teachers College in
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2022. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree
 Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently a Full in computer technology with Jiangsu University,
 Professor with the School of Computer Science and Zhenjiang, China. His research interests include
 Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, malicious traffic detection and data augmentation.
 Zhenjiang, China. He has published more than
 100 papers in some famous journals or conferences, including the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 R ELIABILITY, Information Sciences, Information
 and Software Technology, and Software: Practice
and Experience. His major research interests include software testing, software
security, and trusted software. He is a member of ACM, and the China
Computer Federation.

 Tianxiang Lv received the M.D. degree in computer Chunlei Huang received the B.E. degree in automascience and technology from Jiangsu University, tion from the Nanjing Institute of Technology,
 Zhenjiang, China, in 2023. He has published two Nanjing, China, in 2012. He is currently pursuing
 papers in Information and Software Technology and the master’s degree in software engineering with
 QRS. His major research interest includes malicious Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. He is currently
 traffic detection. working with Zhenjiang Maternal and Child Health
 Hospital, Zhenjiang. His research interests include
 malicious traffic detection and healthcare insurance
 fraud detection.