IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 3631

 GT-HAD: Gated Transformer for Hyperspectral
 Anomaly Detection
 Jie Lian , Lizhi Wang , Member, IEEE, He Sun , and Hua Huang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) aims to According to the strategies employed to distinguish between
distinguish between the background and anomalies in a scene, the background and anomalies, existing HAD methods can
which has been widely adopted in various applications. Deep be categorized into three groups: 1) statistics-based methods
neural network (DNN)-based methods have emerged as the [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16],
predominant solution, wherein the standard paradigm is to
 [17], 2) representation-based methods [18], [19], [20], [21],
discern the background and anomalies based on the error of
self-supervised hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction. How- [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], and 3) deep
ever, current DNN-based methods cannot guarantee correspon- neural network (DNN)-based methods [30], [31], [32], [33],
dence between the background, anomalies, and reconstruction [34], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]. Statisticserror, which limits the performance of HAD. In this arti- based methods assume that the background follows a specific
cle, we propose a novel gated transformer network for HAD data distribution, and the pixels that do not conform to
(GT-HAD). Our key observation is that the spatial–spectral sim- this data distribution are regarded as anomalies. However,
ilarity in HSI can effectively distinguish between the background the background in different scenarios may follow distinct
and anomalies, which aligns with the fundamental definition
 data distributions, and thus restricting the background to a
of HAD. Consequently, we develop GT-HAD to exploit the
spatial–spectral similarity during HSI reconstruction. GT-HAD single data distribution would limit the generalization ability
consists of two distinct branches that model the features of the of the model. Representation-based methods can be clasbackground and anomalies, respectively, with content similarity sified into two categories. The first category assumes that
as constraints. Furthermore, we introduce an adaptive gating unit the background can be approximately represented by several
to regulate the activation states of these two branches based on a basis signals extracted from the HSI, while anomalies cannot.
content-matching method (CMM). Extensive experimental results The second category utilizes matrices or tensors to represent
demonstrate the superior performance of GT-HAD. The orig- the background and anomaly components, which are then
inal code is publicly available at https://github.com/jeline0110/ solved within a mathematical optimization framework. How-
GT-HAD, along with a comprehensive benchmark of state-of- ever, representation-based methods typically introduce a large
the-art HAD methods.
 number of parameters that require manual tweaking, subject to
 Index Terms— Content similarity, gating unit, hyperspectral individual experience, which results in uncertainty regarding
anomaly detection (HAD), transformer. method accuracy.
 Owning to the powerful capability of feature modeling,
 I. I NTRODUCTION DNN-based methods have emerged as the mainstream solutions for HAD. Unlike other methods, DNN-based methods
T HE hyperspectral image (HSI) captures the power distribution of a scene as 3-D data, which delineates the
spectral intensity for each wavelength at every pixel location
 do not rely on prior distribution assumptions or manual
 parameter tweaking. Instead, DNN-based methods employ the
 self-supervised HSI reconstruction as a proxy task of HAD,
[1], [2], [3]. The rich spectral and spatial information in where the background can be accurately reconstructed by
HSI has proven beneficial for diverse scene analysis and the network while anomalies cannot. Thus, the reconstruction
understanding tasks. One such task is hyperspectral anomaly errors, i.e., the differences between the original HSI and the
detection (HAD), which focuses on distinguishing between reconstructed one, are treated as indicators of the anomalies.
the background and anomalies in a scene. Recently, HAD However, it is not always guaranteed that the corresponhas found applications in various domains, including remote dence between the background, anomalies, and reconstruction
sensing, military surveillance [4], and mineral exploration [5]. error will hold in current DNN-based methods. The fundamen-
 Manuscript received 1 June 2023; revised 14 December 2023; accepted
 tal reason is that DNNs tend to prioritize the reconstruction
9 January 2024. Date of publication 12 February 2024; date of current of HSI contents with simple data distributions, which results
version 6 February 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural in reconstruction difficulties of the background with com-
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62322204, Grant 62131003, Grant plex data distribution and reconstruction over-fitting of the
62072038, and Grant 62301534. (Corresponding author: Lizhi Wang.) anomalies with simple data distribution. Such a scenario
 Jie Lian and Lizhi Wang are with the School of Computer Science, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: lianjie@bit.edu.cn; deviates from the basic assumption of the DNN-based methods
wanglizhi@bit.edu.cn). that anomalies should have significantly higher reconstruction
 He Sun is with the Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging errors than the background.
Technology, Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of To address such issues, feature constraints should be
Sciences, Beijing 100094, China (e-mail: sunhe@aircas.ac.cn).
 Hua Huang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal
 imposed on the background and anomalies to guide the HSI
University, Beijing 100875, China (e-mail: huahuang@bnu.edu.cn). reconstruction. Specifically, the ability of DNN to reconstruct
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3355166 the background can be enhanced by enhancing the background
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 to enhancing background features and weakening anomaly
 features by mining the content similarity in HSI. In addition, we develop a gating unit to regulate the activation
 states of each branch based on a content-matching method
 (CMM). Comprehensive experiments demonstrate superior
 performance compared with state-of-the-art HAD methods.
 We believe our study would propel further research on
 integrating transformers into HAD tasks and encourage the
 exploration of additional possibilities for HAD methods.
 The main contributions of our work are summarized as
 follows.
 1) We introduce a new GT-HAD, which leverages content
 similarity to guide the reconstruction of both background
 and anomalies.
 2) We develop a gating unit to regulate the activation states
 of different branches in GT-HAD, based on a CMM.
 3) We perform comprehensive comparative experiments
 and ablation studies on six HSI datasets to demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed
Fig. 1. Example intuitively shows the content similarity in HSI. (a) Spectral
curves of PA –Pa4 . (b) Spectral curves of PB –Pb4 . The background (PB )
 GT-HAD.
exhibits high similarity with its surrounding contents (Pb1 –Pb4 ), while the The remaining sections of this article are structured as
anomaly (PA ) displays different characteristics and exhibits low similarity follows. Section II provides an overview of related works on
with the surrounding contents (Pa1 –Pa4 ). HAD, Section III presents the details of GT-HAD, Section IV
 presents the experimental results and analysis, and finally,
features, while preventing DNN from over-fitting the anoma- Section V concludes the article.
lies can be achieved by weakening the anomaly features.
 Recently, several DNN-based methods have been proposed II. R ELATED W ORK
to incorporate specific constraints to guide the HSI recon- In this section, we briefly review the related work of
struction. The autonomous HAD network (Auto-AD) [31] HAD in statistics-based, representation-based, and DNN-based
assumes that the network can reconstruct the background while methods, respectively.
anomalies appear as reconstruction errors, and the errors are
used as adaptive weights to further suppress the anomalies A. Statistics-Based
reconstruction. However, Auto-AD overlooks the fact that it Statistics-based methods are the earliest proposed and
is difficult to reconstruct the background with a complex data widely used methods for the HAD task. The Reed–Xiaoli
distribution, which results in reconstruction errors that may (RX) algorithm [6], based on the principle of the generalized
mistakenly suppress the background reconstruction. The deep likelihood ratio test (GLRT), is widely recognized as the
low-rank (LR) prior-based method (DeepLR) [32] assumes benchmark method in this field. The RX assumes that the
that the reconstructed HSI exhibits an LR characteristic, while background follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution, and
the anomalies deviate from this distribution and appear as then the anomalies are detected by estimating the Mahareconstruction errors. Yet the high-frequency information in lanobis distance between each test pixel and the background.
the reconstructed background would be lost when enforcing Inspired by the classical RX, various improved versions are
an LR distribution, which increases false alarm rates (FARs) subsequently proposed, such as the local RX (LRX) [7], the
in HAD. Existing constraints primarily concentrate on sup- weighted RX (WRX) [8], and the subspace RX (SRX) [9].
pressing the anomalies reconstruction, while neglecting the However, as abnormal targets often involve multiple pixels,
reconstruction quality of the background. This limits their RX-based methods relying on test point vector calculation
applicability in certain scenarios. Hence, further investigation may exhibit suboptimal detection performance. To address this
is necessary to develop more robust and accurate DNN-based issue, a two-step GLRT (2S-GLRT) method [10] is proposed,
HAD methods. which considers the background information around each test
 Back to the basics of HAD, the anomalies are defined pixel and aggregates neighboring pixels to detect multipixel
as such pixels that possess different spectral characteristics anomalies. Besides the GLRT-based methods, many kernelfrom their surrounding contents. This definition implies that based HAD methods are proposed in the literature [11], [12],
the background exhibits high similarity with its surrounding [13], [14]. The distributed online one-class support vector
contents, whereas anomalies exhibit low similarity, as depicted machine (doCSVM) method [13] maps the data into the kernel
in Fig. 1. This principle motivates us to exploit the content space and then separates the anomalies from the background.
similarity as the feature constraint to enhance the background The kernel isolation forest detection (KIFD) method [14]
features and weaken the anomaly features, thus guiding the assumes that the anomalies are more easily isolated than the
reconstruction of the background and anomalies. background in kernel space and constructs an isolation forest
 In this article, we propose a novel gated transformer net- to detect isolated pixels in the image. Moreover, different
work for HAD (GT-HAD), which leverages the exceptional from the above methods, the recent MsRFQFT method [17]
capabilities of the transformer in capturing content similarity analyzes the discriminative properties of background and
[43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], aligning with our motiva- anomalies in the frequency domain.
tion in exploiting content similarity in HSI reconstruction. Yet most statistics-based methods heavily rely on data
The proposed GT-HAD comprises two branches dedicated assumptions, which limit their generalization capabilities in
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3633

different application scenarios. Furthermore, in the presence of classified as an anomaly. In addition, some methods [40], [41],
complex scenes and noisy data, statistics-based methods may [42] use the reconstruction networks as feature extractors and
fail to capture subtle features or changes, potentially resulting then detect anomalies in the deep feature. The LR embedded
in missed detection or false positives. network (LREN) [42] learns spectral features through the joint
 training of an auto-encoder and a Gaussian mixture model,
B. Representation-Based followed by an LR representation for generating detection
 results based on the learned deep feature.
 In addition to statistics-based methods, representation the- Although the methods above have achieved some positive
ory has recently been applied to develop HAD algorithms. results, they neglect to utilize the inherent data characteristics
The collaborative representation detection (CRD) algorithm of HSI to distinguish between the background and anoma-
[18] is the pioneer of the representation-based methods, lies, which limits their effectiveness in certain instances. In
which assumes that background pixels can be approximated contrast, our proposed GT-HAD focuses on exploring the
by a linear combination of their neighboring spatial pixels, content similarity in HSI and utilizes the content similarity
while abnormal pixels cannot. Following the original CRD, to process the background and anomalies, thus increasing the
a series of improved CRD-based methods have also been discrimination between the background and anomalies.
proposed, e.g., the sparse CRD (SCRD) [19], the weighted
CRD (WCRD) [20], and the recursive CRD (RCRD) [21].
Unlike pixel-wise detection in CR-based methods, LR and III. M ETHOD
sparse representation (LRASR) methods [22], [23], [24], [25] Drawing inspiration from the content similarity in HSI and
focus on exploiting the pixel correlations in HSI and become the exceptional performance of the transformer in capturing
more attractive. The LR and CRD (LRCRD) method [22] such similarity, we present a novel GT-HAD. This section
utilizes a nuclear norm and a weighted l2-norm to regularize introduces the GT-HAD and illustrates the implementation
the representation coefficient to combine the global structure details.
and local attributes of HSI. Similarly, the graph and total
variation regularized LR representation (GTVLRR) method
 A. Overall Framework
[25] exploits the graph Laplacian to regularize the representation coefficient to preserve the local geometrical structure and The anomaly detection process of GT-HAD is divided into
spatial relationships in HSI. Yet most LRASR methods con- two stages, as depicted in Fig. 2. In the training stage, the
vert 3-D HSI into a 2-D matrix, which destroys the inherent network is optimized through the mean square error (MSE)
3-D structure property of HSI. To tackle this problem, several loss function, where the HSI cubes are used as training data.
tensor representation-based methods [26], [27], [28], [29] Our proposed network is highly lightweight and consists of
are proposed. The prior-based tensor approximation (PTA) a newly developed gated transformer block (GTB) and two
method [26] uses a third-order tensor to preserve the data 3 × 3 convolution layers. Two feature-modeling branches
structure for integrated consideration of all the dimensions. exist in the GTB, namely, the anomaly-focused branch (AFB)
The principal component analysis (PCA)-based tensor LRASR and background-focused branch (BFB), which are used to
(PCA-TLRSR) method [29] utilizes a 3-D tensor LR model to reconstruct the background and anomalies, respectively. The
separate the LR background part from HSI, then detects the activation states of AFB and BFB are regulated by a gating
anomalies using the rest sparse tensor. unit, with the gating states determined by a CMM. In the
 However, most representation-based methods require man- detection stage, the reconstruction errors of all HSI cubes are
ual parameter tweaking, which increases the complexity of used to generate an anomaly map as the final detection result.
the algorithm. In addition, the detection results are sensitive The overall process is described as follows.
to parameter selection and adjustment, leading to uncertainty Given a 3-D HSI data, X ∈ R H ×W ×D , where H , W , and D
in the accuracy of the methods. represent the height, width, and number of spectral bands of
 HSI, respectively. We first apply a sliding window to partition
 N
 X into N overlapped HSI cubes X = {xi }i=1 , with the cube
C. DNN-Based size being H × W × D. The default values for the cube height
 Different from the preceding two kinds of HAD methods, H and cube width W are set to 9, and the sliding stride of
DNN-based methods [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36] the window is set to 3. Subsequently, these HSI cubes are fed
aim to distinguish between the background and anomalies into the proposed network to be reconstructed.
according to the error of the self-supervised HSI recon- First, a 3 × 3 convolution layer is applied to map HSI cube
struction, which is free of prior distribution assumption or xi into feature map f i ∈ RH×W×C , where C is the number
manual parameter tweaking. Auto-AD [31] leverages a fully of channels and is set to 64 by default. Then, the feature map
convolutional autoencoder to reconstruct the original HSI from f i is fed into GTB to generate an updated feature map f̂ i ∈
noise input, with the anomalies appearing as the reconstruction RH×W×C . The gating unit determines whether the AFB or
errors. WeaklyAD [35] employs a spectral-constrained genera- BFB processes the feature map f i . Finally, the reconstructed
tive adversarial network (GAN) for HSI reconstruction, where HSI cube x̂ i ∈ RH×W×D can be obtained by applying another
abnormal pixels demonstrate higher reconstruction errors com- 3 × 3 convolution layer to model the updated feature map f̂ i .
pared with background pixels. Besides the conventional recon- To optimize the network, we use MSE as the loss function
struction error-based methods, some variant methods [37], B
[38], [39] have been proposed. The deep support vector data 1 X 2
description (DSVDD) classifier transforms anomaly detection L(θ) = xi − xˆi 2 (1)
 B i=1
into a classification problem, which uses the deep features
to train a compact hypersphere. At the test phase, once the where θ refers to the learnable parameters in the proposed net
feature of a sample is outside the hypersphere, the sample is and B represents the batch size per training iteration.
3634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 2. Framework of GT-HAD. The proposed network is designed based on a transformer-like architecture and trained using numerous HSI cubes. In the
detection stage, the reconstruction errors of the HSI cubes are utilized for detecting anomalies.

 Once the training is completed, anomaly detection can be where feature map fˆi ∈ RH×W×C is the final output of GTB.
performed. We first obtain the residual map m i ∈ RH×W by Next, we introduce the details of AFB and BFB,
measuring the difference between the HSI cube xi and its respectively.
corresponding reconstructed one xˆi . Then, all residual maps 1) Anomaly-Focused Branch: We denote the input feature
 N
M = {m i }i=1 are aggregated and folded to generate the final map of AFB as f i A ∈ RH×W×C . The chief goal of AFB is to
anomaly map M ∈ R H ×W . remove the anomaly features from the feature map f i A , thereby
 suppressing the anomalies’ reconstruction.
 To achieve this goal, we propose a feature redefinition
B. Gated Transformer Block
 approach where we divide the feature map f i A into several
 As shown in Fig. 2, GTB is composed of two components: parts and redefine each part by taking a weighted sum of
a gated dual-branch network (GDBN) and a feed-forward its surrounding parts, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). Anomalies
network (FFN). GDBN comprises a single layer normaliza- typically exhibit low similarity with surrounding contents.
tion (LN) and two distinct feature-modeling branches acti- Consequently, when a specific part contains anomaly features,
vated/deactivated by a gating unit. For each input feature map this part cannot be accurately defined by its surrounding parts,
 f i of GDBN, we use gi to symbolize the corresponding gating which results in the removal of anomaly features. To better
state. Specifically, if feature map f i contains anomaly features, capture the content similarity in HSI, we perform the feature
gi equals 0, and AFB is activated. Conversely, if feature map redefinition process at the patch level instead of the pixel level,
 f i solely comprises background features, gi equals 1, and BFB as the patch contains both spectral and spatial information,
is activated. The processing flow of GDBN is represented as which ensures the integrity of the HSI content.
 Specifically, we partition the feature map f i A into J A
 AFB(LN( f i )), if gi = 0
 
 JA
 f̃ i = (2) nonoverlapped feature patches P A = { pa }a=1 with a patch size
 BFB(LN( f i )), if gi = 1 of L A × C, where L A = h A w A represents the flattened spatial
where feature map f̃ i ∈ RH×W×C is the output of GDBN. dimension of the patch. The default values for the patch height
 FFN comprises an LN and a multilayer perceptron (MLP), h A and patch width w A are set to 3. Then, the similarity weight
and the skip connection is exploited for bridging the informa- between a feature patch pa and its adjacent feature patch p j
tion flow between the head and the tail of FFN. MLP consists is calculated as
of two linear layers with a GELU activation in between.
 S pa , p j = pa W A , p j W A
 
The first linear layer expands the channel dimension by a (4)
factor of 2, and the second linear layer restores the channel
dimension to the original one. The computation process of where W A ∈ RC×(C/4) represents a learnable weight matrix
FNN is formulated as and ⟨·, ·⟩ means the dot-product. Subsequently, the similarity
 weight S( pa , p j ) ∈ R1 is collected across the search region
 fˆi = MLP LN f̃ i + f̃ i
 
 (3) Z and fed into a soft-max function to obtain the correlation
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3635

 Fig. 4. Illustration of CMM procedure. During training, the activation states
 of AFB and BFB are controlled by the gating unit, whose operational states
Fig. 3. Methods of modeling the features of AFB and BFB, respectively. are determined by CMM.
(a) For each part in feature map f i A , generate a brand new feature for it by
taking a weighted sum of its surrounding parts. (b) For each part in feature
map f iB , generate an enhanced feature for it by aggregating its surrounding
parts.
 V ∈ R JB ×L B ×C
 Q = TB W B , K = TB W B , V = TB (8)
 C×(C/4)
weight as where W B ∈ R represents a learnable weight matrix
 and shares the parameters with W A . Next, for the dimension
 exp S pa , p j
 
 matching requirement, Q, K , and V are, respectively, reshaped
 ωa j = P (5)
 z∈Z exp(S( pa , pz ))
 to Q̂ ∈ R JB ×H , K̂ ∈ R JB ×H , and V̂ ∈ R JB ×H , where H =
 (L B C/4). Finally, attention is calculated by the self-attention
where Z = {z|1 ≤ z ≤ J A and z ̸ = a} is the set of indexes of mechanism
neighboring feature patches of pa . Then, patch-wise features
 f̃ i = R Softmax Q̂ K̂ T V̂
  
are aggregated according to the correlation weights (9)
 where K̂ T represents the transpose of matrix K̂ and R(·)
 X
 pˆa = ωa j p j (6)
 j∈Z represents the dimension reshape operation.

where pˆa ∈ R L A ×C represents the redefined feature patch.
Finally, the output of AFB is obtained as C. Content-Matching Method
  JA
  In the process of training, the activation states of AFB and
 f˜i = I pˆa a=1 (7) BFB are regulated by the gating unit, whose control states
 are determined by a CMM. This section provides a detailed
where I(·) represents the reshape and fold operation to com- explanation of CMM.
bine this set of redefined feature patches into a new feature To record the gating states during feature maps { f i }i=1 N
map f˜i ∈ RH×W×C . processing in GTB, we utilize the notation G =
 2) Background-Focused Branch: We denote the input fea- [g1 , . . . , gi , . . . , g N ]. Initially, all elements in gating states
ture map of BFB as f i B ∈ RH×W×C . The primary objective list G are initialized to zero, which indicates that all feature
of BFB is to enhance the background features in the feature maps { f i }i=1 N
 are fed into AFB at the start of the training.
map f i B , thus strengthening the background reconstruction. When feature map f i solely comprises background features
 Here, we develop a feature enhancement approach to and passes through the AFB, its primary contents can be
achieve this objective. Unlike anomalies, the background preserved since each feature patch in the feature map f i can
exhibits high similarity with surrounding contents. Hence, be approximately defined by its adjacent feature patches. As
each part of the feature map f i B is enhanced by aggregating a result, the corresponding reconstructed HSI cube xˆi exhibits
its surrounding parts, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). Previous good reconstruction quality. Conversely, if feature map f i
works [49], [50], [51] have shown that leveraging image contains anomaly features, such features will be removed when
structure prior is effective for image reconstruction, and we the former passes through the AFB, which results in poor
anticipate that it would also be advantageous for background reconstruction quality of the reconstructed HSI cube xˆi , due
reconstruction. Taking this into consideration, we perform the to the loss of contents. The CMM determines the presence
feature enhancement process at the patch level, as the patch of anomaly features in the feature map f i by evaluating the
retains structural information. content matching degree between the HSI cube xi and the
 The entire procedure of BFB is regarded as a patch-level reconstructed one xˆi and then sets the gating states.
self-attention calculation process. To be specific, we first The specific CMM procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4. The
partition the feature map f i B into J B nonoverlapped feature CMM searches for the most similar one to the reconstructed
 JB N
patches P B = { pb }b=1 with a patch size of L B × C, where the HSI cube xˆi within the HSI cubes set {xi }i=1 . If the searched
size of L B is equal to L A and J B = J A . For the convenience HSI cube xv and the reconstructed one xˆi have identical
of calculation, we reshape the feature patches P B into a tensor indexes, the reconstructed one xˆi is deemed to have no contents
format TB ∈ R JB ×L B ×C . Then, the self-attention computation loss and has consistent contents with the original HSI cube xi .
is restricted to each nonoverlapped feature patch. It implies that the feature map f i solely comprises background
 The feature patches tensor TB is first projected into query features and should be fed into the BFB in the next training
Q ∈ R JB ×L B ×(C/4) , key K ∈ R JB ×L B ×(C/4) , and value iteration, with the gating state gi transitioning from 0 to 1.
3636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 Algorithm 1 GT-HAD
 N
 Input: HSI cubes X = {xi }i=1
 Initialize: gating states list G = [g1 , . . . , gi , . . . , g N ] =
 [0, . . . , 0, . . . , 0]
 Training of the network:
 while training process do
Fig. 5. Compare the residual responses before and after using RD. (a) Airport 1: net forward using (2) - (9);
scene. (b) Abnormal target. (c) Residual response before using RD. (d) Resid- 2: update G;
ual response after using RD.
 3: calculate the loss function using (1);
 4: net backward;
Conversely, if the indexes are distinct, the reconstructed HSI
cube xˆi is deemed to have a content loss and exhibit a end while
low content matching degree with the original one xi . It Output: obtain the anomaly map using (10) - (11);
implies that the feature map f i contains anomaly features and
should continue to pass through the AFB in the next training
iteration, with the gating state gi remaining at 0. Notably, the IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
Euclidean distance is used to estimate the similarities between In this section, we compare the performance of GT-HAD
 N
the reconstructed HSI cube xˆi and the HSI cubes {xi }i=1 , when with ten existing HAD methods on six real HSI datasets.
searching for the most similar HSI cube pair. The results indicate that GT-HAD outperforms the existing
 As the training progresses, CMM gradually updates the val- methods significantly.
ues of the elements in gating states list G. Then, an increasing
number of feature maps solely comprising background features A. Datasets Description
are directed to BFB and separated from AFB to focus on the Here we introduce the six HSI datasets and these datasets
background reconstruction. are gathered and available in our project.1
 1) Los Angeles-1 Dataset: This dataset is acquired using
D. Anomaly Detection the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
 After completing the training, the reconstruction errors of sensor over the region of Los Angeles. It comprises an image
all image pixels are used to generate the anomaly map. The of dimensions 100 × 100 pixels, with a spatial resolution
residual cube is denoted as ri = (xi − xˆi )2 ∈ RH×W×D , and of 7.1 m/pixel and 205 spectral bands. The dataset exhibits
then we sum the residual cube ri along the band dimension 144 abnormal pixels originating from several airplanes, which
to obtain the residual map m i ∈ RH×W . Finally, the anomaly account for 1.44% of the total number of pixels.
 2) Los Angeles-2 Dataset: The second dataset is also capmap is generated as
 tured by the AVIRIS sensor from Los Angeles. There exist
 N
 
 M = F {m i }i=1 (10) two airplanes with 87 abnormal pixels to be detected in this
 image, constituting 0.87% of the total number of pixels. It
where F(·) represents the fold operation to combine all the consists of 205 spectral bands, with a spatial size of 100 ×
residual maps into the anomaly map M ∈ R H ×W . Since 100 and a spatial resolution of 7.1 m/pixel.
overlaps exist between the residual maps, we use the average 3) Gulfport Dataset: The third dataset is acquired utilizing
operation to deal with the overlapped areas. This strategy the AVIRIS sensor from Gulfport, which features a spatial
can suppress the blocking effect [52] in the final output and resolution of 3.4 m/pixel. The image has a spatial extent
establish the information interaction between residual maps. of 100 × 100 and encompasses 191 spectral bands, after
 However, the pixel mixing phenomenon is obvious at the excluding unsuitable bands. The anomalies come from three
boundaries between the background and anomalies, which airplanes in various scales with 60 abnormal pixels, which
decreases the spectral differences between the background and occupy 0.60% of the total number of pixels.
anomalies. Therefore, it is challenging to detect the anomalies 4) Texas Coast Dataset: The fourth dataset is captured by
near the boundaries, which results in low residual responses, the AVIRIS sensor over the Texas Coast region. It comprises
as shown in Fig. 5(c). We use a residual postprocessing method 100 × 100 pixels with a spatial resolution of 17.2 m/pixel
called residual diffusion (RD) to address this issue. and contains 204 spectral bands. The dataset contains several
 For a voxel in the residual cube ri , we recalculate its houses exhibiting abnormal characteristics, with 67 abnormal
value, i.e., averaging the residuals within the 3-D space pixels accounting for 0.67% of the total number of pixels.
centered around this voxel. In this way, within the region of 5) Cat Island Dataset: The fifth dataset pertains to the
abnormal targets, high residuals diffuse toward the areas with Cat Island vicinity, which exhibits a spatial resolution of
low residuals, which increases the residual response in those 17.2 m/pixel and a spatial resolution of 150 × 150. Following
areas, as shown in Fig. 5(d). To implement the RD, a 3-D the exclusion of the noisy bands, 188 spectral bands are
average pooling filter with a kernel size of 3 × 3 × 5 is retained for analysis. Anomalies consist of a single airplane
utilized with 19 abnormal pixels, which account for 0.08% of the total
 ei = AvgPool3d(ri ) (11) number of pixels. Similar to the previous datasets, the AVIRIS
 sensor is employed for data acquisition.
where AvgPool3d represents the 3-D average pooling. Then, 6) Pavia Dataset: The final dataset, Pavia, is acquired using
we sum the recalculated residual cube ei ∈ RH×W×D along the reflective optics system imaging spectrometer (ROSIS)
the band dimension to obtain the residual map m i . sensor. The image has a spatial extent of 150 × 150 and
 The proposed GT-HAD method is described in detail in
Algorithm 1. 1 https://github.com/jeline0110/GT-HAD
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3637

 TABLE I
 O PTIMAL PARAMETERS OF T EN HAD M ETHODS ON S IX DATASETS

exhibits a spatial resolution of 1.3 m/pixel, along with performance is determined based on a specific parameter list
102 spectral bands, following the exclusion of unsuitable (d, λ , λ ′ ). In Auto-AD, the training process stops when the
bands. The primary anomalies are several vehicles on the average variation of the loss falls below a certain threshold σ ,
bridge, encompassing 68 abnormal pixels, which correspond which is varied from 1.0 × 10−5 to 1.5 × 10−5 to achieve the
to 0.30% of the total number of pixels. optimal detection performance. In LREN, the coefficient λ in
 the optimization problem requires tuning. The optimal values
B. Experiment Setup of λ are obtained for different datasets by varying its value
 from 10−6 to 1. Table I summarizes the optimal parameters of
 1) Comparison Methods: We compare GT-HAD with ten HAD methods on six datasets.
ten existing HAD methods, including RX [6], KIFD [14], For the training of GT-HAD, we apply the adaptive moment
2S-GLRT [10], MsRFQFT [17], CRD [18], GTVLRR [25], estimation (ADAM) to optimize the model. The training
PTA [26], PCA-TLRSR [29], LREN [42], and Auto-AD process consists of 150 epochs, with a batch size of 64 and
[31]. RX, KIFD, 2S-GLRT, and MsRFQFT are statistics- a learning rate of 0.001. Besides, all DNN-based methbased methods, CRD, GTVLRR, PTA, and PCA-TLRSR are ods, including GT-HAD, are implemented on an NVIDIA
representation-based methods, while LREN and Auto-AD are 3090 GPU. In terms of deep learning framework, GT-HAD
DNN-based methods. Among these methods, RX and CRD and Auto-AD use Pytorch 1.7.0, while LREN utilizes Tenare regarded as the most classical methods for the HAD task, sorflow 1.14.0. On the other hand, all non-DNN methods are
while the other methods have also gained widespread attention implemented using MATLAB 2020a on a computer with an
in recent literature and have shown competitive performance. Intel i7-10700 CPU and 16 GB of RAM.
 We empirically tune the parameters of all compared methods 2) Evaluation Metrics: We utilize qualitative and quantitaand select the optimal parameters for comparative experiments. tive evaluation metrics to evaluate the detection performance
Specifically, in RX, no parameters that need to be tuned. In of the compared HAD methods. The qualitative evaluation
KIFD, the first ζ principal components of HSI are used as
 metrics include color anomaly map, box-whisker plot [53],
input, and we vary its value from 50 to 300 to determine the
 2-D and 3-D receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves
optimal detection performance. For 2S-GLRT, we investigate
the detection performance under various outer window sizes [54], and the quantitative evaluation metric uses the area under
wout ranging from 5 to 25 and inner window sizes win ranging the 2-D ROC curve (AUC). The color anomaly map provides
from 3 to 15, then the best detection performance under insight into the detection performance of the methods on
specific window sizes (wout , win ) is collected. In MsRFQFT, both background suppression and anomaly response, while
the selected band number Nd is fixed at 3, and the tuning the box-whisker plot assesses the separability between the
range of parameter σ is set to 0.2–10 with the step of 0.2. background and anomalies. In addition, 2-D and 3-D ROC
We tune the parameters (Nd , σ ) for each dataset individu- curves illustrate the relationship between the probability of
ally to achieve the best performance. Similar to 2S-GLRT, detection (PD) and FAR at different thresholds (τ ). PD denotes
for CRD, we first fix λ at 10−6 , then vary wout and win the number of correctly detected abnormal pixels among all
from 5 to 25 and from 3 to 15, respectively. Finally, the optimal the abnormal pixels, while FAR is the number of pixels that are
detection performance is achieved using specific window sizes marked as abnormal targets among all the background pixels.
(wout , win ). In GTVLRR, the dictionary is constructed with A 2-D ROC curve that approaches the upper-left corner of
a category set of 6, and the largest 20 elements in each the axis indicates a better detection performance and a larger
category are selected as the atoms of the dictionary. Then, AUC. The ideal AUC is 1, signifying that all abnormal targets
the parameters (λ , β, γ ) are tuned based on the suggestions are detected with no false alarms.
in the original article [25]. For PTA, parameters α, τ , and β
are set to 1, and parameter µ and truncated LR r are set in C. Comparison Results
the range {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 10, 102 , 103 , 104 } and In this section, we provide a unified analysis of the detection
range 0–40, respectively. The optimum detection performance performance of 11 methods on six datasets.
is determined by employing a specific parameter set (µ, r ). The color anomaly maps of different methods on each
In PCA-TLRSR, the first d principal components of HSI are dataset are presented in Fig. 6. We can see that GT-HAD
used as input, and d is varied from 1 to 20. Meanwhile, achieves a balance between background suppression and
parameters λ and λ ′ are selected from the set {0.001, 0.005, anomaly response on the Los Angeles-1, Los Angeles-2,
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}. Finally, the best detection Gulfport, and Pavia datasets. Taking Los Angeles-1 as an
3638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 6. Color anomaly maps of different HAD methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island.
(f) Pavia.

Fig. 7. Box-whisker plots of different methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia.

example, while KIFD, GTVLRR, and PCA-TLRSR can high- but the other three methods exhibit limited responses in the
light the anomalies to some extent, they generate a high abnormal region compared with GT-HAD. Of the 11 methods
number of false alarms in the background region. On the other evaluated across six datasets, only 2S-GLRT on the Cat Island
hand, although RX, 2S-GLRT, CRD, Auto-AD, and LREN dataset performs similar performance to GT-HAD. These color
exhibit lower residual responses in the background region, anomaly maps provide compelling evidence that GT-HAD
they miss most anomalies. Conversely, GT-HAD can locate all achieves effective background reconstruction while successanomalies effectively and suppress the background with high fully suppressing the anomaly reconstruction.
accuracy. On the Texas Coast dataset, 2S-GLRT, CRD, Auto- Fig. 7 shows the box-whisker plots achieved by 11 methods
AD, and GT-HAD closely resemble the ground-truth map, on six datasets. The box-whisker plots show the abnormal
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3639

Fig. 8. Two-dimensional and 3-D ROC curves of different methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast.
(e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia. (a1)–(f1) Two-dimensional ROC curves. (a2)–(f2) Three-dimensional ROC curves.

 TABLE II
 AUC S CORES OF E LEVEN HAD M ETHODS ON S IX DATASETS

pixel distributions in red boxes and the background pixel
distributions in blue boxes, with the distance between red and
blue boxes indicating the background anomaly separability.
Especially, the height of the blue box reflects whether the
background is well suppressed. As shown In Fig. 7, we can see
that GT-HAD balances the background-anomaly separability
and background suppression degree on all six datasets. Using
Los Angeles-2 as an example, although KIFD has better
background-anomaly separability than other methods, it cannot
suppress the background nicely. On the other hand, while
2S-GLRT has better background suppression performance
than other methods, it cannot separate the background and
anomalies well. GT-HAD, by contrast, performs well on both
the background-anomaly separability and background suppression degree. In conclusion, the excellence of GT-HAD in
enhancing background reconstruction and suppressing anomalies reconstruction provides satisfactory background-anomaly
 Fig. 9. Network structures of (a) base model, (b) base + AFB model,
separability and background suppression degree. (c) base + AFB + BFB model, and (d) base + AFB + BFB + RD model,
 The 2-D and 3-D ROC curves obtained by 11 methods on respectively. For simplicity, S- and D-network represent the shallow and deep
six datasets are illustrated in Fig. 8. We can see that the network layers of the model. G stores the gating states.
3640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDY OF GT-HAD ON S IX DATASETS

Fig. 10. Ablation visualization results on six datasets. Row 1 represents the (a) ground-truth maps of the six datasets. Rows 2–5 represent the corresponding
anomaly maps for (b) base model, (c) base + AFB model, (d) base + AFB + BFB model, and (e) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively. The
yellow boxes visible in (b)–(e) locate the background regions that we focus on.

2-D ROC curves of GT-HAD are positioned closest to the seen that GT-HAD outperforms all other methods on the
upper-left corner of the axis on all the datasets. For example, six datasets in AUC scores. Furthermore, by analyzing the
on the Los Angeles-2 dataset, although 2S-GLRT exhibits 3-D ROC curves, we can observe that GT-HAD successfully
slightly higher PDs than GT-HAD when FAR values range maintains a well-balanced relationship between the PD and
from 0.05 to 0.1, GT-HAD shows higher PDs in terms of FAR at various thresholds on all six datasets. The presented
the overall curve comparison and is closer to the upper-left results not only confirm the robustness of GT-HAD across
corner of the axis. The AUC scores of all evaluated methods various scenarios but also intuitively present the performance
across six datasets are presented in Table II, with the highest of GT-HAD under different threshold settings. In a word, GT-
AUC score highlighted in bold for each row. It can be HAD excels in both 2-D and 3-D ROC analyses, consistently
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3641

Fig. 11. Three-dimensional residual response maps on six datasets. Rows 1–4 represent the residual responses of abnormal regions of (a) base model,
(b) base + AFB model, (c) base + AFB + BFB model, and (d) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively. Rows 5–8 represent the residual responses
of background regions of (e) base model, (f) base + AFB model, (g) base + AFB + BFB model, and (h) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively.

achieving superior AUC scores across all evaluated datasets. base + AFB + BFB model, and base + AFB + BFB + RD
Indeed, the integrated capabilities of enhancing background model. Fig. 9 illustrates the corresponding network architecreconstruction and suppressing anomalies reconstruction in tures. All models initialize the same training epochs, batch
GT-HAD ensure the balance between PD and FAR at various sizes, and learning rates for a fair comparison. Finally, ablation
thresholds. quantitative and visualization results are reported in Table III
 and Fig. 10. To better illustrate the detection results, we also
D. Ablation Study present the 3-D residual response maps in Fig. 11, where the
 This section conducts an ablation study on six datasets to residual responses of background and anomalies are intentionevaluate the impact of AFB, BFB, and RD. First, we establish ally separated for display.
a base model by replacing AFB and BFB in the GT-HAD 1) Effectiveness of AFB: In Fig. 10(b), the color anomaly
with a feature identity-mapping operation while deactivating map generated by the base model illustrates that the con-
RD. Then, we progressively integrate AFB, BFB, and RD ventional DNN model faces challenges in reconstructing the
into the base model. To facilitate a clear discussion, we refer background with complex data distribution (yellow boxes)
to these models as the base model, base + AFB model, and is prone to over-fitting the anomalies with simple data
3642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 high degree of similarity, as observed in the grassland and
 water surface regions of Fig. 13. Hence, when CMM searches
 for the most similar HSI cube to the reconstructed HSI cube,
 it is prone to misidentifying the neighboring cube of the
 target cube as the search result. Ultimately, the pixels within
 these cubes fail to be marked as background pixels. Although
 not marked as background pixels, these pixels exhibit high
 similarity with the surrounding content. Hence, these pixels
 can be well represented by the surrounding contents, which
 allows for effective reconstruction without adversely affecting
 the detection results. This indicates that our method exhibits a
 high level of fault tolerance. Table IV reports the quantitative
 measures of pixel overlap between the marked background
 pixels and the abnormal pixels. These results demonstrate that
 CMM performs excellently in marking the background and can
 effectively circumvent most anomalies. This characteristic is
 particularly advantageous since it ensures that the constraints
 imposed by AFB on anomalies remain unaltered by BFB.
 Fig. 10(c) and (d) depicts the color anomaly maps of
 the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model,
 respectively. In addition, Fig. 11(b), (c), (f), and (g) depicts
 the 3-D residual responses of anomalies and background for
 the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model,
 respectively. Based on these visualization results, two conclusions can be drawn. First, BFB outperforms AFB in terms
 of suppressing the complex background. Second, BFB has
Fig. 12. Two-dimensional ROC curves (PD, τ ) of base model and base + minimal negative effects on anomalies, which enables the
AFB model on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulf- base + AFB + BFB model to highlight abnormal regions
port. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia. similar to the base + AFB model effectively. The AUC scores
 of the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model are
distribution, which aligns with our previous analysis. We reported in the second to third rows of Table III. Moreover,
decompose that into two subproblems, i.e., difficulty in Table V reports the increase rate (IR) in the running time
reconstructing the complex background and susceptibility to of the model after using CMM on each dataset. It can be
over-fitting the simple anomalies. AFB is exactly designed to observed that the running time of the base + AFB + BFB
address the latter subproblem. model increases by only 10% compared with the base + AFB
 The results in Fig. 10(c) clearly show that the base + AFB model when CMM is used, yet the AUC score improves
model can effectively highlight abnormal regions and generate considerably. The comprehensive analyses provide evidence
higher residual responses compared with the base model. that BFB exhibits superior performance in suppressing the
These visual results are more intuitive in the 3-D residual complex background and that its core module, CMM, is highly
response maps presented in Fig. 11(a) and (b). It is worth effective in marking the background.
noting that the base + AFB model exhibits similar background 3) Effectiveness of RD: Figs. 10(d) and (e) and 11(c), (d),
suppression performance to the base model, as shown in (g), and (h) show that RD can effectively raise the resid-
Figs. 10(b) and (c) and 11(e) and (f). It suggests that even ual responses of the abnormal region while leaving that
though AFB is designed for extracting anomalies, it can also of the background region nearly unchanged. The fundaeffectively suppress the simple background. However, it may mental reason is that BFB has effectively suppressed the
not be as effective in suppressing the complex background. background region, thereby minimizing the negative impact
Finally, the base + AFB model achieves higher PDs than the of the RD on the background region. The residuals flow
base model at various thresholds, which leads to a significant within the abnormal region and merge, thus increasing the
improvement in AUC score, as shown in Fig. 12 and the first residual response contrast between the abnormal and backtwo rows of Table III. These experimental results sufficiently ground regions. Moreover, the RD effect brings the shape
validate the effectiveness of AFB in extracting the anomalies. of the anomaly response region closer to the actual shape
 2) Effectiveness of BFB: The inability of AFB to effectively of the abnormal target. Fig. 14 gives the box-wisher plots of
suppress the complex background promotes the proposal of the base + AFB + BFB and base + AFB + BFB + RD
BFB. By leveraging CMM, BFB is activated and focuses on models. We can see that the background-anomaly separability
reconstructing the regions marked by CMM. Given that CMM of the base + AFB + BFB + RD model is larger than
is the foundation of BFB, conducting a thorough analysis of that of the base + AFB + BFB model. It indicates that the
the marking performance of CMM is crucial. The marking positive impact of RD on the residual response of the abnormal
results of CMM are visually presented in Fig. 13(b), with the region is much greater than its negative impact on that of the
red areas indicating the marked background pixels. background region. Finally, the base + AFB + BFB + RD
 CMM assesses the presence of background pixels in the HSI model obtains further improvements in AUC scores than the
cube by gauging whether the HSI cube exhibits the highest base + AFB + BFB model, as reported in the third to fourth
similarity to itself after reconstruction. However, in certain rows of Table III. Sufficient experimental results demonstrate
smooth regions, adjacent HSI cubes exhibit an exceedingly the efficacy of RD in boosting the detection performance.
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3643

Fig. 13. Background marking results of CMM on six datasets. (a) Display the false-color maps of the six datasets. (b) Display the marking results of CMM,
where the red areas indicate the marked background pixels and the white areas indicate the abnormal pixels.

 TABLE IV
 OVERLAP (P IXELS ) B ETWEEN THE A BNORMAL P IXELS AND THE M ARKED
 BACKGROUND P IXELS ON S IX DATASETS

 TABLE V
 RUNNING T IME (s) OF W HETHER GT-HAD U SES CMM ON S IX DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 M ODEL G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE A SSESSMENT

Fig. 14. Box-wisher plots of base + AFB + BFB and base + AFB + BFB
+ RD models on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia.

E. Model Generalization
 In this section, we conduct a cross-validation experiment
to assess the model’s generalization. The number of layer TABLE VII
channels in the network is determined by the input HSI data M ODEL C OMPLEXITY OF T HREE DNN-BASED M ETHODS
band number. Hence, of the six HSI data, only Los Angeles-1
and Los Angeles-2 are suitable for the cross-validation experiment since these two datasets have the same band number.
The experimental results are shown in Table VI. The stability
in AUC scores across different testing datasets highlights the
generalization behavior of GT-HAD.
 on different hardware platforms and software, we mainly
F. Model Complexity compare GT-HAD with LREN and Auto-AD for the sake
 In this section, we evaluate GT-HAD in terms of efficiency. of fairness. Table VII gives the model complexity of the
Since DNN-based and non-DNN methods are implemented involved DNN-based methods, and the experimental data
3644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

utilizes the Los Angeles-1 dataset. Compared with LREN [10] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
and Auto-AD, GT-HAD has the fewest parameters and the anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
shortest running time. The running time of LREN com- Oct. 2022.
prises three parts, i.e., spectrum mapping, dictionary con- [11] Y. Gu, Y. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “A selective kernel PCA algorithm for
struction, and optimized-problem solving. Although LREN anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
has fewer floating point operations (FLOPs) than GT-HAD, Acoust. Speed Signal Process. Proc., vol. 2, Toulouse, France, May 2006,
the optimized-problem solving stage of LREN significantly pp. 725–728.
 [12] V. Roth, “Kernel Fisher discriminants for outlier detection,” Neural
increases the running time, which leads to LREN having Comput., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 942–960, Apr. 2006.
a longer total time than GT-HAD. In summary, GT-HAD [13] X. Miao, Y. Liu, H. Zhao, and C. Li, “Distributed online one-class
exhibits superior detection performance and demonstrates support vector machine for anomaly detection over networks,” IEEE
lower model complexity. Trans. Cybern., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1475–1488, Apr. 2019.
 [14] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 V. C ONCLUSION Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020.
 In this article, we propose GT-HAD, a novel GT-HAD, [15] Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. Wu, and T. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly
which utilizes content similarity to guide the HSI reconstruc- detection with Otsu-based isolation forest,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
 Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 9079–9088, 2021.
tion. GT-HAD contains two key components, i.e., an AFB [16] C.-I. Chang, H. Cao, and M. Song, “Orthogonal subspace projection
that focuses on suppressing the anomalies reconstruction and target detector for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
a BFB that focuses on strengthening the background recon- Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 4915–4932, 2021.
struction. In addition, a gating unit is developed to regulate [17] B. Tu, X. Yang, W. He, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral anomaly
the activation states of these two branches based on a CMM. detection using reconstruction fusion of quaternion frequency domain
 analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jan. 31,
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that GT-HAD out- 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3227167.
performs many existing HAD methods and exhibits superior [18] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
detection performance. Our study introduces a new perspective anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
on integrating transformers into HAD tasks, and it can serve as pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
a stepping stone for further research in this direction. In future [19] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
 by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel.
work, we would like to devise a streamlined and efficient HAD Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533,
method. As we delve into this research, the criticality lies Jun. 2015.
not only in advancing the algorithms themselves but also in [20] R. Wang, H. Hu, F. He, F. Nie, S. Cai, and Z. Ming, “Self-weighted
optimizing the computational efficiency of HAD to meet the collaborative representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Signal
stringent requirements of real-time applications. Process., vol. 177, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 107718.
 [21] N. Ma, Y. Peng, and S. Wang, “A fast recursive collaboration representation anomaly detector for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 588–592, Apr. 2019.
 [22] H. Su, Z. Wu, A.-X. Zhu, and Q. Du, “Low rank and collaborative
 The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their great representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection via robust dictioefforts in reviewing this article. nary construction,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 169,
 pp. 195–211, Nov. 2020.
 R EFERENCES [23] S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Zhong, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 detection via locally enhanced low-rank prior,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 [1] L. Fang, P. Zhou, X. Liu, P. Ghamisi, and S. Chen, “Context enhancing Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6995–7009, Oct. 2020.
 representation for semantic segmentation in remote sensing images,” [24] Y. Xu, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Chang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Sep. 9, 2022, doi: decomposition-based dictionary reconstruction and anomaly extraction
 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3201820. framework for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
 [2] N. He, L. Fang, S. Li, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Skip-connected covariance Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1248–1252, Jul. 2020.
 network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural [25] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized low-
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1461–1474, May 2020. rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 [3] R. Dian, S. Li, and L. Fang, “Learning a low tensor-train rank repre- Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, Jan. 2020.
 sentation for hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Neural [26] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 2672–2683, Sep. 2019. tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
 [4] M. Shimoni, R. Haelterman, and C. Perneel, “Hypersectral imaging IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
 for military and security applications: Combining myriad processing Mar. 2022.
 and sensing techniques,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. Replaces [27] S. Sun, J. Liu, X. Chen, W. Li, and H. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detec-
 Newsletter, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 101–117, Jun. 2019. tion with tensor average rank and piecewise smoothness constraints,”
 [5] S. Sudharsan, R. Hemalatha, and S. Radha, “A survey on hyperspectral IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 4, 2022, doi:
 imaging for mineral exploration using machine learning algorithms,” in 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152252.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. Netw. (WiSPNET), [28] S. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, and W. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 Mar. 2019, pp. 206–212. detection based on adaptive low-rank transformed tensor,” IEEE
 [6] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jan. 24, 2023, doi:
 optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3236641.
 Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Oct. 1990. [29] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
 [7] H. Kwon, “Adaptive anomaly detection using subspace separation for tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
 hyperspectral imagery,” Opt. Eng., vol. 42, no. 11, p. 3342, Nov. 2003. IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
 [8] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Weighted- [30] J. Lei, S. Fang, W. Xie, Y. Li, and C.-I. Chang, “Discriminative recon-
 RXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics struction for hyperspectral anomaly detection with spectral learning,”
 estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 7406–7417,
 Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366, Oct. 2020.
 Jun. 2014. [31] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
 [9] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convoluanomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014. Art. no. 5503314.
LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION 3645

[32] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Deep low-rank prior for [52] Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, F. Wen, and C. Zhu, “AMP-net: Denoisinghyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., based deep unfolding for compressive image sensing,” IEEE Trans.
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5527017. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 1487–1500, 2021.
[33] X. Wang, L. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Local spatial–spectral information- [53] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: A
 integrated semisupervised two-stream network for hyperspectral simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann. Intern. Med., vol. 110,
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, no. 11, pp. 916–921, 1989.
 Art. no. 5535515. [54] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target
[34] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, D. Quan, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, “AUD-net: A detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE
 unified deep detector for multiple hyperspectral image anomaly detection Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2021.
 via relation and few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 Syst., early access, Oct. 27, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3213023.
[35] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
 discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
 network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Jie Lian received the B.S. degree from the
 Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022. Southwest University of Science and Technology,
[36] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, Mianyang, China, in 2017, and the M.S. degree from
 “BS3 LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for North China Electric Power University, Beijing,
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218. Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science
[37] K. Li et al., “Spectral–spatial deep support vector data description for and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology,
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., Beijing.
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522316. His research interests include hyperspectral and
[38] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for medical image processing.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 vol. 72, 2022, Art. no. 5001817.
[39] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514.
[40] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Hyperspectral Lizhi Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising CNN regulariza- Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9553–9568, in 2011 and 2016, respectively.
 Nov. 2021. He is currently a Professor with the School of
[41] C. Zhao, C. Li, S. Feng, and W. Li, “Spectral–spatial anomaly detec- Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute
 tion via collaborative representation constraint stacked autoencoders of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interfor hyperspectral images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, ests include computational photography and image
 pp. 1–5, 2022. processing.
[42] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank Dr. Wang received the Best Paper Runner-Up
 embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Award of ACM MM 2022 and the Best Paper Award
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 35, 2020, pp. 4139–4146. of IEEE VCIP 2016.
[43] H. Du, J. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Wang, and E. Meijering, “SwinPA-net: Swin
 transformer-based multiscale feature pyramid aggregation network for
 medical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 early access, Sep. 19, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3204090. He Sun received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
[44] Y. Wang et al., “Learning oriented object detection via naive geometric and electrical engineering from the University of
 computing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Strathclyde, Glasgow, U.K., in 2020.
 Feb. 10, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3242323. He is currently an Assistant Researcher with the
[45] H. Chen, G. Yang, and H. Zhang, “Hider: A hyperspectral image Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging
 denoising transformer with spatial–spectral constraints for hybrid noise Technology, Aerospace Information Research Instiremoval,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Oct. 19, tute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3215751. His research interests include hyperspectral target
[46] I. O. Tolstikhin et al., “MLP-Mixer: An all-MLP architecture for detection and band selection.
 vision,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2021,
 pp. 24261–24272.
[47] M. Chen, H. Peng, J. Fu, and H. Ling, “AutoFormer: Searching transformers for visual recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICCV), 2021, pp. 12270–12280.
[48] D. Lian, Z. Yu, X. Sun, and S. Gao, “AS-MLP: An axial shifted MLP Hua Huang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 architecture for vision,” 2021, arXiv:2107.08391. B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong Univer-
[49] T. Plötz and S. Roth, “Neural nearest neighbors networks,” in Proc. Adv. sity, Xi’an, China, in 1996 and 2006, respectively.
 Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2018, pp. 1087–1098. He is currently a Professor with the School of
[50] Z. Zha, X. Yuan, J. Zhou, C. Zhu, and B. Wen, “Image restoration Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University,
 via simultaneous nonlocal self-similarity priors,” IEEE Trans. Image Beijing, China. His main research interests
 Process., vol. 29, pp. 8561–8576, 2020. include image and video processing, computational
 photography, and computer graphics.
[51] C. Mou, J. Zhang, and Z. Wu, “Dynamic attentive graph learning
 Dr. Huang received the Best Paper Award of ICML
 for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 2020/EURASIP2020/PRCV2019/ChinaMM2017.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 4328–4337.