4026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

GTAE-IDS: Graph Transformer-Based Autoencoder
 Framework for Real-Time Network
 Intrusion Detection
Jalal Ghadermazi , Soumyadeep Hore , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ankit Shah , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Nathaniel D. Bastian , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) utilize I. I NTRODUCTION
signature and anomaly-based methods to detect malicious activities within networks. Advances in machine learning (ML) and
deep learning (DL) algorithms have enabled NIDS to analyze
large volumes of data and identify complex patterns. However,
 N ETWORK intrusion detection systems (NIDS) monitor
 network traffic to detect intrusions through signaturebased and anomaly-based detection techniques. The progress
traditional ML/DL approaches in NIDS have primarily relied on in machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms,
flow-based features and utilized flat data formats, such as vectors especially for anomaly-based detection, has significantly
or grids, which limit their ability to recognize the structural enhanced the precision of NIDS in distinguishing between
and contextual nuances of network attacks, particularly in
real-time. Additionally, most NIDS depend on supervised or benign and malicious activities in network traffic. The intesemi-supervised learning, requiring extensive labeled data that gration of these algorithms within NIDS empower them to
is time-consuming to generate and not always feasible. This process and learn generalizable and intricate patterns from
reliance restricts their ability to detect novel attacks, as they large amounts of data [1]. Until recently, the predominant
typically only recognize threats similar to those encountered approach in ML/DL-based network intrusion detection systems
during training. Hence, there is a significant need to develop
NIDS that can operate in near real-time, eliminate the need (NIDS) relied on flat data formats like vectors or grids,
for labeled data, and effectively identify novel attack patterns. which are commonly used in image representations. Although
We propose GTAE-IDS, a novel unsupervised packet-based these models showcase impressive capabilities in learning
graph neural network framework aimed at early and precise patterns within the data, they face limitations in capturing
anomaly detection in network traffic. GTAE-IDS employs graph the intrinsic structural and contextual patterns associated with
embeddings to capture and process network traffic data swiftly,
creating sequential packet-based graphs that reflect network network attacks. Network data inherently possesses a graph
communications. Our approach employs graph autoencoders to structure, and graphs serve as universal representations that
identify structural and global patterns in benign data without provide a high-level and abstract overview of a system, encapneeding labeled graph data, enhancing detection capabilities sulating both structural and contextual information. Hence,
against novel attacks. Incorporating transformers in the encoder representing network data as a graph and developing graph
segment, GTAE-IDS effectively discerns contextual patterns in
network traffic, achieving over 98% accuracy in identifying representation learning (GRL) methods to learn the associated
malicious activities on benchmark network intrusion data sets. structural features present a promising approach. The increasing popularity of DL has facilitated the emergence of graph
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, graph representation learning, graph transformer, autoencoders, real-time neural network (GNN) involving spectral and spatial convoanomaly detection, network security. lutions applied to graph structures, demonstrating promising
 results in the context of NIDS [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7],
 Received 24 May 2024; revised 22 November 2024; accepted 24 March [8], [9].
2025. Date of publication 3 April 2025; date of current version 22 April However, existing GNN studies in literature face several
2025. This work was supported in part by U.S. Military Academy (USMA)
under Grant W911NF-22-2-0045 and in part by U.S. Army Combat Capa- limitations. GNN-based NIDS typically employ flow-based
bilities Development Command (DEVCOM) U.S. Army Command, Control, features, in which packets are aggregated and detection
Communications, Computers, Cyber, Intelligence, Surveillance and Recon- techniques are applied on the characteristics of the flows.
naissance (C5ISR) Center under Grant USMA21056. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Flow-based NIDS are well-suited for offline traffic analy-
Prof. Husrev T. Sencar. (Corresponding author: Ankit Shah.) sis as they process packets collected after communication
 Jalal Ghadermazi and Soumyadeep Hore are with the Department has concluded, making them effective only for retrospecof Industrial and Management Systems Engineering, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: jghadermazi@usf.edu; tive assessments. However, intrusions and attacks manifest
soumyadeep@usf.edu). through sequences of suspicious and benign packets between
 Ankit Shah is with the Department of Operations and Deci- the sender and receiver in a network. Therefore, a packetsion Technologies, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
(e-mail: ankit@iu.edu). based GNN approach is suitable for real-time traffic analysis,
 Nathaniel D. Bastian is with United States Military Academy, West Point, enabling prompt detection of network anomalies as they occur.
NY 10996 USA (e-mail: nathaniel.bastian@westpoint.edu). While many existing GNN studies focus on flow-based fea-
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3557741, provided by the authors. tures, the exploration of packet-based GNNs for NIDS remains
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3557741 underexplored. Furthermore, a significant portion of GNN-

 © 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4027

based NIDS follows either a supervised or semi-supervised strates the effectiveness of our framework. Finally, Section VI
learning paradigm which introduces two major challenges. presents the concluding remarks of this paper and outlines
Firstly, labeling graph data is a time-consuming process and future research directions.
may not always be applicable, particularly in scenarios like
detecting anomalous activity within expansive networks where II. R ELATED L ITERATURE
obtaining ground truth labels proves challenging. Additionally,
 In this section, we present our literature review findings
training supervised models often demand significant compuon different graph representations of network data and the
tational resources, especially when dealing with vast data sets
 data types used to construct graphs for identifying attacks and
such as network data [10], [11]. Secondly, these methods struganomalies in network traffic.
gle in detecting novel attacks, which employ new structural
patterns that have not been exposed to the models during
training, leading to limitations in the detection capability of A. Graph Representation of Network Traffic
GNN-based NIDS. A computer network can be viewed as a system with
 In this study, we introduce GTAE-IDS, a novel unsupervised multiple entities interconnected. Representing large computer
packet-based GNN framework utilizing graph embeddings networks as graphs is highly intuitive. Nodes typically repaimed at achieving early and precise anomaly detection in resent the entities within the network (such as printers,
network traffic. The contributions of this study are multi- servers, databases, desktops, etc.), while communication or
faceted and encompass the following aspects. First, GTAE-IDS connections between these entities are usually depicted as
operates in near real-time, capturing network traffic data edges. Literature studies have explored using extracted flow
and decomposing it through dynamic processes to construct data, authentication data, and packet data to construct this
sequential packet-based graphs that represent network com- node-edge structure, illustrating computer network traffic [8],
munications. Second, we propose utilizing graph autoencoders [15], [16].
to uncover structural and global patterns within benign data, Flow data is the most popular among them. Flows are
employing a fully unsupervised approach. This eliminates the abstractions made of multiple packets captured over a period
requirement for labeled graph data and enhances the robust- of time. One flow can be identified as a 5-tuple inforness of NIDS against previously unseen attacks, bolstering its mation: Source IP, Destination IP, Source Port, Destination
ability to detect emerging threats. Furthermore, the sequences Port, and Protocol. Within a flow, data encapsulates statistical
of packets within each communication graph bear resemblance summaries of various packets comprising the flow, includto the sequences of words in a sentence. Hence, recognizing ing metrics such as average byte length, packet count, and
the sequential nature of packet transmission in each communi- minimum/maximum/average inter-arrival times, among others.
cation, we employ transformers in the encoder segment of the Some studies have advocated a straightforward strategy where
graph autoencoder model. This approach aims to capture the flows represent all nodes, with edges representing commucontextual patterns inherent in benign data, thereby enhancing nications between the source and destination IP addresses
the model’s ability to discern meaningful structures within the involved in the respective flow [8]. Initially, a bipartite graph
network traffic data. In summary, although dynamic GNNs is constructed encompassing all source and destination IP
are employed in other studies, the unique application and addresses, which subsequently undergoes transformation into a
innovations found in GTAE-IDS, specifically the unsupervised linegraph. This method proposes the incorporation of residual
learning framework, packet-level representation, integration nodes to balance the size disparity between the source and
of transformers, near real-time processing, and emphasis destination node sets. An alternative approach involves creon emerging threats, constitute significant advancements in ating an intermediary attribute node storing diverse statistical
the realm of network anomaly detection. These innovations information pertaining to the flow between two IP addresses
enhance detection capabilities and tackle critical challenges [15]. The direction of flow also assumes significance in the
present in current methodologies. Finally, our framework representation. Chang and Branco amalgamated forward and
effectively identifies ongoing malicious communications with backward packets to generate an aggregated flow, whereas
accuracies exceeding 98% on three contemporary publicly Pujol-Perich et al. considered two distinct flows for forward
available network intrusion data sets, CIC-IDS2017 [12], CIC- and backward packets.
IDS2018 [13], and ACI-IoT-2023 [14]. Notably, GTAE-IDS Another efficient way of handling the intrusions is by focusachieves this high level of accuracy by constructing communi- ing specifically on authentication requests. This method is
cation graphs with very few initial packets in an ongoing flow, particularly effective in detecting attacks that rely on malicious
indicating a paradigm shift in the early detection of network authentications. In this type of representation, nodes are mostly
intrusions. users and edges are analogous to authentication requests [16].
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- A meticulous method of constructing detailed graphs with
tion II examines prior research in network intrusion detection exhaustive information involves utilizing packet data. Packets
and highlights distinctions between our approach and exist- encapsulate payloads, which constitute the actual data intended
ing methods. Section III details the design of our proposed for transmission, along with several layers of header informaframework. Section IV provides the details of the experiments tion. Despite encryption measures, packet payload data can
including the data, specifics of the models, and experimental either reveal or obscure crucial attack information. Intuitively,
cases. Section V presents the experimental results and demon- packet data can be translated into graphs [17], [18], for
4028 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF D IFFERENT G RAPH -BASED NIDS IN R ECENT L ITERATURE

example, by assigning nodes to IP addresses and establishing training phase and in effectively detecting newly emerged
an edge for each packet transmitted between a pair of nodes. attacks.
However, the practice of creating distinct edges for every Our research leverages packet-based network data to
packet typically leads to scalability concerns, rendering such approach intrusion detection through a graph-based framea graph structure seldom employed in the literature. Table I work. In contrast to previous packet-based NIDS approaches,
provides a summary of the different graph representations and we construct dynamic graphs for each network flow utilizing
learning-based approaches used in literature for NIDS. We only the sequence of the initial p packets, rather than the
have identified and listed the type of learning, classification entire flow data. This methodology offers two significant
task, graph, DL algorithm(s), and data used in each of the advantages for NIDS. Firstly, it enables quick identificastudies presented in the respective papers. We provide an tion of anomalous activities within the network. Secondly,
extended literature review covering studies on both flow- by exclusively utilizing benign communication graphs, we
based and packet-based GNNs for NIDS in the supplemental introduce graph transformer-based autoencoder (GTAE) for
appendix. unsupervised detection of anomalous activities, eliminating the
 dependency on labeled data and enhancing resilience against
 novel attacks. GTAE autonomously extracts embeddings from
B. Gaps in Literature and Our Work both graph features and packet data through the utilization of
 the graph transformer-based encoder model. We then employ
 While flow-based detection methods are commonly utilized a selection of ML/DL algorithms tailored for anomaly detecin NIDS, their application is primarily restricted to offline tion, which obviates the need for extensive labeled training
detection of network attacks and anomalies. Furthermore, samples and manual parameter tuning. Next, we describe our
these approaches entail extracting features from packet data methodology in detail.
and aggregating them to generate arbitrary feature sets, leading
to two primary issues: (i) overlooking the intrinsic malicious behaviors of certain attacks inherent in packet data, III. M ETHODOLOGY
and (ii) encountering varied sets of training features with Network traffic can be effectively modeled as a dynamic
differing sizes and complexities, influenced by unique orga- graph based on two dynamic processes, wherein the graph
nizational contexts. Conversely, packet-based NIDS offer a structure undergoes variations in each process. The first progranular perspective of the actual data transferred within net- cess is time-based, causing changes in the graph structure
works, rendering them suitable for near real-time detection of over time. The number of nodes (vertices) and edges in the
anomalous activities. Nonetheless, existing packet-based NIDS graph associated with the network traffic changes for different
are significantly constrained, primarily treating network data timestamps {t, t + 1, . . . , t + n}. The second dynamic process
as attributed graphs within a supervised or semi-supervised is event-based and is contingent upon the number of packets,
learning framework, thus posing challenges both during the p, for each communication in the network traffic data at any
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4029

 Fig. 2. Graph generation process (only the generation of graph networks for
 2 and 3 packets is shown).

 A. Graph Generation Component
 The network traffic is continuously monitored, and relevant
 information is captured for any given timestamp t, which
 could be set by an organization in minutes or hours. This
 information encompasses packet data for each communication
 within the network traffic. The preferred format for storing
 network traffic data is the packet capture (pcap) format, widely
 acknowledged as the de facto standard for network packet
 capture. This format is widely used in packet sniffers and
 analysis tools like Wireshark [24]. Multiple open-source tools
 capable of performing this task exist, including well-known
Fig. 1. GTAE-IDS Framework: The anomaly detection process is depicted options such as libpcap [25] and tshark [26]. The goal of
exclusively for communication graphs involving 2 packets and 3 packets, the graph generation component is to construct distinct graph
denoted as Gt,2 and Gt,3 , respectively. The red edges displayed at the representations (Gt,p = (Vt,p , Et,p , Xv,t,p , Xe,t,p )) based on the
conclusion of the process within the performance metrics section highlight the anomalous edges identified by the preceding anomaly detection varying number of packets p within the network traffic at each
algorithms. timestamp t. To generate each graph, it is necessary to identify
 the characteristics of each Gt,p , including the nodes Vt,p and
 their features Xv,t,p , edges Et,p and their features Xe,t,p , as well
 as the graph type (whether directed or undirected). Next, we
arbitrary timestamp t. The graph structure changes with each discuss the details about the nodes, edges, and the graph type.
event, depending on p in each evolving communication. 1) Nodes: In network communications, each flow or ses-
 Our objective is to detect anomalous activities in the sion is uniquely identified by a four-tuple from source (Src)
dynamic graph, represented as Gt,p = (Vt,p , Et,p , Xv,t,p , Xe,t,p ), and destination (Dest), given by (S rcIP, S rcPort, DestIP,
where Gt,p is the graph snapshot of the network at times- DestPort). In the context of this study, to distinguish between
tamp t and event p, comprising nodes Vt,p , edges Et,p , nodes, we employ these identifiers to represent the nodes of
and node and edge features Xv,t,p and Xe,t,p , respectively. the graphs. Consequently, Vt,p = Vt,p S rcIP,S rcPort DestIP,DestPort
 ∪ Vt,p .
To achieve this objective, we propose a graph transformer- Furthermore, we model the nodes to be devoid of any intrinsic
based autoencoder framework. A transformer neural network attributes (Xv,t,p = ∅), capturing solely the global features
architecture with a self-attention mechanism can effectively of specific traffic data through a graph representation of
capture intricate relationships and dependencies among nodes interactions among source and destination addresses. Figure 2
and edges. The encoder-decoder neural network architecture shows the graph generation process. Notably, the graph on
can analyze the graph data, learning a latent space that the left represents the snapshot of the network at a timestamp
captures essential graph features, and can reconstruct the with p number of packets, with destinations depicted in green
original graph data based on this learned representation. circles and sources in grey circles. The numbers on the edges
Figure 1 illustrates our graph transformer-based autoencoder indicate the quantity of packets transmitted by each flow
intrusion detection system (GTAE-IDS) framework compris- or session at the time of the snapshot capture. Note that
ing two main components: (i) graph generation and (ii) during the decomposition of these snapshots into different
anomaly detection. Next, we present the details of these graph representations (Gt,p ), some nodes may not be present
components. in subsequent graphs.
4030 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 encrypted information in various protocols like HTTPS,
 FTPS, etc., is also removed. Additionally, considering that
 many packets within a flow or connection lack payload
 data, the segment data is systematically removed from
 each packet. These information bytes, depicted in red in
 Figure 3 (a), are therefore removed for the aforementioned considerations.
 • Information associated with the utilized IPs, Ports, and
 Protocols has the potential to introduce bias to the model,
 rendering it less applicable to diverse environments. Consequently, specific elements, including the IP version (one
 byte - 45), the differentiated services field (1 byte - 00),
 the protocol (one byte - 06), and the information pertaining to source and destination IP addresses (four bytes
 each - c0 a8 0a 32 & c0 a8 0a 03), are excluded from
 the IP header. Moreover, the information bytes concerning
 source and destination ports (two bytes each - db 2c & 0c
 c4) from the TCP header of each packet are also removed.
 These identified information bytes, highlighted in red
 in Figure 3 (b), undergo removal to address potential
 Fig. 3. Packet data structure. bias and enhance the model’s adaptability across different
 environments.
 • After the removal of these information bytes (totaling
 2) Edges: For every pair of source and destination nodes, 1569 bytes), the resulting packet data consists of 25 bytes
an edge is established if a flow or session exists between of information, as depicted in Figure 3 (c). Each byte sigthem. Additionally, the packet data transmitted through such nifies a feature in the packet-based feature representation.
flow or session is utilized for the edge features (Xe,t,p ) of the Subsequently, a byte-wise transformation is applied to the
graphs. Understanding the process of edge feature encoding packet-based features, converting the hexadecimal byte
employed in this study requires familiarity with the computer values to their respective decimal values. The decimal
network standards and protocols. The Transmission Control values range from 0 (for 00 byte) to 255 (for ff byte).
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) model serves as the stan- Finally, each feature is normalized to a range from 0 to
dard model in network communication, governing the process 1, as illustrated in Figure 3 (d).
of information exchange across the internet. It comprises four Next, this processed packet data undergoes encoding into
layers: the network access layer (also known as the host-to- the edge features of the constructed graph representations.
network layer), the internet layer, the transport layer, and the 3) Graph Type: Network communication involves the backapplication layer. and-forth exchange of data between a source node and a
 Figure 3 (a) illustrates the distinct TCP/IP layers, accompa- destination node. In this context, the packets transmitted from
nied by the number of information bytes at each layer. Each a source node to a destination node are termed “forward
packet transmitted through the TCP protocol can contain up (fwd)” packets, while the reply packets from a destination
to 1594 information bytes. However, not every information node to a source node are referred to as “backward (bwd)”
byte contained within a packet is pertinent to the training packets. Certain attacks, such as SYN flooding, aim to keep
process, and there may be limitations in accessing certain the destination (server) occupied and exhaust its resources by
bytes. We outline the steps taken to prepare packet data inundating it with multiple null packets devoid of malicious
to ensure the extraction of the most concise and relevant data [28]. Therefore, distinguishing between forward (attacker
information conducive to efficient training. to server) and backward (server to attacker) packets becomes
 • Information pertaining to the environment and protocols crucial. Consequently, encoding the direction of each packet
 can introduce bias to the model, potentially limiting its in the edge features is necessary.
 applicability in diverse environments. To mitigate this Although this study adopts an undirected graph structure,
 bias, the Ethernet (ETH) header information (14 bytes), we propose a novel method to incorporate the directionality
 which includes the physical MAC address, is excluded information into the edge features. The edge features encoding
 from each packet. Furthermore, to prevent misalignment process considering the packets directionalities is illustrated
 issues between two packets of the same flow and min- in Figure 4. As mentioned earlier, each processed packet,
 imize noise in the model, both IP options and TCP regardless of direction, comprises 25 normalized features
 options are eliminated. Misalignment can occur when within the range of 0 to 1. To distinguish between fwd and
 the bytes in two feature representations of packets with bwd packets, we introduce a 50-feature long placeholder for
 and without options are not synchronized, resulting in each packet. For fwd packets, the first half (25 features)
 a reduction in model performance and interpretability are populated with the packet data, and the second half of
 [27]. The segment data (payload), which may contain the packet placeholder is zero-padded. Conversely, for bwd
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4031

 Fig. 4. The edge features encoding process.
 Fig. 5. The graph transformer-based autoencoder model (GTAE).

packets, indicating transmission from a destination node to a
 models consist of an encoder, tasked with decomposing the
source node, the second half of the packet placeholder is filled
 input features (x) into a lower-dimensional space, namely the
with the packet data, while the first half is zero-padded.
 bottleneck or latent representation (z), and a decoder network
 The proposed graph generation procedure provides a logical
 that reconstructs a representation ( x̂) of the input features from
and effective way to capture information within bidirectional
 the latent representation [32].
flows into edge features due to several reasons:
 Figure 5 illustrates an AE model consisting of an encoder
 • By allocating specific features to represent the direction of function f (·) and a decoder function h(·), parameterized by
 packets allows ML models to distinguish between packets φ and θ, respectively. The encoder network compresses the
 transmitted from the source node to the destination node original high-dimensional input x into a low-dimensional code
 and packets transmitted from the destination node to the denoted by z = fφ (x) within the bottleneck layer. Subsequently,
 source node. the decoder network reconstructs the input by generating
 • This approach provides a clear and intuitive represen- x̂ = hθ fφ (x) . Throughout the training phase, the parameters
 tation of packet direction within the edge features. By (θ, φ) are jointly learned to produce a reconstructed data
 splitting the placeholder into two halves and populating sample closely resembling the original input, i.e., hθ fφ (x) ≈
 
 each half differently based on the direction of the packet, x, effectively learning an identity function. A loss function
 a structured and easily interpretable encoding scheme can quantifies the difference between the original input data (x)
 be created. and the reconstructed output ( x̂). Various loss functions can be
 • The proposed method generates machine-readable fea- employed based on the use case and data characteristics. For
 tures that are suitable for input into ML models. By instance, if the feature sets exhibit different scales, mean absoincorporating directionality information directly into the lute error (MAE) could be a suitable loss function. However, in
 feature space the model’s ability to learn and recognize this study, the feature sets are of the same scale. Furthermore,
 patterns associated with different directions of packet our emphasis is on the precision of reconstruction, and we aim
 transmission can be enhanced. to penalize larger errors more significantly than smaller errors.
 • Allocating a fixed length placeholder for each packet Therefore, we employ mean squared error (MSE) as the loss
 ensures consistency in feature dimensionality, facilitating function, which can be calculated for n number of samples as
 uniform processing across all packets. Additionally, the follows:
 zero-padding of unused features ensures that the model n
 can effectively differentiate between meaningful packet 1 X (i) 2
 LAE (θ, φ) = x − hθ fφ x(i) (1)
 data and empty placeholders. n
 i=1

 In this study, we introduce an asymmetrical GTAE model
B. Anomaly Detection Component incorporating graph transformer layers for constructing the
 In the complex landscape of network security, the effective- encoder network and a deep neural network (DNN) archiness of classifiers within the supervised learning framework tecture for the decoder network. Such a design enables the
and anomaly detectors within the unsupervised learning frame- proposed GTAE to demonstrate the following capabilities:
work stands out as a pivotal focus. Each detection method • The global features of the graph for benign traffic are
possesses distinct strengths. An anomaly detector excels in captured through the utilization of graph transformer
identifying deviations from historical network communication layers in the encoder network.
patterns, regardless of whether these anomalies are linked to • Employing a straightforward DNN model for the decoder
known or new attacks. Therefore, we leverage an unsupervised facilitates the training process.
learning approach to develop NIDS capable of uncover- • After training the GTAE, the encoder model is detached
ing emerging patterns in traffic, including those associated and utilized in the subsequent phases, offering a
with previously unseen attacks. The autoencoder (AE) tech- lightweight network suitable for deployment.
nique, a promising deep learning method, operates within 1) Encoder Network: The graph transformer layers
the unsupervised learning paradigm by learning a compressed employed in the encoder network follow a methodology simirepresentation of input data samples without requiring explicit lar to the one proposed in [33], which supports edge features.
labels. AE models have been widely explored in literature In the case of a graph G with edge features γi j ∈ Rde ×1 for each
for constructing NIDS using flow data [29], [30], [31]. These edge between nodes i, j, the input edge features γi j undergo
4032 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

a linear projection to embed them into d-dimensional hidden The specifics of the GTAE model, including the choice of
features e0i j . activation functions, the number of graph transformer layers
 e0i j = K 0 γi j + k0 , (2) (L), the number of attention heads (H), the number of DNN
 layers (D), and neurons in each layer, may vary depending on
where K 0 ∈ Rd×de and k0 ∈ Rd represent the parameters of the input graph representation. We describe the specifics of
the linear projection layers. However, as there are no node the model in Section IV.
features available, we proceed to embed Laplacian positional
 3) Anomaly Detectors: Next, we discuss the generation
encodings (λi j ) [34] of dimension k through a linear projection,
 of edge embeddings for the train and test graphs using
and subsequently, add them to the edge features, resulting in
 the encoder network of the trained GTAEs (encoder-only),
ê0i, j .
 followed by the edge embedding results of the training graphs
 λ0i j = F 0 λi j + f 0 ; ê0i j = e0i j + λ0i j , (3)
 employed as part of the training data for the anomaly detecwhere F 0 ∈ Rd×k and f 0 ∈ Rd . It is important to note that the tion algorithms. Subsequently, we utilize the resulting edge
Laplacian positional encodings are exclusively added to the embeddings from the test graphs in the anomaly detection
edge features at the input layer and not during intermediate algorithms to identify anomalous edges. In the anomaly deteclayers. We now proceed to define the edge update equations tion algorithms, we use ML models instead of traditional
for a layer `. thresholding that uses anomaly scores statistics such as mean
 0 1 and standard deviation. The reason is that in the thresholding
 mechanism, the anomaly score is determined by human experts
 ê`+1 ` H @ k,` ` A
 X
 i, j = Oe kk=1 i j V ei, j ,
 wk,` (4)
 and often finding the optimal thresholding value is timej∈Ni
 consuming and prone to error. However, ML-based anomaly
where, detection algorithms use benign traffic data for training in
 Qk,` e`i,j · Kk,` e`i,k
 !
 a fully unsupervised approach, aiming to identify instances
 i j = SoftMaxj
 wk,` √ , (5)
 that differ significantly from the benign traffic distribution. By
 dk
 training on a data set composed of benign data embeddings,
wherein, Q denotes the query matrix, K denotes the key these algorithms can establish a reliable profile of normal
matrix, V denotes the value matrix, and Qk,` , K k,` , V k,` ∈ Rdk ×d , behavior, which then helps to identify deviations that may
O`e ∈ Rd×d , and k = 1 to H represents the number of signify anomalies. During testing, both normal and anomalous
attention heads, with k denoting concatenation. The attention data points (embeddings) are evaluated. The models output
outputs ê`+1
 i, j are subsequently forwarded to a FNN, followed a value of 0 for normal activities and -1 for anomalies: a
by residual connections and normalization layers, as: 0 indicates that the test instance aligns with the benign data
  
 êˆ `+1
 ij = LayerNorm e `
 ij + ê`+1
 ij , (6) profile, while a -1 signals a significant deviation, aligning with
   malicious activity.
 êˆˆ `+1
 ij
 `
 = We,2 ReLU W`e,1 êˆ `+1
 ij , (7) In this study, we adopted a multi-faceted approach to com-
   prehensively analyze available anomaly detection algorithms.
 e`+1 ij = LayerNorm êˆ `+1
 ij + êˆˆ `+1
 ij , (8) Our approach incorporates candidates from different perspectives, including proximity-based, outlier ensembles, and linear
where We,1`
 ∈ R2d×d , We,2` ˆ j`+1
 ˆ j`+1 , and êi
 ∈ Rd×2d , êi model approaches. The proximity-based approach leverages
denote intermediate representations. The edge representations the distribution of data to compute outlier scores efficiently.
obtained at the final layer of the encoder model (z) serve as It focuses on analyzing the proximity of data points within a
the bottleneck features, subsequently fed into a DNN-based feature space to identify anomalies effectively. The ensemdecoder model to reconstruct the original edge features (x). ble approach aims to identify anomalies by isolating them
 2) Decoder Network: The decoder is tasked with recon- into smaller partitions within a random forest structure. By
structing the input features (x) from the compressed repre- aggregating the results of multiple base learners, it enhances
sentation obtained in the bottleneck layer (z). Essentially, the the robustness and accuracy of anomaly detection. Lastly, the
decoder maps the encoded features back to the original input linear model approach relies on constructing a hyperplane to
space. Let’s denote the DNN layers as Di , where i represents segregate normal instances from anomalies within the feature
the layer index. The decoder can be expressed as: space. It utilizes linear separation techniques to classify data
 zi+1 = Wi zi + bi , (9) points as either normal or anomalous based on their position
 ai+1 = g zi+1 ,
 
 (10) relative to the hyperplane.
 In particular, we analyze several anomaly detection
where Wi is the weight matrix, bi is the bias vector, zi is algorithms from the aforementioned three approaches: (i)
the input to layer Di , zi+1 is the output after the linear the histogram-based outlier score (HBOS) [35] algorithm
transformation, g(·) is the activation function, and ai+1 is the (proximity-based), (ii) the isolation forest (IF) [36] and
output after activation. The output layer is denoted by: the isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
 ensembles (INNE) [37] (outlier ensembles), and (iii) the
 x̂ = Wout zfinal + bout , (11)
 one-class support vector machines (OCSVM) algorithm [38]
where Wout and bout are the weights and biases of the final (linear model). We not only utilize these individual anomaly
output layer, and zfinal is the output of the last layer. detection algorithms but also integrate their detection out-
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4033

comes in a voting-based ensemble method to enhance using two important metrics commonly employed for intrusion
robustness and accuracy beyond the capabilities of individual detection models, namely, true positive rate (TPR) and false
models. Specifically, we introduce a majority voting ensemble positive rate (FPR). These metrics are calculated from the
classifier where each algorithm “votes” for a specific class testing graph samples, as follows:
label (either benign or malicious). The final prediction is deter- • TPR: It is also known as the detection rate (DR) and is
mined by selecting the class label that receives the most votes. the ratio of correctly detected anomalous samples (TP)
This ensemble approach aims to leverage the diverse strengths and the total number of anomalies.
of individual algorithms, contributing to an improved and more • FPR: It is also known as the false alarm rate (FAR) and
reliable anomaly detection system. Below we provide a brief is the ratio of incorrectly detected benign samples as
description of each of these algorithms. anomalies (FP) and the total number of benign samples.
 • One-class support vector machines (OCSVM): The
 OCSVM is a linear approach that forms a hyperplane IV. N UMERICAL E XPERIMENT S ETUP
 to encapsulate normal instances while minimizing the
 influence of anomalies. OCSVM is effective in high- This section provides a comprehensive overview of the
 dimensional spaces and is particularly useful when nor- numerical experiments undertaken to evaluate our methodolmal instances occupy a small fraction of the feature space. ogy. First, we elaborate on the network traffic data employed
 1 T in the experiments. Next, we outline the process of generating
 ThePmobjective function is defined as minw,ξ,ρ 2 w w + graph sets for training and testing purposes. Finally, we delve
 i=1 ξi − ρ, subject to hw, φ(xi )i ≥ ρ − ξi for normal
 1
 ν
 instances and hw, φ(xi )i ≤ ρ + ξi for anomalies, where, w into the specifics of the models and the parameters utilized
 is the weight vector of the hyperplane used to separate within the framework.
 normal instances from anomalies, ξ is slack variable Our experiments were performed utilizing a 12th Generation
 introduced to allow for some misclassification of data Intel Core i9-12950HX processor, featuring a 30 MB cache,
 points, ρ denotes the offset or bias term, ν is a parameter 24 threads, and 16 cores. To enhance the training efficiency,
 that controls the trade-off between maximizing the margin an NVIDIA RTX A5500 graphics card with 16 GB GDDR6
 and minimizing the number of outliers, φ(xi ) denotes the SDRAM was employed, along with the latest installations
 feature mapping function, and m represents the number of CUDA, a universal parallel computing framework, and
 of training instances. cuDNN, a deep neural network acceleration library.
 • Isolation forest (IF): The IF technique, being an ensemble method, excels at isolating anomalies with ease, A. Data Description
 often requiring fewer partitions to highlight them promi-
 We conducted numerical experiments utilizing three widely
 nently. IF demonstrates efficiency, especially in scenarios
 used publicly available data sets: CIC-IDS2017 [12], CICinvolving high-dimensional data and rare anomalies. The
 IDS2018 [13], and ACI-IoT-2023 [14]. Notably, in comparison
 isolation of an instance x is defined as h(x) = E(h(x)),
 to other publicly accessible data sets such as NSL-KDD [39]
 where h(x) is the path length to reach x in the tree,
 and KDD-CUP [40], these data sets are more recent, offering
 and E(h(x)) is the expected path length for an average
 more realistic representations of contemporary network traffic
 instance.
 [41]. These data sets comprise raw traffic data capturing vari-
 • Histogram-based outlier score (HBOS): The HBOS
 ous attack and benign communications in pcap files distributed
 method utilizes histograms to estimate the likelihood
 across specific days of the week. The pcap files contain raw
 of observing data points within each feature. HBOS is
 network packet data; however, these packets lack labels, in
 computationally efficient, particularly suited for large data
 contrast to readily available flow data sets. We processed these
 sets, and less sensitive to parameter tuning. The outlier
 pcap files following the procedures outlined in [42], [43] to
 score for an instance x is calculated as Score(x) =
 Q d extract packet data and label them based on the metadata
 i=1 Pi (xi ), where Pi (xi ) is the probability of observing provided by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC)
 xi in the histogram of the i-th feature and d denotes the
 [44] and the Army Cyber Institute (ACI) [45].
 dimensionality of the data, i.e., the number of features.
 • Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest neighbor ensembles (INNE): The INNE technique is also an B. Train and Test Graphs
 ensemble algorithm which combines isolation with a While the CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018, and ACI-IoT-2023
 nearest-neighbor approach, emphasizing the isolation of data sets are created over a span of multiple days, in the
 instances based on their distance from their nearest neigh- context of our framework, we consider them as a snapshot
 bors in a nearest-neighbor ensemble. INNE enhances of network traffic at an arbitrary timestamp t. To showcase the
 anomaly detection by considering the local density of effectiveness of our approach, we generate multiple sample
 instances and their relationships with neighbors. Simi- graph sets at different stages of the framework, including the
 lar to IF, the isolation of an instance x is defined as training of the GTAEs, training the anomaly detection algoh(x) = E(h(x)), where E(h(x)) is the expected path length rithms, and testing. Specifically, the benign data is employed
 for an average instance. in three key aspects of the framework: training graph sets for
 4) Evaluation Metrics: The evaluation of the anomaly the GTAEs (train sets 1), training graph sets for the anomaly
detectors’ performance in the GTAE framework is conducted detection algorithms (train sets 2), and combining benign
4034 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
 C HARACTERISTICS OF THE T RAINING AND T ESTING G RAPH S ETS S PECIFICATION D ETAILS OF VARIOUS GTAE M ODELS

 TABLE IV
and anomaly data to create testing graph sets for framework H YPERPARAMETER VALUES U SED FOR A LL GTAE M ODELS
evaluation. When creating the graph sets, we take into account
the following criteria:
 • We exclusively utilize benign samples from the CIC-
 IDS2017 data set for training both the GTAEs and
 anomaly detection algorithms. The CIC-IDS2018 and
 ACI-IoT-2023 data sets are then reserved for additional
 framework evaluation, demonstrating its effectiveness and
 generalization in detecting novel attacks or anomalies TABLE V
 within a new environment. H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION AND VALUES U SED IN G RID S EARCH FOR
 • As outlined in the graph generation process, each flow A NOMALY D ETECTION A LGORITHMS
 corresponds to an undirected edge in the graph. The
 quantity of benign data utilized to construct the training
 graph sets 1 & 2 and testing graph sets for various graph
 representations p is consistent and comprises 5000, 2000,
 and 5000 edges, respectively.
 • In the testing phase, we incorporate anomaly data from
 each attack type. Given the substantial volume of anomalous data for the DDoS and DoS Hulk classes, we limit Table III. The remaining hyperparameters are selected based
 the usage to 5000 edges for each of these attack types. on best empirical values through experimentation using grid
 • The number of edge features for different Gt,p ’s is equal search, as shown in Table IV.
 to 2 × 25 × p. After completing the training of GTAEs, the optimized
 • The initial packet in any communication/flow is typically encoder-only models were employed to generate edge embeda synchronize (SYN) packet, devoid of any malicious dings (i.e., bottleneck features) from both the training graphs
 intent. Consequently, we initiate the creation of graph sets (train 2) and testing graphs for each graph representation.
 from p = 2 packets. Furthermore, we continue generating The train 2 graph sets consist solely of benign traffic data,
 graph sets up to p = 8 packets, as indicated in [43], as outlined in Table II. These train 2 graphs are used with the
 where this number of packets per communication proves encoder-only model to generate edge embeddings, which are
 sufficient for anomaly detection. then applied to train the ML-based anomaly detection models.
 The characteristics of the sample graph sets utilized to Importantly, a distinct set of benign data is used to construct
generate various graphs during both the training and testing the graphs at this stage, ensuring no overlap with the benign
phases are detailed in Table II. For example, in the case of data used in the train 1 graph sets that trained the GTAE. This
p = 3, indicating a snapshot of dynamic graphs for flows approach allows for a more realistic and robust profiling of
comprising three packets each, the edge features amount to the benign data by training the ML-based anomaly detection
150 features. Furthermore, the training data set 1 comprises a algorithms on a different set of benign graphs. In the evaluation
graph encompassing benign flows, consisting of 7144 nodes phase, both benign and anomalous data points are included
(including source and destination IPs/Ports) and 5000 edges to create graph sets from the CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018,
representing the flows. and ACI-IoT-2023 data sets, as previously noted. We utilized
 four algorithms: OCSVM, IF, INNE, and HBOS for anomaly
 detection.
C. Model Specifics and Parameters We employed the grid search method in each experiment
 For each graph representation, the training of the GTAE for parameter tuning, ensuring optimal configurations for
model involved subgraph sampling from the corresponding each detection algorithm. The grid search involved parameters
training graph set (train 1). Each GTAE model comprises such as contamination for all algorithms, the kernel type for
a transformer-based encoder and a DNN-based decoder, as OCSVM, the number of estimators for IF, the number of
discussed earlier in Section III. The number of graph trans- estimators for INNE, and the number of bins for HBOS.
former and DNN layers in both encoder and decoder parts Table V provides a detailed overview of the grid search
varies depending on the graph representation, as outlined in parameters. The contamination parameter plays a critical role
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4035

 TABLE VI
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON CIC-IDS2017 DATA S ET ACROSS D IFFERENT G RAPH R EPRESENTATIONS

in setting the expected proportion of anomalies within the data the importance of the context and information provided by
set. In the grid search, we evaluated values ranging from 0.001 the GRL paradigm utilized in this study. Lastly, we conduct
to 0.1 to assess how sensitive the models were to different comparative analysis with the state-of-the-art approaches to
contamination levels. Lower contamination values (e.g., 0.001 assess the superiority of GTAE-IDS.
and 0.01) were tested to determine the models’ robustness in
cases with a very small fraction of anomalies, while higher A. Performance Results on Cic-IDS2017 Test Graph Sets
values (e.g., 0.05 and 0.1) were explored for data sets with Table VI shows the performance of the anomaly detection
a moderate level of anomalies. We observed that as the con- models on the CIC-IDS2017 test graph sets through the TPR
tamination level increased, detection rates generally improved and FPR metrics defined in Section III. It can be observed
due to the model’s increased focus on potential anomalies. that the performance improves as the dynamic graph evolves in
However, excessive contamination values led to higher false terms of the total number of packets in the flows, as evidenced
positives, as the models began labeling more normal traffic by the metric values. The best performance across the metrics
as anomalous. The optimal contamination values, as indi- is observed with graph representation of eight packets with an
cated by performance metrics, typically fell between 0.01 and anomaly detection rate (TPR) of 99.04% for the voting-based
0.05, balancing high detection rates with lower false-positive ensemble model. Achieving such a high TPR when only the
rates. For OCSVM, the ‘rbf’ kernel showed superior anomaly first few packets are communicated in a flow indicates that
detection due to its ability to capture complex patterns, while formulating network traffic as a dynamic graph representation
simpler kernels like ‘linear’ and ‘poly’ offered faster but using GTAE-IDS enables quick and accurate detection of
less accurate results. In IF and INNE, increasing the number anomalies in network traffic.
of estimators improved detection reliability, although values Next, we present the performance of the model in detecting
above 150 provided minimal additional benefits while raising anomalies across different types of network attacks. The CICcomputational costs. For HBOS, a moderate bin count (around IDS2017 testing graph sets were generated to include flows
15-20) balanced granularity and detection accuracy, as too few (edges) from all attack classes in the graph representation
bins missed subtle patterns, and too many led to overfitting. along with benign edges. In the previous experiment we have
In Table V, the best hyperparameter values are highlighted treated all attack classes edges as anomalous edges to evaluate
in bold font after employing the grid search method. After the GTAE-IDS performance. However, it is equally important
training each algorithm, the test graphs from CIC-IDS2017, to see how our framework is performing when exposed to
CIC-IDS2018, and ACI-IoT-2023 data sets were utilized to malicious traffic associated with specific attack types. For this
evaluate the model’s success in an unsupervised manner, as experiment, we extracted new testing graph sets with each set
illustrated in the ‘Anomaly Detection’ component in Figure 1. containing edges only belonging to a specific attack type. We
 generated graph sets for all attack types presented in the CIC-
 V. A NALYSIS OF R ESULTS IDS2017 pcap file. Table VII shows the anomaly detection
 This section presents the results and analysis of the exper- results per attack type using CIC-IDS2017 test graph sets for
iments conducted using our GTAE-IDS framework. We first the eight packets graph representation. The anomaly detection
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach using the test graph rates across all attack types exceed 98.5%, indicating that
sets from CIC-IDS2017. We analyze the performance across GTAE-IDS is able to identify the malicious traffic representing
the different graph representations and extract insights into the all network attacks with high accuracy.
sufficient number of packets being transmitted in order that
GTAE-IDS framework can detect anomalies with optimal pre- B. Performance Results on Cic-IDS2018 and Aci-IoT-2023
cision. Next, we assess the GTAE-IDS framework performance Test Graph Sets
in detecting novel anomalies from a new target environment, Next, we assess the GTAE-IDS performance and general-
CIC-IDS2018. We then perform an ablation study to showcase ization in detecting anomalies in new environments. In this
4036 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VII
 A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS P ER ATTACK T YPE U SING CIC-IDS2017 T EST G RAPH S ETS FOR 8-PACKET G RAPH R EPRESENTATION

 TABLE VIII of the GTAE-IDS framework. Specifically, we examine how
GTAE-IDS P ERFORMANCE R ESULTS ON CIC-IDS2018 AND ACI-I OT- providing context through graph representation enhances the
 2023 T EST G RAPH S ETS ACROSS D IFFERENT ability of our framework to detect anomalies. GTAE-IDS
 G RAPH R EPRESENTATIONS
 leverages a graph transformer-based encoder network within
 an autoencoder architecture to capture the contextual and
 global features from benign graph data. Therefore, we aim
 to discern the impact of omitting graph representation by
 directly applying the anomaly detection algorithms to the edge
 features of graph sets. In other words, the edge features of
 the testing graphs are stored in a tabular format and then the
 anomaly detection algorithms are applied. Table X displays
 the performance of GTAE-IDS in detecting anomalies in data
 samples containing eight packets from CIC-IDS2017, covering
 both benign and malicious data. The differences in TPR and
 FPR between the approaches, with and without context (GRL),
 are presented in the last row of the table. There is an average
 improvement of 4.4% in TPR and 3.97% in FPR with GRL
experiment, the testing graph sets only include the malicious enabled. We further show the comparison of anomaly detection
traffic data from the CIC-IDS2018 and ACI-IoT-2023 data sets. performance across individual attack types between both these
Table VIII presents the GTAE-IDS anomaly detection results approaches in the supplemental appendix (see Table XVI in
for graph representations of two to eights packets for the best the supplemental material).
method (ensemble model). The high detection results, over
98%, for the eight-packet graph representations from CIC-
 D. Comparative Analysis
IDS2018 and ACI-IoT-2023 test graphs further validate the
effectiveness of GTAE-IDS in detecting anomalies irrespective This section presents a comprehensive comparative analysis
of the network environment. We further show the anomaly of our framework with other state-of-the-art methods within
detection results per attack type for graph representation of both the context of GNN-based methodologies and broader
eight packets for both CIC-IDS2018 and ACI-IoT-2023 data approaches utilized in the field of network intrusion detection.
sets. Table IX shows the anomaly detection results per attack Firstly, we conduct a performance evaluation of GTAE-IDS
type for various graph representation up to eight packets in comparison to recent GNN-based methods. Secondly, we
for both CIC-IDS2018 and ACI-IoT-2023 data sets. From compare the results of our approach with other non-GNN
the 12 attack types in the ACI-IoT-2023 data set, we have methods in the literature that utilize packet information in their
selected six, Port Scan, DoS Slowloris, ICMP Flooding, Ping proposed NIDS. Lastly, we provide a detailed comparison of
Sweep, ARP Spoofing, and BruteForce, as representative cases our framework with another contemporary method employing
to demonstrate the generalization of our approach to a new a similar sequential packet representation approach but without
network environment. incorporating graph representation learning technique.
 1) Comparison With GNN-Based Methods: Given the
 absence of existing GNN-based approaches employing sequen-
C. Ablation Study tial packets in an unsupervised context, we have assessed the
 We conducted an ablation study to systematically evaluate performance of GTAE-IDS in comparison to recent state-ofthe impact of the GRL component on the overall performance the-art methods utilizing flow data for intrusion detection in
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4037

 TABLE IX
A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS P ER ATTACK T YPE U SING CIC-IDS2018 AND ACI-I OT-2023 G RAPH S ETS FOR 8 PACKET G RAPH R EPRESENTATION

 TABLE X of detection rate, GTAE-IDS outperforms all listed methods,
A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS W ITH AND W ITHOUT G RAPH R EPRESEN - achieving a TPR of 0.990, which surpasses even the best-
 TATION L EARNING (A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR 8-PACKET DATA ) performing non-GNN model, PBCNN, at 0.983. Additionally,
 our framework demonstrates a highly efficient inference time
 of 1.28 µs per packet, which is the lowest among all evaluated
 methods. This includes both the time required for graph
 generation and model inference. The results highlight the
 effectiveness of our approach in providing a rapid response
 with superior accuracy, making it promising for near real-time
 anomaly detection.
supervised settings. To accomplish this, we have chosen three
 3) Comparison With Other Sequential Packet-Based
methodologies from literature: E-GraphSAGE [7], GraphD-
 Method: Our approach considers packet-level data and
DoS [22], and another recent GNN-based approach proposed
 analyzes the temporal characteristics associated with the
in [15]. Experiments in this section are carried out using the
 ongoing sequence of packets in a flow. To ensure a fair
CIC-IDS2017 data set. Each of these methods is evaluated
 comparative analysis, we benchmark our approach against a
in a binary manner, with a balanced distribution of benign
 recent method from the literature called sequential packets
and attack samples for each attack type. Table XI displays
 image-based network intrusion detection system (SPINthe detection results (TPR) for different attacks across all the
 IDS) [43]. SPIN-IDS utilizes packet-level data to construct
approaches. The GTAE-IDS method demonstrated superior
 images from the sequential packets within ongoing network
performance over the other algorithms for the seven attack
 communications. These images are then processed through a
types and achieved nearly comparable results for the remaining
 CNN-based classifier to detect malicious activities. Table XIII
four attack types. Particularly noteworthy was the significant
 provides a comparison of our approach with SPIN-IDS across
improvement observed for the WebAttack-BruteForce, Infiltravarious representations, ranging from two to eight packets,
tion, and DoS Slowloris attack types, in comparison to other
 using the CIC-IDS2017 data set. The results demonstrate
approaches. This suggests that the inclusion of anomalous data
 the superior performance of our approach across all packet
from packets aids in accurately identifying attacks. Conversely,
 representations compared to SPIN-IDS. These results suggest
when combined and aggregated to derive flow-based data,
 that GTAE-IDS with the GRL paradigm effectively captures
these anomalous patterns in data may be lost, potentially
 the structural and contextual information inherent in network
impacting the effectiveness of the detection process.
 traffic data, leading to enhanced attack detection accuracy.
 2) Comparison With Non-GNN Methods: We conducted a We further compare both their performances in detecting
comparative analysis of our GTAE-IDS framework against individual attack classes in the supplemental appendix,
several non-GNN NIDS that leverage packet-level informa- demonstrating the superior attack detection ability of GTAEtion, as presented in recent literature. Table XII summarizes IDS. The results are shown in Table XVII in the supplemental
this performance comparison, showcasing detection rates and material.
inference times for our approach alongside other DL models
that were evaluated on the CIC-IDS2017 data set, including
AEIDS [46], HAST-II [47], PL-RNN [48], Packet2Vec [49], E. Efficiency Evaluation
PayloadEmbeddings [50], and PBCNN [51]. Key metrics such Our methodological design enables the detection of anomaas detection rate (TPR) and inference time per packet (mea- lies without waiting for the completion of an entire network
sured in microseconds, µs) are reported in Table XII. In terms flow, which can sometimes range in hundreds of packets and
4038 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XI
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT GNN-BASED M ETHODS ON THE CIC-IDS2017 DATA S ET

 TABLE XII TABLE XIV
C OMPARISON OF GTAE-IDS W ITH N ON -GNN S TATE - OF - THE -A RT NIDS T RAINING AND T ESTING T IMES OF GTAE-IDS FOR D IFFERENT S TAGES
 F ROM L ITERATURE OF THE F RAMEWORK FOR THE G RAPH S NAPSHOT OF p = 8

 TABLE XV
 T RAINING AND T ESTING T IMES OF GNN-BASED M ETHODS

 TABLE XIII
GTAE-IDS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH SPIN-IDS FOR VARIOUS
 N UMBER OF PACKETS

 (MDT) presented in Table XV exclude the extraction time of
 initial features, specifically the statistical flow-based feature
 extraction time. Moreover, the time spent waiting for the
 completion of flows to extract the statistical features for the
 methods from literature is not considered for a fair comparison.
 In contrast, for GTAE-IDS we considered all the required
 stages of our framework from feature extraction and graph
 generation to anomaly detection process in Table XIV where
 GCT denotes the graph construction time, GRLT represents
 the graph representation learning time, and ADT indicates the
cause significant delays. We construct graphs based on packet anomaly detection time.
representations of up to eight packets, as literature (e.g., SPIN- A comprehensive comparison of training and testing times
IDS) and our findings suggest that malicious behavior can very highlights the efficiency of our model. In Table XV, existing
often be identified early in the packet sequence. This allows us GNN-based methods, such as E-GraphSAGE [7], GNN-based
to detect anomalies promptly and minimize processing time by [15], and GraphDDoS [22], have training times of 3.1, 2.7, and
halting further graph construction once an anomaly is detected. 4.6 hours, respectively, while our GTAE-IDS model requires a
For example, if an anomaly is identified at the 3-packet stage, slightly longer training time of 5.43 hours due to the inclusion
we avoid processing up to eight packets, conserving resources of a transformer-based encoder. Although this increases the
and improving overall efficiency. GTAE-IDS operates with initial training time, it is a one-time investment that does
a time complexity of O(c), where c represents the number not impact real-time performance. The additional complexity
of valid network communications. Each communication is enhances feature extraction and detection robustness, justifyrepresented by a single edge in the constructed graph, facili- ing the extended training duration. However, as per MDT,
tated through dynamic packet processing, which enables our which is crucial for real-time detection, GTAE-IDS demonsystem to scale efficiently as network traffic increases. This strates impressive performance. Our model achieves an MDT
design supports rapid anomaly detection without unnecessary value of 1.28 µs, which is competitive with one and faster
computation, which is crucial in high-traffic environments than other GNN-based methods, which have MDT values of
where quick response times are essential. 1.20 µs, 1.45 µs, and 2.12 µs, respectively. This shows that,
 Tables XV and XIV display the training time (in hours, despite the slightly higher training cost, our framework’s realh) and testing time (in microseconds, µs) of the various time inference performance is comparable to or better than
GNN-based methods and GTAE-IDS on the CIC-IDS2017 existing methods, confirming its suitability for near real-time
data set. The training time and the mean detection time anomaly detection.
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4039

 In addition to conducting experiments on CIC-IDS2018 and by the ensemble anomaly detection model using a graph
ACI-IoT-2023 data sets, we have also deployed our framework representation of first eight packets in a flow, indicating
in a real-world scenario to verify the time efficiency of GTAE- an early attack detection. Our research also assessed the
IDS. In this practical deployment, we use the same computing performance of GTAE-IDS in detecting anomalies across
resources as in the testing phase (Intel Core i9-12950HX CPU various types of network attacks. Different graph sets were
and NVIDIA RTX A5500 GPU), representing a typical high- generated to represent specific attack types, and the results
performance workstation in a cybersecurity environment. In showed that GTAE-IDS consistently achieved high anomaly
this deployment scenario, we thoroughly assessed the latency, detection rates, exceeding 98.5%, across all attack types. The
computational overhead, and efficiency of our GTAE-IDS study further evaluated GTAE-IDS performance in detecting
framework. These factors are critical in evaluating whether anomalies in a new environment using malicious traffic data
our model meets the near real-time requirements for network from the CIC-IDS2018 data set. The results demonstrated
anomaly detection. The scenario involved processing network that our framework maintained high anomaly detection rates
traffic of 10,000 packets per second, simulating conditions (over 98%) even in a new network environment. The GRL
typical of a medium-sized enterprise. Below is an expanded paradigm integrated into our framework effectively captures
breakdown based on latency, computational overhead, and the both structural and contextual information within network
practicalities of deployment. traffic, resulting in enhanced accuracy for detecting malicious
 Latency, defined as the time taken for the model to process activities when compared to other state-of-the-art methods in
each packet and produce an anomaly detection result, is a the literature.
key factor in ensuring near real-time capability. In our testing, While the GTAE-IDS framework is designed to generalthe MDT was measured at 1.32 µs per packet, demonstrating ize to unseen data by modeling normal traffic patterns and
that GTAE-IDS introduces minimal latency. This low latency identifying deviations, its performance is inherently tied to
ensures timely anomaly detection without creating network the stability of these patterns. Significant changes in traffic
bottlenecks, which is essential for maintaining smooth opera- behavior over time, due to factors like temporal shifts or
tions in security-sensitive applications. Specifically, the MDT network variations, can impact anomaly detection accuracy.
value of 1.32 µs per packet (with 0.06 µs, 0.83 µs, and This limitation can be addressed through either periodically
0.43 µs allocated for GCT, GRLT, and ADT, respectively) retraining the model with updated data to reflect evolving
enables GTAE-IDS to handle traffic rates of up to 10,000 traffic patterns or implementing an adaptive mechanism that
packets per second without noticeable delay. This efficiency is triggers retraining when key performance metrics indicate a
attributed to sequential packet processing and early termination decline. A promising direction for future research could also
upon detecting anomalies. As a result, GTAE-IDS achieves involve exploring hybrid approaches that combine periodic
near real-time detection with minimal latency and manageable retraining with real-time adaptive mechanisms, allowing the
computational overhead, making it well-suited for high-traffic model to dynamically adjust to evolving network conditions
environments, such as medium-sized enterprise networks. while minimizing computational overhead. Other promising
 In summary, although the transformer-based encoder future research directions include enhancing the scalability
requires an extended training phase, the deployed framework and adaptability of the GTAE-IDS framework for network
delivers robust and efficient real-time anomaly detection with intrusion detection by leveraging proprietary data sets. Addiminimal computational overhead. Achieving (mean) detection tionally, integrating network vulnerability scanner data into
times of 1.28 µs per packet during testing and 1.32 µs per the graph generation process presents an intriguing avenue for
packet in deployment, along with early anomaly detection research, as it could enable even earlier detection of attacks
capabilities, GTAE-IDS offers a scalable and an efficient by factoring in the exploitation probabilities of the machines
solution for near real-time applications in high-traffic network involved in network communications.
environments. These attributes underscore its effectiveness and
reliability for timely intrusion detection in dynamic network ACKNOWLEDGMENT
conditions. The views and conclusions expressed in this article are those
 of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
 of U.S. Military Academy, U.S. Army, U.S. Department of
 In this paper, we proposed a graph transformer-based Defense, or U.S. Government.
autoencoder framework for network intrusion detection. We
demonstrated the effectiveness of GTAE-IDS in detecting R EFERENCES
anomalies in evolving network traffic, across various types
 [1] C. Janiesch, P. Zschech, and K. Heinrich, “Machine learning and deep
of network attacks, and in different network environments, learning,” Electron. Mark., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 685–695, 2021.
showcasing its potential for practical applications in network [2] Q. Xiao, J. Liu, Q. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, and Y. Yao, “Towards
security. We evaluated our anomaly detection framework using network anomaly detection using graph embedding,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Comput. Sci., Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, Swizerland:
the CIC-IDS2017 test graph sets and measured the perfor- Springer, Jun. 2020, pp. 156–169.
mance based on TPR and FPR metrics. The results showed [3] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. M. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating botnet detection
that as the dynamic graph representing network traffic evolved with graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06344.
 [4] B. Zhang, J. Li, C. Chen, K. Lee, and I. Lee, “A practical botnet traffic
with more packets, the performance improved significantly. detection system using GNN,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Cyberspace Saf. Secur.
The best performance, with a TPR of 99.04%, was achieved Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 66–78.
4040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[5] W. W. Lo, G. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, [30] Y. Dong et al., “HorusEye: A realtime IoT malicious traffic detection
 “XG-BoT: An explainable deep graph neural network for botnet detec- framework using programmable switches,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur.
 tion and forensics,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 100747. Symp., 2023, pp. 571–588.
[6] J. Zhao, X. Liu, Q. Yan, B. Li, M. Shao, and H. Peng, “Multi-attributed [31] G. Andresini, A. Appice, N. D. Mauro, C. Loglisci, and D. Malerba,
 heterogeneous graph convolutional network for bot detection,” Inf. Sci., “Multi-channel deep feature learning for intrusion detection,” IEEE
 vol. 537, pp. 380–393, Oct. 2020. Access, vol. 8, pp. 53346–53359, 2020.
[7] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E- [32] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of
 GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
 for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Budapest, Jul. 2006.
 Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9. [33] V. P. Dwivedi and X. Bresson, “A generalization of transformer networks
[8] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Graph-based solutions with residuals for intru- to graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2012.09699.
 sion detection: The modified E-GraphSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms,” [34] V. P. Dwivedi, C. K. Joshi, A. T. Luu, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and
 2021, arXiv:2111.13597. X. Bresson, “Benchmarking graph neural networks,” J. Mach. Learn.
[9] G. Hu, X. Xiao, M. Shen, B. Zhang, X. Yan, and Y. Liu, “TCGNN: Res., vol. 24, no. 43, pp. 1–48, 2023.
 Packet-grained network traffic classification via graph neural networks,” [35] M. Goldstein and A. Dengel, “Histogram-based outlier score (HBOS): A
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 106531. fast unsupervised anomaly detection algorithm,” in Proc. Poster Demo
[10] B. Khemani, S. Patil, K. Kotecha, and S. Tanwar, “A review of Track, 2012, pp. 59–63.
 graph neural networks: Concepts, architectures, techniques, challenges, [36] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 datasets, applications, and future directions,” J. Big Data, vol. 11, no. 1, IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 p. 18, Jan. 2024. [37] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
[11] L. Waikhom and R. Patgiri, “A survey of graph neural networks in J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
 various learning paradigms: Methods, applications, and challenges,” ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 968–998, Nov. 2018.
 Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 6295–6364, Jul. 2023. [38] A. Bounsiar and M. G. Madden, “One-class support vector machines
[12] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis revisited,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Sci. Appl. (ICISA), May 2014, pp. 1–4.
 of the CICIDS2017 data set,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. [39] C. Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. (2009).NSL KDD Dataset.
 Privacy, Funchal-Madeira, Portugal. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. Accessed: Aug. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/
 2018, pp. 172–188. datasets/nsl.html
[13] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating [40] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
 in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, Jan. 2018, pp. 108–116. Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[14] N. Bastian, D. Bierbrauer, M. McKenzie, and E. Nack, 2023, “ACI IoT [41] H. Hindy et al., “A taxonomy of network threats and the effect of
 network traffic dataset,” IEEE Dataport, doi: 10.21227/qacj-3x32. current datasets on intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
[15] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Suarez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. Barlet- pp. 104650–104675, 2020.
 Ros, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for robust [42] S. Hore, J. Ghadermazi, D. Paudel, A. Shah, T. K. Das, and N. D. Basintrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 49, tian, “Deep PackGen: A deep reinforcement learning framework for
 no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jun. 2022. adversarial network packet generation,” 2023, arXiv:2305.11039.
[16] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “Euler: Detecting network lateral movement [43] J. Ghadermazi, A. Shah, and N. D. Bastian, “Towards real-time network
 via scalable temporal link prediction,” ACM Trans. Privacy Secur., intrusion detection with image-based sequential packets representation,”
 vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1–36, 2023. IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 157–173, Feb. 2025.
[17] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting [44] C. University of New Brunswick. (2023).Canadian Institute for Cyberand mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial–temporal graph con- security. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/
 volutional network,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, [45] I. of Things Res. Lab (IoTRL). (2023).Army Cyber Institute
 no. 6, pp. 3855–3872, Nov. 2022. (aci). [Online]. Available: https://cyber.army.mil/Research/Research-
[18] S. Govindaraju, W. V. R. Vinisha, F. H. Shajin, and D. A. Sivasakthi, Labs/Datasets/\#dataset1
 “Intrusion detection framework using auto-metric graph neural net- [46] B. A. Pratomo, P. Burnap, and G. Theodorakopoulos, “Unsupervised
 work optimized with hybrid woodpecker mating and capuchin search approach for detecting low rate attacks on network traffic with
 optimization algorithm in IoT network,” Concurrency Comput., Pract. autoencoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Protection Digit. Services
 Exper., vol. 34, no. 24, p. 7197, Nov. 2022. (Cyber Security), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[19] A. Protogerou, S. Papadopoulos, A. Drosou, D. Tzovaras, and I. Refani- [47] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
 dis, “A graph neural network method for distributed anomaly detection features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
 in IoT,” Evolving Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–36, Mar. 2021. IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
[20] J. Lan et al., “E-minBatch GraphSAGE: An industrial Internet attack [48] H. Liu, B. Lang, M. Liu, and H. Yan, “CNN and RNN based paydetection model,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, pp. 1–12, Jul. 2022. load classification methods for attack detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
[21] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A self- vol. 163, pp. 332–341, Jan. 2019.
 supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural [49] E. L. Goodman, C. Zimmerman, and C. Hudson, “Packet2 Vec:
 networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030. Utilizing word2 Vec for feature extraction in packet data,” 2020,
[22] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph arXiv:2004.14477.
 neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported [50] M. Hassan, M. E. Haque, M. E. Tozal, V. Raghavan, and R. Agrawal,
 Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD), May 2022, pp. 1275–1280. “Intrusion detection using payload embeddings,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
[23] A. Premkumar, M. Schneider, C. Spivey, J. V. Pavlik, and N. D. Bastian, pp. 4015–4030, 2022.
 “Graph representation learning for context-aware network intrusion [51] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 detection,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 12538, pp. 82–92, Jun. 2023. for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
[24] L. F. Sikos, “Packet analysis for network forensics: A comprehensive Art. no. 108117.
 survey,” Forensic Sci. Int., Digit. Invest., vol. 32, Mar. 2020, Art. no.
 200892.
[25] Libpcap. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
 www.tcpdump.org/ Jalal Ghadermazi is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[26] B. Merino, Instant Traffic Analysis With Tshark How-to. Birmingham, degree with the Industrial and Management Sys-
 U.K.: Packt Publishing, 2013. tems Engineering Department, University of South
[27] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions Florida, specializing in the field of cybersecurity. His
 in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. research interests span the areas of robustness, real-
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383. time analytics, and adversarial machine learning in
[28] M. M. Alani, Guide to OSI and TCP/IP Models. Cham, Swizerland: cybersecurity applications. He integrates principles
 Springer, 2014. from computer science, operations research, data
[29] Y. Yang, K. Zheng, B. Wu, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “Network intrusion science, and information technology to develop innodetection based on supervised adversarial variational auto-encoder with vative solutions for enhancing cybersecurity.
 regularization,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 42169–42184, 2020.
GHADERMAZI et al.: GTAE-IDS: GRAPH TRANSFORMER-BASED AUTOENCODER FRAMEWORK 4041

 Soumyadeep Hore (Graduate Student Member, Nathaniel D. Bastian (Senior Member, IEEE) is an
 IEEE) received the B.Tech. degree in mechanical Assistant Professor with the Department of Matheengineering from West Bengal University of Tech- matical Sciences, United States Military Academy,
 nology, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India, in 2015, and the also serving as a Chief Scientist and the Director,
 M.Tech. degree in industrial engineering from IIT Office of Science and Engineering at the Army
 (ISM) Dhanbad, India, in 2019. He is currently Cyber Institute, West Point. His research interpursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of ests lie at the intersection of artificial intelligence
 Industrial and Management Systems Engineering, (AI), operations research, data science, and systems
 University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA. His engineering with a strong focus on AI security,
 research interests include cybersecurity, predictive robustness and resiliency, intelligent battlefield comand prescriptive analytics, decision making under mand and control, and AI for cyberspace operations.
uncertainty, machine learning, multi-objective optimization, and deep reinforcement learning.

 Ankit Shah (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently an
 Assistant Professor in operations and decision technologies with the Kelley School of Business, Indiana
 University, and the Deputy Director of Cybersecurity with the Kelley’s Data Science and Artificial
 Intelligence Laboratory (DSAIL). His research interests are at the intersection of computer science,
 operations research, data science, and information technology, with a strong focus on artificial
 intelligence (AI) for cybersecurity and defense applications and security of AI systems. His current
research work is in the area of deep reinforcement learning and machine
learning for secure and efficient systems.