16840 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Guarding Graph Neural Networks for Unsupervised
 Graph Anomaly Detection
 Yuanchen Bei , Sheng Zhou , Jinke Shi, Yao Ma, Member, IEEE, Haishuai Wang,
 and Jiajun Bu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Unsupervised graph anomaly detection aims at V Set of nodes in G.
identifying rare patterns that deviate from the majority in E Set of edges in G.
a graph without the aid of labels, which is important for a Ni Neighborhood set of node vi .
variety of real-world applications. Recent advances have utilized graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn effective node
 n = |V| Number of nodes in G.
representations by aggregating information from neighborhoods. d Dimension of node attributes in G.
This is motivated by the hypothesis that nodes in the graph k Number of graph anomalies in G.
tend to exhibit consistent behaviors with their neighborhoods. Y Anomaly label set of nodes.
However, such consistency can be disrupted by graph anomalies S Anomaly score vector indicating node
in multiple ways. Most existing methods directly employ GNNs to abnormalities.
learn representations, disregarding the negative impact of graph
anomalies on GNNs, resulting in suboptimal node representations and anomaly detection performance. While a few recent I. I NTRODUCTION
approaches have redesigned GNNs for graph anomaly detection
 RAPH anomaly detection aims to identify rare patterns
under semi-supervised label guidance, how to address the adverse
effects of graph anomalies on GNNs in unsupervised scenarios
and learn effective representations for anomaly detection are still
 G or behaviors that significantly deviate from the majority
 of a graph [1], [2], [3]. It has attracted increasing attention
underexplored. To bridge this gap, in this article, we propose a
simple, yet effective framework for guarding GNNs for unsufrom both academia and industry due to its practical applicapervised graph anomaly detection (G3AD). Specifically, G3AD tions, such as network intrusion detection [1], social spammer
first introduces two auxiliary networks along with correlation detection [4], and financial fraud detection [5]. The scarcity
constraints to guard the GNNs against inconsistent information of anomaly labels in real-world applications, coupled with the
encoding. Furthermore, G3AD introduces an adaptive caching challenge of acquiring such labels, has led to a widespread
(AC) module to guard the GNNs from directly reconstructing study of unsupervised graph anomaly detection [6], [7]. Piothe observed graph data that contains anomalies. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our G3AD can outperform neer works on graph anomaly detection have separately mined
20 state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic and real-world the attributed anomalies and topological anomalies by feature
graph anomaly datasets, with flexible generalization ability in engineering and graph structure encoding, respectively [8], [9].
different GNN backbones. Recent breakthroughs in graph neural networks (GNNs) have
 Index Terms—Graph anomaly detection, graph learning, graph empowered the unified modeling of attributes and topology,
neural networks (GNNs), unsupervised anomaly detection. leading to significant advancements in unsupervised graph
 anomaly detection [10], [11], [12].
 N OMENCLATURE The success of representative GNNs, as illustrated in
 Abbreviation Expansion Fig. 1(a), has heavily relied on aggregating information
 G = ( A, X) Attributed graph with anomalies. from neighborhoods sharing similar patterns, for example,
 A Graph adjacency matrix. label homophily and feature consistency [13], [14]. Although
 X Node attribute matrix. successful, in graphs with anomalies, we argue that this foundation can be easily undermined by various graph anomalies
 Received 25 April 2024; revised 20 February 2025; accepted 4 May 2025. in multiple ways [15]. Fig. 1(b)–(d) illustrates toy examples
Date of publication 29 May 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of the three main types of graph anomaly impacts on GNNs.
of China under Grant 62476245 and in part by Zhejiang Provincial Natural 1) As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the attributed-induced anoma-
Science Foundation of China under Grant LTGG23F030005. (Corresponding
author: Sheng Zhou.) lies where node features are corrupted, such as the
 Yuanchen Bei, Jinke Shi, and Haishuai Wang are with the College account takeover in social networks, will directly result
of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou in aggregating incorrect information from neighbor-
310058, China (e-mail: yuanchenbei@zju.edu.cn; shijinke@zju.edu.cn;
haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn).
 hoods.
 Sheng Zhou and Jiajun Bu are with Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible 2) As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), the topological-induced
Perception and Intelligent Systems, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, anomalies that connect to incorrect neighborhoods,
China (e-mail: zhousheng zju@zju.edu.cn; bjj@zju.edu.cn). such as the fraudsters in E-commerce systems, will
 Yao Ma is with the Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: majunyao@gmail.com). result in aggregating information from inconsistent
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3569526 neighborhoods.
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16841

 Fig. 2. Concept maps between the (a) existing GNN-based unsupervised graph
 anomaly detection paradigm and (b) our proposed GNN-guarded unsupervised
 graph anomaly detection paradigm.

 observed graph with anomalies, G3AD first introduces two
Fig. 1. Toy examples of GNN message passing on clear graphs and the graphs auxiliary encoders tailored with correlation constraints to
under three types of anomaly impacts. (a) Clean graph; (b) attribute-induced
anomaly; (c) topology-induced anomaly; and (d) mixed anomalies. guard the GNNs against encoding inconsistent information.
 Subsequently, to optimize GNNs in an unsupervised manner
 3) More seriously, as illustrated in Fig. 1(d), the mixed and detect multiple types of unknown anomalies, G3AD
 anomalies that simultaneous occurrence of multiple proposes a comprehensive learning objective that includes both
 anomaly types is a more common situation and will have local attribute/topology reconstruction and global consistency
 a significantly more detrimental impact on GNNs. alignment, which also serves as anomaly scoring. During
 this process, to avoid directly reconstructing the observed
Existing unsupervised graph anomaly detection methods
 graph with anomalies G3AD introduces an adaptive caching
have primarily focused on designing effective unsupervised
 (AC) module to guard the GNNs from misleading learnanomaly scoring functions in the representation space learned
 ing objectives during model training. Fig. 2 illustrates the
directly from GNNs while overlooking the negative impact
 comparison between the existing GNN-based unsupervised
of anomalies on the inherent GNNs themselves [3], [16],
 graph anomaly detection paradigm and the one under G3AD
[17]. This is crucial for accurate anomaly detection, which
 framework. Extensive experiments on both four synthetic and
is indispensable to discriminative node representations. Under
 two real-world graph anomaly datasets demonstrate that G3AD
this limitation, the representation learning ability of GNNs is
 outperforms 20 state-of-the-art unsupervised graph anomaly
hampered from adequately capturing normal patterns in the
 detection models. Further in-depth analysis from diverse pergraph, thereby leading to suboptimal representation learning
 spectives also demonstrates the strengths of G3AD. The main
and anomaly detection performance. Hence, it is crucial to
 contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
alleviate the negative impact of anomalies and fully release
the power of GNNs for anomaly detection. 1) We emphasize the negative impact of unknown anoma-
 Although important, addressing the negative impacts of lies on GNNs, which is crucial for graph anomaly
graph anomalies on GNNs in unsupervised scenarios is non- detection under unsupervised settings while overlooked
trivial. An intuitive solution might involve the development by most existing unsupervised works.
of innovative GNNs that adapt to certain graph anomalies. 2) We propose G3AD, a simple yet effective framework
This has attracted increasing attention, and a few very recent to guard GNNs from encoding inconsistent information
works have achieved tremendous success in semi-supervised and directly reconstructing the abnormal graph in unsuscenarios [18], [19]. However, the lack of labels in unsu- pervised graph anomaly detection.
pervised anomaly detection poses a significant challenge in 3) We conduct extensive experiments on 20 widely used
guiding the redesign of GNNs, which is more commonly datasets, including both synthetic and real-world scenarencountered in practice. More importantly, while anomalies ios. Experimental results show that the proposed G3AD
do exist on the graph and exert certain effects on GNNs, they outperforms 20 state-of-the-art baselines.
account for only a small fraction of the total. The majority In the following sections, we will first review the previous
of patterns remain normal and can be effectively captured work related to our method in Section II. Second, we will give
by GNNs. Therefore, a complete redesign or deprecation some key preliminaries of our work in Section III. Then, the
of GNNs could risk compromising the identification of the detailed description of the proposed G3AD will be introduced
majority of normal patterns due to the influence of a minor in Section IV. To further verify the effectiveness of G3AD,
proportion of anomalies, especially in unsupervised contexts. we conduct various experiments in Section V. Finally, the
Therefore, how to reduce the impact of anomalies on GNNs conclusion of this article is posed in Section VI.
while enabling them to capture the majority of normal patterns
effectively and aid in unsupervised anomaly detection? II. R ELATED W ORKS
 To answer the above underexplored research question, in
this article, we propose a simple, yet effective framework A. Graph Neural Networks
for guarding graph neural networks for unsupervised graph GNNs are a series of deep learning models specifically
anomaly detection (G3AD). Instead of directly encoding the designed for processing graph-structured data [20], [21]. The
16842 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

core design of GNNs is to learn node representations by aggre- 4) Graph Contrastive Learning Methods: CoLA [42]
gating and propagating information from neighborhoods to the exploits the local information and introduces a selfcentral nodes. This information propagation (message passing) supervised graph contrastive learning method to detect
allows GNNs to capture complex topology dependencies and anomalies. Furthermore, ANEMONE [43] utilizes the
contextual information among nodes [22], [23]. graph contrastive learning method at multiple scales.
 Typically, in GNNs, each node has an initial feature repre- SL-GAD [16] further performs anomaly detection from
sentation, and through multiple layers of message aggregation both generative and multiview contrastive perspecand propagation operations, the node representations are grad- tives. Sub-CR [17] then proposes a self-supervised
ually updated and refined [20], [21], [24]. Representatively, method based on multiview contrastive learning with
graph convolution networks (GCNs) [20] adopt the graph graph diffusion and attribute reconstruction. Furtherconvolution operator and stack it into multiple layers for more, ARISE [44] enhances graph contrastive learning
neighbor message passing. Graph attention networks (GATs) with substructure discovery. NLGAD [6] adopts multi-
[24] further introduce the attention mechanism to consider scale graph contrastive learning with a hybrid normality
the different importance of neighbor nodes and dynamically measurement.
assign different weights when aggregating neighbor features. However, the above GNN-based models directly apply the
GraphSAGE [21] extends and improves the graph convolution message passing without anomaly guarding, neglecting the
to handle large-scale graph data, with the key idea of gener- impact of neighborhood inconsistency on GNN mechanisms,
ating node representations through sampling and aggregating thus the performance of GNNs is harmed and limited.
neighbor nodes.
 Because real-world data can be widely modeled as graphs,
GNNs have emerged as a significant branch within the field C. Neighborhood Consistency in Graphs
of neural network research [23], [25]. They possess the The nature that neighboring nodes in real-world graphs tend
ability to perform learning on graph-structured data, automat- to share consistent behaviors, such as labels or attributes [45],
ically extracting features and making predictions, providing has been the foundation of many GNNs. As introduced in
an effective solution for tasks on graph data. Based on these Section II-A, pioneer representative works of GNNs [20], [21],
advantages, GNNs have achieved significant success in various [24] have utilized the neural message passing by aggregatapplication domains, such as social network analysis [26], ing information from neighbors, which is a straightforward
[27], recommendation systems [28], [29], and bioinformatics way of applying the feature consistency. Later works have
[30], [31]. proved that such message passing is equivalent to classic
 label propagation, where the labels are propagated along with
B. Unsupervised Graph Anomaly Detection the connection between neighboring nodes [46]. This can be
 Graph anomaly detection technologies have been widely viewed as utilizing the neighborhood consistency in labels,
applied in real-world systems to ensure their robustness and which is also widely called the homophily assumption in
security, such as financial transaction networks [19], social practice [14].
network applications [32], and E-commerce systems [33]. However, the homophily assumption may not always hold
 Existing graph anomaly detection methods in unsupervised in real-world graphs [47], [48], [49]. To tackle this challenge,
manners can be largely divided into four main categories. recent works have been made on the heterophily GNN for
 1) Classical Shallow Models: SCAN [34] can be utilized representation learning under graphs with low neighborhood
 for anomaly detection based on structural similarity. consistency. Representatively, MixHop [50] mixes powers of
 MLPAE [35] detects anomalies with nonlinear transfor- the adjacency matrix for graph convolution to ease the limitamations. tion. H2GCN [51] designs a model with ego and neighbor
 2) Enhanced GNNs: GAAN [36] utilizes a generative separation, higher-order neighbors, and intermediate repreadversarial framework to train the graph encoder with sentations combination. LINKX [52] separately embeds the
 real graph and anomalous fake graph samples. ALARM adjacency and node features with simple MLP transformations
 [37] proposes a multiview representation learning frame- rather than the aggregation based on neighborhood consiswork with multiple graph encoders and a well-designed tency. GloGNN [53] performs aggregation from the whole set
 aggregator. AAGNN [11] then enhances the GNN with of nodes with both low-pass and high-pass filters.
 an abnormality-aware aggregator. Nevertheless, in unsupervised graph anomaly detection,
 3) Deep Graph Autoencoder Models: Dominant [38] first these heterophily GNNs mentioned above are not directly
 introduces a deep graph autoencoder model with a appropriate, due to the unknown neighborhood inconsistency
 shared encoder to measure anomalies by reconstruction in attribute and topology under the unsupervised setting and
 error. AnomalyDAE [39] introduces asymmetrical cross- the overlook of the anomaly-specific design.
 modality interactions between autoencoders. ComGA
 [40] further designs a community-aware tailored graph
 III. P RELIMINARIES
 autoencoder to make the representation between normal
 and anomalous nodes more distinguishable. Recently, In this section, we present some key notations and def-
 CoCo [41] enhances the graph autoencoder-based initions related to our target unsupervised graph anomaly
 anomaly detector with node-level context correlation detection task. Note that we focus on node-level graph
 modeling. anomaly detection in this article. For the convenience of
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16843

Fig. 3. Overall architecture of G3AD guarding framework contains two major novel parts: 1) Guarding GNNs against encoding inconsistent information with
two auxiliary encoders with correlation constraints and 2) guarding GNNs against reconstructing abnormal graphs with adaptive information caching. Under
the two guards, we comprehensively consider both local reconstruction and global alignment to detect different types of anomalies.

readers, we list the main symbols used in this article in label set and each element yi ∈ {0, 1} denotes whether node vi
Nomenclature. is an anomaly.
 Notations: Let G = (A, X) be a graph with the node set Definition 3 (Unsupervised Graph Anomaly Detection)
V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } and the edge set E, where |V| = n. Given an abnormal graph as Definition 2, the target of
A ∈ Rn×n denotes the graph adjacency matrix, for each unsupervised graph anomaly detection is to learn a model
element Ai, j in A, Ai, j = 1 indicates that there is an edge F(·) : Rn×n × Rn×d → Rn in an unsupervised manner that
between node vi and node v j , and otherwise Ai, j = 0. X ∈ Rn×d outputs anomaly score vector S ∈ Rn to measure the degree
denotes the node attribute matrix, where the ith row vector of abnormality of nodes. Specifically, the ith element si in the
xi = X[i, :] ∈ Rd indicates the attribute vector of vi with score vector S indicates the abnormality of node vi , where a
d-dimensional representation. Ni is the neighborhood set of larger score means a higher abnormality. Note that the anomaly
a central node vi in the graph G. label set Y is invisible in the unsupervised setting.
 Definition 1 (Graph Neural Networks) In form, for an
L-layer GNN, the calculation process of each layer can be IV. M ETHODOLOGY
expressed as the aggregation and updating operators. In the
aggregation phase, each central node aggregates the message In this section, we present the details of the guarding
from its neighbor nodes GNN for unsupervised graph anomaly detection (G3AD). The
 overall framework of G3AD is illustrated in Fig. 3. Generally,
 m(l+1)
 i = Aggregator({h(l)
 j | j ∈ Ni }) (1) G3AD follows a representative GNN-based anomaly detection
 scheme where the GNNs learn the representations, and the
where the function Aggregator(·) is the message aggregation representations are optimized with unsupervised objectives and
operator to aggregate information from nodes’ neighborhoods, measured for anomaly detection. Besides, G3AD introduces
h(l)
 j is the representation of node v j in the lth GNN layer, two novel guarding strategies to the paradigm, namely guardand m(l+1)
 i is the aggregated message for node vi in the ing against encoding inconsistent information and guarding
(l + 1)th GNN layer. After obtaining the aggregated message, against reconstructing abnormal graphs, so that the GNNs
in the updating phase, each central node adopts the aggregated can produce effective representations and boost the anomaly
information to update and transform its own representations detection ability. With carefully designed guarding strategies
 and equipped anomaly detection tasks, G3AD can outperform
 h(l+1)
 i = Updater(h(l) (l+1)
 i , mi ) (2) current GNN-based models. In the rest of this section, we
 will introduce the details of these guarding strategies and how
where the function Updater(·) is the node representation G3AD serves unsupervised graph anomaly detection.
updating operator and hi(l+1) is the updated representation of
node vi .
 Definition 2 (Graph Anomalies) Given an abnormal A. Guarding GNNs Against Encoding Inconsistent
attributed graph G = (A, X) containing n node instances, Information
and k of them are graph anomalies (k  n), whose attributes, Motivation: As discussed in previous works, GNNs are
connections, or behaviors are different from most other normal designed for capturing consistent information from neighnodes. On a graph with anomalies, each node vi is associated borhoods [15]. However, in graphs with anomalies, the
with an anomaly label yi ∈ Y, where Y denotes the anomaly anomaly-induced inconsistent patterns in unsupervised graph
16844 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

anomaly detection have been largely overwhelmed and will where fa (·) and ft (·) are two MLPs with learnable parameters
 0
negatively disrupt the GNN performance. Therefore, G3AD W a and W t , respectively, and H(a) , H(t) ∈ Rn×d are the
first introduces two auxiliary encoders with correlation con- corresponding output matrices.
straints to design an encoding guarding strategy for GNNs. To ensure better guarding of the GNN encoder against
Specifically, the auxiliary encoders are expected to encode those inconsistent patterns, it is desired that the representathe inconsistent information from the attribute and topology tions encoded from the GNN and the auxiliary encoders are
perspectives, and the GNNs are guarded against encoding more independent of each other. Therefore, we impose the
the inconsistent information under the correlation constraints correlation constraint on the embedding space of the encoded
among the representations learned by the three encoders. representation to ensure all aspects of information H(a) , H(t) ,
 1) GNN Encoder: The GNN encoder is utilized for encod- and H(c) are well-disentangled encoding.
ing the part of the information that satisfies the consistent Specifically, the correlation constraint between each pair
homophily assumption, which is shared by both attribute and of encoded representation aspects is designed as the absolute
topology. To focus on the model architecture, we adopt a two- correlation coefficient measurement. Minimizing the constraint
layer GAT [24] as the GNN encoder fgnn (·) for simplicity. ensures the two paired vectors become more independent [55].
It is worth noting that any other GNNs can be directly applied Take the constraint between H(a) and H(t) as an example, the
here. Given the input attributes xi and x j of node vi and its formal expression is as follows:
neighbor v j , a GAT layer learns the input attributes with the !
attention mechanism. The attention coefficient is computed as Cov(H (a)
 , H (t)
 )
 aCor(H(a) , H(t) ) = abs p (7)
 Var(H(a) ) · Var(H(t) )
 ei, j = att(xi , x j ) = LeakyReLU(aT · [W enc xi ||W enc x j ]) (3)
 where Cov(·) is the covariance between two matrices, and
where att(·) is a single-layer feedforward neural network, Var(·) is a matrix’s own variance, and abs(·) is the absolute
 0 0
parameterized by weight vector a ∈ R2d and W enc ∈ Rd ×d value function. aCor(H(a) , H(c) ) and aCor(H(t) , H(c) ) can be
 0
with the transformed dimension d , || denotes the concatenate calculated in the same way. Cov(·) is insensitive to the order of
operation. The attention coefficient αi, j is normalized as the two inputs. The overall regularization Lcc of all correlation
 exp(ei, j ) constraints can be presented as
 αi, j = Softmax(ei, j ) = P (4)
 k∈Ni exp(ei,k ) Lcc = aCor(H(a) , H(c) ) + aCor(H(t) , H(c) )
where Ni denotes the neighbor set of node vi . Then, the final
 0
 + aCor(H(a) , H(t) ) (8)
output feature hi ∈ Rd of node vi can be obtained as
 X where the calculated Lcc is utilized as a correlation regularhi = αi, jW enc x j . (5) ization loss during the model training stage.
 j∈Ni
 0
For convenience, we use H(c) ∈ Rn×d denote the output B. Guarding GNNs Against Reconstructing Abnormal Graph
representation of consistency encoder fgnn (·). Note that G3AD Motivation: Graph anomalies have various types, including
can be generalized in different GNN backbones, and any other attribute anomalies, topology anomalies, and mixed anomalies.
graph message passing functions [21], [54] can also be adopted In unsupervised graph anomaly detection, we are unable to
here. We will discuss the generalization ability of G3AD in know either anomaly labels or anomaly types. Thus, G3AD
Section V-D. aims to comprehensively detect different anomaly types in the
 2) Auxiliary Encoders With Correlation Constraints: In following ways.
our G3AD, the attribute-auxiliary encoder and the topology-
 1) Local Attribute Reconstruction: The attribute reconstrucauxiliary encoder are further utilized for encoding the part of
 tion errors distinguish sparse attribute anomalies from
information dependent on each information source (attribute
 the predominant normal nodes.
and topology) as well as the potential specific type of anoma-
 2) Local Topology Reconstruction: The topology reconlies under the attribute/topology inconsistent situation.
 struction errors distinguish sparse topology anomalies
 Existing methods directly utilize GNNs to model the
 from the primary normal nodes.
attribute and topology simultaneously. However, in the part
 3) Global Consistency Alignment: The alignment distance
where the consistency is destroyed by anomalies, message
 between node representations simultaneously considerpassing in GNNs will introduce negative noise information,
 ing attribute and topology information encoded by the
even helping anomalies to camouflage when passing normal
 GNN and the global graph consistency vector can further
messages to them [18]. Therefore, here we use two indepenbe equipped for anomaly distinguishing.
dent MLPs without graph message passing, rather than GNN
encoders based on neighborhood consistency, to better model Among these objectives, the graph reconstruction scheme has
the inconsistent attribute/topology patterns and guard the GNN been proved to be essential for both representation optimizaencoder learning. tion and anomaly detection under the unsupervised setting
 Specifically, the two independent MLPs fa (·) and ft (·) are [38], [39], [56]. However, reconstruction targets are needed
applied to encode the original attribute matrix X and the to make GNN-encoded consistent representations to fit the
adjacency matrix A, respectively, observed graph data with anomalies. The unknown anomalies
 in the abnormal graph may provide a misleading objective
 H(a) = fa (X), H(t) = ft ( A) (6) to GNNs for both tasks. Thus, G3AD further introduces AC
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16845

to guard the GNNs against reconstructing abnormal graphs A∗ = A + I, where I is the identity matrix. R(l) and W (l)
 re
by cooperating with the auxiliary encoders that partake the are the input features and trainable parameters in the lth
inconsistent anomaly patterns. layer, respectively.
 1) Adaptive Caching: From the consistent alignment per- For the cached attribute representation Z A , ga (·) reconspective, since the consistent information encoded by the structs the attribute matrix X̂ ∈ Rn×d with corresponding
GNN encoder has already been guarded, it should be directly distance-based reconstruction loss Lattr , which can be
used for measuring the global consistency under a mix- computed as
ture of attribute and topology information. Yet from the
attribute/topology reconstruction perspective, due to the graph X̂ = ga (Z A , A) (13)
to be reconstructed containing anomalies, it is necessary to fur- Lattr = ||X − X̂||22 (14)
ther guard the GNN-encoded representations against directly
 where || · ||22 is the Euclidean distance.
reconstructing and preserving the abnormal graph.
 b) Local topology reconstruction: Similar to the perspective
 Therefore, we design an AC module to concurrently leverof local attribute reconstruction, for the given cached
age the GNN-encoded representations for normal part recontopology representation ZT , the topology reconstrucstruction and auxiliary-encoded representations for incontion capability is also a factor for anomaly detection
sistent part reconstruction, avoiding the force of GNNs to
 due to topology anomalies’ rare and inconsistent local
fit inconsistent anomaly patterns. It automatically selects
 topological patterns. The reconstruction function gt (·)
appropriate information for the reconstruction of normal and
 reconstructs the adjacency matrix from Z T with the
abnormal parts from GNN representation and auxiliary repreconstruction loss Ltopo as follows:
resentation under unsupervised conditions, through learnable
parameters. The general AC module can be formulated as Â = gt (Z T ) = Z T · Z 0T (15)
follows: Ltopo = ||A − Â||22 (16)
 imp = Tanh(τ(H(1) ||H(2) )) (9)
 where gt (·) is designed as an inner product between Z T
 AC(H(1) , H(2) ) = imp[:n] · H(1) + imp[n:] · H(2) (10) and its self-transposition Z 0T to make the reconstruction
where τ(·) is an MLP for information fusion, imp ∈ R2n is efficient.
the weight vector of each dimension of the input features, and c) Global consistency alignment: Given the GNN encoded
H(1) and H(2) denote two information sources, such as H(a) , representation H(c) with both the attribute and topology
H(t) , and H(c) . information by graph message passing to detect anoma-
 The AC module is utilized to generate two types of repre- lies, a naive way for evaluation is to measure the distance
sentations for attribute and topology reconstruction between node embeddings and their corresponding subgraph. However, the anomalies may occur as neighbors
 Z A = AC(H(a) , H(c) ), Z T = AC(H(t) , H(c) ) (11) of normal nodes under the neighborhood inconsistency.
where Z A and Z T are the cached attribute representation Aligning the node with a noisy subgraph may be suband cached topology representation. Compared with vanilla optimal. Thus, due to abnormal nodes making up only
GNN-based representation, the caching of GNN-encoded and a minority of the entire graph, we turn to measure each
attribute/topology-specific information automatically selects node embedding with the graph summary vector for
helpful information and better alleviates anomalies’ impact on global consistency measurement to reduce the negative
the GNN-encoded representations. impact of neighborhood on the summary vectors.
 2) Anomaly Detection Tasks: Given the GNN encoded Specifically, to conduct the alignment, we first read out the
representation, cached attribute representation, and cached consistent GNN-encoded representations of nodes into a graph
topology representation, we aim to make full use of them summary representation
for anomaly scoring in an unsupervised setting. Therefore, as
the above definition of the three types of anomaly detection Eg = Readout(H(c) ) (17)
objectives, the detection tasks can be unfolded as follows. where Readout(·) can be a kind of pooling operation (such as
 a) Local attribute reconstruction: The reconstruction-based min, max, mean, and weighted pooling [42]). Here, we use the
 operator has been widely observed to be effective mean pooling as default for simplicity and Eg is the readout
 for unsupervised anomaly detection [7], [38], [56]. representation of the graph.
 Therefore, given the cached attribute representation Then, we conduct the global consistency alignment task
 Z A , we utilize the node’s attribute reconstruction abil- between each node’s GNN-encoded representation zc,i ∈ H(c)
 ity for attribute anomaly mining, benefiting from the and the graph summary vector Eg as follows:
 reconstruction target tending to fit the patterns of the 0v 1
 u n
 predominant nodes while the patterns of anomalies are uX
 rare [38]. We use a two-layer GCN [20] as the attribute Lcons = log @ t ||zc,i − Eg ||22 + eA (18)
 reconstruction function ga (·) as follows: i=1

 R(l+1) = LeakyReLU( ÃR(l)W (l) where zc,i is the consistent representation of node vi and
 re ) (12)
 constant e is used to limit the lower bound of the loss for
 −1 −1
 where Ã = D̂ 2 A∗ D̂ 2 ∈ Rn×n is the normalized better balance Lcons ’s numerical relationship with other loss
 adjacency matrix, D̂ ∈ Rn×n is the degree matrix of terms.
16846 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

C. Anomaly Scoring Algorithm 1 Overall Procedure of G3AD
 With the three different anomaly detection tasks, we utilize Input: An abnormal graph G = ( A, X); Training epochs T;
the above three anomaly detection tasks for the final anomaly Balance parameters λ1 and λ2 .
scoring. The normal nodes in the graph are expected to show Output: An anomaly score list for the nodes.
low discrepancies, while anomalies exhibit high discrepant 1: for epoch ∈ 1, 2, . . . T do
values due to their inconsistency, irregularity, and diversity. 2: Obtain the attribute-specific, topology-specific, and
Therefore, here we compute the anomaly score si of each consistency representation H(a) = fa (X), H(t) = ft ( A),
node vi in multiperspectives according to H(c) = fgnn (X, A), respectively.
 3: Calculate the correlation constraint loss Lcc between
 si = λ1 · ||xi − x̂i ||22 + (1 − λ1 ) · ||ai − âi ||22 any two of the three encoded representations (H(a) ,
 H(t) , H(c) ) via Eq.(8).
 „ ƒ‚ … „ ƒ‚ …
 Local Attribute Reconstruction Local Topology Reconstruction
 q 4: Obtain the cached attribute representation Z A =
 + λ2 · log( ||zc,i − Eg ||22 + e) (19) AC(H(a) , H(c) );
 Reconstruct the attribute matrix X̂ = ga (Z A , A), and
 „ ƒ‚ …
 Global Consistency Alignment 5:
 calculate the reconstruction loss Lattr via Eq.(14);
where λ1 is a hyperparameter to balance the attribute and 6: Obtain the cached structure representation Z T =
topology reconstruction and λ2 is also a hyperparameter that AC(H(t) , H(c) );
measures the effect of the global consistency alignment. Nodes 7: Reconstruct the adjacency matrix Â = gt (Z T ), and
with larger scores are more likely to be considered as anomacalculate the reconstruction loss Ltopo via Eq.(16);
lies, thus we can compute the ranking of anomalies according
 8: Conduct the global consistency alignment with consisto the nodes’ scores calculated as (19).
 tency representation H(c) , and calculate the reconstruction loss Lcons via Eq.(18);
D. Joint Training Objective Function 9: Minimize the joint training loss L = λ1 · Lattr + (1 −
 Following previous works to optimize the model in the λ1 ) · Ltopo + λ2 · Lcons + Lcc ;
absence of labels [38], [42], to jointly train different aspects of 10: Update model’s learnable parameters by using stochasanomaly scoring loss with the correlation constraint for GNN tic gradient descent;
guarding, the training objective function of G3AD 11: end for
 12: Compute anomaly scores of nodes in the attributed net-
 L = λ1 · Lattr + (1 − λ1 ) · Ltopo + λ2 · Lcons + Lcc (20) work G based on Eq.(19).
where the hyperparameters λ1 and λ2 are the same as mentioned in (19). In this way, G3AD is trained using the gradient
descent algorithm on the overall joint training objective max(O(ga (·), gt (·))), where O(ga (·)) is O(|E|dF) and O(gt (·))
function. is O(|V|2 ). To sum up, the overall time complexity of G3AD
 Conclusively, the pseudocode of the overall procedure work- is O((|V| + |E|)dF + max(|E|dF, |V|2 )).
flow of G3AD is described as the given Algorithm 1. In each
training epoch, G3AD first encodes three aspects of represen- V. E XPERIMENTS
tations by the guarded GNN encoder along with the auxiliary
encoders. Furthermore, we adopt the correlation constraint In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments
to minimize correlations between the three representations. and in-depth analysis to demonstrate the effectiveness of
Before conducting the anomaly detection tasks, the AC module G3AD. Specifically, we aim to answer the following research
is equipped for GNN representation guarding. Then, anomaly questions: RQ1: How does G3AD perform compared with
detection tasks are conducted for anomaly scoring and joint state-of-the-art models? RQ2: How much do the architecture
objective loss obtaining. A backpropagation is then executed and components of G3AD contribute? RQ3: Can G3AD
with a gradient descent algorithm to optimize the parameters framework positively generalize in different GNN backbones?
of G3AD. Finally, the anomaly scores are returned for each RQ4: How well does G3AD disentangle encode the informanode to evaluate their abnormality. tion in each encoder? How does G3AD perform on different
 types of anomalies? And how to explain the anomaly scoring
 effectiveness of G3AD? RQ5: How do key hyperparameters
E. Complexity Analysis impact G3AD’s anomaly detection performance?
 In this subsection, we conduct the complexity analysis of G3AD. First, the time complexity of encoding is
max(O( fa (·), ft (·), fgnn (·))). The complexity of fa (·) and ft (·) A. Experimental Settings
is O(|V|dF), and the complexity of fgnn (·) is O((|V| + |E|)dF), 1) Datasets: We adopt six graph anomaly detection datasets
where F is the summation of all feature maps across dif- on both synthetic and real-world scenarios that have been
ferent layers. Therefore, the complexity of the encoding widely used in previous research [18], [42], including four
guarding part is O((|V| + |E|)dF). Then, the complexity of synthetic datasets: Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed [57], and Flickr
the AC(·) module is O(|V|dF), and the global consistency [58], and two real-world datasets: Weibo [59] and Reddit [60].
alignment can be processed simultaneously with O(|V|dF). The statistics are shown in Table I. The details of the datasets
Finally, the time complexity of the reconstruction modules is are introduced as follows.
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16847

 TABLE I is perturbed by generating small cliques composed of
 S TATISTICS OF THE E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS nodes that were originally not related. The insight is
 that in a small clique, a small group of nodes is significantly more interconnected with each other than the
 average, which can be considered a typical situation of
 topological anomalies in real-world graphs. Specifically,
 to create cliques, we begin by defining the clique size p
 and the number of cliques q. When generating a clique,
 we randomly select p nodes from the set of nodes V and
 connect them fully. This implies that all the selected p
 nodes are considered topological anomalies. To generate
 q cliques, we repeat this process q times. This results
 in a total of p × q topological anomalies. Following the
 1) Cora1 [57] is a classical citation network consisting previous works, the value of p is fixed as 15, and the
 of 2708 scientific publications (contains 150 injected value of q is set to 5, 5, 20, 20, 15 for Cora, Citeseer,
 anomalies) along with 5429 links between them. The Pubmed, ACM, and Flickr, respectively.
 text contents of each publication are treated as its 2) Injection of Attributed Anomalies: We inject attributed
 attributes. anomalies by disturbing the attributes of nodes.
 2) Citeseer1 [57] is also a citation network consisting To generate an attributed anomaly, a node vi is ranof 3327 scientific publications (contains 150 injected domly selected as the target, and then another k nodes
 anomalies) with 4732 links. The node attribute in this (vc1 , . . . , vck ) are sampled as a candidate set V c . Next, we
 dataset is defined the same as in the Cora dataset. compute the Euclidean distance between the attribute
 3) Pubmed1 [57] is another citation network consisting vector xc of each vc ∈ V c and the attribute vector xi of
 of 19717 scientific publications (contains 600 injected vi . We then select the node vcj ∈ V c that has the largest
 anomalies) with 44338 links. The node attributes in this Euclidean distance to vi and change xi to xcj . Following
 dataset are also defined as in the Cora dataset. the previous works, the value of k is set to 50 in this
 4) Flickr2 [58] is a social network dataset acquired from the article.
 image hosting and sharing website Flickr. In this dataset,
 7575 nodes denote the users (contains 450 injected 2) Compared Baselines: We compare our proposed G3AD
 anomalies), 239738 edges represent the following rela- with 20 representative state-of-the-art models, which can be
 tionships between users, and node attributes of users are categorized into five main categories.
 defined by their specified tags that reflect their interests a) Shallow detection methods:
 on the website.
 i) SCAN [34] is a classic clustering method that can
 5) Weibo3 [59] is a user-posts-hashtag graph dataset from
 be applied for anomaly detection, which clusters
 the Tencent-Weibo platform, which collects informavertices based on structural similarity to detect
 tion from 8405 platform users (contains 868 suspicious
 anomalies.
 users) with 61964 hashtags. The user-user graph proii) MLPAE [35] utilizes autoencoders on both anomavided by the author is used, which connects users who
 lous and benign data with shallow nonlinear
 used the same hashtag.
 dimensionality reduction on the node attribute.
 6) Reddit4 [60] is a user-subreddit graph extracted from
 a social media platform, Reddit, which consists of one b) Enhanced GNNs:
 month of user posts on subreddits. The 1000 most active i) GAAN [36] is a generative adversarial framework
 subreddits and the 10000 most active users (containing with a graph encoder to obtain real graph nodes’
 366 banned users) are extracted as subreddit nodes and representation and fake graph nodes’ representauser nodes, respectively. We convert it to a user-user tion and a discriminator to recognize whether two
 graph with 20744044 connections based on the co- connected nodes are from the real or fake graph.
 interacted subreddit for our experiments. ii) ALARM [37] is a multiview representation learning
 For the five synthetic datasets, we adopted synthetic anoma- framework with multiple graph encoders and a
lies to validate models [38], [42]. Following the widely used well-designed aggregator between them.
anomaly injection approach in previous advances [16], [17], iii) AAGNN [11] is an abnormality-aware GNN, which
[42], [43], we inject a combined set of both topological and utilizes subtractive aggregation to represent each
attributed anomalies for each experimental synthetic dataset node as the deviation from its neighbors.
with the following manner. c) Graph autoencoder-based models:
 1) Injection of Topological Anomalies: To obtain topolog- i) GCNAE [61] is a classic variational graph autoenical anomalies, the topological structure of networks coder with the graph convolutional network as its
 1 https://linqs.soe.ucsc.edu/datac backbone and utilizes the reconstruction loss for
 2 http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/pages/datasets unsupervised anomaly detection.
 3 https://github.com/zhao-tong/Graph-Anomaly-Loss ii) GATAE [24] is a graph autoencoder based on GATs
 4 http://files.pushshift.io/reddit with the same architecture as GCNAE.
16848 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 iii) Dominant [38] is a deep graph autoencoder-based (ROC-AUC) and average precision (AP), two widely adopted
 method with a shared encoder. It detects the metrics in previous works [7], [38], [43], to comprehenanomalies by computing the weighted sum of sively evaluate the anomaly detection performance in different
 reconstruction error terms of each node. aspects. A higher AUC and AP value indicates better detection
 iv) AnomalyDAE [39] is a dual-graph autoencoder performance. Note that we run all experiments five times with
 method based on the GAT, and the cross-modality different random seeds and report the average results with
 interactions between network structure and node standard deviation to prevent extreme cases.
 attribute are asymmetrically introduced on the node 4) Hyperparameter Settings: In the experiments on difattribute reconstruction side. ferent datasets, the embedding size is fixed to 64, and the
 v) ComGA [40] is a community-aware attributed embedding parameters are initialized with the Xavier method
 graph anomaly detection framework with a [62]. The loss function is optimized with the Adam optidesigned tailored deep graph convolutional mizer [63]. The learning rate of G3AD is searched from
 network. [5×10{−2,−3,−4} , 2×10{−2,−3,−4} , 1×10{−2,−3,−4} ]. For the balance
 vi) CoCo [41] is a correlation-enhanced graph autoen- parameter of G3AD, we first tune λ1 from [0, 1], then
 coder with correlation analysis between the local once λ1 is determined, we select an appropriate λ2 based
 and global contexts of each node. on the fixed λ1 . For fair comparisons, all experiments are
 d) Graph contrastive learning methods: conducted on the CentOS system equipped with NVIDIA
 RTX-3090 GPUs.
 i) CoLA [42] is a graph contrastive learning method.
 It detects anomalies by evaluating the agreement
 between each node and its neighboring subgraph B. Anomaly Detection Performance (RQ1)
 sampled by the random walk-based algorithm.
 ii) ANEMONE [43] is a multiscale graph contrastive We first compare the main performance results between
 learning method, which captures the anomaly pat- G3AD and the baseline models. The performance comparison
 tern by learning the agreements between node results on synthetic and real-world datasets are reported in
 instances at the patch and context levels concur- Tables II and III, respectively. From these results, we have the
 rently. following observations.
 iii) SL-GAD [16] is a state-of-the-art anomaly detec- G3AD can achieve significant performance improvements
 tion model with generative and multiview con- over state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, for AUC metrics,
 trastive perspectives, which captures the anomalies G3AD achieves the best performance on all synthetic and
 from both the attribute and the structure space. real-world datasets among all baselines. For AP metrics,
 iv) Sub-CR [17] is a self-supervised learning method G3AD can also generally perform well and have the best
 that employs the graph diffusion-based multiview or second-best performance on half of the datasets. Overall,
 contrastive learning along with attribute recon- G3AD has the top rank among all baselines on average in
 struction. two metrics. The superior performance verifies the guarding
 v) NLGAD [6] is a multiscale graph contrastive learn- schemes with correlation constraints, and the AC under the
 ing network with a hybrid normality evaluation local and global anomaly detection tasks can help improve
 strategy. anomaly distinguishability.
 Directly using the consistency GNNs or heterophily GNNs
 e) Heterophily GNNs:
 has suboptimal detection performance. We can find from the
 i) MixHop [50] is a graph convolutional network results that the performance of enhanced consistency-based
 with the mixed aggregation of multihop neighbors GNNs (the second category) and heterophily-based GNNs
 during a single message passing operation. We con- (the fifth category) both have a certain gap with G3AD.
 struct the unsupervised autoencoder architecture Thus, it further verifies that, under such a disrupted phefor it and the rest heterophily models to fit the nomenon induced by unknown anomalies, G3AD can provide
 unsupervised graph anomaly detections. an effective way to guard the consistent homophily and utilize
 ii) H2GCN [51] is a heterophily GNN by the discrepant heterophily patterns.
 separate encoding of ego and neighbor embed- There are differences in the performance of baselines
 dings with higher-order neighbors and intermediate between synthetic and real-world datasets. It can be found
 representations. from the table that the graph contrastive learning-based methiii) LINKX [52] is an MLP-based model for het- ods are the best-performed baselines on synthetic datasets
 erophily graph modeling, which separately embeds in general, while enhanced GNNs and graph autoencoders
 the adjacency and node features with simple MLP achieve better results on real-world datasets. One possible
 operations. reason is that the contrastive objective function of these models
 iv) GloGNN [53] is a method that considers both the is related onefold, which is insufficient for directly applying
 homophily and heterophily properties on the graph to the irregular real-world datasets, and then enhanced GNNs
 with the combination of both low-pass and high- and graph autoencoders.
 pass filters over the whole node set. Anomaly detection on real-world datasets is significantly
 3) Evaluation Metrics and Hyperparameter Settings: We harder than on synthetic datasets. The performance gap in
evaluate the models with area under the ROC curve real-world datasets between the models is large compared
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16849

 TABLE II
 OVERALL U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON S YNTHETIC A NOMALY DATASETS (M EAN ± S TANDARD
 D EVIATION IN P ERCENTAGE OVER FIVE T RIAL RUNS ). T HE B EST AND S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS IN E ACH C OLUMN
 A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD F ONT AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 OVERALL U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION C OMPARISON C OMPONENT A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON G3AD
 R ESULTS ON R EAL -W ORLD A NOMALY DATASETS

 C. Ablation Study (RQ2)
 In this subsection, we aim to conduct a fine-grained ablation
 study to analyze the contribution of components and architecture of our G3AD.
 1) Component Study: To verify the effectiveness of the
 components, we conduct an ablation study on three variants:
 G3AD-w/o AR, G3AD-w/o TR, G3AD-w/o CA, and their
 combinations, which remove the local attribute reconstruction, local topology reconstruction, and global consistency
 alignment, respectively. From the results in Table IV, we can
 observe that G3AD notably outperforms all three variants and
to synthetic datasets, especially the graph contrastive learn- three ablation combinations in general. Specifically, first, the
ing methods. This shows that the widely used anomaly removal of attribute reconstruction and topology reconstrucinjection scheme may lack diversity and be inadequate to tion has a greater impact, which shows that the modeling
simulate irregular patterns in the real world, [64] also has of graph properties is important for anomaly discrimination.
the same observation. Thus, we suggest that the model Therefore, well-representing attributes and topology under
effectiveness examination should be conducted on both anomaly discrepancy are significant for anomaly detection.
synthetic and real-world datasets for a more objective Second, the effect of different modules varies from dataset,
evaluation. which is related to the diversity of anomaly definitions in
16850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 Fig. 6. Visualization of the distribution of three aspects of embeddings after
Fig. 4. Architecture ablation study results on G3AD. G3AD encoding guarding. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer.

Fig. 5. Generalization study results of G3AD in different GNN backbones.
(a) Cora. (b) Citeseer.
 Fig. 7. Posthoc analysis of anomaly score distribution predicted by G3AD.

different scenarios. Thus, the comprehensive consideration of
topology-specific, attribute-specific, and consistent patterns is 16.12% and 23.62% average AUC improvements on the Cora
beneficial to the model. and Citeseer datasets, respectively. Furthermore, the improve-
 2) Architecture Study: To study the effectiveness of ments are evident across all GNN backbones. It has achieved at
G3AD’s architecture, we further study the guarding archi- least a 10% gain on each GNN, with an average improvement
tecture of G3AD with its two architecture variants: of 25.16% specifically on GCNs. These results highlight the
1) G3AD-shared removes the auxiliary encoders and shares generalization capability of G3AD in improving various GNN
all input information with a single GNN, which ignores the backbones across different datasets.
guarding of anomalies for the GNN, and 2) G3AD-separated
replaces the three encoders with two parallel encoders without E. Case Study (RQ4)
any information sharing, which is the simplest way without In this subsection, we aim to conduct case studies on G3AD
considering the consistent attribute-topology correlation that with synthetic datasets to analyze the correlation-constrained
remained in the major normal nodes. The results are shown in GNN encoding guarding via embedding visualization and ana-
Fig. 4. From the results, we have the following observations. lyze the performance of G3AD on different types of anomalies.
First, compared to G3AD-shared variant, G3AD gains signif- 1) Embedding Visualization: We first conduct the distribuicant improvements, which proves the necessity of auxiliary tion visualization of attribute-specific, topology-specific, and
guarding under abnormal graphs. Second, the improvements consistent GNN embeddings after the correlation constrained
over G3AD-separated demonstrate that simply separating guarding from the attribute encoder fa (·), the topology encoder
attribute and topology information will miss the consistent ft (·), and the GNN encoder fgnn (·) by reducing their dimension
patterns that remained in most normal nodes and lead to to two with the t-SNE [65] method. The visualization results
suboptimal performance. Therefore, the guarding architecture are illustrated in Fig. 6, which shows that the three aspects of
of G3AD is effective for unsupervised anomaly detection. representations are well distinguished from each other in the
 embedding space. Therefore, it illustrates that the three aspects
D. Generalization Study (RQ3) of representations have been well disentangled by G3AD to
 To investigate the generalization ability of the proposed guard the GNN encoding.
G3AD framework in different GNN backbones, we evaluate 2) Performance on Different Anomaly Types: To further
the improvements of G3AD (w/ G3AD) for different GNN analyze different types of induced anomalies, we conduct
backbones (w/o G3AD). Specifically, we adopt the represen- a case study of G3AD compared with the overall top-3
tative GCN [20], GAT [24], SAGE [21], and GIN [54] for performed baselines on two synthetic datasets. We report the
G3AD in the GNN encoder, respectively. detection performance on synthetic attributed anomalies, syn-
 The generalization study results are illustrated in Fig. 5. thetic structure anomalies, and synthetic mixed (both attribute
From the results, we can find that G3AD can stably bring and structure perspectives) anomalies. The split performance
significant improvements across each GNN backbone. Specif- results are shown in Table V. From the results, we find
ically, equipped with our G3AD framework, the GNNs have that the best baseline Sub-CR obviously tends to detect
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16851

Fig. 8. Parameters study on G3AD with different learning rates. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.

Fig. 9. Parameters study on G3AD with different embedding dimensions. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.

 TABLE V scores for both normal nodes and anomalies with dashed
C ASE S TUDY OF G3AD ON ATTRIBUTE -I NDUCED , T OPOLOGY-I NDUCED , lines. From the results, the distinct separation between the
 AND M IXED A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE normal and anomaly node distributions in both datasets shows
 W ITH T OP -3 P ERFORMED BASELINES
 the effectiveness of G3AD in anomaly detection. The clear
 distinction in anomaly scores allows for accurate identification
 and discrimination of anomalies.

 F. Parameter Analysis (RQ5)
 In this subsection, we aim to study the impact of different
 hyperparameters on G3AD with two synthetic datasets and two
 real-world datasets, including the learning rate, the embedding
 dimension, the balanced parameters λ1 and λ2 , and the readout
 function in (17).
 1) Effectiveness of Learning Rate: Then, the study of the
 effectiveness of the learning rate can be found in Fig. 8. From
attribute anomalies, and the second-best performed model, the results, we can find that the performance of G3AD on
ANEMONE, has an inclination toward detecting topology synthetic datasets is less sensitive to changes in learning rate.
anomalies. Our G3AD can generally balance and achieve good As long as the learning rate is not set too large, the model’s
performance on all types of anomalies due to the explicit performance is similar under relatively small learning rates.
guarding of representation learning, guarding of directly For real-world datasets, the appropriate learning rate range
abnormal graph reconstruction, and comprehensive considera- will be smaller than that of synthetic datasets, but a learning
tion of different kinds of anomaly characteristics. rate value of around 0.005 can generally achieve relatively
 3) Anomaly Score Distribution: To provide an explanation good anomaly detection performance.
foundation for G3AD anomaly detection, we conduct a post 2) Effectiveness of Embedding Dimension: Furthermore,
hoc analysis by visualizing the anomaly score distribution we have also analyzed the impact of different embedding
predicted by G3AD. This distribution is crucial for both the dimensions on G3AD, as illustrated in Fig. 9. It can be seen
gradient descent training phase and the anomaly discrimination from the study results that, except for the Cora dataset, which
process of the model. The visualization results are depicted in can achieve optimal performance on a smaller 16-D space,
Fig. 7 for nodes in the Cora and Citeseer datasets. In the the other three datasets can achieve optimal performance on a
figure, we differentiate between normal nodes and anoma- 64-D representation space in general, which is no need for us
lies using distinct colors: blue for normal nodes and red to continue to increase the representation dimension to achieve
for anomalies. Additionally, we indicate the mean anomaly better performance.
16852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this article, we study the problem of negative anomaly
 impact on GNNs in unsupervised graph anomaly detection,
 which is largely neglected by previous works. To address this
 issue, we propose G3AD, a simple but effective framework to
 guard GNNs against anomaly impacts in unsupervised settings.
 Specifically, G3AD introduces two guarding strategies with
 comprehensive anomaly detection perspectives. First, G3AD
 guards the GNN encoder against encoding inconsistent information to enhance the node representation quality for anomaly
 distinguishing. Then, we comprehensively include both local
 reconstruction and global alignment as the objectives for better
 detecting multiple anomalies. During this process, to guard the
 GNN-encoded representations against directly reconstructing
 the abnormal graph, G3AD further equips the representations
 with AC. Extensive experiments demonstrate that G3AD outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
 and description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, no. 3,
 pp. 626–688, 2015.
Fig. 10. Parameters study results with different combinations of λ1 and λ2 .
 [2] T. Zhao, T. Jiang, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “A synergistic approach for
(a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.
 graph anomaly detection with pattern mining and feature learning,” IEEE
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2393–2405, Jun.
 2022.
 TABLE VI
 [3] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON D IFFERENT R EADOUT F UNCTIONS with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 IN THE G LOBAL C ONSISTENCY A LIGNMENT pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2021.
 [4] S. Fakhraei, J. Foulds, M. Shashanka, and L. Getoor, “Collective
 spammer detection in evolving multi-relational social networks,” in
 Proc. 21st ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Aug. 2015, pp. 1769–1778.
 [5] D. Wang et al., “A semi-supervised graph attentive network for financial
 fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Beijing,
 China, Nov. 2019, pp. 598–607.
 [6] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection
 via multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf.
 3) Effectiveness of Balanced Parameters: We first investi- Multimedia, Oct. 2023, pp. 7502–7511.
 [7] Y. Bei et al., “Reinforcement neighborhood selection for unsupervised
gate the effect of the different combinations of key balanced graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining
parameters λ1 (balances the effect between topology and (ICDM), Dec. 2023, pp. 11–20.
attribute reconstruction) and λ2 (tunes the impact of consis- [8] T. Kim, S. C. Suh, H. Kim, J. Kim, and J. Kim, “An encoding technique
tency alignment) on G3AD. The parameter study results are for CNN-based network anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Big Data (Big Data), Jun. 2018, pp. 2960–2965.
shown in Fig. 10 on the Cora, Citeseer, Weibo, and Reddit [9] S. Carta, A. S. Podda, D. R. Recupero, and R. Saia, “A local feature
datasets. From the results, we can observe that the performance engineering strategy to improve network anomaly detection,” Future
of G3AD varies with respect to balanced parameters λ1 and Internet, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 177, Oct. 2020.
 [10] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “GNN-
λ2 . More specifically, first, changes in parameter λ1 may bring based graph anomaly detection with graph anomaly loss,” in Proc. 2nd
more volatility than parameter λ2 . This is explainable since the Int. Workshop Deep Learn. Graphs: Methods Appl., 2020, pp. 1–7.
consistency is related to both attribute and topology, which [11] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
 aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
is more robust and stable [66]. Furthermore, with a fixed ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
λ2 value, a relatively large value of λ1 can make G3AD [12] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
perform better, which means that the impact of the attribute distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
reconstruction needs more attention and consideration. Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
 [13] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather:
 4) Effectiveness of Readout Function: We further discuss Homophily in social networks,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 27, no. 1,
the readout function selection of consistency alignment in (17), pp. 415–444, Aug. 2001.
which includes mean, min, max, and attention (scoring by an [14] Y. Ma, X. Liu, N. Shah, and J. Tang, “Is homophily a necessity for graph
 neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021.
MLP) pooling as in Table VI. From the results, we can find [15] L. Yang et al., “Graph neural networks beyond compromise between
that the simple nonparameter operation with mean pooling can attribute and topology,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
achieve relatively good performance. The possible reason is pp. 1127–1135.
that due to the unbalanced number of normal and anomalies, [16] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
 and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
simple mean pooling can reflect the global consistency from IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233, Dec.
the representations of the majority of normal nodes. 2021.
BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION 16853

[17] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view [42] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis,
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in “Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2376–2382. supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
[18] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?,” no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
 in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Vienna, Austria, Jul. 2022, [43] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
 pp. 1945–1951. Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
[19] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2022, [44] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE:
 pp. 21076–21089. Graph anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure
[20] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph awareness,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12,
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. pp. 18172–18185, Dec. 2024.
 2016. [45] T. Wang, D. Jin, R. Wang, D. He, and Y. Huang, “Powerful graph
[21] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation convolutional networks with adaptive propagation mechanism for
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. homophily and heterophily,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2022,
 2017, pp. 1025–1035. pp. 4210–4218.
[22] Z. Zhang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Deep learning on graphs: A survey,” [46] H. Wang and J. Leskovec, “Combining graph convolutional neural
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 249–270, Mar. 2020. networks and label propagation,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 40, no. 4,
[23] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A pp. 1–27, Oct. 2022.
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural [47] J. Zhu et al., “Graph neural networks with heterophily,” in Proc. AAAI
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 11168–11176.
[24] P. V. ković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and Y. Bengio, [48] L. Wu, H. Lin, Z. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, and S. Z. Li, “Homophily-
 “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. enhanced self-supervision for graph structure learning: Insights and
 2017. directions,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9,
[25] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning and its pp. 12358–12372, Sep. 2023.
 applications,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, May 2021, Art. no. 100379. [49] J. Chen, S. Chen, J. Gao, Z. Huang, J. Zhang, and J. Pu,
[26] S. Kumar, A. Mallik, A. Khetarpal, and B. S. Panda, “Influence max- “Exploiting neighbor effect: Conv-agnostic gnn framework for graphs
 imization in social networks using graph embedding and graph neural with heterophily,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35,
 network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 607, pp. 1617–1636, Aug. 2022. no. 10, pp. 13383–13396, Oct. 2023.
[27] L. Jain, R. Katarya, and S. Sachdeva, “Opinion leaders for information [50] S. Abu-El-Haija et al., “MixHop: Higher-order graph convolutional
 diffusion using graph neural network in online social networks,” ACM architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Trans. Web, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1–37, May 2023. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 21–29.
[28] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang, [51] J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhao, M. Heimann, L. Akoglu, and D. Koutra,
 “LightGCN: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for “Beyond homophily in graph neural networks: Current limitations and
 recommendation,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. effective designs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2020,
 Inf. Retr., Jul. 2020, pp. 639–648. pp. 7793–7804.
[29] H. Chen et al., “Macro graph neural networks for online billion- [52] D. Lim et al., “Large scale learning on non-homophilous graphs: New
 scale recommender systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, benchmarks and strong simple methods,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 pp. 3598–3608. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021, pp. 20887–20902.
[30] X.-M. Zhang, L. Liang, L. Liu, and M.-J. Tang, “Graph neural networks [53] X. Li et al., “Finding global homophily in graph neural networks when
 and their current applications in bioinformatics,” Frontiers Genet., meeting heterophily,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2022,
 vol. 12, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 690049. pp. 13242–13256.
 [54] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
[31] H.-C. Yi, Z.-H. You, D.-S. Huang, and C. K. Kwoh, “Graph represenneural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Oct. 2018.
 tation learning in bioinformatics: Trends, methods and applications,”
 [55] A. G. Asuero, A. Sayago, and A. González, “The correlation coefficient:
 Briefings Bioinf., vol. 23, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. bbab340.
 An overview,” Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 41–59, 2006.
[32] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
 [56] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
 anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 18,
 reconstruction,” in Proc. 17th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
 no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2016.
 Mar. 2024, pp. 576–585.
[33] Y. Deldjoo, T. D. Noia, and F. A. Merra, “A survey on adversarial
 [57] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassirecommender systems: From attack/defense strategies to generative
 Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag., vol. 29, no. 3,
 adversarial networks,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38,
 p. 93, Sep. 2008.
 Mar. 2021.
 [58] L. Tang and H. Liu, “Relational learning via latent social dimensions,”
[34] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. J. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural
 in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Jun. 2009, pp. 817–826.
 Discov. Data Min. (KDD), 2007, pp. 824–833.
 [59] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “Error-
[35] M. Sakurada and T. Yairi, “Anomaly detection using autoencoders with bounded graph anomaly loss for GNNs,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf.
 nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. MLSDA 2nd Workshop Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 1873–1882.
 Mach. Learn. Sensory Data Anal., Dec. 2014, pp. 4–11. [60] S. Kumar, X. Zhang, and J. Leskovec, “Predicting dynamic embed-
[36] Z. Chen, B. Liu, M. Wang, P. Dai, J. Lv, and L. Bo, “Generative ding trajectory in temporal interaction networks,” in Proc. 25th
 adversarial attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019,
 Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., Oct. 2020, pp. 1989–1992. pp. 1269–1278.
[37] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi- [61] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” in Proc.
 view framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” NIPS Workshop Bayesian Deep Learn., Jan. 2016.
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, [62] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
 Jun. 2022. feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
[38] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on Statist., 2010, pp. 249–256.
 attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining. Philadel- [63] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 phia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2019, pp. 594–602. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[39] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for [64] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detecanomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. tion on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. 36th Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, Jan. 2022, pp. 27021–27035.
[40] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly [65] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
 detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Feb. J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008.
 2022, pp. 657–665. [66] J. Zhu, J. Jin, D. Loveland, M. T. Schaub, and D. Koutra, “How does
[41] R. Wang et al., “Context correlation discrepancy analysis for graph heterophily impact the robustness of graph neural networks? Theoretical
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 1, connections and practical implications,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
 pp. 174–187, Jan. 2025. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, pp. 2637–2647.