IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 1827

 Guest Editorial:
 Introduction to the Special Section on Large Models
 for Future Vehicles and Transportation
 OMBINING Large Models (LMs) with Artificial Intel- gains. Experimental results have consistently confirmed that this
C ligence (AI) technologies, edge computing and cloud
computing, can create a powerful synergy that addresses the
 proposed LMs enabled hybrid beamforming for reconfigurable
 intelligent surface aided IoVs outperforms traditional schemes
challenges and requirements of future vehicles and transporta- in the respect of system throughput and network coverage.
tion systems. In light of this potential, this special section pro- The paper “PPRU: A Privacy-Preserving Reputation Updatvides a venue to cover comprehensively algorithms, frameworks, ing Scheme for Cloud-Assisted Vehicular Networks” proposes a
technologies, and applications of AI as well as LMs for future novel privacy-preserving reputation updating scheme for cloudvehicles and transportation. Based on the reviewers’ feedback, assisted vehicular networks based on the elliptic curve cryptogas well as the evaluations of the editors, some good papers are raphy and Paillier algorithms. Experimental results show this
selected for this special section. These papers, which cover broad proposed scheme can provide strong privacy preservation, strong
topics, are introduced briefly as follow. security, and robust reputation management with acceptable
 The paper “LLM Enhanced Reconfigurable Intelligent computation and communication overheads.
Surface for Energy-Efficient and Reliable 6G IoV” leverages The paper “Emerging Blockchain and Reputation Managethe analytical capabilities of LLM, combined with key IoV data ment in Federated Learning: Enhanced Security and Reliability
such as channel status, vehicle movement patterns, and quality for Internet of Vehicles (IoV)” proposes a new reliable and secure
of service requirements, to model and optimize RIS-based IoV federated learning for IoVs based on decentralized blockchain
communication systems. This work justifies the significant and reputation management. Moreover, this work uses the conperformance advantages of LLM-enhanced RIS, demonstrating cept of the reputation of vehicles to select suitable participants
a viable technical pathway for the development of 6G IoV. with reliability, ultimately improving accuracy. Security analysis
 The paper “Large Model-assisted Federated Learning for results, including comparisons with previous works, prove that
Object Detection of Autonomous Vehicles in Edge” proposes a the scheme can address security concerns.
novel federated learning framework that combines the strengths The paper “IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid Network Intrusion Detecof both synchronous and asynchronous methods for object de- tion System in IoV Using Large Language Models” introduces a
tection of autonomous vehicles in edge. Experimental results hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoVs using LLM,
demonstrate this proposed method significantly enhances the denoted as IoV-BERT-IDS in IoVs. Experiments demonstrate
model convergence and performance in object detection for that the proposed IoV-BERT-IDS outperforms in several public
autonomous vehicles. datasets and shows good generalization capabilities to in-vehicle
 The paper “Optimization of Resource Allocation for V2X networks of different vehicles.
Security Communication based on Multi-Agent Reinforcement The paper “CFPC: The Curbed Fake Point Collector to
Learning” proposes a resource allocation optimization frame- Pseudo-LiDAR-Based 3D Object Detection for Autonomous
work based on the multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm, Vehicles” proposes a curbed fake point collector to support 3D
in which a large-scale neural network model is built to train the object detection for autonomous vehicles. The effectiveness of
vehicular to learn the optimal resource allocation strategy for this proposed method is demonstrated on the public dataset. It
optimal communication performance and security performance. is superior to the baseline in most situations, particularly in the
Experimental results show that the load successful delivery rate categories of cars and riders.
and confidentiality performance of the vehicular communication The paper “Large Models for Cooperative Control of Connetwork are effectively improved compared with some baselines nected and Autonomous Vehicles” proposes LMs-based apwhile ensuring link security. proaches for cooperative control and coordination of connected
 The paper “Large Beamforming Models for Robust Wireless and autonomous vehicle (CAV) fleets. Experimental results
Transmission in Generalized Scenes of RIS-aided Intelligent IoV demonstrate enhanced traffic efficiency, safety, robustness, and
Network” formulates and integrates LMs to achieve excellent hy- scalability using LMs for cooperative control of CAV.
brid beamforming within IoV-based wireless communications The paper “Online Analytic Exemplar-Free Continual
system which is aided by reconfigurable intelligent surfaces Learning with Large Models for Imbalanced Autonomous
and base stations to provide additional channels and coverage Driving Task” proposes an analytic exemplar-free online continual learning algorithm with LMs for imbalanced autonomous
 driving task. Experimental results demonstrate that despite being
 Date of current version 14 February 2025.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3528618

 0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1828 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

an exemplar-free strategy, this proposed method outperforms lower-bound the costs that would be incurred when using more
various methods on the autonomous driving. advanced and more expensive predicate encryption schemes.
 The paper “An Efficient Division Method of Traffic Cell Based The paper “Block-FeDL: Electric Vehicle Charging Load
on Improved K-means Clustering Algorithm for the Location Forecasting using Federated Learning and Blockchain” proof Infrastructure in Vehicular Networks” proposes a systematic poses Block-FeDL, a blockchain-based federated learning apclustering combined with genetic algorithm-K-means algorithm proach for electric vehicle charging load forecasting considering
for traffic cell delineation method. This proposed method is the private and sensitive charging information of each user.
validated through clustering experiments on real datasets, and its Experimental results show that the Block-FeDL outperforms
clustering advantages are demonstrated by combining clustering the second-best baseline method obviously in terms of mean
evaluation indicators. square error, mean absolute error, and root mean square error
 The paper “Federated Learning-based Privacy-aware Loca- for forecasting the electric vehicle charging load.
tion Prediction Model for Internet of Vehicular Things” proposes The paper “An Efficient 6G Federated Learning-enabled
an innovative approach that leverages machine learning and edge Energy-Efficient Scheme for UAV Deployment” proposes a
computing techniques to predict vehicles’ subsequent locations multi-UAV energy efficient coverage deployment algorithm
using large-scale data, concurrently prioritizing user privacy. based on a spatial adaptive play. Experimental results show this
Furthermore, this work introduces an optimization method to proposed method outperforms all the state-of-the-art algorithms
monitor vehicle speed and outlines a comprehensive attack by achieving an improved data rate and balanced SINR value.
model, along with effective protection measures. The paper “Intelligent Prediction of Urban Road Network
 The paper “Federated Reinforcement Learning-Empowered Carrying Capacity and Traffic Flow Based on Deep Learning”
Task Offloading for Large Models in Vehicular Edge Computing” proposes a spatiotemporal dynamic deep network considering
proposes a federated learning framework to judiciously deter- the spatial characteristics of urban road networks and the temmine the proportion of resource allocation of auxiliary vehicles poral information of traffic speeds. Experimental results have
through the implementation of inventive mechanisms. Exper- demonstrated the effectiveness and superiority of this proposed
imental results validate this proposed method not only leads model.
to the improvement of key system performance indicators, but The paper “Learning-based Cooperative Cache Strategy Intealso ensures the comprehensive exploitation of the computing grating Content Recommendation in IoV” proposes a clustering
resources of mobile vehicles. caching model by considering constraints for tolerable delay of
 The paper “Integration of LLM and Human-AI Coordination tasks and the residence time of vehicles. Experimental results
for Power Dispatching with Connected Electric Vehicles under demonstrate this proposed method has significant advantages in
SAGVNs” proposes a framework LLM-D3PG, LLM-guided dual saving task delay and system energy consumption compared to
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient, which empowers electric other solutions.
vehicle drivers to articulate their expectations for AI-generated The paper “PR-OppCL: Privacy-Preserving Reputationdispatching strategies using natural language instructions. Ex- Based Opportunistic Federated Learning in Intelligent Transperimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed portation System” proposes an innovative framework for
framework and show outperformance in comparison to some privacy-preserving reputation-based opportunistic federated
existing methods for power dispatching tasks with the random learning to address privacy concerns in intelligent transportation
connection of electric vehicles in space-air-ground integrated systems. Finally, experimental results demonstrate a significant
vehicular networks. reduction in training rounds and total time, outperforming ex-
 The paper “A Novel Design and Comparison for Connected isting methods.
Autonomous Vehicle Enabled Signal-Free Intersection Control The paper “Electromagnetic Exposure Safety Assessment of
Scheme” models the operations of three unconventional au- Medical Implants in the Human Body for Electric Vehicle
tonomous intersections and compare their operational perfor- Wireless Power Transfer Considering Uncertainty” analyzes the
mance with one conventional autonomous intersection. Results safety issues of human electromagnetic exposure containing
show that unconventional vehicle crossing paths at intersections implants in the electric vehicle wireless power transfer. Experiare likely to reduce vehicle delay and fuel consumption com- mental results show this scheme can obtain accurate results with
pared with conventional intersections in most scenarios. fewer training sets and have higher computational efficiency.
 The paper “Superpixel Prior Cluster-level Contrastive Clus- The paper “Reliable Computation Offloading of DAG Applitering Network for Large-scale Urban Hyperspectral Images cations in Internet of Vehicles Based on Deep Reinforcement
and Vehicle Detection” proposes a superpixel prior cluster-level Learning” proposes a partial offloading algorithm for DAG apcontrastive clustering network for large-scale hyperspectral im- plication via deep reinforcement learning in IoVs. Experimental
age clustering tasks. Experimental results indicate this proposed results show this proposed method achieves better comprehenmethod performs well in both hyperspectral image clustering sive utility than the baseline algorithms.
and vehicle recognition tasks. The paper “Transportation Route Optimization of Municipal
 The paper “AACS: A Secure Attribute Based Data Access Solid Waste based on Improved Ant Colony Algorithm in Internet
Control for Cloud-aided Internet of Vehicles Using SGX” devel- of Vehicles” proposes an enhanced ant colony optimization alops a pure cryptographic construction to enforce attribute-based gorithm for transportation route optimization of municipal solid
access control model in untrusted cloud for IoVs based on ci- waste in IoVs. Experimental findings reveal that, compared with
phertext policy-attribute based encryption and explore three lim- both separate and unified schemes, this proposed model yields
itations. Experimental results show this method can effectively reductions in collection and transportation costs.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 1829

 The paper “Location Optimization Enhancement of Wireless The paper “Multiple Models-Based Fault Tolerant Control of
Sensor Networks in Intelligent Transportation System Based Levitation Module of Maglev Vehicles against Partial Actuator
on Reverse Elite Large Model” proposes a multi-objective Failures” proposes a fault-tolerant control strategy to solve the
whale optimization algorithm based on reverse elite large model problem of partial actuator failures in the levitation module
for location optimization in intelligent transportation systems. control system of maglev vehicles based on multi-models. The
Experimental results show this proposed method can provide effectiveness of this proposed method with actuator fault comhigher-quality non-dominated solutions, select suitable node pensation technology for multiple-point levitation modules of
locations, and optimize their performance metrics. maglev vehicles is verified.
 The paper “Digital Twin-Aided Vehicular Edge Network: A The paper “DMDAT: Diffusion Model-based Data Augmenta-
Large-Scale Model Optimization by Quantum-DRL” introduces tion Technique for Vision-based Accident Detection in Vehicular
a comprehensive model that integrates quantum computing with Networks” presents a diffusion model-based data augmentation
a deep reinforcement learning model for a digital twin-aided ve- for enhanced vehicular network applications. This work uses a
hicular edge network. Experimental results demonstrate notable vision-based accident detection dataset and a MobileNet-based
improvements in task offloading efficiency, highlighting the deep learning model to understand the efficacy of the proposed
model’s efficacy over conventional deep reinforcement learning data augmentation technique. Experimental results indicate this
models. proposed data augmentation technique improves the perfor-
 The paper “Multimodal 3D Object Detection Based on Sparse mance notably.
Interaction in Internet of Vehicles” proposes the multimodal grid The paper “Intelligent Optimization Algorithm for Green IoV
encoder with positional information, through positional infor- Networks based on SSA” states power consumption optimizamation implicitly guiding and the transformer-based attention tion plays an important role in green IoVs. In this paper, the
mechanism for grid-level features, improves the perception of author investigates the intelligent power allocation optimization
detection scene context spatial information and enhances the of green cooperative IoVs based on SSA. Experimental results
robustness of the algorithm. Experimental results demonstrate show this proposed method can achieve a shorter running time
this proposed algorithm has superior 3D object detection per- and a good outage probability performance, thereby enhancing
formance in Internet of Vehicles (IoVs). the system’s efficiency.
 The paper “Attribute-Consistency Reversible Pedestrian All papers tackle different but extremely relevant domain
De-Identification in Intelligent Transportation” proposes an vectors of AI and LMs for future vehicles and transportation.
Attribute-Consistency Reversible Pedestrian De-Identification Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to all the authors
(ACRPD) framework for intelligent transportation and pedes- who submitted their research to this special section. We also
trian navigation scenarios. Experimental results conducted on acknowledge the invaluable contributions of numerous field extwo datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed perts who participated in the review process and offered insight-
ACRPD method. ful suggestions to enhance the content and presentation. Special
 The paper “Intelligent Transportation Vehicle Road Collab- thanks go to Professor Abbas Jamalipour, the Editor-in-Chief,
oration and Task Scheduling Based on Deep Learning in Aug- and the publishing team for their support and valuable feedback
mented Internet of Things” proposes an intelligent transportation during the final stages of completing this special section.
vehicle road collaboration and task scheduling method based on
deep learning in Internet of Things. Experimental results show SHAHID MUMTAZ, Guest Editor
this proposed method can effectively reduce the overall cost of Nottingham Trent University
edge cloud computing, and improve the safety and efficiency of NG11 8NS Nottingham, U.K.
intelligent driving. dr.shahid.mumtaz@ieee.org
 The paper “A New Edge Computing Method Based on Deep BO AI, Guest Editor
Learning in Intelligent Transportation System”, combines deep Beijing Jiaotong University
learning with edge computing to take traffic flow detection in Beijing 100044, China
intelligent transportation system as the research base point. Fi- boai@bjtu.edu.cn
nally, the effectiveness and superiority of this proposed method
are verified by comparison experiments with various prediction IKRAM ASHRAF, Guest Editor
models. Nokia
 The paper “Adaptive Spatio-Temporal Relation based Trans- 90014 Oulu, Finland
former for Traffic Flow Prediction” introduces the ASTRformer, ikram.ashraf@nokia-bell-labs.com
an innovative approach to traffic flow prediction that emphasizes
the fusion of spatial and temporal information in historical data ANWER AL-DULAIMI, Guest Editor
through an adaptive spatiotemporal relation learning mecha- EXFO Inc.
nism. Experimental results on six datasets demonstrate this pro- Québec City, G1M 2K2 Canada
posed method effectively captures spatiotemporal dependencies, anwer.al-dulaimi@exfo.com
achieving state-of-the-art performance across various prediction
metrics.