IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 10651

Guest Editorial of the Special Section on Advances
 in Neural Computing-Enabled Device Health
 Management for Consumer Technology

 ONSUMER technology has undergone an evolution from domains, which were prescreened and reviewed by experts in
C simple manually operated devices to complex intelligent
systems that integrate seamlessly into daily life. The rapid
 the fields. At the end of the review process, 2 papers were
 ultimately accepted.
proliferation and integration of consumer technology in our The work in [A1] focuses on safety to protect patients
daily lives has brought about the need for more elaborative from potential risks in clinical trials using healthcare condevelopment of health management systems to ensure device sumer electronics. Serious adverse events (SAEs) in clinical
reliability, resilience, and longevity. Unexpected failures of trials may pose significant safety threats to patients and
consumer technology, including both hardware and software, incur substantial economic losses. To predict and prevent
can lead to significant inconvenience in daily lives and work, SAEs, a universal dataset for Serious Adverse Events
financial costs, health and safety risks for users, increased prediction (SerAE) is built by aggregating trial protocol,
warranty and repair costs, brand reputation damage, and legal drug, and disease information from multiple data sources.
issues for manufacturers. The dataset encompasses 10,643 clinical trials, 4,512 dis-
 Challenges remain to realize highly adaptive, weak- eases, and 2,563 drugs. Furthermore, an Event-aware Dual
supervision, efficient, and secure intelligence for consumer Representation model with mixture-of-Expert (EDRE) for seritechnology health management. Neural computing-enabled ous adverse event prediction is proposed to achieve universal
methods are increasingly being widely applied through- prediction of SAEs. The experiments on SerAE demonout different aspects of consumer technology. The learning strate that EDRE significantly enhances the performance
paradigm of neural computing-enabled methods has evolved in predicting SAEs compared to state-of-the-art baseline
rapidly in recent years, from supervised learning, and models.
semi-supervised learning to unsupervised and self-supervised In [A2], a novel backbone network, referred to as multiscale
learning. Therefore, breakthroughs have been witnessed convolutional reservoir computing (MCRC), is proposed to
in various regression, classification, model updating and learn features in multiple time-scales for Li-ion battery
optimization tasks, supported by different kinds of data such RUL prediction based on only previous capacity meaas numeric sensor values, images, speech signals, texts, etc. surements. Li-ion batteries are widely employed as power
Advanced neural computing-enabled techniques, incorporated sources for consumer electronics, whose degradation is
with optimization, control theory, reliability and resilience complex and contains temporal dependencies in different timemodeling, etc. are expected to form advanced health manage- scales. The proposed MCRC employs convolutional filters
ment methods for consumer electronics to avoid unexpected to extract multiscale temporal features, whose multiscale
failure, extend the life span, and reduce costs for consumers sustained dependence are further captured by multiple reserand manufacturers. voir layers. Benchmark and in-house experiments show
 Based on the above premises, this Special Section on that the proposed MCRC can accurately predict RUL of
Advances in Neural Computing-enabled Device Health Li-ion batteries, outperforming other state-of-the-art backbone
Management for Consumer Technology focusing on con- networks.
sumer electronics health management, such as early anomaly In general, the above research topics include neural
detection, fault diagnosis, remaining useful life (RUL) networks, data modeling and prediction for health manprediction, predictive maintenance, usage recommendation, agement. All of them focus on neural computing-enabled
reliability modeling, resilience analysis, personalized usage technologies on consumer electronics.
pattern recommendation, etc. enabled by advanced neural
computing-enabled techniques. The Special Section was orga-
 A PPENDIX : R ELATED A RTICLES
nized by several representative of the Technical Committees
of IEEE Consumer Technology Society in these areas [A1] B. Kan et al., “An event-aware dual representation model with mixtureof-experts for serious adverse events prediction in clinical trials,” IEEE
(https://ctsoc.ieee.org/technical.html). Overall, 14 submissions Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 3337–3346, May 2025,
were received spanning different consumer electronic (CE) doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.3572452.
 [A2] C. Li, G. Guo, and Z. Pu, “Multiscale convolutional reservoir computing for remaining useful life prediction of li-ion batteries,” IEEE
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 3347–3356, May 2025,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3595513 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.3570594.

 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
10652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 Y U WANG, Guest Editor B IN Z HANG, Guest Editor
 Department of Mechanical Engineering Department of Electrical Engineering
 Xi’an Jiaotong University University of South Carolina
 Xi’an 710049, China Columbia, SC 29208 USA
 E-mail: ywang95@xjtu.edu.cn E-mail: zhangbin@cec.sc.edu
 Z HE YANG, Guest Editor YANXIA S UN, Guest Editor
 Department of Mechanical Engineering Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering Science
 Dongguan University of Technology University of Johannesburg
 Dongguan 523808, China Johannesburg 2092, South Africa
 E-mail: yangz@dgut.edu.cn E-mail: ysun@uj.ac.za

 Yu Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in mechanical design and
 manufacturing automation in 2005, the M.Eng. degree in manufacturing engineering and
 automation in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in systems engineering and engineering management
 in 2014. From 2016 to 2018, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Department of
 Mechanical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. His current
 research interests include data mining, machine learning, reliability modeling and assessment, fault
 prognostics, and health management. He has published over 100 technical papers in related fields.
 He was the Program Co-Chair of several top conferences, including the International Conference
 on Neural Computing for Advance Applications. He is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE
 ACCESS.

 Zhe Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in measurement and control and instrument
 and the M.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
 2012 and 2015, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in energy and nuclear science and technology
 from the Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy, in 2020. From 2020 to 2022, he was a Postdoctoral
 Research Fellow with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
 Xi’an, China. Since 2022, he has been with the Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan,
 China, where he is currently an Associate Professor of Industrial Engineering with the School
 of Mechanical Engineering. His research interests include prognostics and health management
 of industrial equipment, machine learning, combinatorial optimization, and intelligent monitoring
 systems.

 Bin Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in mechanical
 engineering from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 1993 and
 1999, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Nanyang Technological
 University, Singapore, in 2007. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of
 Electrical Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA. He was with Research
 and Development, General Motors, Detroit, MI, USA; Impact Technologies, Rochester, NY, USA;
 and the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. His current research interests include
 prognostics and health management, intelligent systems and controls, and their applications to
 various engineering systems. He is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 AUTOMATION S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING and Neurocomputing.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 10653

 Yanxia Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) received the D.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from
 the Tshwane University of Technology, South Africa, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
 from University Paris-EST, France, in 2012. She is currently a Professor with the Department
 of Electrical and Electronic Engineering Science, University of Johannesburg, South Africa. Her
 research interests are deeply rooted in the development of nature-inspired optimization algorithms,
 multiobjective evolutionary optimization, and the application of deep learning in health and
 engineering. Her contributions to her field are recognized globally, marked by her inclusion in
 the World’s Top 2% Scientists by citations in 2023. Her leadership extends beyond teaching
 and research; she actively participates in academic and industry collaborations, contributing to
 advancements in engineering education and practice internationally.