Hawkeye: Diagnosing RDMA Network Performance Anomalies
 with PFC Provenance
 Shicheng Wang1 , Menghao Zhang2 , Xiao Li3 , Qiyang Peng2 , Haoyuan Yu3 , Zhiliang Wang1 ,
 Mingwei Xu1 , Xiaohe Hu4 , Jiahai Yang1,5 , Xingang Shi1
 1 Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, BNRist, Tsinghua University
 2 School of Software, Beihang University
 3 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
 4 Infrawaves 5 Quan Cheng Laboratory

Abstract 1 Introduction
RDMA is becoming increasingly prevalent from private data centers Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) has become a pivotal techto public multi-tenant clouds, due to its remarkable performance im- nology for network applications to achieve ultra-low latency and
provement. However, its lossless traffic control, i.e., PFC, introduces ultra-high throughput. With the advent of RoCEv2 (RDMA over
new complexities in network performance anomalies (NPAs) due to Converged Ethernet version 2) [29], RDMA has been increasingly
its cascading congestion spreading property, which usually incurs used for many distributed applications in industrial large-scale
complaints from customers/applications about certain flows’ per- data centers [6, 17, 20, 56, 80], especially in areas like distributed
formance degradation. Existing studies fall short in fine-grained vis- deep learning training [9, 16, 30, 31, 51, 65, 69] and cloud storibility of PFC impact and traceability of PFC causality, and are thus age [6, 11, 12, 15, 17, 32, 44, 70]. And currently it is becoming a
ineffective in diagnosing the root causes for RDMA NPAs. In this trend to expand RDMA from private data centers to public multipaper, we propose Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient RDMA NPA tenant clouds [1, 5, 6, 56].
diagnosis system based on PFC provenance. Hawkeye comprises However, RDMA also introduces new complexity for network
1) a fine-grained PFC-aware telemetry mechanism to record the performance anomalies (NPAs), especially under the trend of de-
PFC impact on flows; 2) an in-network PFC causality analysis and ployment in multi-tenant public clouds. In RDMA networks, Priortracing mechanism to quickly and efficiently collect causal teleme- ity Flow Control (PFC) [28] is deployed to enable a loss-free network
try for diagnosis; and 3) a provenance-based diagnosis algorithm to and guarantee high performance. Nevertheless, PFC introduces sevcomprehensively present the anomaly breakdown, identifying the eral performance issues. Once one port becomes congested, PFC
anomaly type and root causes accurately. Through extensive evalu- spreads the congestion across multiple hops and imposes perforations on both NS-3 simulations and a Tofino testbed, Hawkeye mance degradation on other flows that may even not traverse the
can quickly and accurately diagnose multiple RDMA NPAs with initial congested point. Therefore, various performance anomalies
over 90% precision and 1-4 orders of magnitude lower overhead can be raised, such as head-of-line blocking, unfairness, PFC storm
than baselines. and even PFC deadlock [20, 26]. Even with fine-grained congestion control [36, 45, 80] and advanced load balance [52, 59], PFC
CCS Concepts cannot be fully eliminated and still occurs frequently. Worse yet,
 these mechanisms can in turn be misled by PFC to make wrong
• Networks → Programmable networks; Network monitoring;
 decisions [25, 63]. As a result, when customers/applications com-
Data center networks; Network performance analysis.
 plain about certain flows’ performance degradation, it is difficult
 to diagnose the root causes for the RDMA NPAs, especially under
Keywords increasingly complex traffic in multi-tenant public clouds.
RDMA Networks, Performance diagnosis, Programmable Networks, Current network performance anomaly diagnosis mechanisms
Network Provenance cannot diagnose RDMA NPAs and the root causes effectively and
 efficiently. First, fine-grained PFC visibility is lacking in current
ACM Reference Format:
 monitoring and diagnosis systems, making inaccurate congestion
Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Xiao Li, Qiyang Peng, Haoyuan Yu,
Zhiliang Wang, Mingwei Xu, Xiaohe Hu, Jiahai Yang, Xingang Shi. 2025.
 identification. Existing NPA diagnosis studies, either on the host
Hawkeye: Diagnosing RDMA Network Performance Anomalies with PFC side [19, 21, 41, 46] or the switch side [6, 17, 22, 24, 39, 47, 58, 66,
Provenance. In ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference (SIGCOMM ’25), Septem- 79], lack the monitoring capability for flow-level PFC impact, and
ber 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. thus cannot distinguish PFC-related anomalies from direct flow
https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750490 contention. Second, current monitoring and diagnosis systems fall
 short in quickly and efficiently tracing PFC causality. Due to the
 cascading property of PFC, the congestion may not occur within a
 single queue independently. Therefore, tracing the PFC causality
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. requires collecting the related telemetry on the PFC spreading path
SIGCOMM ’25, Coimbra, Portugal efficiently. However, existing approaches either fail to capture the
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). complete set of causal switches [22, 37, 47, 58, 66, 79] or suffer from
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1524-2/25/09
https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750490
 high overhead [24, 55]. Third, current diagnosis algorithms, which

 481
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

are mainly based on the flow-interaction paradigm [10, 37, 46, 66], Polling
 Packet P2 P1
cannot support accurate root cause analysis on PFC anomalies. S1 R1
They attribute the root cause to the flows contending with the F1 SW3
 P3 P1
victim flow in the shared queue, instead of flows or hosts causing S2 R2
 P1 PAUSE P1
PFC originally. Therefore, both why (the root cause flows or hosts F2 SW1 SW2 PAUSE SW4
 congested
beyond the victim path) and how (the PFC spreading path) about
 F3-F6 A1 …… A4
the anomaly are largely ignored by current diagnosis paradigms.
 In this paper, we present Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient (a) PFC backpressure by flow contention (e.g., incast micro-bursts).
RDMA NPA diagnosis system with PFC provenance. Hawkeye
 F1
detects the victim flow encountering performance anomalies, con- P1
 H2
structs the complete anomaly provenance and locate the root causes: PAUSE SW2 PAUSE
 H1 P1 F2
flows (e.g., problematic bursts) or hosts (e.g., host-side PFC injec- PAUSE P1 H3
tion), hence providing network operators with comprehensive un- SW1 PAUSE SW3 PAUSE
derstanding of the anomalies. The accuracy and efficiency of Hawk- (b) PFC storm by host injection.
eye are derived from the following three key techniques. First,
Hawkeye augments telemetry systems by incorporating flow-level F1 P1 F2
 SW2
 F1 P1 F2
PFC impact, delivers fine-grained PFC visibility and enables analysis SW1
 PAUSE
 SW1 SW2
 P2 Flow
of PFC-induced effects beyond conventional intra-queue flow inter- Contention PAUSE P2 PFC
action. Second, Hawkeye supports accurate and efficient telemetry F5-F8 Injection
information collection across the network. By line-rate analyzing
the victim flow path and the port-level PFC causality in the data
plane, Hawkeye quickly identifies the switches causally relevant SW4 SW3 SW4 SW3
to the anomaly, and efficiently collects the telemetry data through
 F4 F3 F4 F3
the switch CPU asynchronously. Third, Hawkeye constructs a
heterogeneous provenance graph describing causality relationship (c) Deadlock by flow contention.
 23
 (d) Deadlock by PFC injection.
between flows and ports. Hawkeye also proposes a signature-based
 Figure 1: PFC introduces complexity in congestion.
anomaly diagnosis algorithm to match the behaviors and locate the
root cause. We implement a prototype of Hawkeye at both Intel
Tofino hardware and NS-3, and make the code publicly available spread congestion in a cascading manner, causing issues like headat Github [62]. Extensive evaluations on simulations and testbed of-line blocking, unfairness, PFC storms, and even deadlock [20, 26].
demonstrate that Hawkeye is able to accurately and robustly di- To alleviate the side effect of PFC, conventional wisdom introduces
agnose multiple representative NPAs in RDMA networks, with > the end-to-end congestion control [36, 40, 45, 80] to mitigate the
90% average precision and ∼100% recall. Hawkeye also presents congestion. However, PFC cannot be fully eliminated and still ochigh efficiency in telemetry collection and diagnosis, whose band- curs frequently.
width and processing overhead are orders of magnitude lower than
baselines. Hawkeye also fits well in current switch hardware with 2.1 RDMA NPAs
efficient resource usage. Hawkeye focuses on the performance anomalies caused by switch
Contributions. We analyze the complexity of diagnosing RDMA queue congestion in networks. However, these problem are chal-
NPAs (§2) and propose Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient RDMA lenging to diagnose in the context of RDMA. We here present
NPA diagnosis system with PFC provenance (§3). We implement several typical cases of RDMA NPAs to illustrate their complexity.
the prototype at both NS-3 simulation and Tofino hardware (§3.6). PFC backpressure by flow contention. Flow contention, such as
Our evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of incast traffic, micro-bursts or ECMP load imbalance, is frequent in
Hawkeye (§4). data center networks [6, 18, 20, 27, 59], which rarely occurs within
Ethics: This work does not raise any ethical issues. a single switch in isolation. It typically causes PFC and spread
 congestion across multiple hops in RDMA networks. Therefore,
2 Background and Motivation victim flows even without any queue sharing with the conges-
RDMA requires a lossless network to achieve high transport perfor- tion culprit may get blocked, such as F1 in Figure 1(a). Besides, the
mance1 . In particular, RoCEv2 deploys PFC [28], the hop-by-hop queue buildup caused by PFC falsifies the congestion signals such as
flow control, to achieve the loss-free property. With PFC, when a queue length [80] and queuing delay [36], which may mislead conswitch’s ingress queue exceeds a threshold (𝑋𝑜 𝑓 𝑓 ) due to conges- gestion control to make long-term rate degradation on these victim
tion, it sends a "PAUSE" frame to stop upstream packet transmission, flows [63]. PFC backpressure by flow contention can also be potenand sends a "RESUME" frame when the queue drops below another tially exploited by attackers, such as LoRDMA attacks [63], thereby
threshold (𝑋𝑜𝑛 ). While PFC prevents packet loss, it can potentially leading to performance degradation of innocent flows covertly.
 PFC storm. We define PFC storms as the cascading PFC backpres-
1 Although lossy networks are becoming popular currently, whether lossless or lossy
 sure that caused by continuous PFC injection by hosts (as shown in
networks are better is still an open question and lossless networks are still widely Figure 1(b)), potentially leading to significant degradation of overall
deployed. network performance [6, 17, 20]. Host PFC injection may originate

 482
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

from diverse causes such as malfunctioning or buggy NICs, slow Current solutions fall short in fine-grained PFC visibility.
receiver issues caused by buffer exhaustion on the NIC, or even Current solutions in traditional TCP networks, either host-based [19,
PCIe bottlenecks [20]. PFC storms thus present different durations 21, 46] or network-based [22, 24, 39, 47, 58, 66, 79], lack the visibility
and the number of paused links. In such scenarios, even without of PFC-related information, such as port status and the PFC impact
any flow contention, PFC injection can still lead to extensive or on each flow. As a result, it is challenging for host-based solutions
even network-wide traffic blocking. (even RDMA-specific solutions [20, 41]) to accurately determine
PFC deadlock. PFC deadlock occurs when the paused links form whether a flow has encountered PFC-related anomalies based solely
into a cycle [20]. No packets in the deadlock links can be transmit- on end-to-end metrics (e.g., latency). Many traditional in-network
ted, and the flows will be stopped entirely until the packets in the systems also have no capability of effective PFC telemetry monibuffers are dropped manually. PFC deadlock requires cyclic buffer toring, and thus are unable to detect PFC frames or PFC-related
dependency (CBD) [26, 27, 50, 55, 67] in the network, where each anomalies. Although some emerging studies in RDMA networks
buffer waits for the next to drain out. Even in tree-based topology monitor the events such as PFC status [20], pause frames [79] and
with loop-free routing normally, CBD can also be caused by prob- NACK messages [17], fine-grained PFC visibility, including the PFC
lematic routing on single/multiple flows such as link failure, port status at per-packet level and PFC impact on each flow, is still lackflaps and transient/persistent routing misconfigurations or routing ing. For example, PFC watchdog [6, 17, 20], a typical industrial
loops [20, 27, 67]. Once one of the ports in the CBD becomes con- monitoring tool, checks the PFC status of switch ports periodically.
gested, PFC pause frames will propagate and form into a cycle, i.e., However, the polling period is hundreds of milliseconds or even
deadlock. PFC deadlock can be categorized into two types based seconds, which may miss massive transient PFC congestion. Beon the initial congestion. The initiator-in-loop deadlock is caused sides, the port-level monitoring lacks fine-grained records of the
by the flow contention within the CBD. As shown in Figure 1(c), performance impact on each flow, and thus cannot help identify
SW2.P2 encounters micro-bursts and triggers PFC backpressure the root causes for the victim flows.
along the CBD. The short-duration flow contention (<1ms) then Current solutions fall short in fast and efficient PFC causality
leads to a persistent deadlock. The initiator-out-of-loop deadlock is tracing. Current diagnosis mechanisms fall short in identifying the
caused by the PFC injection outside the CBD. SW2.P1 in Figure 1(d) PFC-relevant switch and collecting its telemetry. Some fine-grained
gets PFC frames injected and spreads congestion along the CBD, monitoring systems [22, 37, 47, 58, 79] mainly focus on the flows
resulting in a deadlock. within a single switch, which thus cannot find the PFC root cause
 located hops away. A straw-man causality tracing method is to
2.2 Complexity of RDMA NPAs collect the complete telemetry information from all switches in
 the network [24] and analyze the PFC causality relationship for
There are two key complexities in RDMA NPA diagnosis.
 the victim flow. However, full telemetry collection usually incurs
Frequent and transient queue congestion. The traffic in RDMA
 high overhead for both collection and diagnosis. Another method
networks exhibits a wide and scattered pattern, especially the sigis to collect the telemetry of the victim flow path’s switches, such
nificant occurrence of bursty mice flows. Exacerbated by the prevaas SpiderMon [66]. Nevertheless, it may miss a part of the PFC
lence of incast traffic patterns [18] and line-rate start of RDMA
 spreading path, especially the initiator node, since the PFC path
congestion control [13, 57, 80], mice flows can easily overwhelm
 does not always overlap completely with the victim flow path.
the shallow buffers of switches quickly [20], resulting in frequent
 Additionally, some solutions [20, 67] support loop detection on PFC
and transient congestion. Worse yet, even with expensive emerging
 spreading paths. For example, PFC watchdog can only check the
switching hardware such as NVIDIA Spectrum-X [49], fine-grained
 port PFC status on a single switch, and the operator should analyze
load balance is still challenging in large RDMA networks [59],
 the PFC spreading path by manually checking multiple switches.
which further increases the possibility of congestion.
 Besides, ITSY [67] sends probing packets to the upstream PFC
PFC complexity. PFC introduces a unique congestion pattern in
 causal ports to detect PFC deadlock, but it ignores non-loop PFC
RDMA networks. Unlike traditional TCP networks where switch
 backpressure and cannot diagnose the root cause of PFC anomalies.
queue congestion stems solely from local flow contention within
 Current solutions fall short in accurate anomaly diagnosis.
queues, PFC-induced congestion spreads from downstream nodes
 Currently, traditional diagnosis studies usually analyze the flow
independently of local queue conditions. This creates novel percontention within the switch queues on the victim flow path. They
formance anomalies analyzed in §2.1. Worse yet, PFC invalidates
 find the main contributor by flow statistics [4, 22, 39, 46, 58, 60],
conventional diagnostic approaches based on local flow interaction
 queue measurement [10, 37], or provenance [66, 68]. However, these
analysis [66], and such methods cannot identify root causes located
 diagnosis solutions become less accurate in RDMA networks and
multiple hops away. As Figure 1(a) demonstrates, F1’s degradation
 fail to completely describe the whole anomaly causality. First, the
at SW1.P1 actually originates from the bursts at SW4.P1 (propadiagnosis analyzer cannot identify whether congestion is caused
gated via PFC). Only analyzing local contention between F1 and F2
 by local flow contention or remote PFC, and how badly the PFC
would miss the true root cause at SW4.P1, which is hops away and
 is pausing the victim flow due to the lack of PFC consideration
even out of F1’s path.
 in diagnosis algorithms. Second, the diagnosis analyzer cannot
 identify the true anomaly type due to the lack of PFC causality
2.3 Problems of Current Work understanding. For example, PFC deadlock will be misdiagnosed
In this subsection, we summarize why existing methods fall short if the loop is not recognized. Third, the diagnosis analyzer cannot
in accurately and efficiently diagnosing RDMA NPAs. attribute the anomaly to the root-cause flow events, even with

 483
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

 Switch CPU Anomaly: PFC Deadlock InPort
 Root Cause: {݂ଵ , … }
 Collector Agent Operator OutPort

 Switch ASIC Notify Poll P3 is PFC
 Port Analyzer P2 Port Meter causal
 InPortto 1 InPort 2 InPort 3 ... InPort P Port Status
 Infer Causality Port Infer Telemetry F1 P1’s flow
 Anomaly Diagnosis OutPort 1 0000 0000 0000 0000 ON
Update Traffic Poll
 PFC Meter Flow P1 P3 OutPort 2 1000 0000 0000 0000 ON
 Provenance Construction
Read Status Update Update Telemetry
 TESsdf
 F2 OutPort 3
 sdfT 1000 0000 0000 0000 OFF
 P5 F3 P4 ... …
 Report
 SW OutPort P 0000 0000 0000 0000 OFF
 Normal Packet
 PAUSE P3 is PFC causal to P1
 PFC Frame
 Polling Packet
 Figure 3: Hawkeye PFC causality structure.
 Figure 2: Hawkeye framework. polling packets to them. Simultaneously, the switch notifies its CPU
 to perform asynchronous telemetry collection without compromisextensive flow interaction analysis in current switches. For the root ing packet forwarding. Third, Hawkeye runs a provenance-based
cause flows (e.g., bursts in SW4.P1 in Figure 1(a)) outside the victim offline diagnosis algorithm (§3.5). The analyzer constructs a heteroflow path (e.g., F1 in Figure 1(a)), the diagnoser can only attribute geneous provenance graph describing the comprehensive anomaly
the anomalies to flows sharing queues with the victim flow, and breakdown, including the flow victimization extents, PFC causality,
cannot catch the real root causes correctly. and each flow’s contribution to this anomaly. Then it conducts a
 diagnosis procedure to trace the congestion causality and pinpoint
3 Hawkeye Design the root causes.
3.1 Design Goal
 3.3 Telemetry Logging
Based on the above analysis, diagnosing RDMA network perfor-
 Awareness of PFC visibility and causality. To support PFCmance anomalies should fulfill the following goals: 1) It should prorelated telemetry, Hawkeye sets up a PFC status register at the
vide fine-grained PFC visibility. The monitor should capture flow
 egress pipeline for each port, as shown in the "Port Status" column
victimization characteristics, distinguishing between PFC-induced
 in Figure 3. When receiving a PFC frame at the ingress pipeline of
congestion and conventional flow contention while quantifying
 a specific port, Hawkeye passes the frame into the egress pipeline,
respective victimization extents. 2) It should efficiently collect the
 extracts the pause time encoded in the frame and updates the port
telemetry relevant to the victim flows. The system must quickly
 status and remaining pause time (refer to the red line in Figure 6)2 .
and exactly identify all causally relevant switches on both the vic-
 Accordingly, when a data packet enqueues during the paused status
tim flow path and PFC spreading path, to comprehensively cover
 of the port, it is regarded as a paused packet, and the corresponding
the anomaly provenance while minimizing the size of collected
 telemetry is updated correspondingly. Furthermore, to analyze PFC
telemetry. 3) It should accurately identify the anomaly and the corcausality, Hawkeye records the port-level traffic causality at the
responding root cause. After collecting the telemetry, the analyzer
 egress pipeline, as shown in Figure 3. Specially, to monitor the
should comprehensively understand the anomaly, including the de-
 PFC spreading contribution between ports, Hawkeye sets up a
tailed anomaly scenario (e.g., PFC-related anomalies or normal flow
 traffic meter for each port pair to record the traffic volume. This
contention), how the PFC spreads (i.e., the PFC spreading path), and
 is much finer grained than existing approaches like ITSY [67] that
where the anomaly originates (e.g., micro-bursts, load imbalance
 uses only a single bit to note the presence of traffic between ports.
or host PFC injection).
 For example, as shown in Figure 3, although both P3 and P4 are
 PFC congested, P4 is irrelevant to the PFC backpressure at P1 be-
3.2 Overview and Workflow cause there is no traffic sending from P1 to P4, and thus P4 does
Figure 2 shows the overall framework of Hawkeye. First, Hawkeye not contribute to the packet accumulation at P1. Therefore, once
passively records the telemetry with PFC visibility and causality the upstream switch connected with P1 complains about its PFC
awareness (§3.3). It enables packet-level port PFC status visibility to congestion, this switch can identify the causal ports relevant to the
record PFC impact, and logs PFC causality to trace PFC spreading. PFC backpressure as P3.
It then aggregates the detailed flow and port telemetry information Epoch-based multi-granularity telemetry. Hawkeye logs flowaugmented with PFC impact for comprehensive diagnosis. Second, level and port-level telemetry in an epoch-based manner for fine-
Hawkeye deploys fast in-data-plane PFC causality analysis and grained monitoring, as shown in Figure 4. The switch maintains a
CPU-based telemetry collection (§3.4). To start diagnosis and trigger set of epochs in the egress pipeline as a ring buffer. To index the
the PFC causality analysis, we set a host-based agent monitoring epoch to which a packet belongs at line rate, we utilize the timesthe flow performance. Once performance degradation is detected, tamp in the packet metadata. Specifically, programmable switches
the detection agent will send a "polling" packet with the victim
 2 To enable PFC awareness of Hawkeye on Tofino, we have to pass PFC frames into
flow information encoded into the network. When a Hawkeye
 P4 pipelines and record PFC status using extra registers, since Tofino does not support
switch receives the polling packet, it infers the causal neighboring the monitoring of certain PFC features natively, such as the real-time PFC status of
switches relevant to this anomaly at line rate and distributes the each port.

 484
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

 Epoch Port Telemetry Table 1: Polling flag specifications.
 Indexing Epoch 0 Index Data
 Timestamp Polling Flag Meaning
 …… 00000010 01 …… Epoch 1 0 0110 00 Useless tracing
 1 1101
 [݇ − ܿ: ݇) [݇: ݇ + ‫)ݓ‬ Epoch 2 01 (Default) Only trace along victim flow path
 Cycle ID Epoch ID … …
 Packet
 10 Only trace along PFC causality
 Epoch 3
 Flow Telemetry 11 Trace both of them
 Packet Metadata Index Data
 5-tuple Ingress Port Egress Port 0 1001
 Ingress Pipeline Pi
 Traffic Egress Pipeline Pk
 1 1100 Manager No Forward
 Indexing by Hash PFC Is Pk on Victim
 … … Pass Table Update PFC Status
 Flow path?
 Pass to Egress Read Update Yes No
 Figure 4: Telemetry layout. Normal Packet
 Traffic meter #Paused[Pk]>0? #Paused[Pk]>0?
 Forward Table Forward
 Read Read Update Yes
 L2 Header Polling Packet Header Format Polling Packet Port Meter[Pi][Pk]
 Forward Table Telemetry >0?
 DST MAC SRC MAC ETH TYPE POLLING FLAG EVENT ID VIC FLOW 5-TUPLE Yes Read Update
 Multicast Yes No Yes
 Flow
 Flag==1* ? Flag=11 Flag=01 Flag=10 Egress
 Reserved Indicating Telemetry
 ETH TYPE Forwarding No Yes Mirror
 Unicast Is Mirrored
 Flag == 01 ?
 Packet? Yes, Send out (via CPU Port)
 Figure 5: Hawkeye polling packet format.
 Figure 6: Hawkeye PFC causality analysis.
assign each enqueued packet a unique 48-bit timestamp with nanosecond granularity, where the least significant bit corresponds to 1 ns. end-to-end performance of flows (e.g., RTT), and triggers an anom-
Consequently, we can select several bits from this 48-bit times- aly diagnosis event when the performance degradation exceeds
tamp to demarcate the epoch. For example, assuming that the a threshold. This host-side triggering mechanism provides two
epoch size is 1 ms, which is approximately 220 ns, we can uti- key advantages over switch-triggering approaches. First, host-side
lize timestamp[21:20] to identify indices of different epochs, as triggering eliminates duplicated efforts of PFC tracing. Due to the
shown in Figure 4. In addition, to distinguish the sequential order of cascading property of PFC congestion, there are usually multiple
different epochs in the ring buffer, Hawkeye also records the 8 bits switches on a PFC path detecting the anomaly simultaneously and
preceding the epoch index as the epoch ID, e.g., timestamp[29:22]. initiating the procedure of PFC causality analysis. In contrast, by
Once the epoch ID in the incoming packet timestamp is newer than sending polling packets from the source host and piggybacking
that stored in the current epoch, which means a wrap-around, the PFC tracing instructions, each switch forwards the extra control
register value will be reset and start to count from zero. packets only once to completely cover PFC causality. Second, in-
 For flow-level telemetry, Hawkeye records the flow 5-tuple, network monitoring cannot obtain some high-level performance
packet count, and egress queuing depth, similar to existing work [22, metrics, such as RTT [36, 45], flow completion time [72] or job
47]. Additionally, to enable fine-grained PFC visibility, Hawkeye completion time [53], which usually require massive information
also records the number of packets paused by PFC for each flow. from host-side applications.
For each incoming packet, Hawkeye first locates the right flow Once performance degradation is identified, the host-end detectelemetry table based on its epoch, and the slot in this table is in- tion agent generates a polling packet into the network, which is
dexed by the hash value of the packet’s 5-tuple. Then a bit-wise assigned to a separate queue that is not paused by PFC, to further
XOR between the packet’s 5-tuple and the 5-tuple in the slot is trigger the telemetry collection and diagnosis. The polling packet
executed. The result 0 indicates this packet belongs to an existing format is illustrated in Figure 5. By default, the polling flag is set to
flow and the telemetry will be updated accordingly; the result 1 01 (see Table 1), instructing switches to forward the packet along
indicates this packet belongs to a new flow, and the existing entry the path of the victim flow, whose 5-tuple is encoded in the polling
will be evicted and stored at the controller. Moreover, since PFC header. Once PFC is detected on the victim flow path, it will also
spreads hop by hop, diagnosing the anomaly usually requires ag- be forwarded to the PFC spreading path to trace the causality (flag
gregating flow-level data into port level, requiring considerable 1*), so that the complete anomaly causality is covered. To avoid
computation overhead on the data plane. We therefore record the duplicate detection for a single flow, Hawkeye drops polling packport-level telemetry in the egress pipeline, to avoid this expensive ets with the same 5-tuple within a certain time interval. All polling
computation. For each port, Hawkeye records the number of pack- packets are set to the same priority as control packets (e.g., CNP) to
ets paused by PFC and egress queue depth. The port-level data is avoid potential queuing delay. The forwarding of polling packets
indexed by the port number in each epoch, and is also updated by is conducted exclusively by the switch data plane, as shown in the
each incoming packet, similar to the flow-level data. gold dotted line Figure 6.
 In-data-plane causality analysis. Hawkeye presents a line-rate
3.4 Telemetry Collection causality analysis mechanism that can accurately locate all causally
Anomaly-driven detection agent. Rather than monitoring anom- relevant switches on the paths of the victim flow and PFC spreading,
alies on switches [66, 79], Hawkeye detects the NPA by deploying without covering unnecessary ones or introducing additional overa host-based detection agent. The detection agent monitors the head. Specifically, each Hawkeye switch analyzes its PFC causality

 485
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

and further forwards the polling packet to the causally relevant PFC at each hop and their corresponding impact extents; 2) how
switches. The causality analysis workflow of polling packets inside PFC spreads to the victim flow path and which flow contributes to
a switch is demonstrated in Figure 6. First, when a switch on the this spreading; 3) where is the initial congestion point and what
victim flow path receives a polling packet marked as 01 (e.g., SW1 is the root cause. Hawkeye addresses these challenges through: 1)
in Figure 1(a)), the polling packet is unicasted to the same port constructing a heterogeneous wait-for provenance graph to compreas the victim flow by extracting the IP address (in the 5-tuple) en- hensively describe the congestion causality(§3.5.1); 2) identifying
coded in the packet. The switch then checks the number of paused the anomaly case and locating the root causes by analyzing the
packets on the egress pipeline. If the victim flow is PFC paused, the provenance and matching anomaly signatures (§3.5.2).
higher bit of the polling flag is set, notifying the next switch (from
 3.5.1 Provenance Graph Construction. The heterogeneous wait-for
which PFC frames spread) to analyze its PFC causality. The ingress
 provenance graph encodes the congestion causality between flows
pipeline of the downstream switch (e.g., SW2), multicasts the 1*
 and ports. Specifically, flows and ports are represented as the nodes
polling packet to each egress port, so that every port analyze wether
 in the graph, and directed weighted edges between the nodes are
it is related to the anomaly. They check the PFC causality structure
 defined to present their wait-for relationship [76]. Hawkeye first
(maintained as Figure 3) and only emits the polling packets on
 adds port-level edges presenting the PFC causality, then adds flowthe ports causally relevant to this PFC congestion (e.g., SW2.P3).
 port edges demonstrating the PFC pausing impact on flows, and
Such PFC causality analysis procedure is conducted recursively hop
 finally adds port-flow edges indicating flow contention. The formal
by hop, until the last switch whose egress port is connected to a
 procedure is described in Algorithm 1.
host or has no PFC paused packets, which respectively means the
 Port-level edges. We define the port-level provenance graph to
PFC comes from host injection or the flow contention within this
 describe PFC causality including the spreading path and the initial
queue. Note that, once receiving the polling packet, each switch
 congestion point. For a port 𝑃𝑖 paused by PFC, it actually waits for
will also notify its controller through mirroring the polling packet
 the downstream congested ports to drain out the queues. Thereto the CPU port, triggering the asynchronous telemetry collection.
 fore, we define a wait-for directed edge from a congested egress
Consequently, all the telemetry data on the PFC spreading path
 port 𝑃𝑖 (e.g., SW2.P3 in Figure 1(a)) to each downstream congested
and victim flow path will be collected, and the polling packet is
 egress port 𝑃 𝑗 (e.g., SW4.P1 in Figure 1(a)). For 𝑃 𝑗 , its contributransmitted at line rate without disrupting the collection.
 tion to the PFC congestion at 𝑃𝑖 is determined by the traffic rate
Controller-assisted data collection. Upon receiving the polling
 between 𝑃𝑖 and 𝑃 𝑗 , 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃𝑖 ] [𝑃 𝑗 ], and the queue buildup of 𝑃 𝑗 ,
packet, the switch reports the telemetry it stored to the analyzer
 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ]. Therefore, we define the edge weight from 𝑃𝑖 to 𝑃 𝑗 as
server. Although programmable switches are able to generate pack- 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃 ] [𝑃 ]
 𝑖 𝑗
ets and take telemetry data as the payload, it is cumbersome to 𝑤𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑃𝑖 ] ∗ Í 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃 ∗𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ]. For 𝑃 𝑗 with
 𝑘 𝑖 ] [𝑃𝑘 ]
dump all the data fully using data plane packet generation. Since 𝑁 packets enqueuing over a period, 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ] can be calculated
each stage only allows one memory access, dumping the telemetry as the average 𝑁1 ∗ Σ𝑘 ∈ [1,𝑁 ] 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 ).
for all flows requires numerous recirculations. Besides, due to the Flow-port edges. We define flow-port edges to represent which
limited PHV field size of programmable switches, a large number ports pause a certain flow and the corresponding severity. Specifiof packets need to be generated to dump all the data. Consequently, cally, for a flow 𝑓𝑖 which traverses through a PFC-paused port 𝑃 𝑗 ,
in-data-plane packet generation will impose a non-negligible over- such as F1 in SW1.P1 in Figure 1(a), 𝑓𝑖 is waiting for 𝑃 𝑗 to restart
head on traffic forwarding. To alleviate these problems, we design packet forwarding. We hence add an edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑃 𝑗 , and set
a controller-assisted data collection mechanism that enables the the weight as the number of paused packets for 𝑓𝑖 at 𝑃 𝑗 , denoted as
asynchronous telemetry collection without affecting the data plane 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑛𝑢𝑚(𝑓𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑗 ).
forwarding. Once receiving the mirrored polling packet, the con- Port-flow edges. Conversely, for some ports encountering flow
troller then starts to read the telemetry register, filters out useless contention, they are actually waiting for the flows to be drained
telemetry such as zero-value data slots, and aggregates the data from their queues. We characterize the wait-for relationship from
into a large packet reporting to the analyzer. The packet size can a port to a flow using the flow’s contribution to the overall flow
be as large as the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), thereby contention in the port. When a packet 𝑝𝑘𝑡 of flow 𝑓𝑖 enqueues with
reducing the number of telemetry packets. To prevent duplicate 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡), a flow-level wait-for edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑓 𝑗 can be defined
data collection on one switch caused by multiple flows’ polling with the weight as the number of 𝑓 𝑗 ’s packets in 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡), depackets (e.g., F1-F4 in Figure 1(c)), Hawkeye set a time interval noted by 𝑥 𝑗 (𝑝𝑘𝑡). Therefore, the average wait-for edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑓 𝑗
between two telemetry collections. Note that Hawkeye can easily over a period can be calculated as 𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) = Σ𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 ∈ 𝑓𝑖 𝑥 𝑗 (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 )/𝑁𝑖 ,
support multiple NPAs concurrently. If two NPAs do not have the where 𝑁𝑖 is the number of 𝑓𝑖 ’s packets in this period. This wait-for
path overlap, their telemetry data can be collected and diagnosed weight is exactly the congestion contribution of flow 𝑓 𝑗 to 𝑓𝑖 . Howindependently. ever, 𝑓 𝑗 ’s contribution to the overall flow contention can not be
 described by directly aggregating the wait-for weights to 𝑓 𝑗 from
 every 𝑓𝑖 , since 𝑓 𝑗 may also be blocked by other flows. For example,
3.5 Provenance-based Diagnosis a large flow blocked by short micro-bursts may have a high wait-
Hawkeye proposes a diagnosis paradigm that can completely an- for weight from other flows, although it is actually a victim [37].
alyze the anomaly causality. Due to the PFC complexity (§2.2), Therefore, the wait-for weight from 𝑓 𝑗 to other flows should be
diagnosing RDMA NPAs should answer the following questions: subtracted. We hence finally denote the port-flow wait-for weight
1) whether the victim flow encounters normal flow contention or to 𝑓 𝑗 as Σ𝑖 𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) − Σ𝑘 𝑤 (𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓𝑘 ). Flows with positive and negative

 486
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

 Algorithm 1: Provenance Construction Procedure. including the root causes and PFC-spreading ones. The formal diag-
 Input: 𝑃 - Port list in reported telemetry; 𝐹 - Flow list in reported telemetry; nosis procedure is shown in Algorithm 2. The supported signatures
 𝑇 - Epoch size; 𝑁 - Network topology can be extended if more anomalies are identified.
 Output: 𝐺 - Provenance graph
1 # Construct port-level provenance
2 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do Table 2: Representative signatures.
3 𝐺 .AddVertex(𝑝𝑖 , 𝑃𝑂𝑅𝑇 𝐿𝐸𝑉 𝐸𝐿)
4 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝𝑖 ] = 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝𝑖 ]/𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑝𝑖 ]
 Anomaly Root Cause Signatures
5 𝑠𝑢𝑚 _𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] = Σ𝑝 𝑗 ∈𝑝𝑖 .𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑟 _𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ]
 ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ :
6 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do (out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 0
 7 for 𝑝 𝑗 ∈ 𝑝𝑖 .𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑟 _𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ : 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ] > 0 do Flow contention
 Micro-bursts incast ∧ (∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
 8 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 = 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑝𝑖 ] ∗ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ] ∗ (Micro-bursts)
 (𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹
 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝 𝑗 ]/𝑠𝑢𝑚 _𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ]
 9 𝐺 .AddEdge( (𝑝𝑖 → 𝑝 𝑗 ), 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 ) ∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0 ∧ burst-flow(𝑓 )))
 ∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : (∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 :
10 for 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 do (out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 1
11 𝐺 .AddVertex(𝑓𝑖 , 𝐹 𝐿𝑂𝑊 𝐿𝐸𝑉 𝐸𝐿) In-loop ∧ ∀𝑝 ′ : (𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 → 𝑝 ′ ∈ loop))
 Flow contention
 deadlock
12 # Construct flow-port provenance ∧ (∃𝑝 ′′ ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
13 for (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐹 × 𝑃 : 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) > 0 do (𝑝 ′′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0)
14 𝐺 .AddEdge( ( 𝑓𝑖 → 𝑝 𝑗 ), 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) )
 ∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝑝 ′ :
15 # Construct port-flow provenance (out-degP (𝑝) > 1
16 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do Out-of-loop
 Flow contention ∧ ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : out-deg𝑃 (𝑝 ′ ) = 0
17 𝑆𝑒𝑞 = ReplayQueue(𝑝𝑖 ) deadlock
 ∧ (∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
18 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 =Contribution(𝑆𝑒𝑞 )
 (𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) > 0))
19 for 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝐹 do
20 𝐺 .AddEdge( (𝑝𝑖 → 𝑓 𝑗 ), 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 [ 𝑓 𝑗 ] ) ∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝑝 ′ :
 Out-of-loop (out-degP (𝑝) > 1
 Function ReplayQueue(p): Host PFC injection
 ∧ ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : out-deg𝑃 (𝑝 ′ ) = 0
21
 deadlock
22 for 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 do
23 for 𝑗 ∈ 𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 ) do ∧ ∀𝑓 : (𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 → weight(𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0)
24 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 = 𝑗 ∗ 𝑇 /𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 ) ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ :
25 𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 + = (𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 , 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 ) PFC storm Host PFC injection (out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 0
 ∧ ∀𝑓 : (𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 → weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0)
26 Sort 𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 by ascending order of 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
 (∀𝑢, 𝑣 ∈ 𝐺 𝑃 : 𝑢 ≠ 𝑣 → (𝑢, 𝑣) ∉ 𝐸𝑃 )
27 return [𝑝𝑘𝑡 ∈ 𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ] Normal flow
 Flow contention ∧ (∃𝑝 ∈ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
28 Function Contribution(Seq): contention
 ((𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0))
29 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 = { } 𝑊 = { {0} } 𝑤 = { {0} }
30 for 𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝑒𝑞 do
31 for 𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 ∈ 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ) do
32 𝑊 [ 𝑓 (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ) ] [ 𝑓 (𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 ) ]+ = 1 PFC backpressure by flow contention. This anomaly case is
33 for (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐹 × 𝐹 do
 characterized by 1) a high number of paused packets of the victim
34 𝑤 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] [ 𝑓 𝑗 ] = 𝑊 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] [ 𝑓 𝑗 ]/𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[ 𝑓𝑖 ] flow, 2) a PFC path on the port-level sub-graph, and 3) flow con-
35 for 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝐹 do tention at the initially congested port. As shown in Figure 12(a), F1
36 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] = Σ𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) − Σ𝑤 (𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓𝑖 ) is paused at SW1.P1 by PFC instead of normal flow contention (the
37 return 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 dotted flow-port lines). And the initial node at the PFC path has
38 return 𝐺 a large number of outgoing port-flow edges, remarking that the
 root cause is flow contention. The major contributing flows are also
 remarked by the positive weights (marked in red) directed to them.
weights are contention contributors and victims, respectively. Note The flow contention cause can be further analyzed. For example,
that in real networks, the queue may experience PFC pause and incast bursts can be identified by analyzing the contributing flows’
flow contention simultaneously. The packets in the queue may also paths and throughput [46, 79], and load imbalance can be located
includes paused packets, which is not congested by local flow con- by calculating ECMP imbalance ratio. We omit these details orthogtention. In this case, the port-flow edge construction excludes the onal to our work which can be further integrated into Hawkeye.
paused packets in queues. Besides the root-cause flows, other anomaly-contributing flows can
 be identified. For example, F2 is responsible for the PFC spreading
3.5.2 Anomaly Breakdown and Diagnosis. The provenance graph from SW2.P3 to SW1.P1, since it is paused at both ports.
provides a comprehensive breakdown for the anomaly causality, PFC storm. Similarly, Hawkeye locates the initially congested port
including the victimization extent from flow contention and PFC node along the port-level edges in the provenance graph. However,
at each hop, the PFC spreading causality, and each flow’s contri- since PFC storm is usually caused by host PFC injection, the initial
bution. We present the signatures of representative RDMA NPAs port node has no flow contention, i.e., no positive outgoing portmentioned in §2.1, describing the corresponding graph feature of flow edges. Therefore, the root cause can be located as host issues,
each anomaly. Their detailed formal definitions are shown in Ta- as shown in Figure 12(b).
ble 2, and their example provenance graphs are demonstrated in Initiator-in/out-of-loop deadlock. Hawkeye detects PFC dead-
Figure 12. Hawkeye traverses the graph and matches the signatures locks by searching for loops starting from the port pausing the
to identify the anomaly and locate the anomaly-contributing flows, victim flow. Hawkeye further identifies the deadlock types and

 487
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

root causes by analyzing the port-port and port-flow edges. Specifi- Algorithm 2: Provenance Analysis Procedure.
cally, on one hand, the initially congested queue may be located in Data: 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) - Neighboring flow nodes of port 𝑝 ; 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑃 (𝑝 ) -
the port within the deadlock loop (i.e., initiator-in-loop deadlock), Neighboring port nodes of port 𝑝 ; outdegP (𝑝 ) - Port-level outdegree
 for port 𝑝
which is usually caused by the accidental flow contention. In this Input: 𝐺 - Provenance graph; 𝑁 - Network topology; 𝑓𝑣 - Victim flow
case, one of the port nodes in the loop will have multiple outgoing 1 Function AnalyzeFlowContention(p):
positive edges to a set of flows, as shown in Figure 12(c). On the 2 # Flow contention analysis
other hand, PFC can be injected by a host or caused by flow con- 3 if max 𝑓 ∈𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0 then
 4 # No flow contention
tention in a port out of the loop (i.e., initiator-out-of-loop deadlock). 5 check PFC injection from port 𝑝 ’s peer device
In this case, there will be a port node in the loop with multiple neigh- 6 else
boring port nodes, which leads to a PFC path ending at the initial 7 for 𝑓 ∈ 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) : weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0 do
congestion node, as shown in Figure 12(d). Analyzing the port-flow 8 # check flow contention causes
 9 check flow throughput
edges on it can identify whether the root cause is flow contention
 10 check flow priority
or PFC injection. The PFC spreading causality of Hawkeye also 11 check ECMP imbalance ratio
enables analysis on circular buffer dependency (CBD) for deadlock
prevention and resolution [20, 27, 67]. As shown in Figure 12(c), 12 Function DeadlockDiagnose(𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ):
 # Root cause
F1-F4 causes the PFC spreading loop. Further troubleshooting, such 13
 14 if ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 : outdeg𝑃 (𝑝 ) > 1 then
as routing configuration checking [7] can be conducted. 15 # Initial node out of loop
Traditional congestion by flow contention. Although flow con- 16 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ Neibr𝑃 (𝑝 ) ∧ ¬𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 do
tention congestion in RDMA networks is almost impossible without 17 CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , [ ] )
generating PFC, it can also be diagnosed by Hawkeye, which degen- 18 else
erates into a traditional congestion diagnosis. In this case, there is 19 # Initial node in loop
 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 do
no port-level edges because of no PFC spreading path. But there is a 20
 21 AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝𝑖 )
set of port nodes containing port-flow edges with positive weights
which point to the contributors of flow contention. 22 # Buffer dependency analysis
 23 print port-nodes in loops
 24 Function CheckPortNode(𝑝, 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ):
 25 # DFS-based check port
 26 check whether loop exists
3.6 Implementation 27 if 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 contains loop then
We implement a prototype of Hawkeye at Intel Tofino hardware 28 # Deadlock
 29 DeadlockDiagnose(𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 )
using ∼2500 lines of P4 code and ∼3000 lines of C code. We also
 30 if outdeg𝑃 (𝑝 ) == 0 then
implement an NS-3 version based on HPCC simulator [2]. The root 31 # Initial nodes of PFC spreading
cause analyzer is implemented in Python. We implement a detection 32 AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝 )
agent prototype on NVIDIA BlueField-3 DPU. The source code is 33 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ Neibr𝑃 (𝑝 ) do
publicly available at Github [62]. 34 CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 + 𝑝 )
Host detection agent. The detection agent prototype is imple- 35 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑓𝑣 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ do
mented on NVIDIA BlueField-3 DPU, based on PCC (Programmable 36 if weight(𝑓𝑣 , 𝑝𝑖 ) > 0 then
Congestion Control) in DOCA [48]. The agent monitors each flow’s 37 # check PFC causality
 38 CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , [ ] )
RTT on the data-path accelerator via PCC’s API. Once the RTT of a
 39 else
specific flow exceeds the threshold, the agent sends a polling packet 40 # normal flow contention
encoding the victim flow 5-tuple and start a diagnosis. Note that, 41 AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝𝑖 )
we use RTT as an example performance metric, and more metrics
such as throughput, flow-completion time and even job-completion
time can be integrated to support flexible detection.
Enable PFC awareness for P4. In Tofino, PFC port control is Hawkeye in Tofino hardware. The polling packet forwarding
orthogonal to P4 application logic, and PFC frames are filtered out logic is implemented in the ingress pipeline to determine which
by MAC without sending to the P4 pipeline by default, leading port(s) to forward the polling packet. The port status, the PFC
to limited PFC visibility. To enable awareness of PFC status, we causality meter, and the telemetry are collectively implemented in
set the filterpf bit to 0 in rxconfig register on MAC so that the egress pipeline. To accelerate the bulk register read performance
PFC frames can be passed to the application logic. Once receiv- on CPU, we utilize the REGISTER_SYNC table operation provided by
ing a PFC frame at the ingress P4 pipeline, the PFC frame is then BF_Runtime, the runtime library on the controller, which utilizes
passed to the egress pipeline so that the corresponding port sta- DMA transfer to quickly synchronize the whole register array to
tus register can be updated. Then the PFC-related telemetry can the control plane. Then the register value can be quickly read inside
be maintained accordingly. Fortunately, emerging RDMA-native the software.
switches support significantly enhanced monitoring capabilities
and expose interfaces for monitoring PFC status at switch ports, 4 Evaluation
eliminating the need for additional PFC frame processing, thereby We evaluate Hawkeye in both large-scale simulation and real
easing Hawkeye’s implementation. testbed experiments to answer the following questions:

 488
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

 • Can Hawkeye accurately diagnose RDMA NPAs (§4.2)? recall, since Hawkeye triggers diagnosis once RTT exceeds the
 • How efficiently does Hawkeye collect the telemetry and threshold, nearly all the anomalies can be reported and thus false
 diagnose the root cause (§4.3)? negativeness is rare.
 • Can Hawkeye cover common RDMA NPAs (§4.4)? Precision& recall v.s. baselines. We compare the precision and
 • Can Hawkeye be efficiently implemented on current net- recall between Hawkeye and other baselines in diagnosing PFCwork hardware (§4.5)? related anomalies and normal flow contention. We deploy Spider-
 Mon [66] and NetSight [24] as the baselines from traditional net-
4.1 Experimental Setup works. SpiderMon monitors the queuing delay of every packet and
 reactively analyzes the flow interaction within the queues on the
Topology. We set up a Fat-Tree (K=4) topology [14] with 20 switches
 victim flow path; NetSight collects per-packet postcards at each
on NS-3 simulation. The link bandwidth is 100 Gbps and the link
 switch across the network. Since traditional solutions cannot handle
delay is 2 𝜇𝑠. Our hardware testbed partitions 2 pipelines of a Tofino
 RDMA NPAs well, we also propose another 2 baselines derived from
switch into 2 logical switches. The logical links between them are
 Hawkeye. The "full polling" method collects the complete telemetry
emulated by directly attached cables. Two Dell PowerEdge R7525
 across all the switches in the network. The "victim-only" method
servers are connected to each logical switch.
 only polls the telemetry on the victim flow path without tracing
Workload. We set up an empirical RoCEv2 workload to evaluate
 the switches on PFC spreading paths. As the sub-optimal results
Hawkeye, which comes from an industrial operating data center
 of Hawkeye are already presented in Figure 7, we demonstrates
and displays a long-tailed flow size distribution [54]. Specifically,
 the upper bound of precision and recall each method presents over
< 80% of flows are smaller than 10 MB, < 90% of flows are smaller
 different anomalies with its optimal parameters, as depicted in Figthan 100 MB, and about 10% flows are 100 MB ∼ 300 MB. The
 ure 8. Hawkeye shows an upper bound of accuracy at the same
arrival time of flows is based on a Poisson process, the arrival
 level as the full polling method, since it also covers the complete
rate of flows is varied based on the link load of the network, and
 causal telemetry. However, only collecting telemetry on the victhe source and destination of flows are selected randomly. For
 tim flows presents much lower precision, especially on deadlock
each anomaly scenario, we craft 100 traffic traces following the
 diagnosis, since the causality coverage is limited. Specifically, when
described traffic patterns with different link load. We inject a group
 diagnosing burst-induced PFC backpressure, PFC storm, and norof synchronized short-lived bursts passing through the same link
 mal flow contention, the victim flow triggering the diagnosis may
to craft PFC backpressure by flow contention, configure a host
 pass through the initial congestion point, which means the PFC
to continuously inject PFC frames and cause PFC storm. We also
 path is exactly the victim flow path. Therefore, the precision of
simulate routing misconfigurations to trigger the initiator-in/outthe victim-only method is closed to Hawkeye. In PFC deadlock
of-loop deadlocks.
 scenarios, each flow typically occupies only a part of the loop. As a
 result, tracing only the victim flow path results in incomplete prove-
4.2 Overall Effectiveness nance graph and lower accuracy. Furthermore, since traditional
In this subsection, we evaluate the effectiveness of Hawkeye. We baselines do not have the visibility for PFC, they can hardly diagfirst evaluate Hawkeye’s diagnosis accuracy with different param- nose the PFC-related NPAs, despite high effectiveness on normal
eters, and compare the accuracy with other baselines using NS-3 flow contention.
simulation.
Precision & recall with different parameters. We define a true
positive result iff it identifies both the exact anomaly case (e.g., a
deadlock) and the corresponding root causes (e.g., the burst flows). 4.3 Efficiency Breakdown
False positives mean incorrect anomaly cases or root causes are We evaluate the efficiency of each component in Hawkeye.
reported, while false negatives occur when an existing anomaly is Telemetry logging effectiveness. Hawkeye logs port-level and
not reported. We evaluate the precision and recall over different flow-level telemetry to construct complete causality and make fine-
PFC anomalies, as mentioned in §3.5.2, with different combinations grained diagnosis. We evaluate the effectiveness of the telemetry
of parameters: detection threshold and epoch size. The threshold at different granularity. We set up 2 baselines: 1) Port-level only
is normalized as percentage of RTT (i.e., 200% ∼ 500% RTT), and telemetry system, which only stores the port-level telemetry inthe epoch size varies from 100us to 2ms. As shown in Figure 7, cluding the paused packet count at each port and the port-level
Hawkeye can achieve 100% precision and recall with correctly traffic meter. The port-only method still supports in-network PFC
configured parameters, and the precision is mainly affected by the causality analysis. 2) Flow-level only telemetry system, which only
epoch size of the telemetry. Specifically, as the epoch increases, stores the flow-level telemetry including the paused packet count
the accuracy of flow contention identification decreases, thereby and queue depth for each flow. The flow-only method is thus unreducing the locating precision of transient burst flows and the able to trace PFC due to the lack of port-level traffic causality.
diagnosis precision. Besides, a too long epoch may mistakenly Figure 10 demonstrates the precision and recall of different methcorrelate two events and make wrong causality. For example, a ods for monitoring traffic containing mixed different anomalies.
slight flow contention ending before the host PFC injection within Two baselines present much lower performance, due to the lack
the same epoch maybe mistakenly regarded as one NPA. Then the of complete causality. Specifically, the port-level method cannot
diagnosis may be misled into attributing the PFC causes to flow identify the flow contention and therefore misses the root causes,
contention, reducing the precision consequently. Considering the although it can detect the PFC path. And the flow-level method can

 489
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

 (a) PFC backpressure by flow contention. (b) PFC storm by host injection. (c) Initiator-in-loop deadlock. (d) Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock.

 Figure 7: Precision & recall of typical anomaly cases over different epoch sizes and thresholds.

 (a) Precision v.s. baselines. (b) Recall v.s. baselines. Figure 10: Diagnosis effec- Figure 11: Count of Coltiveness of different teleme- lected switch & causal switch
 Figure 8: Precision & recall upper bound v.s. baselines.
 try systems. coverage ratio.

 very low bandwidth overhead. The victim-only method presents
 approximately lower bandwidth overhead because the polling packets are only forwarded to the switches on the victim flow path. The
 full polling method causes no extra bandwidth since it does not
 need polling packets to trigger the telemetry collection on switches.
 SpiderMon adds an extra 16-bit header field in every packet to
 record the cumulative delay, leading to higher bandwidth overhead.
 (a) Processing overhead. (b) Bandwidth overhead. NetSight generates considerable per-packet additional bandwidth
 overhead, with about 15 bytes per packet and per average hop count
 Figure 9: Overhead v.s. baselines. due to the postcard for the packets at every switch.
not identify PFC path, leading to wrong diagnosis, as analyzed in Telemetry-collected switch. Hawkeye collects the telemetry on
§2.3. the switches related to the anomaly via in-network PFC causality
Processing overhead. We compare the processing overhead us- analysis. We evaluate the collected switch count and the coverage
ing the size of the telemetry collected for diagnosis. As shown in ratio of the causally relevant switches, as Figure 11 shows. Com-
Figure 9(a), the full polling method collects the telemetry on all pared to full polling, Hawkeye collects a much smaller number of
switches, which includes a huge amount of irrelevant telemetry switches while ensuring 100% coverage of causal switches. In condata. The victim-only method merely collects the telemetry on the trast, the victim-only method exhibits low causality coverage due
victim flow path, showing much lower processing overhead despite to not tracing the PFC, despite a lower count of switches collected.
lower accuracy. Hawkeye collects the telemetry on the switches Therefore, the complete provenance cannot be constructed, and
along both victim flow paths and PFC spreading paths, thus exhibit- the accuracy is thus lower. To summarize, through in-network PFC
ing approximately higher processing overhead than the victim-only causality analysis, Hawkeye efficiently collects the anomaly causal
method. SpiderMon collects the flow telemetry along the victim switches with low collection scale.
flow path with 36 bytes per flow, showing similar telemetry amount
to the victim-only method. NetSight collects all the postcards for 4.4 Case Study
every packet at each hop, and consequently results in significant We demonstrate Hawkeye’s diagnosis effectiveness by constructing
overhead. the provenance graphs of the typical NPAs in §2.1.
Monitoring bandwidth overhead. We measure the additional PFC by incast micro-bursts. As shown in Figure 1(a), multiple
bandwidth overhead during the monitoring introduced by differ- line-rate micro-burst flows are injected into SW4.P1 by devices
ent methods in Figure 9(b). Hawkeye monitors and records the A1∼A4 and spread PFC to SW1.P1. As Figure 12(a) shows, the
telemetry passively without extra traffic, and it only generates addi- victim flows F2 and F1 are paused at SW1.P1 and SW2.P3 by PFC
tional polling packets to the switches on victim flow paths and PFC (dotted edges to port nodes), and the port-level graph indicates that
spreading paths when an anomaly is detected. Therefore, it presents the initial congestion point is SW4.P1. Inside SW4.P1, the main

 490
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

 F5
 F1 -15 F6
 F3 F1 24 14
 F1 15 SW2. 20 F7 F1
 19 SW1. SW2. SW2. SW1. SW2.
 F4 P1 30
 SW1. SW2. SW4. SW1. P1 P2 -73 F8 P1 P1 P2
 P1 P3 P1 P1 F4 F2 F4 F2
 F5 SW3.
 18 SW4. SW3.
 -68 16 P1 SW4. SW3.
 F2 P4 P3 P4 P3
 F6 F2 F3 F3

 (a) PFC by incast micro-bursts. (b) PFC storm. (c) Initiator-in-loop deadlock. (d) Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock.

 Figure 12: Provenance graphs for typical anomalies. Port-flow and port-level edge weights are omitted for simplicity.

 (a) Resource usage summary. (b) Resource usage with 2 & 4 epochs. (a) Telemetry size reduction. (b) Telemetry packet reduction.

 Figure 13: Hardware resource usage. Figure 14: CPU reduces telemetry collected.

contributor flows F3-F6 (connected with red edges) are identified the data of 64 ports and 4096 flows. Since CPU polling and lineas root causes. rate polling packet forwarding are asynchronous, the telemetry
PFC storm. The PFC injection from H1 in Figure 1(b) causes PFC collection on multiple individual switches starts in parallel within
storm in the network. Figure 12(b) demonstrates the PFC path from an end-to-end delay (∼ 𝜇𝑠). Therefore, the total time usage is ap-
SW1.P1 to SW2 and SW3. With no flow contention in SW1.P1, the proximately equal to the time of polling one switch, showing high
congestion is due to host PFC injection. scalability with network scale.
Initiator-in-loop deadlock. Figure 1(c) shows the PFC deadlock We then evaluate the efficiency of the CPU poller. Compared
caused by the flow contention in the loop. The provenance graph to fully dumping the telemetry using packet generation in the
in Figure 12(c) identifies the deadlock through a loop of port-level data plane, the CPU can reduce the telemetry data size reported
edges. Since each port node has a port-level out-degree < 2, the to the analyzer significantly by excluding the useless telemetry
initial congestion point lies inside the loop. Analyzing the port-to- data such as zero values. As shown in Figure 14(a), in most cases,
flow edges for each port reveals the root cause of flow contention the concurrent flow count in one epoch is much smaller than the
at SW2.P2. maximum flow count in data plane telemetry, thus the telemetry
Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock. Figure 1(d) shows the PFC dead- size can be reduced by >80%. Besides, due to the limited PHV size
lock caused by PFC injection out of the loop. The provenance graph (around 200 bytes), exporting the complete flow telemetry on the
in Figure 12(d) first identifies the deadlock through the loop. Among data plane requires a significant number of packets and incurs
the port nodes in the loop, SW1.P1 has another outgoing path a heavy communication overhead. However, the CPU can batch
destined to SW2.P1 which has no flow contention, and the PFC the meaningful subset of the telemetry into a much larger packet
injection can be identified. (e.g., the MTU of 1500 bytes), reducing the number of packets
 considerably. As shown in Figure 14(b), the telemetry-reporting
4.5 Real Testbed Evaluation packet count can be reduced by about 95% in most cases.
We implement Hawkeye at a real testbed, and validate its deployability and efficiency accordingly. 5 Discussion
Switch resource usage. Figure 13(a) shows Hawkeye’s hardware Operating scenarios of Hawkeye. Network operators can utiresource usage, which fits well on Tofino. Furthermore, Hawkeye’s lize Hawkeye in different ways by setting different triggering conmemory usage scales well with the epoch count monitored and ditions. For example, the monitored performance metrics can be
the maximum flow count per epoch. As shown in Figure 13(b), the extended to various definitions, such as flow throughput, co-flow
memory usage of PFC causality structure (Figure 3) and port-level completion time, or even application-level metrics such as job comtelemetry is small and constant, bounded by the number of switch pletion time or algorithmic bandwidth. Besides on-demand diagnoports, while the flow-level telemetry increases with 𝑂 (#𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤). sis, when integrated with pingmesh-like probes [41], Hawkeye can
CPU poller. We first measure the total time usage of polling the carry out periodic diagnosis for a more complete understanding
telemetry from switches using the on-switch CPU. Polling full of the network. Furthermore, in multi-tenant networks, anomaly
telemetry from one switch, including 2 or 4 epochs, requires ap- diagnosis can be provided as a service to users by sharing client
proximately 80 and 120 ms, respectively, with each epoch containing performance information with operators.

 491
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

Representativeness of covered anomalies. In this paper, we The major parameters in Hawkeye, as mentioned in §4.2, is the
propose a diagnosis method for a range of representative anomalies. epoch size and detection threshold. A shorter epoch size can cap-
Although we do not claim that we cover the complete NPA space ture flow interactions more accurately, helping to identify flow
in RDMA networks, the anomaly cases addressed in this paper contention and major contributors. However, too short epoch size
are sufficiently representative. Specifically, the proposed anomalies requires much more epochs to be maintained at the switch so that
cases (shown in Table 2) cover the existence of PFC, the different the telemetry will not be flushed quickly, causing higher memory
PFC root causes (flow contention or host PFC injection) and the usage and telemetry size. For detection threshold, taking latency as
shape of PFC spreading paths (whether a loop exists). We leave an example metric, it is important to consider the network’s scale
more comprehensive NPA coverage and a more general diagnosis and application requirements. Typically, for latency-sensitive applialgorithm as our future work. cations, the detection threshold is usually 2-4 times the maximum
Extensibility of Hawkeye telemetry. Our main focus in teleme- RTT (determined by the maximum hop count). A sensitive detectry design is to enable PFC visibility and causality tracing, which tion threshold can quickly trigger diagnosis, while causes higher
is orthogonal to flow-level information recording. Therefore, the diagnosis frequency.
flow-level telemetry in Hawkeye can be further complemented by
numerous existing studies [22, 37, 47, 58] to provide more informa- 6 Related Work
tion such as flow features and queue evolution, enabling a more
 Besides the most relevant works we discussed early, our work is
in-depth understanding of flow interactions. However, integrating
 also inspired by the following topics.
fine-grained flow telemetry also incurs higher overhead especially
 Performance anomaly in intra-host networks. Many studon switch resource usage.
 ies observe the intra-host network is becoming an RDMA per-
Applicability of Hawkeye. Our Tofino implementation serves
 formance bottleneck. Collie [35] explores the anomaly space to
as a readily available proof-of-concept. However, Hawkeye is not
 find performance anomalies in intra-host networks. Husky [34]
tightly tied to Tofino, and is inexpensive to implement into nextpresents a test suite to evaluate performance isolation in RNICs.
generation switching ASICs. The real time PFC status of each port
 Hostping [42]diagnoses the performance bottleneck in intra-host
is already supported by many RDMA switches. Hawkeye only
 networks using loopback traffic. Lumina [71] proposes a test tool to
requires two additional components. First, the PFC causality data,
 evaluate the performance of RNIC network stacks. However, there
including the causality structure (Figure 3) and port-level telemetry,
 are relatively fewer studies effectively diagnosing inter-host RDMA
requires additional registers with constant size, which is bounded
 NPAs, as analyzed in §2.3, and we bridges this gap via Hawkeye.
by the number of switch ports. Second, Hawkeye enhances the
 Programmable network. Programmable networks, represented
flow-level telemetry with PFC-aware data, such as PFC impact
 by programmable switches and SmartNICs, have been widely used
on each flow. Such modification only requires a new data field in
 to accelerate various applications in network monitoring [22, 39,
the telemetry recording system. As current switches are becoming
 47, 79], traffic analysis [58, 64, 73, 77], queue measurement [10, 37],
more plentiful in resource and embracing greater programmability,
 traffic control [3, 25, 38, 75], and security [33, 43, 74]. Inspired
especially considering the trend of white-box customized switches,
 by them, Hawkeye leverages programmable switches to support
we believe that Hawkeye is fully implementable to next-generation
 PFC-aware telemetry logging, PFC causality tracing and telemetry
commodity switches.
 collection.
Partial Deployment of Hawkeye. Hawkeye contains two core
 Provenance-based diagnosis. There is a body of studies that
components: 1) the PFC causality analysis mechanism to trace
 leverage provenance to trace event causality relationship [8] and
the PFC spreading path; 2) the PFC-aware flow telemetry to andiagnose security threats or performance issues. ForenGuard [61]
alyze queue contention between flows and PFC impact on each
 monitors the provenance of runtime activities in SDN. Unicorn [23]
flow, both of which are crucial to locate the root causes. If only a
 leverages the provenance of system executions to detect APT (Adpart of switches deploy Hawkeye, such as ToR switches, the PFC
 vanced Persistent Threat). SpiderMon [66] and PrintQueue [37]
tracing will be interrupted at a non-Hawkeye switch, making it
 construct flow-level and packet-level provenance, respectively, to
difficult to correlate victim flows with root causes even though
 identify queue contention contributors. DTaP [78] and Zeno [68]
a certain switch’s telemetry may have recorded them. We give a
 construct time-aware event provenance and diagnose performance
feasible partial deployment option. Assume that all switches supissues in distributed systems. Hawkeye takes PFC causality into
port PFC causality analysis, but we only deploy flow telemetry
 provenance consideration to diagnose RDMA NPAs.
on some hot-spot switches, e.g., ToR switches, where a lot of flow
contention such as incast frequently occurs. In this case, the PFC
spreading causality can be completely traced, and a significant 7 Conclusion
percentage of the root causes located in ToR switches can also be RDMA network performance anomalies present new complexities
covered. However, diagnosis effectiveness is still inevitably com- due to the cascading congestion of PFC and make existing solutions
promised. For instance, some root causes like ECMP imbalance [66] less effective. We propose Hawkeye to bridge the gap. It provides
or routing problems [27, 67] occurring on leaf/spine switches, are fine-grained PFC visibility through a multi-granularity PFC-aware
consequently uncovered. telemetry system, a fast in-network PFC causality tracing mecha-
Parameter setting on different network environment. Hawk- nism to efficiently collect causal telemetry, and a precise diagnosis
eye empirically adjusts the parameters for different network work- algorithm based on the heterogeneous provenance graph. Our evalloads, to achieve a good trade-off between accuracy and overhead. uations demonstrate Hawkeye can accurately detect and diagnose

 492
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

RDMA network performance anomalies with low overhead. We [12] Yanzhe Chen, Xingda Wei, Jiaxin Shi, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2016. Fast
hope Hawkeye can inspire new paradigms for anomaly diagnosis and general distributed transactions using RDMA and HTM. In Proceedings of
 the Eleventh European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’16). Association
in RDMA networks. for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 26, 17 pages. https:
 //doi.org/10.1145/2901318.2901349
 [13] Wenxue Cheng, Kun Qian, Wanchun Jiang, Tong Zhang, and Fengyuan Ren. 2020.
Acknowledgment Re-architecting Congestion Management in Lossless Ethernet. In 17th USENIX
We thank our shepherd, Costin Raiciu, and the anonymous SIG- Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20). USENIX
 Association, Santa Clara, CA, 19–36. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20
COMM reviewers for their valuable comments. This work is sup- /presentation/cheng
ported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [14] Charles Clos. 1953. A study of non-blocking switching networks. The Bell
 System Technical Journal 32, 2 (1953), 406–424. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-
(No. 62402025 and No.62221003), the Fundamental Research Funds 7305.1953.tb01433.x
for the Central Universities and gifts from Huawei-BUAA Joint [15] Aleksandar Dragojević, Dushyanth Narayanan, Miguel Castro, and Orion Hodson.
Lab. Menghao Zhang and Zhiliang Wang are the corresponding 2014. FaRM: Fast Remote Memory. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Networked
 Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14). USENIX Association, Seattle, WA,
authors. 401–414. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi14/technical-sessions/dragoje
 vi
 [16] Adithya Gangidi, Rui Miao, Shengbao Zheng, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Guilherme Goes,
References Hany Morsy, Rohit Puri, Mohammad Riftadi, Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Jingyi
 [1] Alibaba. 2024. Alibaba builds high-speed RDMA network for AI and scientific Yang, Shuqiang Zhang, Mikel Jimenez Fernandez, Shashidhar Gandham, and
 computing. https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/alibaba-builds-high-speed-rd Hongyi Zeng. 2024. RDMA over Ethernet for Distributed Training at Meta
 ma-network-for-ai-and-scientific-computing_594895. (2024). Scale. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM
 [2] Alibaba-edu. 2019. HPCC simulation. https://github.com/alibaba-edu/High- ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 57–70. https:
 Precision-Congestion-Control. (2019). //doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672233
 [3] Serhat Arslan, Yuliang Li, Gautam Kumar, and Nandita Dukkipati. 2023. Bolt: [17] Yixiao Gao, Qiang Li, Lingbo Tang, Yongqing Xi, Pengcheng Zhang, Wenwen
 Sub-RTT Congestion Control for Ultra-Low Latency. In 20th USENIX Symposium Peng, Bo Li, Yaohui Wu, Shaozong Liu, Lei Yan, Fei Feng, Yan Zhuang, Fan
 on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Liu, Pan Liu, Xingkui Liu, Zhongjie Wu, Junping Wu, Zheng Cao, Chen Tian,
 Boston, MA, 219–236. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/ Jinbo Wu, Jiaji Zhu, Haiyong Wang, Dennis Cai, and Jiesheng Wu. 2021. When
 arslan Cloud Storage Meets RDMA. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
 [4] Behnaz Arzani, Selim Ciraci, Luiz Chamon, Yibo Zhu, Hongqiang (Harry) Liu, Jitu Design and Implementation (NSDI 21). USENIX Association, 519–533. https:
 Padhye, Boon Thau Loo, and Geoff Outhred. 2018. 007: Democratically Finding //www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi21/presentation/gao
 the Cause of Packet Drops. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems [18] Yixiao Gao, Yuchen Yang, Tian Chen, Jiaqi Zheng, Bing Mao, and Guihai Chen.
 Design and Implementation (NSDI 18). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 419–435. 2018. DCQCN+: Taming Large-Scale Incast Congestion in RDMA over Ethernet
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi18/presentation/arzani Networks. In 2018 IEEE 26th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP).
 [5] Azure. 2023. High performance computing VM sizes. https://learn.microsoft.co IEEE, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 110–120. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNP.2018.
 m/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-hpc/. (2023). 00021
 [6] Wei Bai, Shanim Sainul Abdeen, Ankit Agrawal, Krishan Kumar Attre, Paramvir [19] Mojgan Ghasemi, Theophilus Benson, and Jennifer Rexford. 2017. Dapper: Data
 Bahl, Ameya Bhagat, Gowri Bhaskara, Tanya Brokhman, Lei Cao, Ahmad Cheema, Plane Performance Diagnosis of TCP. In Proceedings of the Symposium on SDN
 Rebecca Chow, Jeff Cohen, Mahmoud Elhaddad, Vivek Ette, Igal Figlin, Daniel Research (SOSR ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
 Firestone, Mathew George, Ilya German, Lakhmeet Ghai, Eric Green, Albert 61–74. https://doi.org/10.1145/3050220.3050228
 Greenberg, Manish Gupta, Randy Haagens, Matthew Hendel, Ridwan Howlader, [20] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Zhong Deng, Gaurav Soni, Jianxi Ye, Jitu Padhye,
 Neetha John, Julia Johnstone, Tom Jolly, Greg Kramer, David Kruse, Ankit and Marina Lipshteyn. 2016. RDMA over Commodity Ethernet at Scale. In
 Kumar, Erica Lan, Ivan Lee, Avi Levy, Marina Lipshteyn, Xin Liu, Chen Liu, Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference (SIGCOMM ’16). Association
 Guohan Lu, Yuemin Lu, Xiakun Lu, Vadim Makhervaks, Ulad Malashanka, for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 202–215. https://doi.org/10.114
 David A. Maltz, Ilias Marinos, Rohan Mehta, Sharda Murthi, Anup Namdhari, 5/2934872.2934908
 Aaron Ogus, Jitendra Padhye, Madhav Pandya, Douglas Phillips, Adrian Power, [21] Chuanxiong Guo, Lihua Yuan, Dong Xiang, Yingnong Dang, Ray Huang, Dave
 Suraj Puri, Shachar Raindel, Jordan Rhee, Anthony Russo, Maneesh Sah, Ali Maltz, Zhaoyi Liu, Vin Wang, Bin Pang, Hua Chen, Zhi-Wei Lin, and Varugis
 Sheriff, Chris Sparacino, Ashutosh Srivastava, Weixiang Sun, Nick Swanson, Kurien. 2015. Pingmesh: A Large-Scale System for Data Center Network Latency
 Fuhou Tian, Lukasz Tomczyk, Vamsi Vadlamuri, Alec Wolman, Ying Xie, Joyce Measurement and Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special
 Yom, Lihua Yuan, Yanzhao Zhang, and Brian Zill. 2023. Empowering Azure Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’15). Association for Comput-
 Storage with RDMA. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems De- ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 139–152. https://doi.org/10.1145/2785956.27
 sign and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 49–67. 87496
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/bai [22] Arpit Gupta, Rob Harrison, Marco Canini, Nick Feamster, Jennifer Rexford, and
 [7] Ryan Beckett, Aarti Gupta, Ratul Mahajan, and David Walker. 2017. A Gen- Walter Willinger. 2018. Sonata: query-driven streaming network telemetry. In
 eral Approach to Network Configuration Verification. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIG- Communication (SIGCOMM ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New
 COMM ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 155–168. York, NY, USA, 357–371. https://doi.org/10.1145/3230543.3230555
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3098822.3098834 [23] Xueyuan Han, Thomas Pasquier, Adam Bates, James Mickens, and Margo Seltzer.
 [8] Peter Buneman, Sanjeev Khanna, and Tan Wang-Chiew. 2001. Why and Where: 2020. Unicorn: Runtime Provenance-Based Detector for Advanced Persistent
 A Characterization of Data Provenance. In Database Theory — ICDT 2001, Jan Threats. In Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium 2020.
 Van den Bussche and Victor Vianu (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, [24] Nikhil Handigol, Brandon Heller, Vimalkumar Jeyakumar, David Mazières, and
 Heidelberg, 316–330. Nick McKeown. 2014. I Know What Your Packet Did Last Hop: Using Packet
 [9] Jiamin Cao, Yu Guan, Kun Qian, Jiaqi Gao, Wencong Xiao, Jianbo Dong, Binzhang Histories to Troubleshoot Networks. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Networked
 Fu, Dennis Cai, and Ennan Zhai. 2024. Crux: GPU-Efficient Communication Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14). USENIX Association, Seattle, WA,
 Scheduling for Deep Learning Training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 71–85.
 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, [25] Jinbin Hu, Chaoliang Zeng, Zilong Wang, Junxue Zhang, Kun Guo, Hong Xu,
 New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672239 Jiawei Huang, and Kai Chen. 2023. Enabling Load Balancing for Lossless Data-
[10] Xiaoqi Chen, Shir Landau Feibish, Yaron Koral, Jennifer Rexford, Ori Rot- centers. In 2023 IEEE 31st International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP).
 tenstreich, Steven A Monetti, and Tzuu-Yi Wang. 2019. Fine-grained queue 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNP59255.2023.10355615
 measurement in the data plane. In Proceedings of the 15th International Con- [26] Shuihai Hu, Yibo Zhu, Peng Cheng, Chuanxiong Guo, Kun Tan, Jitendra Padhye,
 ference on Emerging Networking Experiments And Technologies (CoNEXT ’19). and Kai Chen. 2016. Deadlocks in Datacenter Networks: Why Do They Form,
 Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 15–29. https: and How to Avoid Them. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics
 //doi.org/10.1145/3359989.3365408 in Networks (HotNets ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
[11] Youmin Chen, Youyou Lu, and Jiwu Shu. 2019. Scalable RDMA RPC on Reliable USA, 92–98. https://doi.org/10.1145/3005745.3005760
 Connection with Efficient Resource Sharing. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth [27] Shuihai Hu, Yibo Zhu, Peng Cheng, Chuanxiong Guo, Kun Tan, Jitendra Padhye,
 EuroSys Conference 2019 (EuroSys ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, and Kai Chen. 2019. Tagger: Practical PFC Deadlock Prevention in Data Center
 New York, NY, USA, Article 19, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3302424.3303968 Networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 27, 2 (2019), 889.

 493
SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal Shicheng Wang et al.

[28] IEEE. 2011. IEEE 802.1 Qbb - Priority-based Flow Control. https://1.ieee802.org/ [43] Zaoxing Liu, Hun Namkung, Georgios Nikolaidis, Jeongkeun Lee, Changhoon
 dcb/802-1qbb/. (2011). Kim, Xin Jin, Vladimir Braverman, Minlan Yu, and Vyas Sekar. 2021. Jaqen:
[29] InfiniBand Trade Association. 2020. InfiniBand Architecture Specification Release A High-Performance Switch-Native Approach for Detecting and Mitigating
 1.4 Annex A17: RoCEv2. (2020). Volumetric DDoS Attacks with Programmable Switches. In 30th USENIX Se-
[30] Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Chang Lan, Bairen Yi, Yong Cui, and Chuanxiong Guo. curity Symposium (USENIX Security 21). USENIX Association, 3829–3846. https:
 2020. A Unified Architecture for Accelerating Distributed DNN Training in //www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/liu-zaoxing
 Heterogeneous GPU/CPU Clusters. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating [44] Youyou Lu, Jiwu Shu, Youmin Chen, and Tao Li. 2017. Octopus: an RDMA-enabled
 Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 463–479. Distributed Persistent Memory File System. In 2017 USENIX Annual Technical
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/jiang Conference (USENIX ATC 17). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 773–785.
[31] Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Yinmin Zhong, Qi Huang, Yangrui Chen, Zhi Zhang, https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc17/technical-sessions/presentation/lu
 Yanghua Peng, Xiang Li, Cong Xie, Shibiao Nong, Yulu Jia, Sun He, Hongmin [45] Radhika Mittal, Vinh The Lam, Nandita Dukkipati, Emily Blem, Hassan Wassel,
 Chen, Zhihao Bai, Qi Hou, Shipeng Yan, Ding Zhou, Yiyao Sheng, Zhuo Jiang, Monia Ghobadi, Amin Vahdat, Yaogong Wang, David Wetherall, and David Zats.
 Haohan Xu, Haoran Wei, Zhang Zhang, Pengfei Nie, Leqi Zou, Sida Zhao, Liang 2015. TIMELY: RTT-based congestion control for the datacenter. ACM SIGCOMM
 Xiang, Zherui Liu, Zhe Li, Xiaoying Jia, Jianxi Ye, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. 2024. Computer Communication Review 45, 4 (2015), 537–550.
 MegaScale: Scaling Large Language Model Training to More Than 10,000 GPUs. [46] Masoud Moshref, Minlan Yu, Ramesh Govindan, and Amin Vahdat. 2016. Trumpet:
 In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation Timely and Precise Triggers in Data Centers. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
 (NSDI 24). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 745–760. https://www.usenix.o SIGCOMM Conference (SIGCOMM ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
 rg/conference/nsdi24/presentation/jiang-ziheng New York, NY, USA, 129–143. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2934879
[32] Anuj Kalia, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Andersen. 2016. FaSST: Fast, Scalable [47] Srinivas Narayana, Anirudh Sivaraman, Vikram Nathan, Prateesh Goyal, Venkat
 and Simple Distributed Transactions with Two-Sided (RDMA) Datagram RPCs. Arun, Mohammad Alizadeh, Vimalkumar Jeyakumar, and Changhoon Kim. 2017.
 In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation Language-Directed Hardware Design for Network Performance Monitoring. In
 (OSDI 16). USENIX Association, Savannah, GA, 185–201. https://www.usenix.o Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Commurg/conference/osdi16/technical-sessions/presentation/kalia nication (SIGCOMM ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
[33] Qiao Kang, Lei Xue, Adam Morrison, Yuxin Tang, Ang Chen, and Xiapu Luo. 2020. USA, 85–98. https://doi.org/10.1145/3098822.3098829
 Programmable In-Network Security for Context-aware BYOD Policies. In 29th [48] NVIDIA. 2024. NVIDIA DOCA PCC Application Guide. https://docs.nvidia.com/
 USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX Association, 595–612. doca/sdk/nvidia+doca+pcc+application+guide/index.html. (2024).
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/kang [49] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA Spectrum-X Networking Platform. https://www.nvidia.c
[34] Xinhao Kong, Jingrong Chen, Wei Bai, Yechen Xu, Mahmoud Elhaddad, Shachar om/en-us/networking/spectrumx/. (2025).
 Raindel, Jitendra Padhye, Alvin R. Lebeck, and Danyang Zhuo. 2023. Under- [50] Kun Qian, Wenxue Cheng, Tong Zhang, and Fengyuan Ren. 2019. Gentle flow constanding RDMA Microarchitecture Resources for Performance Isolation. In 20th trol: avoiding deadlock in lossless networks. In Proceedings of the ACM Special In-
 USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). terest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’19). Association for Computing
 USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 31–48. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 75–89. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341302.3342065
 nsdi23/presentation/kong [51] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan, Binzhang
[35] Xinhao Kong, Yibo Zhu, Huaping Zhou, Zhuo Jiang, Jianxi Ye, Chuanxiong Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, Chao Wang, Peng Wang, Pengcheng
 Guo, and Danyang Zhuo. 2022. Collie: Finding Performance Anomalies in Zhang, Xianlong Zeng, Eddie Ruan, Zhiping Yao, Ennan Zhai, and Dennis Cai.
 RDMA Subsystems. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems De- 2024. Alibaba HPN: A Data Center Network for Large Language Model Training.
 sign and Implementation (NSDI 22). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 287–305. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM ’24).
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi22/presentation/kong Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 691–706. https:
[36] Gautam Kumar, Nandita Dukkipati, Keon Jang, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Xian //doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672265
 Wu, Behnam Montazeri, Yaogong Wang, Kevin Springborn, Christopher Alfeld, [52] Mubashir Adnan Qureshi, Yuchung Cheng, Qianwen Yin, Qiaobin Fu, Gautam
 Michael Ryan, David Wetherall, and Amin Vahdat. 2020. Swift: Delay is Simple Kumar, Masoud Moshref, Junhua Yan, Van Jacobson, David Wetherall, and Abdul
 and Effective for Congestion Control in the Datacenter. In Proceedings of the Kabbani. 2022. PLB: congestion signals are simple and effective for network
 Annual Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on load balancing. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIGCOMM
 the Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Commu- ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 207–218. https:
 nication (SIGCOMM ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, //doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544226
 USA, 514–528. https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3406591 [53] Sudarsanan Rajasekaran, Manya Ghobadi, and Aditya Akella. 2024. CASSINI:
[37] Yiran Lei, Liangcheng Yu, Vincent Liu, and Mingwei Xu. 2022. PrintQueue: Network-Aware Job Scheduling in Machine Learning Clusters. In 21st USENIX
 performance diagnosis via queue measurement in the data plane. In Proceedings of Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24). USENIX
 the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIGCOMM ’22). Association for Computing Association, Santa Clara, CA, 1403–1420. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ns
 Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 516–529. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544 di24/presentation/rajasekaran
 257 [54] Arjun Roy, Hongyi Zeng, Jasmeet Bagga, George Porter, and Alex C. Snoeren.
[38] Wenxue Li, Chaoliang Zeng, Jinbin Hu, and Kai Chen. 2023. Towards Fine- 2015. Inside the Social Network’s (Datacenter) Network. In Proceedings of the 2015
 Grained and Practical Flow Control for Datacenter Networks. In 2023 IEEE 31st ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM
 International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP). 1–11. https://doi.org/10.110 ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 123–137. https:
 9/ICNP59255.2023.10355582 //doi.org/10.1145/2785956.2787472
[39] Yuliang Li, Rui Miao, Changhoon Kim, and Minlan Yu. 2016. FlowRadar: A Better [55] Alex Shpiner, Eitan Zahavi, Vladimir Zdornov, Tal Anker, and Matty Kadosh.
 NetFlow for Data Centers. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems 2016. Unlocking Credit Loop Deadlocks. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop
 Design and Implementation (NSDI 16). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
 311–324. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi16/technical-sessions/present New York, NY, USA, 85–91. https://doi.org/10.1145/3005745.3005768
 ation/li-yuliang [56] Arjun Singhvi, Aditya Akella, Dan Gibson, Thomas F. Wenisch, Monica Wong-
[40] Yuliang Li, Rui Miao, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Yan Zhuang, Fei Feng, Lingbo Tang, Chan, Sean Clark, Milo M. K. Martin, Moray McLaren, Prashant Chandra, Rob
 Zheng Cao, Ming Zhang, Frank Kelly, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Minlan Yu. Cauble, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Behnam Montazeri, Simon L. Sabato, Joel Scher-
 2019. HPCC: high precision congestion control. In Proceedings of the ACM pelz, and Amin Vahdat. 2020. 1RMA: Re-envisioning Remote Memory Ac-
 Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’19). Association for cess for Multi-tenant Datacenters. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
 Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 44–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341 the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the Applications,
 302.3342085 Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIG-
[41] Kefei Liu, Zhuo Jiang, Jiao Zhang, Shixian Guo, Xuan Zhang, Yangyang Bai, COMM ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 708–721.
 Yongbin Dong, Feng Luo, Zhang Zhang, Lei Wang, Xiang Shi, Haohan Xu, Yang https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3405897
 Bai, Dongyang Song, Haoran Wei, Bo Li, Yongchen Pan, Tian Pan, and Tao [57] John Snyder, Alvin R Lebeck, and Danyang Zhuo. 2022. RDMA Congestion
 Huang. 2024. R-Pingmesh: A Service-Aware RoCE Network Monitoring and Control: It Is Only for the Compliant. IEEE Micro 43, 1 (2022), 76–82.
 Diagnostic System. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM [58] John Sonchack, Oliver Michel, Adam J. Aviv, Eric Keller, and Jonathan M. Smith.
 SIGCOMM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Scaling Hardware Accelerated Network Monitoring to Concurrent and
 554–567. https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672264 Dynamic Queries With *Flow. In 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
[42] Kefei Liu, Zhuo Jiang, Jiao Zhang, Haoran Wei, Xiaolong Zhong, Lizhuang Tan, (USENIX ATC 18). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 823–835. https://www.usen
 Tian Pan, and Tao Huang. 2023. Hostping: Diagnosing Intra-host Network ix.org/conference/atc18/presentation/sonchack
 Bottlenecks in RDMA Servers. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems [59] Cha Hwan Song, Xin Zhe Khooi, Raj Joshi, Inho Choi, Jialin Li, and Mun Choon
 Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 15–29. Chan. 2023. Network Load Balancing with In-network Reordering Support for
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/liu-kefei RDMA. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM

 494
Hawkeye SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

 ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 816–831. https: Carlsbad, CA, 527–543. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentatio
 //doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604849 n/zhou
[60] Praveen Tammana, Rachit Agarwal, and Myungjin Lee. 2018. Distributed Network [77] Guangmeng Zhou, Zhuotao Liu, Chuanpu Fu, Qi Li, and Ke Xu. 2023. An Efficient
 Monitoring and Debugging with SwitchPointer. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Design of Intelligent Network Data Plane. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
 Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 18). USENIX Association, (USENIX Security 23). USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA, 6203–6220. https://
 Renton, WA, 453–456. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi18/presentation/ www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/zhou-guangmeng
 tammana [78] Wenchao Zhou, Suyog Mapara, Yiqing Ren, Yang Li, Andreas Haeberlen, Zachary
[61] Haopei Wang, Guangliang Yang, Phakpoom Chinprutthiwong, Lei Xu, Yangyong Ives, Boon Thau Loo, and Micah Sherr. 2012. Distributed time-aware provenance.
 Zhang, and Guofei Gu. 2018. Towards Fine-grained Network Security Forensics VLDB Endowment 6, 2 (2012), 49–60.
 and Diagnosis in the SDN Era. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference [79] Yu Zhou, Chen Sun, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Rui Miao, Shi Bai, Bo Li, Zhion Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’18). Association for Computing long Zheng, Lingjun Zhu, Zhen Shen, Yongqing Xi, Pengcheng Zhang, Den-
 Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243749 nis Cai, Ming Zhang, and Mingwei Xu. 2020. Flow Event Telemetry on Pro-
[62] Shicheng Wang. 2025. Hawkeye. https://github.com/wangshicheng1225/Hawk grammable Data Plane. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the ACM
 eye. (2025). Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the Applications, Technolo-
[63] Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Yuying Du, Ziteng Chen, Zhiliang Wang, gies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIGCOMM ’20).
 Mingwei Xu, Renjie Xie, and Jiahai Yang. 2024. LoRDMA: A New Low-Rate DoS Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 76–89. https:
 Attack in RDMA Networks. In NDSS 2024. San Diego, CA. //doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3406214
[64] Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Chang Liu, Ying Liu, Xuya Jia, [80] Yibo Zhu, Haggai Eran, Daniel Firestone, Chuanxiong Guo, Marina Lipshteyn,
 and Mingwei Xu. 2021. Making Multi-String Pattern Matching Scalable and Yehonatan Liron, Jitendra Padhye, Shachar Raindel, Mohamad Haj Yahia, and
 Cost-Efficient with Programmable Switching ASICs. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021 - Ming Zhang. 2015. Congestion Control for Large-Scale RDMA Deployments.
 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE Press, Virtual Event, 1–10. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data
 https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488796 Communication (SIGCOMM ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New
[65] Weiyang Wang, Moein Khazraee, Zhizhen Zhong, Manya Ghobadi, Zhihao Jia, York, NY, USA, 523–536. https://doi.org/10.1145/2785956.2787484
 Dheevatsa Mudigere, Ying Zhang, and Anthony Kewitsch. 2023. TopoOpt:
 Co-optimizing Network Topology and Parallelization Strategy for Distributed
 Training Jobs. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
 Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 739–767. https:
 //www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/wang-weiyang
[66] Weitao Wang, Xinyu Crystal Wu, Praveen Tammana, Ang Chen, and T. S. Eugene Ng. 2022. Closed-loop Network Performance Monitoring and Diagnosis
 with SpiderMon. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
 Implementation (NSDI 22). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 267–285. https:
 //www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi22/presentation/wang-weitao-spidermon
[67] Xinyu Crystal Wu and T. S. Eugene Ng. 2022. Detecting and Resolving PFC
 Deadlocks with ITSY Entirely in the Data Plane. In IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE
 Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE Press, Virtual Event, 1928–1937.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM48880.2022.9796798
[68] Yang Wu, Ang Chen, and Linh Thi Xuan Phan. 2019. Zeno: Diagnosing Performance Problems with Temporal Provenance. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
 Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19). USENIX Association,
 Boston, MA, 395–420. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/
 wu
[69] Jilong Xue, Youshan Miao, Cheng Chen, Ming Wu, Lintao Zhang, and Lidong
 Zhou. 2019. Fast Distributed Deep Learning over RDMA. In Proceedings of the
 Fourteenth EuroSys Conference 2019 (EuroSys ’19). Association for Computing
 Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 44, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/33
 02424.3303975
[70] Jian Yang, Joseph Izraelevitz, and Steven Swanson. 2019. Orion: A Distributed
 File System for Non-Volatile Main Memory and RDMA-Capable Networks. In
 17th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 19). USENIX
 Association, Boston, MA, 221–234. https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast19/p
 resentation/yang
[71] Zhuolong Yu, Bowen Su, Wei Bai, Shachar Raindel, Vladimir Braverman, and Xin
 Jin. 2023. Understanding the Micro-Behaviors of Hardware Offloaded Network
 Stacks with Lumina. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference (ACM
 SIGCOMM ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
 1074–1087. https://doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604837
[72] David Zats, Tathagata Das, Prashanth Mohan, Dhruba Borthakur, and Randy
 Katz. 2012. DeTail: reducing the flow completion time tail in datacenter networks. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2012 Conference on Applications,
 Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIG-
 COMM ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 139–150.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/2342356.2342390
[73] Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Cheng Guo, Renyu Yang, Shicheng Wang, Han Bao,
 Xiao Li, Mingwei Xu, Tianyu Wo, and Chunming Hu. 2025. SuperFE: A Scalable
 and Flexible Feature Extractor for ML-based Traffic Analysis Applications. In
 EuroSys 2025. ACM, Rotterdam.
[74] Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Shicheng Wang, Chang Liu, Ang Chen, Hongxin
 Hu, Guofei Gu, Qianqian Li, Mingwei Xu, and Jianping Wu. 2020. Poseidon:
 Mitigating volumetric ddos attacks with programmable switches. In the 27th
 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2020).
[75] Yiran Zhang, Yifan Liu, Qingkai Meng, and Fengyuan Ren. 2021. Congestion
 detection in lossless networks. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGCOMM 2021
 Conference (SIGCOMM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
 NY, USA, 370–383. https://doi.org/10.1145/3452296.3472899
[76] Fang Zhou, Yifan Gan, Sixiang Ma, and Yang Wang. 2018. wPerf: Generic Off-
 CPU Analysis to Identify Bottleneck Waiting Events. In 13th USENIX Symposium
 on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18). USENIX Association,

 495