Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Digital Communications and Networks
 journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/dcan

High-speed encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation by using payload features
Xinge Yan a,b , Liukun He c , Yifan Xu a , Jiuxin Cao a,∗ , Liangmin Wang a , Guyang Xie b
a
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
b
 Nanjing Huafei Data Technology Co., Ltd., Nanjing 210019, China
c
 School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Traﬃc encryption techniques facilitate cyberattackers to hide their presence and activities. Traﬃc classiﬁcation
Traﬃc classiﬁcation is an important method to prevent network threats. However, due to the tremendous traﬃc volume and
Flow analysis limitations of computing, most existing traﬃc classiﬁcation techniques are inapplicable to the high-speed
Information entropy
 network environment. In this paper, we propose a High-speed Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation (HETC) method
Machine learning
 containing two stages. First, to eﬃciently detect whether traﬃc is encrypted, HETC focuses on randomly sampled
Randomness test
 short ﬂows and extracts aggregation entropies with chi-square test features to measure the diﬀerent patterns of
 the byte composition and distribution between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. Second, HETC introduces
 binary features upon the previous features and performs ﬁne-grained traﬃc classiﬁcation by combining these
 payload features with a Random Forest model. The experimental results show that HETC can achieve a 94%
 F-measure in detecting encrypted ﬂows and a 85%–93% F-measure in classifying ﬁne-grained ﬂows for a 1-KB
 ﬂow-length dataset, outperforming the state-of-the-art comparison methods. Meanwhile, HETC does not need to
 wait for the end of the ﬂow and can extract mass computing features. The average time for HETC to process
 each ﬂow is only 2 or 16 ms, which is lower than the ﬂow duration in most cases, making it a good candidate
 for high-speed traﬃc classiﬁcation.

1. Introduction curity assessment, accounting, and service diﬀerentiation [5]. For these
 reasons, TC has gained attention from academia and industry in re-
 With the rapid development of network communication technolo- cent years due to the growth in the usage of encryption protocols. The
gies and protocols, network traﬃc has become more complex and di- traditional payload-based TC method, namely Deep Packet Inspection
verse. Most communication networks use robust encryption algorithms (DPI), accurately classiﬁes ﬂows by matching the string information
to secure data transmission and prevent privacy leakage [1]. However, contained in the packet payload with the existing signatures in the
encryption also facilitates cyberattackers, who can use it to hide their database. However, the widespread use of encryption protocols has
presence and activities. Encrypted traﬃc can hide malicious software made DPI techniques ineﬀective. To compensate for this problem, exand other information, resulting in a series of viruses, worms, and Tro- isting payload-based TC methods focus on detecting the randomness
jans. Consequently, how to classify encrypted traﬃc becomes an urgent of the payload, as encryption can increase the randomness of the payproblem that needs to be solved [2]. load. Entropy is a standard metric for detecting the randomness of a
 Traﬃc Classiﬁcation (TC) is a foundational technology for identify- sequence [6] and is directly proportional to the randomness. So related
ing sensitive data patterns and categorizing clustered network traﬃc.TC studies [7,8] identify whether a ﬂow is encrypted by analyzing the enand its methodologies are of utmost importance in Internet traﬃc en- tropy of the payload byte sequence. However, a high entropy does not
gineering, as they jointly support activities such as network monitoring always mean encryption. Unencrypted compressed ﬂows can also pos-
[3], anomaly detection [4], security assessment, accounting, and ser- sess high entropies [9], so focusing only on the payload entropy cannot
vice diﬀerentiation of utmost importance in Internet traﬃc engineering, wholly detect encrypted ﬂows from all ﬂows. We need to introduce
along with related methodologies and tools, as they jointly support more representative features. In this scenario, Machine Learning (ML)-
activities such as network monitoring [3], anomaly detection [4], se- based approaches prove to be the most suitable for modern TC, as they

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: 230219449@seu.edu.cn (X. Yan), helk@stmail.ujs.edu.cn (L. He), xuyifan@seu.edu.cn (Y. Xu), jx.cao@seu.edu.cn (J. Cao),
liangmin@seu.edu.cn (L. Wang), mariomaurerm@163.com (G. Xie).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2024.02.003
Received 2 July 2022; Received in revised form 21 January 2024; Accepted 20 February 2024
Available online 28 February 2024
2352-8648/© 2024 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Fig. 1. Architecture of our methodology.

can be used to classify encrypted traﬃc using side-channel data and 1) We propose HETC for randomly sampled short ﬂows. HETC can
eﬃcient ML models. However, their usage relies on acquiring many discover the diﬀerent patterns between encrypted and unencrypted
statistical features. The authors of [2] ﬁltered hundreds of statistical ﬂows at the byte level, and use aggregation entropy with chi-square
features from a large number of alternative features, and trained a Ran- test features to measure the patterns and distinguish whether the
dom Forest (RF) model to classify the encrypted ﬂows. The results show traﬃc is encrypted.
a high classiﬁcation accuracy. In a high-speed network environment, we 2) By combining the aggregation entropy, chi-square test, binary feacan hardly acquire the entire ﬂow due to the continuous high volume tures, and a RF model, HETC further performs ﬁne-grained TC for
of network traﬃc, which makes most of the statistical features based reﬁned network management.
on the whole ﬂow unavailable. Therefore, it is imperative to propose 3) Experiments show that HETC can eﬀectively identify encrypted and
an eﬀective encrypted TC mechanism suitable for the high-speed net- unencrypted traﬃc and achieve ﬁne-grained TC for 1 KB ﬂows,
work environment by utilizing the low feature requirement of PR-based providing support for network resource management and service
methods and the eﬀectiveness of ML models. diﬀerentiation in high-speed networks.
 Two challenges make such TC mechanisms non-trivial. The ﬁrst
challenge is to extract eﬀective features besides entropy features. The The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 derange of features we can study is narrow due to calculation limitations scribes the threat model and related work. Section 3 analyzes the diﬀerand traﬃc obfuscations [10]. The second challenge is that the presented ent patterns in BC and BFD between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows,
method should have relatively high classiﬁcation accuracy for short the features to measure such patterns, and the method to classify the
ﬂows. Short ﬂows contain less information and are more diﬃcult to two types of ﬂows. Section 4 introduces the ﬁne-grained ﬂow classiﬁ-
classify. Having the ability to classify short ﬂows allows a TC method to cation method, and Section 5 describes the experimental preparation,
process more samples per unit of time, which is the most critical ability results, and comparative analysis in detail. Finally, Section 6 provides
to realize high-speed encrypted TC. conclusions and future work.
 This research proposes a High-speed Encrypted TC (HETC) method
using payload features. HETC focuses on analyzing randomly sampled 2. Threat model and related work
short ﬂows, and only extracts 4 features to identify the ﬂow types, reducing the classiﬁcation time. HETC also employs an online ﬂow table In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the threat model, review existing netto save the analysis results. When an identical ﬂow is captured again, work TC methods, and divide them into 4 major categories: port-based
HETC can directly output the ﬂow type to realize high-speed TC. Fig. 1 methods, payload-based methods, ML-based methods, and Deep Learnillustrates the structure of HETC, which contains two stages. In the ﬁrst ing (DL)-based methods. The advantages and disadvantages of each
stage, we analyze the diﬀerent patterns of the Byte Composition (BC) method are also discussed. As indicated in the introduction, encrypand Byte Frequency Distribution (BFD) between encrypted and unen- tion causes a change in the randomness of the packet payload, so we
crypted ﬂows. Then we use the aggregation entropy and chi-square detail one of the payload-based methods, namely the Payload Randomtest features to characterize this diﬀerence. Finally, we combine the ness (PR) method.
features with a semi-supervised clustering-based detection method to
eﬀectively detect encrypted ﬂows in all ﬂows, with an F-measure of 2.1. Threat model
94%. In the second stage, we introduce binary features and design a RF
semi-automatic update method to distinguish ﬁne-grained ﬂows, such In the threat model, we assume that the source and destination are
as HTTPS ﬂows in encrypted ﬂows. Compared to other studies, we eval- two nodes in the high-speed backbone network, passing encrypted or
uate HETC on a larger dataset comprising 7 publicly available datasets, unencrypted information through multiple routers. The intermediate
covering 12 traﬃc types. It enables the models to obtain more stable network managers can locate a bidirectional ﬂow by its IP address, port
TC results and reduce overﬁtting. The results show that HETC correctly number, transport layer protocol, and other information. Due to the
classiﬁes 85%–93% of ﬁne-grained random ﬂows of size 1 KB, outper- limitation of storage space and computing resources, it is impossible to
forming existing methods. store the complete ﬂow and analyze the ﬂow type oﬄine. Network man-
 In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows: agers can only randomly capture a part of ﬂow fragments to analyze the

 413
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

ﬂow type, use the online ﬂow table to record the ﬂow information, and softmax classiﬁer. Regarding the baselines, SAM improves classiﬁcation
output the ﬂow label in real-time when the fragment from the same accuracy by 13% (traﬃc type classiﬁcation) and takes only 2 ms to clas-
ﬂow is captured again. The ﬂow table is updated every ﬁxed interval sify a packet, proving that it can perform online TC at the packet level.
(e.g., 300 s) to ensure that ﬂow records do not expire. We will compare them with our method in the experimental section.

2.2. Traﬃc classiﬁcation methods 2.3. Payload randomness-based methods

 Port-based methods [11] distinguish traﬃc by querying a list of
 Most existing studies focus on classifying encrypted traﬃc. Howwell-known ports provided by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authorever, some communication systems still use plaintext traﬃc to deliver
ity (IANA), such as port 80 for HTTP and port 443 for SSL. However,
 sensitive information in their actual deployment, and therefore we must
with the adoption of dynamic ports and port disguise techniques, the
 ﬁrst distinguish whether the traﬃc is encrypted before using an enaccuracy of this type of method has decreased.
 crypted TC method.
 Payload-based methods [12] classify traﬃc by scanning information
 Encryption changes the randomness of the packet payload [22], and
contained in the packet payload, extracting signatures, and comparing
 most encrypted traﬃc has a higher degree of randomness than nonthem with existing signatures in the database. According to the diﬀerencrypted traﬃc. In information theory, entropy is a measure of data
ent comparison rules, this paper divides them into two types. The ﬁrst
 randomness. Related studies ﬁrst determine whether the traﬃc is enis DPI, which directly scans every byte of the packet payload and idencrypted by calculating the packet payload’s entropy, and then analyze
tiﬁes whether the payload contains a speciﬁc signature. However, these
 the speciﬁc type of encrypted traﬃc.
methods are no longer applicable with the wide employment of encryp-
 Mamun et al. [23] ﬁrst extracted the Bintropy [24], the n-length
tion protocols such as Transport Layer Security/Secure Socket Layer
 hexadecimal-encoded entropy, and multiple variants of both entropies
(TLS/SSL). The other is PR-based methods [13]. These methods do not
 of the complete ﬂow. Then they selected the top 8–10 features using a
directly match the speciﬁc signature but use the statistical information
 feature selection algorithm and combined the features with a supervised
of the payload to distinguish diﬀerent types of traﬃc. PR-based methlearning model to achieve a classiﬁcation accuracy of 98.1%.
ods can solve the problem that DPI cannot classify encrypted traﬃc. We
 In high-speed network environments, it is inappropriate for us to
will detail this kind of method in the next section.
 calculate the entropy of a complete ﬂow, as sometimes we must detect
 In recent years, researchers have paid more attention to ML-based
 the ﬂow content on-the-ﬂy. Khakpour et al. [7] proposed Iustitia, a fast
methods [14,15], which have high classiﬁcation accuracy and low resource consumption. Most of the studies extract some representative content-based ﬂow classiﬁer to leverage the observation that text ﬂows
features from the packets or ﬂows and combine them with ML mod- have the lowest entropy, encrypted ﬂows have the highest entropy, and
els such as K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), binary ﬂows have intermediate entropies. The basic idea is to classify
or RF to classify the traﬃc. Anderson et al. [16] proposed supervised ﬂows using ML techniques where a feature is the entropy of every spelearning models, abbreviated as Mal-l1 and Mal-SVM. The authors used ciﬁc number of consecutive bytes. Iustitia uses only the ﬁrst 1 KB of the
TLS handshake metadata, DNS contexts, and HTTP header information ﬂow to calculate the entropy and is suitable for high-speed TC environas features to train the l1-logistic regression and SVM models to detect ments, but does not consider the presence of compressed ﬂows, which
malicious traﬃc. The results show that Mal-l1 can achieve a 99.978% have the same high entropy as encrypted ﬂows.
accuracy at the 0.00% False Discovery Rate (FDR). Dong et al. [17] Casino et al. [9] proposed HEDGE, a high-entropy classiﬁer, to disextracted 15 ﬂow-level features from NetFlow information, including tinguish between encrypted and compressed ﬁles. Speciﬁcally, if the
the average packet arrival time, bidirectional packet ratio, and ﬂow du- chi-square test value, the chi-square test percentage conﬁdence, and the
ration. They proposed a cost-sensitive SVM called CMSVM to identify number of failed National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
the application type of traﬃc with better classiﬁcation accuracy than randomness tests of a random ﬁle fragment pass all pre-deﬁned threshother methods. ML-based approaches extract high-dimensional statis- olds, HEDGE considers the ﬁle encrypted. The threshold-based strategy
tical features from long packet sequences, while PR-based techniques makes it possible for HEDGE to classify a ﬁle using only 1 feature. Howextract fewer features from the payloads of 128 B – 8 KB traﬃc (about ever, HEDGE is evaluated on the ﬁle dataset, and may be inapplicable
1 – 10 packets). Our HETC leverages the beneﬁts of PR-based meth- to the encrypted TC task, since ﬁles are more uniform than the traﬃc
ods. In addition, HETC achieves competitive classiﬁcation performance content. Some of the traﬃc contains both compression and encryption
by incorporating ML models to detect encrypted traﬃc with a 94% F- components, such as TLS traﬃc, which splits the original message into
measure. multiple fragments, compresses each fragment separately, and ﬁnally
 DL-based methods [18] do not require domain experts to select fea- encrypts it by the symmetric encryption algorithm. In addition, some
tures, but automatically learn the complex patterns in traﬃc and extract encryption protocols have plaintext handshake packets, which may lead
depth features. Zheng et al. [19] proposed an end-to-end encrypted TC to misclassiﬁcations.
model, BGRUA, which utilized a bidirectional gated recurrent unit to Doroud et al. [25] proposed an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN)
extra features from the raw byte sequences. They then used the atten- classiﬁer based on randomness tests. The ANN extracts 8 randomness
tion mechanism to learn weights for the features automatically. BGRUA test features, such as the Approximate Entropy (AprEnt) test, from the
outperformed multiple state-of-the-art methods. The DeepPacket [20] payload of the ﬁrst 5 packets to classify the ﬂow. Comparison results
framework takes raw byte streams as input and trains stacked autoen- show that although the randomness test classiﬁer does not perform best,
coders and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to classify network it achieves F1 values greater than 90% at diﬀerent levels of encrypted
traﬃc. DeepPacket-CNN has a recall of 94% in the TC tasks. How- traﬃc detection.
ever, most DL-based methods take raw bytes as input, which is time- Saleh et al. [26] proposed two systems for classifying encrypted and
consuming and violates the limitations of high-speed TC [18]. As a compressed traﬃc, namely Engineered Features Classiﬁcation (EFC)
solution, Xie et al. [21] proposed a Self-Attention Method (SAM) for and Raw Data and Engineered Features Classiﬁcation (RDEFC) sys-
TC. SAM consists of 4 main components: embedding, self-attention, tems. EFC extracts Shannon-entropy, chi-square, and Anderson-Darling
1D-CNN, and a classiﬁer. SAM uses embeddings to enrich the repre- randomness test features to train a 1D-CNN for classiﬁcation. RDEFC
sentation of the packet-level inputs. Then self-attention is leveraged to combines randomness features with load bytes based on EFC and exassign diﬀerent attention weights to each input part to indicate the tracts deep representations using 2 1D-CNNs. The results show that EFC
importance. 1D-CNN is employed to extract further feature represen- achieves a maximum veriﬁcation accuracy of 81.73%, while RDEFC
tations. Finally, SAM computes the predicted class probabilities using a achieves a higher accuracy of 90.77%.

 414
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Fig. 3. Comparison of aggregation entropies between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows.
 Fig. 2. Encrypted ﬂow detection stage of our methodology.

 Based on the previous work, we propose HETC, a high-speed encrypted TC method by using payload features. HETC extracts more Transformation Format-8 (UTF8) CT. Therefore, we utilize the encoded
useful features by analyzing the diﬀerences in the BC, BFD, and binary information to extract aggregation entropy features based on existing
randomness of diﬀerent types of ﬂows, achieves higher classiﬁcation ac- research. The speciﬁc process is as follows.
 { }
curacy on short traﬃc ﬂow datasets, and improves the applicability of Given a ﬂow sequence 𝐵 = 𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝑢 , we ﬁrst calculate the
PR-based and ML-based encrypted TC methods in high-speed network CT priority according to the ﬂow destination IP, then initially set the
environments. We detail HETC in the following sections. number of consecutive aggregate bytes 𝑘 to 3. We regard every three
 consecutive bytes 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏3 as an independent element, look up in the CT
3. Feature analysis and encrypted ﬂow detection by priority, and determine whether 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏3 corresponding to character
 𝑐 exists in the table, such as ‘∖xe3∖x80∖x82’ corresponds to ‘◦’ in UTF8.
 This section describes the ﬁrst phase of HETC, which uses two key If it exists, character counter 𝑡𝑐 will be increased by 1, and we continue
features combined with a semi-supervised algorithm to detect encrypted the above procedure by sliding 𝑘 bytes backward in sequence 𝐵 . If it
traﬃc. This strategy allows HETC to utilize many unlabeled samples to does not exist, 𝑘 − 1 consecutive bytes will be regarded an independent
assist classiﬁcation.
 element and matched in CTs until 𝑘 = 1.
 Fig. 2 shows an overview of the ﬁrst stage. After the network probe
 Then the aggregation entropy of sequence 𝐵 can be calculated accaptures a short ﬂow, HETC computes the ﬂow’s quintuple hash to get
 cording to
its ﬂow ID. The corresponding ﬂow label is output if the ﬂow ID appears
in the ﬂow table. For ﬂows with no record in the ﬂow table, HETC ﬁrst ∑( ) ( )
strips the TCP or UDP header of each packet to get its transport layer 𝐻(𝐵) = 𝐸 (𝑃 ) = − 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log2 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 (1)
 𝑐∈𝐶
payload. Then HETC converts the payload into a hexadecimal sequence.
Subsequently, HETC extracts the aggregation entropy feature from the where 𝐶 represents the characters existing in 𝐵 , 𝐿 denotes the total
hexadecimal sequences to classify ﬂows. However, the high-entropy number of characters, and normalization is performed to eliminate the
ﬂows contain both encrypted and unencrypted compressed ﬂows. Based eﬀect of the length of 𝐵 on the aggregation entropy.
on previous work and our evaluation of the BFD of ﬂows, HETC selects
the chi-square test feature to distinguish these two high-entropy ﬂows.
 ∑( ) 1
 𝐷(𝐵) = 𝐻(𝐵)∕ log2 𝑚 = 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log𝑢 ( ) (2)
Finally, HETC combines these two features to propose a semi-supervised 𝑐∈𝐶 𝑡 𝑐 ∕𝐿
clustering-based traﬃc detection method for encrypted traﬃc by saving
 The details are shown in Algorithm 1. To verify that high entropy
the identiﬁcation records into the ﬂow table.
 and low entropy ﬂows can be eﬀectively classiﬁed by the aggregation
 entropy, we collect 100 encrypted ﬂows (containing 50 HTTPS ﬂows
3.1. Aggregation entropy feature
 and 50 Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) ﬂows) and 100 unencrypted
 ﬂows (containing 50 text ﬂows and 50 compressed ﬂows). HTTPS and
 According
 { information theory, the entropy of a random sequence
 to }
 ∑ VoIP ﬂows are derived from the typical encrypted traﬃc dataset ISCX
𝑆 = 𝑒1 , 𝑒2 , … 𝑒𝑛 is deﬁned as − 𝑛𝑖=1 𝑝𝑖 log 𝑝𝑖 , where 𝑝𝑖 represents the
frequency of the i-th element 𝑒𝑖 appearing in the whole sequence. The nonVPN. We generate text ﬁles by an automated script and compress
entropy is a measure of the sequence randomness. The more random text ﬁles using the zip algorithm. To better simulate the network trafthe elements in sequence 𝑆 , the higher the entropy. When there is only ﬁc environment, we use the sender and receiver hosts on the Internet
1 element in sequence 𝑆 , its randomness is minimized and the entropy to replay the encrypted traﬃc between them. Unencrypted traﬃc is obreaches a minimum value of zero. tained by fetching these ﬁles’ upload and download ﬂows. We extract
 In the ﬁeld of TC, researchers use entropy to distinguish whether the the payload and timestamp of each packet from the traﬃc and stitch the
traﬃc is encrypted. Most existing studies consider every 𝑛 consecutive packet payload according to the timestamp. We will detail the datasets
bytes in the ﬂow as an element and then calculate the entropy based on used in subsection 5.2. For each ﬂow, we intercept the ﬁrst 8 KB bytes to
the occurrence frequency of each element. However, the method loses calculate the aggregation entropy and use the tenfold cross-validation
part of the encoded information carried by bytes in plaintext ﬂows, method to prevent the inﬂuence of outliers. The results are shown in
as a character may consist of diﬀerent lengths of bytes given diﬀerent Fig. 3. The HTTPS and compressed ﬂows have the highest aggregation
code tables. For example, a Chinese character occupies two bytes in the entropies, and the text ﬂows have the lowest entropy, satisfying our
Unicode Code Table (CT), while it occupies three bytes in the Unicode expectations.

 415
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

Algorithm 1 Aggregation entropy feature extraction.
 { }
 Input: Character counter 𝑡𝑐 , byte sequence 𝐵 = 𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , .., 𝑏𝑢 , code table 𝐶𝑇 ,
maximum bytes 𝑘
 Output: Aggregation entropy 𝐷(𝐵)
 1: 𝐶𝑇 ← 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝐶𝑇 , 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑝) , 𝑘 ← 3
 2: for 𝜇 =1 to u do
 3: for 𝑙𝑐𝑡 in 𝐶𝑇 do
 4: if 𝑙𝑐𝑡(𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘))!=None then
 5: 𝑐 ← 𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘)
 6: 𝑡𝑐 ← 𝑡𝑐 + 1
 7: break
 8: end if
 9: end for
 10: if 𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘) not in 𝐶𝑇 then
 11: 𝑘←𝑘−1
 12: end if
 13: end for
 ∑ ( ) 1
 14: 𝐷(𝐵) = 𝑐∈𝐶 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log𝑚 ( ) Fig. 5. Comparison of byte frequency distributions between encrypted and com-
 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿
 15: return 𝐷(𝐵) pressed ﬂows.

 { }
 𝑃 𝐹𝑔1 , 𝑃 𝐹𝑔2 , … , 𝑃 𝐹𝑔256 of 256 bytes and ﬁnally take the average
 value.
 {𝐺 𝐺 𝐺
 }
 ∑ ∑ ∑
 𝑃𝐹 = 𝑃 𝐹𝑔1 ∕256, 𝑃 𝐹𝑔2 ∕256, … , 𝑃 𝐹𝑔256 ∕256 (3)
 Fig. 4. Principle of the deﬂate algorithm. 𝑔=1 𝑔=1 𝑔=1

 Fig. 5 shows a comparison of the BFD of encrypted and compressed
3.2. Chi-square test feature ﬂows. The results show that the frequency is uniformly distributed below 0.01 at all bytes in the encrypted ﬂows except zero-byte, where
 Using the aggregation entropy, we can divide the ﬂows into two the frequency is higher than 0.02. However, the BFD of the compressed
types, high entropy ﬂows and low entropy ﬂows, which means we ﬂows is more uneven. For example, the frequency is signiﬁcantly higher
can detect most unencrypted ﬂows. Still, it is impossible to distinguish than 0.02 in the range of 100–118 and less than 0.005 from 50–100.
between encrypted and unencrypted compressed ﬂows, because com- To measure the diﬀerence between encrypted and compressed ﬂows in
pressed data can have high entropies and thus overlap with encrypted BFD, we use the chi-square test to value whether there is a signiﬁcant
data. To further distinguish encrypted ﬂows from compressed ﬂows, diﬀerence between the observed and theoretical distributions. Previwe ﬁrst analyze the deﬂate algorithm [27], a lossless data compression ous work utilized the chi-square test feature to distinguish encrypted
algorithm that uses both the LZ77 algorithm and Huﬀman encoding. data from unencrypted [28] or compressed data [9,29]. For example,
Deﬂate is the default algorithm for many standard compressed ﬁle for- Wang et al. [29] used the chi-square test to distinguish encrypted data
mats like zip, gz, 7z, etc. from encoded (compressed) data to bypass Digital Rights Management
 Fig. 4 represents the compression and encoding processes of the de- (DRM) protection
 { } services. If the observed BFD of the ﬂow
 in streaming
ﬂate algorithm. In the ﬁrst stage, deﬂate uses the LZ77 algorithm to is 𝐵𝐹 = 𝐵𝐹1 , 𝐵𝐹2 , … , 𝐵𝐹𝜆 , then its corresponding theoretical BFD
 { }
compress plaintext data by eliminating duplicate strings. Speciﬁcally, is 𝑄 = , , … , 𝜆1
 1 1
 . The formula of the chi-square test is shown as
 𝜆 𝜆
LZ77 ﬁrst ﬁnds the identical string in the previous history for the curfollows:
rent string 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟. Then LZ77 replaces 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟 with <DIS, LEN>, where DIS
 𝜆
 ∑
indicates the distance of 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟 from the last repeated string, and LEN de- ( )2
notes the length of 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟. For example, string ‘ab’ is transformed into 𝑥2 = 𝜆 𝐵𝐹𝛽 − 𝑄𝛽 (4)
 𝛽=1
<6,2> after compression. To reduce the computation of compressing,
LZ77 sets a sliding window with a ﬁxed size of 𝛾 KB, which limits the where 𝜆 represents the number of byte types that may appear in the
search space for the duplicate string to the ﬁrst 𝛾 KB of data in the ﬂow. The smaller the chi-square test value is, the closer the BFD of
current string. In the second stage, all DISs and LENs are processed the ﬂow is to a uniform distribution, which means that the ﬂow has
by Huﬀman encoding. The sliding window of 𝛾 KB theoretically has a high possibility of belonging to encrypted ﬂows, and vice versa, i.e.,
𝛾 × 1024 types of DISs. In reality, the appearance of the repetition phe- belonging to compressed ﬂows.
nomenon is localized, and the shorter the DIS, the more frequently it
occurs. Therefore, short DISs can be ﬁnely encoded so that the code 3.3. Semi-supervised clustering-based method
and DIS can be mapped one by one. In contrast, the code for long DISs
can be relaxed appropriately, such as in the zip compression format, Since our method runs in a high-speed network environment, we
DISs of 1, 2, 3, 4 are encoded as 0, 1, 2, 3 respectively. In contrast, DISs cannot collect entire ﬂows. It is necessary to provide fast responses
greater than 769 and less than 1024 are uniformly encoded as 29. The for short ﬂows. HETC ﬁrst divides the input traﬃc into ﬁxed-length
encoding process of LEN is the same. The deﬂate algorithm converts short ﬂows according to the 5 tuples, calculates the hash values of the
these codes into binary sequences and stores them in the data to further 5 tuples, and determines if there is a corresponding record in the ﬂow
compress the data size. table. If the record exists, HETC outputs the ﬂow label directly. If the
 We ﬁnd a certain number of binary sequence repetitions occurs in record does not exist, HETC extracts the aggregation entropy and chicompressed plaintext data, making some compressed data bytes ap- squared test feature vectors from the labeled and unlabeled ﬂows to
pear more frequently than others. At the same time, this phenomenon create a sample set. Then it divides the samples into diﬀerent clusters
does not appear in encrypted data. We collect 50 TLS-encrypted and using multiple clustering algorithms. Due to the diﬀerent types of traﬃc
50 zip-compressed ﬂows to verify this observation. For the g-th ﬂow, patterns and the diﬀerent cluster sizes, densities, and shapes of traﬃc
we intercept the ﬁrst 8 KB, calculate the frequency distribution 𝑃 𝐹𝑔 = patterns, no single clustering algorithm can represent all data struc-

 416
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 similarity measures to divide data points into diﬀerent subsets [32].
 Data within the same subset have high similarity, and data between
 subsets have low similarity. However, there are subtle diﬀerences in
 the feature distribution of diﬀerent subclasses under the same broad
 class, leading to increased similarity. Therefore, to eﬀectively distinguish diﬀerent subclasses, we design a RF multi-classiﬁcation model for
 the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation of a given ﬂow. In addition to using the
 aggregation entropy and chi-square test as input features, we also convert the hexadecimal sequence of the original payload into a binary
 sequence, and extract two additional binary features from it to improve
 the model’s classiﬁcation accuracy.

 4.1. Binary-based features

 4.1.1. Cumulative sum test feature
 The NIST SP800-22 speciﬁcation [33] provides 15 distinct tests to
 Fig. 6. Clustering result using the K-means algorithm. detect randomness in data sequences. These tests are usually used as
 benchmarks to distinguish between compressed and encrypted data.
tures. To improve the clustering results, HETC uses multiple clustering However, not all tests are suitable for ﬁne-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation
algorithms that combine the information of a partition set through a for two reasons. First, most tests cannot provide eﬀective results for
consensus function to obtain a more representative partition. Also, the high entropy ﬂow classiﬁcation, and some require extensive calculaintegration process increases the time complexity, so the number of al- tions. Second, the ﬂow length is relatively short in the high-speed TC
gorithms needs to be considered skillfully. For each cluster containing environment, and most tests have restrictions on data length. We choose
both labeled and unlabeled samples, HETC uses the label of the largest the cumulative sum test as an additional feature for the aggregation enproportion of samples as its label. Then HETC calculates the probability tropy and chi-square test, due to its less restriction on data length. The
𝑝𝑓 ,𝑚 ∈ [0, 1], 𝑓 = 1, … , 𝐹 ; 𝑚 = 1, … , 𝑀 that each type of ﬂow 𝑓 belongs cumulative sum test ﬁrst replaces 0s with -1s in the binary data, then
to a diﬀerent cluster 𝐶𝑅𝑚 , where 𝐹 and 𝑀 denote the total numbers of accumulates from the ﬁrst to the last bit of the binary to generate 𝑞 cuunlabeled samples and clusters, respectively. Subsequently, the weights mulative sum values {𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … , 𝑧𝑞 }, and ﬁnally calculates 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒, the
of diﬀerent clusters [30] in each clustering result are calculated. oﬀset of the maximum cumulative sum 𝑧 with respect to 0. The closer
 ( ( ) ( ) ) 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 is to 0, the greater the randomness of the sequence is. The math-
 𝑉
 ∑ 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅1 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑀 ematical deﬁnition of 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 is as follows:
𝑤𝑚 = 𝐻 ∑𝑀 ( ) , … , ∑𝑀 ( ) × ( )
 𝑗=1 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑗 𝑗=1 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑗 [ ( ) ( )]
 𝑞
 𝑣=1 𝑧
 −1 ∕4
 ( ∑
 |)
 (5) (4𝑜 + 1)𝑧 (4𝑜 − 1)𝑧
 | ∑𝑀 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 1 − Φ √ −Φ √ +
 | ( ) 1 ( )|
 1 − ||𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑚 − 𝐸 𝐶𝑅𝑗 || ( ) (𝑞) (𝑞)
 | 𝑀 𝑗=1 𝑣 | 𝑜= −𝑞
 𝑧
 +1 ∕4
 | | ( ) (8)
where 𝐶𝑅𝑚 denotes the m-th cluster, 𝐸 :𝐶𝑅𝑚 → [0, 1] represents a map-
 𝑞
 𝑧
 −3 ∕4 [ ( ) ( )]
 ∑ (4𝑜 + 3)𝑧 (4𝑜 + 1)𝑧
ping relationship, such as the ratio of the cluster size to the total size, 𝑉 Φ √ −Φ √
 ( )
is the optional mapping space, and 𝐻 denotes the entropy algorithm. −𝑞
 𝑜= 𝑧 +1 ∕4
 (𝑞) (𝑞)
 Finally, HETC calculates each clustering result’s dynamic weighted
probability combination matrix. where 𝑧 denotes the test statistics, i.e., the absolute value of the largest
 partial sum divided by the square root of the sample size, and Φ is the
 ⎡ 𝑝1,1 × 𝑤1 ⋯ 𝑝1,𝑀 × 𝑤𝑀 ⎤ cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
𝑊 𝑃𝑎 = ⎢ ⋮ ⋱ ⋮ ⎥ (6)
 ⎢ ⎥
 ⎣ 𝑝𝐹 ,1 × 𝑤1 ⋯ 𝑝𝐹 ,𝑀 × 𝑤𝑀 ⎦ 4.1.2. Bientropy
 The unlabeled ﬂow sample 𝑓 is assigned a label according to the Bientropy is a simple entropy algorithm proposed in [34], where the
maximum strategy. authors consider that the conventional entropy cannot detect periodic
 ( ) binary data. For example, the entropies of binary strings 01011101 and
 01010101 are both 1, which completely ignores the periodic nature of
𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑓 = arg max arg max 𝑊 𝑃1 , … , arg max 𝑊 𝑃𝐴 (7)
 𝑚𝑓 𝑚𝑓1 𝑚𝑓𝐴 the latter. To reﬂect the periodicity of the binary string, the authors use
 a weighted average of the Shannon entropies of the string and all but
where 𝐴 represents the number of clustering algorithms used, and 𝑚𝑓𝑎 the last binary derivative of the string. When the binary length Θ is
represents the maximum weighted probability label calculated by the lower than 32 bits, Bientropy can be expressed as
a-th clustering algorithm. ( ( ))
 Fig. 6 shows the clustering result of the K-means [31] algorithm. 𝐵𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦 = 1∕ 2Θ−1 − 1 ×
The blue and green clusters in the ﬁgure represent encrypted and un- (Θ−2 )
 ∑ (( )) (9)
encrypted ﬂows. The diﬀerence between these two types of ﬂows is −𝑝(𝜃) log2 𝑝(𝜃) − (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) 2𝜃
slight on the vertical axis but more prominent on the horizontal axis, 𝜃=0
which indicates that the aggregation entropy and chi-square test can When the binary length 𝑛 is greater than 32 bits, Bientropy can be
eﬀectively detect the encrypted ﬂows from all ﬂows. reformulated as
 ( )
 ∑
 Θ−2
4. Fine-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation 𝐵𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦 = 1∕ log2 (𝜃 + 2) ×
 𝜃=0
 (Θ−2 ) (10)
 There are multiple types of encrypted or unencrypted ﬂows in the ∑( )
 −𝑝(𝜃) log2 𝑝(𝜃) − (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (𝜃 + 2)
network. Network managers need to provide diﬀerent handling poli- 𝜃=0
cies for diﬀerent kinds of ﬂows. Clustering algorithms usually adopt

 417
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

4.2. Semi-automatic update method 4.2.3. Structural migration
 After the uncertainty detection phase, the ﬂow dataset  =
 {( )}𝛿
 Considering that the ﬂows in multi-classiﬁcation tasks may contain 𝑥Δ , 𝑦Δ Δ=1
 may contain new types of ﬂows, so the original RF
unknown types, the false positive rate will increase if the model fails to model needs to be updated. Still, there is some similarity in the model
handle unknown ﬂows. In this subsection, we design a semi-automatic structure because the classiﬁcation problem remain the same. Instead
update method to enable the model to identify more types of ﬂows. It of retraining the model, we update the structure of the model partly
includes 3 steps: preliminary classiﬁcation, uncertainty detection, and using the transfer learning concept. Speciﬁcally, we use 𝑡𝑟 ∈  as the
structure migration. In the preliminary classiﬁcation stage, RF, which training set and the Gini index as the metric to extend each leaf node
has performed well in the ﬁeld of TC, is used as the base model to auto- of the tree down to a complete subtree based on the original structure,
matically extract the traﬃc ﬂow features and provide the preliminary so that it can identify the new ﬂow types in the target dataset. Then we
classiﬁcation probability. If the probability is lower than threshold 𝜎 , use te =  ∖𝑡𝑟 as the test set to prune the subtree from the bottom up,
the model will assign uncertainty labels to the ﬂows and store them i.e., we remove the subtree under each non-leaf node and calculate the
locally. These uncertain ﬂows are then marked manually. Finally, the current generalization error of the model. If the error does not increase
model performs structural migration based on the manually labeled with respect to the error before pruning, we prune the subtree vertidataset and reclassiﬁes newly collected ﬂows in the network. Each step cally, and if the error grows, we continue to measure another subtree.
of the method is described in detail as follows. The generalization error is deﬁned as follows:
 1 ∑ 1
 (1 − 𝐹 𝑈 𝑁 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦))2 (13)
4.2.1. Preliminary classiﬁcation |𝑡𝑒 |
 | | (𝑥,𝑦)∈𝑡𝑒 2
 RF [35] is a classical ML algorithm that integrates multiple decision trees. Suppose there are Ψ samples in the training set and Ω is where ||𝑡𝑒 || indicates the number of samples in test set te , and
the feature dimension of a sample. HETC ﬁrst samples 𝜓(𝜓 < Ψ) times 𝐹 𝑈 𝑁 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦) denotes the diﬀerence between the predicted and acfrom these Ψ samples with replacement and uses the 𝜓 samples for tree tual label. If both labels are the same, the function will return a number
building. After that, HETC selects 𝜔(𝜔 < Ω) features from the Ω fea- greater than 0; otherwise, it returns 0.
tures and chooses the best splitting points for 𝜔 features. The splitting {
rule is the information gain ratio. 1 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥) = 𝑦)
 𝐹 𝑈 𝑁(𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦) = (14)
 0 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥) ≠ 𝑦)
 𝐾
 ∑ 𝐾
 ∑
𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖(𝑝) = 𝑝𝑘 (1 − 𝑝𝑘 ) = 1 − 𝑝𝑘 2 (11)
 5. Experiment
 𝑘=1 𝑘=1
 𝐵
 ∑ |𝐷𝑏 | In this section, we ﬁrst detail the process of traﬃc collection and
𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝐷, 𝑎) = 𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖(𝐷𝑏 ) (12) processing, followed by the experimental environment. Finally, we eval-
 𝑏
 |𝐷|
 uate the classiﬁcation performance and time consumption of HETC.
where the proportion of samples in the k-th class is 𝑝𝑘 . Assume that a
discrete attribute 𝑎 has 𝐵 possible values 𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , ..., 𝑎𝐵 , and we use 𝑎 to 5.1. Description of baselines
partition the sample set. In that case, 𝐵 branch nodes are generated,
where the b-th branch node contains all samples in 𝐷 that take value To present a comprehensive understanding of the eﬀects of HETC,
𝑎𝑏 , denoted as 𝐷𝑏 . For a single node in the tree, the splitting will stop we compare it with the most relevant works, which are summarized as
when the number of samples in the node is less than a threshold, or the follows:
Gini index is greater than a certain threshold, which helps to control Three high-speed TC methods, that is Iustitia, HEDGE, and SAM.
the depth of the decision tree and the number of nodes, thus reducing Iustitia is a framework for identifying high-speed ﬂows, and it is prithe complexity of the algorithm. marily used to distinguish whether a ﬂow is textual, binary, or crypto-
 For a newly collected ﬂow sample, each decision tree predicts its graphic. For Iustitia, we consider its variant using the RF model as a
type separately, and then RF uses a voting method to determine the ﬁnal classiﬁer, since the classiﬁer of the initial scheme does not perform as
label. RF can run eﬀectively on large datasets and has higher accuracy well as RF. HEDGE is an eﬃcient high-entropy traﬃc classiﬁer to distinthan other ML algorithms. Therefore, in the preliminary classiﬁcation guish between compressed and encrypted traﬃc. SAM is a self-attentive
stage, we use labeled ﬂow samples to train an RF model to predict method for TC. It uses packets as inputs and outputs classiﬁcation
unlabeled samples. results through a neural network, thus fulﬁlling the requirements of
 online classiﬁcation.
4.2.2. Uncertainty detection Two classical TC methods, namely Mal-SVM proposed in [16] and
 The uncertainty detection phase aims to ﬁlter out the ambiguous DeepPacket-CNN proposed in [20]. The former extracts statistical ﬂow
ﬂows using the predicted probability given by the RF model. If the features to train the SVM model, and the latter uses raw payload bytes
probability is lower than threshold 𝜎 , the ﬂow has a high probability of to train the CNN model to classify encrypted traﬃc.
belonging to the unknown types. Therefore, our model ﬁrst marks it as
an uncertain type, stores it locally, and then hands it to human beings 5.2. Dataset
for further marking. Although existing studies have proposed many DL
automated image labeling methods [36], such methods still adopt su- 5.2.1. Traﬃc collection
pervised learning concepts and cannot be employed to label unknown Although some encrypted traﬃc datasets are publicly available in
types of ﬂows. In addition, the authors in [37] proposed an approach the ﬁeld of network TC, fewer publicly unencrypted traﬃc datasets are
based on unsupervised clustering to automatically label packets, which currently available because the plaintext packet payload may contain
performed well in a small dataset of unknown types of ﬂows. However, personal information about users, such as account passwords, commudue to its simple theoretical background, the clustering algorithm could nication messages, etc. To validate the eﬀectiveness of HETC, we must
only eﬀectively mark some ﬂow samples in a massive traﬃc environ- ﬁrst collect a dataset containing a large amount of labeled traﬃc to
ment. For instance, K-means cannot determine the number of clusters establish a high-speed TC scenario.
and is prone to local optima. Therefore, we adopt the manual labeling We ﬁrst obtain 5 types of unencrypted ﬁles from the Internet, instrategy to ensure the trustworthiness of ﬂow labeling. cluding:

 418
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation tasks with diﬀer- Fig. 8. Performance comparison of diﬀerent methods for encrypted traﬃc deent numbers of samples. tection under diﬀerent ﬂow lengths.

 1) Text, 15,000 random texts generated using automated scripts; Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK) and other related packet capture
 2) Images, 10,000 images obtained from the ImageNet [38] dataset; libraries, which allows us to achieve 10 Gbps single-port real-time input
 3) Audio, 10,000 audio ﬁles obtained from the LibriTTS [39] dataset; packet parsing. In addition to that, we use no other external dependency
 4) Video, 10,000 video ﬁles obtained from the UCF101 [40] dataset; libraries.
 5) Compressed, 15,000 compressed ﬁles obtained by compressing text
 ﬁles in the zip format. 5.4. Classiﬁcation performance on diﬀerent ﬂows

 Since the actual traﬃc is obtained in a network environment, we We evaluate the performance of HETC in diﬀerent TC tasks and comthen use the FTP protocol to upload and download these ﬁles, and use pare it with 5 baseline TC methods, to test how far HETC can shorten
Wireshark to capture the traﬃc generated at the network export. As the the ﬂow length without signiﬁcantly degrading the performance.
traﬃc ﬂows of the core node can provide comprehensive information
about the network [41], we also deploy a shunt device at the core of
 5.4.1. Encrypted ﬂow detection
the enterprise network to aggregate HTTP traﬃc in diﬀerent ﬁbers, and
 In the parameter setting of the encrypted ﬂow detection phase, we
forward it to local storage through mirroring technology.
 chose K-means and the Gaussian mixture model as the base clustering
 For encrypted traﬃc, we integrate non-DoH normal HTTPS traﬃc
 algorithms. Fig. 8 shows the F-measure of HETC and other methods for
from public dataset DoHBrw-2020 [42] and non-VPN normal encrypted
 diﬀerent ﬂow lengths. All 3 methods achieve similar results with an
traﬃc from ISCX VPN2016 [43].
 F-measure greater than 94% for long ﬂows (>2 KB). When the ﬂow
 length is short (<1 KB), HETC still maintains a minimum F-measure
5.2.2. Processing
 of 85%, which is signiﬁcantly better than Iustitia (≈5%) and HEDGE
 As for the collected raw traﬃc, we ﬁrst remove the retransmission
 (≈10%), making it easily applicable to scenarios that require fast classipackets caused by network delays, request failure packets caused by
 ﬁcation results such as Quality of Service (QoS) and intrusion detection.
server errors, and other damaged or non-artiﬁcially generated packets.
 The reason is that Iustitia only uses entropy as the criterion for judging
Then the original traﬃc is divided into bidirectional ﬂows according to
 whether the ﬂow is encrypted. However, the high-entropy ﬂows conthe 5 tuples. In addition, we also strip the handshake packets according
 tain encrypted and compressed ﬂows. Some image ﬂows also have high
to the application layer protocol used. For example, we remove all packentropies. HEDGE has the lowest F-measure among the 3 methods, beets before the second ChangeCipherSpec handshake packet when the
 cause HEDGE sets a ﬁxed threshold range as the criteria to measure
ﬂow is encrypted using the TLS protocol. Finally, we trim each ﬂow to
a 128 B–8 KB ﬂow fragment to construct 7 ﬁxed-length datasets. To en- whether the data is encrypted. When the randomness test value of a
sure the fairness of the experiment, the numbers of samples of each type ﬂow is not within the set range, the ﬂow is directly determined as enof ﬂow are equal, and the ratio of the training set to the test set is 8:2. A crypted. The advantage of using the threshold-based method is the fast
detailed description of the dataset is shown in Table 1. There is a data execution. However, the randomness test must meet certain constraints,
imbalance in diﬀerent categories of traﬃc samples, which will lead to such as the cumulative sum test requiring the ﬂow length to be greater
the unstable feature distribution in types with small sample sizes, mak- than 100 bits. When the ﬂow length is short, the randomness test value
ing it challenging to extract eﬀective patterns from them. To solve this ﬂuctuates widely above and below the threshold, resulting in a high
problem, we use the strategy of random downsampling, that is, a part of false positive rate and a decreased F-measure. Therefore, in this padata from the majority set is selected and recombined with the minor- per, we use a combination of the entropy feature and chi-square test
ity set to form a new dataset. In addition, Fig. 7 demonstrates that the to ﬁlter out the unencrypted compressed ﬂows further, improving the
classiﬁcation performance of encrypted ﬂows is high when the number F-measure and reducing the number of features, with 3 and 2 fewer
of samples is 2 K and then tends to be stable under the same threshold, features compared to HEDGE and Iustitia, respectively.
while the classiﬁcation performance of unencrypted traﬃc is relatively
stable. Thus, we choose 2 K and 1 K as the numbers of encrypted and 5.4.2. Fine-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation
unencrypted ﬂows, respectively. In this subsection, we test the performance of HETC under a ﬁner
 granularity of ﬂows. Precisely, we classify encrypted ﬂows according
5.3. Experimental environment to the type of service, such as chat ﬂows, VoIP ﬂows, etc. We classify
 unencrypted ﬂows according to the content type, such as text ﬂows,
 HETC runs on a Linux server with Intel Xeon E5-2630 v3 @ 2.4 GHz compressed ﬂows, etc. Before performing ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation, we
CPU and 12 GB RAM. The model is implemented in C++ and relies on ﬁrst evaluate the impact of the ﬂow length on the HETC structure. We

 419
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Table 1
 Properties of the dataset when the ﬂow splitting length is 1 KB.

 Type Source Original size Total number Number of Label
 of ﬂows(K) selected
 samples(K)

 HTTPS DoHBrw-2020 9.4 GB 9626 2 Encrypted
 Email ISCX VPN2016 7.87 MB 8 2 Encrypted
 Chat ISCX VPN2016 28.1 MB 29 2 Encrypted
 Streaming ISCX VPN2016 884 MB 903 2 Encrypted
 File Transfer ISCX VPN2016 12 GB 12984 2 Encrypted
 VoIP ISCX VPN2016 770 MB 798 2 Encrypted
 Text Wireshark capture 220 MB 226 1 Unencrypted
 Image Wireshark capture 102 MB 105 1 Unencrypted
 Audio Wireshark capture 7.4 GB 7620 1 Unencrypted
 Video Wireshark capture 5.1 GB 5232 1 Unencrypted
 Compressed Wireshark capture 83 MB 85 1 Unencrypted
 HTTP Network aggregate 2 GB 2049 1 Unencrypted

 Table 2
 Comparison of decision tree depths and numbers of
 nodes under diﬀerent ﬂow lengths.

 Flow length Tree depth Tree nodes

 128 B 39 410
 256 B 30 399
 512 B 26 404
 1 KB 25 266
 2 KB 19 242
 4 KB 55 243
 8 KB 56 301

ﬁnd that the shorter the ﬂow length, the deeper the depth of each decision tree in RF, as shown in Table 2. When the ﬂow length is 128 B,
the depth reaches a maximum of 39 layers. When the ﬂow length in-
 Fig. 9. Unencrypted TC results on an integrated dataset.
creases to 1 KB, the depth of the decision tree is generally about 25
layers. Compared to the 128 B ﬂow length, the number of leaf nodes at
1 KB is smaller, and the decision tree’s complexity is lower. However, on other unencrypted ﬂows. The reason may be that some image ﬁles
this trend is limited. When the ﬂow length exceeds 2 KB, the depth and use the same encoding as standard compressed ﬁles, e.g., jpeg and zip
number of nodes gradually rise again. The RF model consists of multi- use Huﬀman encoding, and png and zip use deﬂate encoding, resulting
ple decision trees. The decision tree generation process generally starts in these types of ﬂows having similar feature distributions.
from the root node, which ﬁrst selects the corresponding features (e.g., Table 3 demonstrates the performance of diﬀerent methods for clasaggregation entropy), followed by selecting splitting points (e.g., aggre- sifying encrypted traﬃc. The experimental data are obtained by our
gation entropy <= 5.8 or aggregation entropy > 5.8) for the features. reproduction experiments, except for DeepPacket, whose results are
Then it splits the parent node according to the splitting points (e.g., sam- derived from the original paper. HETC achieves the best TC perforples with aggregation entropy <= 5.8 are categorized in the left child mance in 3 types of encrypted ﬂows (email, HTTPS, and VoIP), with
node, and the others are categorized in the right child node). The deci- an F-measure around 95%–99%. The TC performance can be further
sion tree will stop splitting if the Gini index exceeds a certain value. As improved with features extracted from the entire ﬂow, which will inthe ﬂows get longer, the average depth of the tree gets smaller, which crease the execution time. SAM and DeepPacket-CNN achieve the best
indicates that the shorter the ﬂow, the more unstable the distribution performance on other ﬂow types. The performance gap is attributed to
of extracted features is, resulting in more information provided by each various factors such as diﬀerences in DL platforms and better paramesplit. Therefore, the tree is deeper. When the ﬂow length exceeds 2 KB, ter tuning. Due to the dynamic and varied nature of encrypted traﬃc,
although the depth of the tree is increasing, the overall number of nodes it is necessary to select appropriate models according to the application
grows slowly, indicating that the distribution of the extracted features scenarios.
is gradually stabilizing.
 Considering that the ﬂow length is inversely proportional to the 5.4.3. Unknown type of ﬂow classiﬁcation
complexity of the HETC model and positively proportional to the time To further verify the classiﬁcation performance of HETC for unconsumption of training and classiﬁcation, 1 KB is chosen as the ﬂow known types of ﬂows, we select 1 KB as the ﬂow length and conlength in this section, as the complexity and execution time of the model struct two new datasets, Denc_1kb and Dunenc_1kb. The training set of
are relatively balanced. Fig. 9 and Table 3 demonstrate the ﬁne-grained Denc_1kb includes all types of encrypted ﬂows except HTTPS and email
ﬂow classiﬁcation performance when the ﬂow length is 1 KB. Fig. 9 re- ﬂow, and the validation and test sets contain all types of encrypted
veals that the overall F-measure of HETC for unencrypted ﬂows is about ﬂows. The training set of Dunenc_1kb includes all types of unencrypted
5.8% higher than the second-best Iustitia. Although the ﬁle structures of ﬂows except text and compressed ﬂows, and the validation and test
the image and compressed ﬂows diﬀer, the F-measure is lower than that sets contain all types of unencrypted ﬂows. The ratio of the number of

 420
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Table 3
 Encrypted TC results on ISCX VPN2016.

 Type Chat Email File Transfer

 Metrics R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%) R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%) R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%)

 Mal-SVM 78 64 70 67 78 72 74 74 74
 Iustitia-RF (1 KB) 59 68 63 57 64 60 58 88 70
 HEDGE (1 KB) 25 42 31 16 42 23 60 72 65
 DeepPacket-CNN 71 84 77 87 96 91 100 98 99
 SAM 76 68 78 74 88 82 87 96 90
 HETC (1 KB) 61 74 71 92 99 95 67 72 69

 Type HTTPS Streaming VoIP

 Metrics R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%) R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%) R. (%) P. (%) F1. (%)

 Mal-SVM 96 99 98 86 72 79 83 77 80
 Iustitia-RF (1 KB) 37 48 42 73 42 54 95 86 90
 HEDGE (1 KB) 48 36 41 46 45 45 95 75 84
 DeepPacket-CNN - - - 87 92 90 88 63 74
 SAM 99 99 99 99 99 98 67 91 83
 HETC (1 KB) 99 99 99 82 79 80 98 99 99

 Table 4
 Comparison of classiﬁcation performance before and after model update.

 Original Updated
 Evaluation metric
 HETC_enc HETC_unenc HETC_enc HETC_unenc

 Accuracy (%) 87 86 84 83
 Precision (%) 89 87 86 84
 F-measure (%) 88 86 85 84
 Number of ﬁltered ﬂows 182 181 13 15

 out 95 HTTPS ﬂows and 87 email ﬂows, and HETC_unenc ﬁlters out
 85 text ﬂows and 96 compressed ﬂows. These ﬂows are then manually
 labeled, and RFenc and RFunenc are re-updated using the structure migration strategy provided in the semi-automatic update method. Finally,
 we re-evaluate HETC utilizing the test set. We can notice that the overall classiﬁcation accuracy of the two updated models is slightly lower
 than the original state. Nevertheless, most of unknown types of ﬂows
 are correctly classiﬁed, which veriﬁes that HETC can classify unknown
 types of ﬂows to some extent.

 5.5. Time analysis

 To verify that HETC can be applied in high-speed TC environments,
 we compare the execution time of the 6 TC methods. We experiment
 on a dataset containing 100,000 encrypted and 100,000 unencrypted
 Fig. 10. Relationship between F-measure, coverage, and threshold. ﬂows, and use tenfold cross-validation to obtain stable results. Those
 ﬂows include unknown types. The purpose of this experiment is mainly
ﬂows in the training, validation, and test sets is 8:1:1. Fig. 10 illustrates to compare the time to process and classify samples by diﬀerent meththe relationship between the F-measure, coverage, and threshold. As ods to verify the eﬃciency of the methods, and therefore HETC outputs
the threshold gradually increases, the performance also rises, and the its prediction probability regardless of the ﬂow types. Table 5 shows
coverage gradually decreases. The F-measure growth rate is maximized the time required for the methods to classify 1 KB samples. HETC
when the threshold is 0.7. Therefore, uncertainty detection threshold uses diﬀerent features in the encrypted ﬂow detection and ﬁne-grained
𝜎 is set to 0.7. HETC_enc and HETC_unenc are trained using the train- classiﬁcation phases, within a classiﬁcation time of 2 ms and 16 ms, reing sets of Denc_1kb and Dunenc_1kb, respectively. The performance of spectively. In the encrypted ﬂow detection phase, HETC has the same
models is veriﬁed using the validation set. highest speed as SAM, and its detection speed is lower than Iustitia and
 Table 4 shows that the two original models have high classiﬁcation SAM in the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation. Nevertheless, HETC achieves a
accuracy overall. Due to uncertainty detection, most of the ﬂow types comparable performance with the state-of-the-art methods, which althat do not exist in the training set are ﬁltered out. HETC_enc ﬁlters lows it to run in a high-speed network environment.

 421
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

 Table 5 [3] J. Gallego-Madrid, R. Sanchez-Iborra, P.M. Ruiz, A.F. Skarmeta, Machine learning-
 Comparison of the time required to classify a ﬂow based zero-touch network and service management: a survey, Digit. Commun. Netw.
 sample in milliseconds. 8 (2) (2021) 105–123.
 [4] J. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Zhao, N. Sharma, M. Blumenstein, S. Yu, Fooling intrusion detec-
 Method Mean Std. dev tion systems using adversarially autoencoder, Digit. Commun. Netw. 7 (3) (2021)
 453–460.
 Mal-SVM 20 0.007 [5] D. Aureli, A. Cianfrani, M. Listanti, M. Polverini, S. Secci, Augmenting diﬀserv op-
 Iustitia-RF 10 0.006 erations with dynamically learned classes of services, Comput. Netw. 202 (2022)
 108624.
 HEDGE 135 0.008
 [6] G.J. Klir, Uncertainty and information: foundations of generalized information the-
 DeepPacket-CNN 95 0.006 ory, Kybernetes 35 (7) (2006) 1297–1299.
 SAM 2 0.006 [7] A.R. Khakpour, A.X. Liu, An information-theoretical approach to high-speed ﬂow
 nature identiﬁcation, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 21 (4) (2012) 1076–1089.
 HETC 2 \ 16 0.004
 [8] Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Guo, S. Li, Using entropy to classify traﬃc more deeply, in:
 2011 IEEE Sixth International Conference on Networking, Architecture, and Storage,
 IEEE, 2011, pp. 45–52.
6. Conclusions and future work [9] F. Casino, K.-K.R. Choo, C. Patsakis, Hedge: eﬃcient traﬃc classiﬁcation of encrypted and compressed packets, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 14 (11) (2019)
 2916–2926.
 In this paper, we propose HETC, a high-speed encrypted TC method
 [10] T. Luo, L. Wang, S. Yin, H. Shentu, H. Zhao, Rbp: a website ﬁngerprinting obfusby using payload features. Unlike existing methods, we do not rely on cation method against intelligent ﬁngerprinting attacks, J. Cloud Comput. 10 (1)
feature selection algorithms to select some eﬀective features from a (2021) 1–14.
wide range of alternative features, but consider the high-speed TC envi- [11] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. De Donato, A. Pescapé, Portload: taking the best of two
ronment and comprehensively analyze the diﬀerent patterns in the BC worlds in traﬃc classiﬁcation, in: 2010 INFOCOM IEEE Conference on Computer
 Communications Workshops, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–5.
and BFD between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. HETC extracts a [12] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, K. Hanssgen, A survey of
few features from randomly sampled short ﬂows to distinguish whether payload-based traﬃc classiﬁcation approaches, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 16 (2)
the ﬂow is encrypted and further identiﬁes the exact type it belongs to (2013) 1135–1156.
(e.g., unencrypted text ﬂows, encrypted HTTPS ﬂows). Compared with [13] J. Zhao, X. Jing, Z. Yan, W. Pedrycz, Network traﬃc classiﬁcation for data fusion: a
 survey, Inf. Fusion 72 (2021) 22–47.
other methods, HETC has the characteristics of high F-measure (94%
 [14] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, J. Aguilar, Towards the deployment
for encrypted ﬂow detection, 85%–93% for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation) of machine learning solutions in network traﬃc classiﬁcation: a systematic survey,
and short execution time (about 2 or 16 ms). IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (2) (2018) 1988–2014.
 In the future, we plan to investigate new methods in network envi- [15] L. Wang, H. Mei, V.S. Sheng, Multilevel identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation analyronments with more traﬃc types and more heterogeneous traﬃc distri- sis of tor on mobile and pc platforms, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17 (2) (2020)
 1079–1088.
butions, and improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. [16] B. Anderson, D. McGrew, Identifying encrypted malware traﬃc with contextual ﬂow
 data, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Se-
CRediT authorship contribution statement curity, ACM, 2016, pp. 35–46.
 [17] S. Dong, Multi class svm algorithm with active learning for network traﬃc classiﬁ-
 cation, Expert Syst. Appl. 176 (2021) 114885.
 Xinge Yan: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, [18] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation: an overview,
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administra- IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81.
tion, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review [19] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirec-
& editing. Liukun He: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal anal- tional gru networks for eﬃcient https traﬃc classiﬁcation, Inf. Sci. 541 (2020)
 297–315.
ysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing –
 [20] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, M. Saberian, Deep
review & editing. Yifan Xu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal packet: a novel approach for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning,
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writ- Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
ing – review & editing. Jiuxin Cao: Conceptualization, Data curation, [21] G. Xie, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, Self-attentive deep learning method for online traﬃc classiﬁ-
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administra- cation and its interpretability, Comput. Netw. 196 (2021) 108267.
 [22] L. Nian-Sheng, Pseudo-randomness and complexity of binary sequences generated
tion, Resources, Software, Writing – original draft. Liangmin Wang: by the chaotic system, Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 16 (2) (2011)
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisi- 761–768.
tion, Methodology, Resources, Visualization, Writing – original draft. [23] M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, N. Stakhanova, An entropy based encrypted traﬃc
Guyang Xie: Data curation, Formal analysis, Resources, Software, Writ- classiﬁer, in: International Conference on Information and Communications Security, Springer, 2015, pp. 282–294.
ing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
 [24] R. Lyda, J. Hamrock, Using entropy analysis to ﬁnd encrypted and packed malware,
 IEEE Secur. Priv. 5 (2) (2007) 40–45.
Declaration of competing interest [25] H. Doroud, A. Alaswad, F. Dressler, Encrypted traﬃc detection: beyond the port
 number era, in: 2022 IEEE 47th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN),
 IEEE, 2022, pp. 198–204.
 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
 [26] M.M. Saleh, M. AlSlaiman, M.I. Salman, B. Wang, Combining raw data and engiinterests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence neered features for optimizing encrypted and compressed Internet of things traﬃc
the work reported in this paper. classiﬁcation, Comput. Secur. 130 (2023) 103287.
 [27] S. Oswal, A. Singh, K. Kumari, Deﬂate compression algorithm, Int. J. Eng. Res. Gen.
 Sci. 4 (1) (2016) 430–436.
Acknowledgements
 [28] P. Choudhury, K.P. Kumar, S. Nandi, G. Athithan, An empirical approach towards
 characterization of encrypted and unencrypted voip traﬃc, Multimed. Tools Appl.
 This work was supported by the National Natural Science Founda- 79 (1–2) (2020) 603–631.
tion of China under Grant No. U1736216. [29] R. Wang, Y. Shoshitaishvili, C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, Steal this movie: automatically
 bypassing drm protection in streaming media services, in: USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Association, 2013, pp. 687–702.
References [30] S. Vega-Pons, J. Correa-Morris, J. Ruiz-Shulcloper, Weighted cluster ensemble using
 a kernel consensus function, in: Iberoamerican Congress on Pattern Recognition,
 [1] J. Rauthan, K. Vaisla, Vrs-db: preserve conﬁdentiality of users’ data using encryption Springer, 2008, pp. 195–202.
 approach, Digit. Commun. Netw. 7 (1) (2021) 62–71. [31] J. MacQueen, et al., Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of mul-
 [2] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Optimizing feature selection for tivariate observations, in: Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on
 eﬃcient encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation: a systematic approach, IEEE Netw. 34 (4) Mathematical Statistics and Probability, University of California Press, 1967,
 (2020) 20–27. pp. 281–297.

 422
X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al. Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

[32] D.T. Nguyen, L. Chen, C.K. Chan, Clustering with multiviewpoint-based similarity [39] H. Zen, V. Dang, R. Clark, Y. Zhang, R.J. Weiss, Y. Jia, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, LibriTTS:
 measure, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 24 (6) (2011) 988–1001. a corpus derived from LibriSpeech for text-to-speech, in: Interspeech 2019, ISCA,
[33] F. Pareschi, R. Rovatti, G. Setti, On statistical tests for randomness included in the 2019, pp. 1526–1530.
 nist sp800-22 test suite and based on the binomial distribution, IEEE Trans. Inf. [40] U.C. for Research in Computer Vision, UCF101: a dataset of 101 human ac-
 Forensics Secur. 7 (2) (2012) 491–505. tions classes from videos in the wild, https://www.crcv.ucf.edu/research/data-sets/
[34] G.J. Croll, BiEntropy – the measurement and algebras of order and disorder in ﬁnite ucf101/ (Accessed 15 December 2023).
 binary strings, in: Scientiﬁc Essays in Honor of H Pierre Noyes on the Occasion of [41] L. Feng, Y. Yao, L. Wang, G. Min, Multi-timescale and multi-centrality layered node
 His 90th Birthday, World Scientiﬁc, 2013, pp. 48–64. selection for eﬃcient traﬃc monitoring in sdns, Comput. Netw. 198 (2021) 108381.
[35] G. Biau, E. Scornet, A random forest guided tour, Test 25 (2) (2016) 197–227. [42] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, A.H. Lashkari, Detection of doh tun-
[36] N. Das, S. Chaba, R. Wu, S. Gandhi, D.H. Chau, X. Chu, Goggles: automatic image la- nels using time-series classiﬁcation of encrypted traﬃc, in: 2020 IEEE Intl. Conf.
 beling with aﬃnity coding, in: Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl. Conf. on Pervasive Intel-
 Conference on Management of Data, ACM, 2020, pp. 1717–1732. ligence and Computing, Intl. Conf. on Cloud and Big Data Computing, Intl. Conf.
[37] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, H. Wu, Autonomous unknown-application ﬁltering and label- on Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech),
 ing for dl-based traﬃc classiﬁer update, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference IEEE, 2020, pp. 63–70.
 on Computer Communications, IEEE, 2020, pp. 397–405. [43] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization of en-
[38] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: a large-scale hier- crypted and vpn traﬃc using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International
 archical image database, in: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), SCITEPRESS,
 Recognition, IEEE, 2009, pp. 248–255. 2016, pp. 407–414.

 423