IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3540215

 Hybrid Approach for Machine Anomaly Detection
 Across Diverse Operating Conditions: Combining
 Self-Supervised Learning With Vibration Statistics
 Seongjae Lee and Taehyoun Kim , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Failure detection in rotating machines is critical for and human losses in industrial environments. Rotating machinreducing maintenance costs, economic losses, and safety-related ery, a vital component of modern industry, is extensively
accidents. Deep learning has become a robust and powerful employed in various systems such as railways, aircraft, and
solution for machine fault diagnosis, but it faces two major
challenges: scarcity of labeled faulty data and variability of turbines. Therefore, faults in rotating machinery are often a
machine operating conditions. To address these challenges, we primary cause of overall mechanical system failures.
propose a novel hybrid machine anomaly detection methodology Vibration is one of the most widely utilized physical paramthat integrates an innovative pretext task-based self-supervised eters for assessing the condition of rotating machinery [1].
learning framework with vibration statistics. First, we designed Traditional vibration-based machine fault diagnosis methods
a pretext task to classify the rotating speeds and trained an
auxiliary classifier on it. This auxiliary classifier effectively usually rely on frequency analysis techniques, which analyze
extracts fault-discriminative features related to rotating speed, the fault-related characteristics in the frequency domain of the
an operating condition closely associated with various machine signal to examine the machine condition [2], [3]. However,
faults. Moreover, the proposed pretext task applies to the fault these approaches typically require expert engineers with extendiagnosis of general rotating machines because the rotating speed sive domain knowledge to make diagnostic decisions, which
can be easily obtained using a Hall sensor. Second, a hybrid
feature was generated by combining the auxiliary classifier limits their scalability. Recently, data-driven approaches, such
outputs with six statistical features derived from raw vibration as machine learning and deep learning, have been actively
signals. These statistical features augment the fault-discriminative investigated, which automatically learn fault-related features
ability of the auxiliary classifier outputs by incorporating the from the data to diagnose machine faults. In particular, recent
magnitude and asymmetry of the signal, which the auxiliary clas- studies have focused on developing deep learning model archisifier alone cannot capture. The evaluation results demonstrated
that our approach significantly outperformed 11 state-of-the-art tectures, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [4],
anomaly detection methods on three different vibration datasets [5], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [6], and Transformers
encompassing multiple operating conditions and a real-world [7], [8], to automatically extract high-level features from raw
run-to-failure scenario. In addition, our method is capable of vibration signals.
performing real-time inference on an edge device platform, Despite their potential, the application of data-driven fault
demonstrating its applicability to practical industrial setups.
Furthermore, feature visualization analysis highlighted how the diagnosis methods in real-world industrial environments faces
proposed hybrid feature enables a more distinct separation two major challenges. First, a large volume of labeled faulty
between faulty and healthy data samples than that achieved with data is often unavailable [9], [10]. Although a substantial
statistical features or auxiliary classifier outputs alone. amount of labeled faulty data is essential for improving
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, diverse operating condi- the diagnostic performance of models, faults in industrial
tions, feature integration, machine fault diagnosis, self-supervised machinery are rare, as the machines typically operate under
learning, vibration statistics. healthy conditions. In addition, labeling the presence and
 type of faults requires skillful engineers’ annotation, which
 I. I NTRODUCTION incurs significant costs. Consequently, developing diagnostic methods that rely only on healthy data is crucial.
M ECHANICAL system failures can result in increased
 maintenance costs, diminished operational efficiency,
and safety-related accidents. The prompt and accurate diagno-
 Second, industrial machinery operates under various conditions, such as varying rotating speeds, motor loads, and
 mechanical components [11]. This variability causes shifts
sis of machine faults is crucial for minimizing both economic
 in the data distribution and increases the data complexity,
 Received 9 April 2025; accepted 15 May 2025. Date of publication 26 which degrades the diagnostic performance of the model.
May 2025; date of current version 5 June 2025. This work was supported As a result, it becomes challenging to generalize the diagby the 2024 Research Fund of the University of Seoul. The Associate Editor nostic capability of the model across different operating
coordinating the review process was Dr. Qing Ni. (Corresponding author:
Taehyoun Kim.) conditions.
 The authors are with the Department of Mechanical and Information To address the first challenge, anomaly detection has
Engineering/Smart Cities, University of Seoul, Seoul 02504, South Korea
(e-mail: junior209@uos.ac.kr; thkim@uos.ac.kr).
 emerged as a viable solution. This method involves training
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3573336 models on normal data instances to detect anomalies, also
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

referred to as outliers, which deviate from the patterns of task ensures both general applicability and strong faultnormal instances [12], [13]. In machine fault diagnosis, discriminative capability.
anomaly detection has been frequently applied by treating 3) To enhance the feature extraction capability of the
healthy samples as normal and faulty samples as anomalies. auxiliary classifier, we adopt a hybrid approach that
 Research on machine anomaly detection can be classified combines features extracted from the auxiliary classiinto three categories: 1) machine learning-based methods; fier with vibration statistics. This integration alleviates
2) reconstruction methods; and 3) self-supervised learning- the limitations of the statistical features and auxiliary
based methods. Machine learning-based methods detect classifier outputs, enabling our method to effectively disanomalies using statistical models [14], [15], [16], which tinguish between complex fault-related patterns across
rely on manually engineered features. This approach requires diverse operating conditions.
a high level of domain expertise to effectively extract the 4) This study demonstrates the practical applicability of the
fault-discriminative features. Reconstruction methods identify proposed method to real-world industrial settings from
anomalies based on the reconstruction errors of the autoen- two perspectives: anomaly detection under run-to-failure
coder (AE) architectures, which compress and reconstruct scenarios and real-time inference on an edge device.
the data [17]. Recently, reconstruction methods have been The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
extended to include adversarial training strategies [18], [19] Section II reviews previous research on machine anomaly
or combined with machine learning-based techniques [20]. detection and discusses their limitations. Section III describes
However, they often experience significant performance degra- the proposed anomaly detection methodology. Section IV
dation when dealing with complex distributions of healthy describes the dataset, experimental setup, and performance
data [12]. Consequently, applying these methods to mod- evaluation of the proposed method against existing approaches.
ern industrial environments with diverse operating conditions Section V presents the results of ablation studies and feature
remains challenging. visualizations, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed
 Self-supervised learning-based methods detect anomalies by approach. Finally, Section VI summarizes the key findings and
leveraging the information intrinsic to the data, eliminating the concludes this study.
need for a labeling process [21]. This approach has attracted
considerable attention because it allows supervised learning II. R ELATED W ORK
techniques to be applied to unlabeled data. In self-supervised
 A. Machine Learning-Based Methods
learning, a learning task used for model training determines
the features that the model extracts. Therefore, the fault- Machine learning-based methods have been widely used
discriminative ability of the model is highly dependent on for anomaly detection even before the advent of deep learnthe design of the learning task. Although several studies have ing. Recent studies have focused on improving the feature
applied self-supervised learning to machine anomaly detection, extraction process. de Novaes Pires Leite et al. [22] proposed
research on designing the learning task specifically tailored a method for diagnosing wind turbine faults by extracting
to rotating machinery fault diagnosis under diverse operating features from the time, frequency, and mechanical domains of
conditions remains scarce. vibration signals. Chen et al. [23] investigated a Transformer
 To overcome the limitations of previous machine anomaly fault diagnosis method based on impulse frequency response
detection methods, this paper proposes a novel hybrid analysis of current signals using a pulse generator. Hu et al.
approach for machine anomaly detection across various oper- [24] conducted order analysis on the frequency domain of
ating conditions. The proposed approach consists of pretext vibration signals to extract vibration vectors for diagnosing
task-based self-supervised learning to train an auxiliary classi- faults in rotating machinery.
fier and integration of the features extracted from the auxiliary Machine learning algorithms used in [22], [23], and [24]
classifier and statistical parameters. The main contributions of achieved strong performance in handling manually extracted
this study are as follows. tabular features. However, they relied on domain-specific
 1) This study addresses fault diagnosis in rotating machines analysis for feature extraction. To overcome this limitation,
 under diverse operating conditions without requiring this study employed a machine learning model for anomaly
 labeled faulty data samples. Unlike previous studies detection but used automatically extracted features without
 that primarily assumed fixed operating conditions, our depending on domain-specific decision-making or analysis.
 approach effectively handles variations in multiple operational states, including those related to rotating speed, B. Reconstruction Methods
 motor load, and bearing type. The reconstruction method identifies machine faults by
 2) We introduce a novel self-supervised learning frame- using the reconstruction error of encoder–decoder architecwork, which is broadly applicable to the fault diagnosis tures, such as AEs, as the anomaly score. An AE model
 of rotating machinery. In this framework, we propose consists of an encoder that compresses the input data and a
 a pretext task to classify the readily available rotating decoder that reconstructs the compressed data to its original
 speed categories. Rotating speed is a key factor in form. The model is trained to minimize reconstruction errors,
 capturing the fault characteristics. Moreover, it can be such as the mean squared error, solely with healthy data.
 easily obtained for all types of rotating machines by Hence, the model accurately reconstructs healthy data but
 using Hall sensors. Therefore, the proposed learning struggles to reconstruct faulty data that are not included in the
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

training data. Consequently, the reconstruction errors of the learning to machine anomaly detection. Yang et al. [36],
faulty data usually exceed those of the healthy data, resulting Cui et al. [37], and Wang et al. [38] proposed machine
in data with reconstruction errors exceeding a predefined anomaly detection methods based on contrastive learning.
threshold being classified as faulty. Yang et al. [36] trained a model using negative sample pairs
 Many studies have utilized the reconstruction method for generated by masking specific regions in the frequency domain
machine anomaly detection. Ahmed et al. [25] proposed a of vibration signals. Cui et al. [37] augmented vibration
gearbox fault diagnosis method using a denoising AE (DAE), signal data to generate positive samples and trained the
and Choi et al. [26] developed a lightweight bearing fault model to minimize their distance from the original samples.
diagnosis model by integrating principal component analysis Wang et al. [38] proposed a self-supervised diagnosis method
with AE to reduce the computational demands. Research using for faults in industrial processes by utilizing the internal con-
AE architectures incorporating CNN or RNN layers has also trastive learning (ICL) strategy [39]. This approach generates
been conducted. Kim and Ro [27] diagnosed dry vacuum pump positive and negative pairs using only a subset of the training
faults using features extracted by discrete wavelet transform as samples, eliminating the need for external data augmentation.
the inputs for long short-term memory-based AE. Zhao et al. Although contrastive learning has shown effectiveness in
[28] proposed CAE-CWT, a model that detects bearing faults machine anomaly detection, it does not fully capture the
using a 2-D convolutional AE (CAE) with 2-D spectrograms fault-discriminative characteristics associated with machine
generated using continuous wavelet transform (CWT). Some operating conditions. Consequently, its performance may
studies have employed the emerging Transformer architecture degrade under diverse operating conditions. For example, the
as the encoder–decoder model. For example, Xu et al. [29] method in [37] can handle datasets with various motor loads
proposed an anomaly Transformer (ATF) architecture, which and rotating speeds, but it requires additional labeled faulty
is trained to minimize both the reconstruction error and data to improve the model performance.
association discrepancy. In contrast, auxiliary pretext task learning trains a model
 Recently, several studies have incorporated reconstruction through a pretext task based on pseudo-labels generated from
methods into adversarial training strategies or combined them metadata. For example, in [40] and [41], models were trained
with machine learning techniques. In [30], [31], and [32], for anomaly detection through a pretext task to classify the
researchers used generative adversarial networks (GANs) to machine ID, which is provided as metadata in the DCASE
diagnose faults in bearings, structures, and industrial products, 2020 anomalous sound detection dataset. Since machine ID
respectively. Hojjati and Armanfard [33] introduced deep reflects the operating conditions of machines in the DCASE
autoencoding support vector data descriptor (DASVDD), an 2020 dataset, this approach allows the model to effectively
anomaly detection method that combines the reconstruction handle diverse operating conditions. However, this metadata
error of AE with the distance metric of SVDD. Yoon and is specific to the dataset and is not universally applicable to
Yu [34] and Du et al. [35] developed methods for machine rotating machinery fault diagnosis. To address these limitations
anomaly detection by combining the AE model with SVDD in existing pretext task learning-based approaches, this paper
and isolation forest (iForest), respectively. presents a new pretext task that can be widely applied to
 Unlike machine learning-based methods, reconstruction vibration data from rotating machinery operating under various
methods are well-suited for raw input data, such as vibration conditions. In summary, the advantage of our approach lies
and sound signals from industrial environments. However, in in overcoming the limitations of prior anomaly detection
reconstruction methods, the model is trained to reconstruct methods based on machine learning and auxiliary pretext task
the input data accurately after compression, rather than dis- learning.
criminate faulty data from healthy data. Consequently, its
performance can degrade when the distribution of the healthy
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
data used for training is complex [12]. Since this study aimed
to address the challenges in fault diagnosis under various This section describes the proposed method. As illustrated
operating conditions, reconstruction methods were not utilized. in Fig. 1, the proposed method consists of three compo-
Instead, a self-supervised learning approach was adopted to nents: an auxiliary classifier, a statistical feature extractor,
train a deep learning model as a feature extractor. During and an anomaly detector. Initially, the auxiliary classifier is
the performance evaluation, the proposed approach was com- trained through a pretext task designed to classify rotating
pared with representative reconstruction methods across three speeds based on vibration signals measured from a healthy
datasets representing diverse operating conditions. machine. During the testing phase, the outputs of the classifier
 serve as feature vectors for anomaly detection. Next, the
C. Self-Supervised Learning-Based Methods statistical feature extractor calculates the statistical features,
 Self-supervised learning can be categorized into contrastive including the mean (µ), peak (pk), rms, crest factor (CF),
learning and auxiliary pretext task learning. Contrastive learn- skewness (skew), and kurtosis (kurt), from the vibration
ing trains a model by using the similarity between data pairs. signals. These statistical features are then combined with
Specifically, the model is trained to embed similar data pairs, the auxiliary classifier outputs to form a hybrid feature.
referred to as positive pairs, closer together and dissimilar data Finally, the anomaly detector identifies machine faults based
pairs, referred to as negative pairs, farther apart in the latent on the hybrid feature using the local outlier factor (LOF)
embedding space. Several studies have applied contrastive algorithm.
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Schematic architecture of the proposed anomaly detection method.

A. Auxiliary Classifier and Self-Supervised Learning Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of the Auxiliary classifier
 Require: Auxiliary classifier f (·) : RL → RC , model parameter θ.
 To distinguish faulty data from healthy data, a pretext task
 Ensure: B ← batch size, L ← data length, C ← number of classes.
for machine anomaly detection should enable the model to function UPDATE(f, θ)
learn fault-related representations of the data from healthy Initialize loss L = 0
machines under diverse operating conditions. To achieve this for i = 0, . . . , B − 1 do
goal, pseudo-labels were generated from one-hot encoded Get vibration x ∈ RL from accelerometer.
rotating speeds, and an auxiliary classifier was trained to Get rotating speed r ∈ R from Hall sensor.
classify these labels. Encode r ∈ R to y ∈ {0, 1}C
 Rotating speed is a physical parameter that can be easily z = f (x; θ) ∈ RC
collected from Hall sensors without additional analysis. More ŷ = softmax(z)
 L = L − C−1
 P
importantly, it is a fundamental factor influencing the fault- i=0 yi log(ŷi )

related behavior of rotating machinery. For example, rotor end for
 L = L/B
faults are closely associated with the ×1 and ×2 harmonics
 Update model parameter θ to θ̂ by backpropagation.
of rotating speed. Additionally, bearing fault frequencies, such return θ̂
as ball pass frequency inner (BPFI), ball pass frequency outer end function
(BPFO), and ball spin frequency (BSF), are also directly
dependent on the rotating speed. These are defined as

 BPFI = r × (NB /2) × (1 + (BD /PD ) cos β) (1) the pseudo-labels for each rotating speed are represented
 BPFO = r × (NB /2) × (1 − (BD /PD ) cos β) (2) as yi ∈ {(1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0), . . . , (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1)}.
 BSF = r × (PD /BD ) × 1 − 2 (BD /PD ) cos2 β Algorithm 1 outlines the training process of the auxiliary
 
 (3)
 classifier. As shown in Table I, the auxiliary classifier f (·)
where r is the rotating speed and NB , BD , PD , and β denote employs a 1-D CNN architecture, which consists of five 1-D
the number of balls, ball diameter, pitch diameter, and contact convolutional layers, one global average pooling (GAP) layer,
angle of the bearing, respectively. Therefore, a model trained and one fully connected (FC) layer.
on a pretext task using the rotating speed information can The ith element zi in the output z ∈ RC of the trained
extract the fault-related features for anomaly detection. classifier represents a logit, indicating the likelihood of the
 For each data instance xi , a pseudo-label yi was assigned in input data belonging to the ith rotating speed class. In this
the form of a one-hot vector corresponding to its revolutions study, the auxiliary classifier is trained on healthy data. When
per minute (RPM) value. The datasets used in this study, a healthy data sample belonging to class i is provided, the
described in Section IV-A, comprise two or more rotating classifier typically produces the highest output value, zi , corspeed conditions. For example, the University of Seoul (UOS) responding to the class i, whereas the outputs for the other
dataset [11] includes data collected at six rotating speeds: classes, {z j | j , i}, are significantly lower than zi . By contrast,
600, 800, 1000, 1200, 1400, and 1600 RPMs. In this case, when a faulty data sample is given, the classifier may produce
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

 TABLE I larger absolute values of µ and skew, and signals with more
 A RCHITECTURE OF THE AUXILIARY C LASSIFIER extreme fluctuations result in higher CF and kurt. Faulty
 machines typically produce large and irregular vibrations,
 leading to significantly higher absolute values of these metrics.
 Therefore, these metrics can effectively distinguish between
 healthy and faulty data.

 C. Anomaly Detector
 To improve the fault-discriminative capability of the features, a hybrid feature vector was constructed by integrating
 the outputs from the auxiliary classifier with statistical parameters. Both components independently contribute to fault
 detection as well as complement each other. The auxiliary
 classifier effectively extracts the fault-related features associ-
 TABLE II
 ated with rotating speed. However, since its outputs represent
 S UMMARY OF S TATISTICAL F EATURES
 the class probabilities, the overall shape of the raw signals
 may be partially lost during computation. In contrast, statistical
 features capture the magnitude and shape of the vibration signals, which are closely related to the fault patterns. However,
 these features are highly sensitive to variations in rotating
 speed. Consequently, by combining these two feature types,
 the proposed hybrid feature approach enhances the robustness
 of anomaly detection across diverse operating conditions.
 Formally, for input data x ∈ RL of length L, let the auxiliary
 classifier output be z = f (x) ∈ RC and the statistical features
 be s = [µ(x), pk(x), rms(x), CF(x), skew(x), kurt(x)] ∈ R6 . The
 hybrid feature vector h ∈ RC+6 is defined as
incorrect class predictions, representing patterns that deviate
from those observed from healthy data, because faulty data h = [z, s] . (4)
are not included during training. This discrepancy enables
the classifier to produce features that effectively distinguish To prepare the feature for anomaly detection, a hybrid feature
faulty data from healthy data. Consequently, the outputs of set H = [h0 , h1 , . . . , hN−1 ]T ∈ RN×(C+6) was generated for N
the auxiliary classifier are used as a feature vector in our data samples. However, since the features from the auxiliary
machine anomaly detection method. Further details on how classifier and statistical parameters have different scales, some
the model outputs distinguish between healthy and faulty data features may dominate the anomaly detection process. For
are discussed in Section V-B. example, the auxiliary classifier output z may have varying
 scales depending on the training results, whereas the statistical
 feature s is typically measured on an acceleration scale, such
B. Statistical Feature Extractor as gravitational acceleration. To solve this problem, z score
 The statistical features represent key characteristics of the normalization was applied to standardize all features in H
signal shape, such as the central axis, magnitude, and asym- with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. The normalized
metry, which are closely associated with fault-related vibration hybrid feature set H̄ ∈ RN×(C+6) is calculated as
patterns. In this study, six frequently used metrics in vibration H̄i, j = Hi, j − µH ( j) /σH ( j)
 
 (5)
analysis [42], listed in Table II, were selected as the statistical N−1
features. These metrics are automatically calculated using 1 X
 µH ( j) = Hi, j (6)
predefined formulas, eliminating the need for further manual N
 i=0
analysis. v
 u N−1
 The value of µ represents the central axis of the vibration, u1 X 2
 σH ( j) = t Hi, j − µH ( j) (7)
whereas pk and rms values represent its overall magnitude. N
 i=0
The value of CF, calculated as the ratio of pk to rms,
indicates the intensity of the impulses within the signal. The where i and j represent the index of a data sample and a
value of skew reflects the asymmetry of the data distribution, feature, respectively, and µH ( j) and σH ( j) are the mean and
with large positive and large negative values indicating right- standard deviation of the jth feature, respectively.
skewed and left-skewed distributions, respectively. The value This study aims to address the challenge presented by the
of kurt quantifies the degree of extreme values in the data. diverse operating conditions of rotating machines by using
In summary, signals with larger amplitudes exhibit higher the hybrid feature, which is an automatically extracted highvalues of pk and rms, signals with greater asymmetry exhibit level feature. As discussed in Section II-B, reconstruction
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 where the reachability distance RD between xi and xj is
 defined as
 RD xi , x j = max kd (xi ) , xi − x j 2 .
  
 (10)
 4) Calculate the LOF of x as
 1 X LRD (xi )
 LOF (x) = . (11)
 |Nk (x; X)| LRD (x)
 xi ∈Nk (x;X)

 5) Classify x as an anomaly when LOF > 1.5. Otherwise,
 classify it as normal.

 Algorithm 2 Procedure for Anomaly Detection
 Require: Input vibration signal x ∈ RL
 Ensure:
 C ← number of classes, L ← data length,
 Auxiliary classifier f (·) : RL → RC ,
 Training dataset X ∈ RNtrain ×L ,
 Hybrid feature from training dataset H ∈ RNtrain ×(C+6) ,
Fig. 2. Visualization of the LOF algorithm with k = 3. (a) Example of Mean and standard deviation of H: µH , σH ∈ RC+6 ,
anomalies (LOF > 1.5). (b) Example of normal instance (LOF ≤ 1.5).
 Normalized feature H̄ ∈ RNtrain ×(C+6) = (H − µH )/σH ,
 Number of neighbors of LOF algorithm k.
 function DETECT(x)
and self-supervised learning-based methods are not effec-
 Compute auxiliary classifier output z = f (x)
tive in handling diverse operating conditions or high-level
 Extract statistics s = [µ(x), pk(x), rms(x), CF(x),
features. Therefore, a machine learning-based anomaly detecskew(x), kurt(x)]
tion algorithm was adopted. Since healthy data often exhibit
 Integrate features h = [z, s]
multimodal distributions owing to their varying operating con-
 Normalize featureP h̄ = (h − µH )/σH
ditions, a density-based anomaly detection algorithm is more
 LOF(h̄) = |Nk (1h̄;H̄)| hi ∈Nk (h̄;H̄) LRD(hi )/LRD(h̄)
suitable than other alternatives, such as a one-class support
 if LOF(h̄) > 1.5 then
vector machine (OC-SVM), which learns the boundary for
 return Faulty
healthy data, or iForest, which detects anomalies by partitionelse
ing the input data from healthy data. Furthermore, parametric
 return Healthy
density-based algorithms may also struggle to model such
 end if
complex data distributions. Based on these considerations,
 end function
LOF [14], a nonparametric density-based anomaly detection
algorithm, was chosen as the anomaly detector.
 The LOF algorithm identifies anomalies based on the local Fig. 2 illustrates how the LOF value of a given data xi
density, which represents the density of normal data around changes based on the varying positions of its neighbor data
an input data sample. Data located in regions with high local when k = 3. Algorithm 2 describes the overall anomaly
density are classified as normal, whereas those with low local detection process of the proposed method.
density are classified as anomalies. By using the Euclidean
distance to measure the distance between two samples, the IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
anomaly detection process for the input data x ∈ RL in a set of This section presents the performance evaluation results
normal data samples X ∈ RN×L , where the number of samples of the proposed method. To assess its anomaly detection
is N and the data length is L, proceeds as follows. performance under various machine operating conditions and
 1) Find the k-nearest neighbors of x within X, denoted as failure scenarios, the evaluation was conducted on three dif-
 Nk (x; X), where k is a user-defined hyperparameter of ferent datasets. The proposed method was compared with
 the LOF algorithm. 11 state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods, including
 2) Calculate the k-distance of x as machine learning-based, reconstruction, and self-supervised
 learning-based methods, as listed in Table III. In addition,
 to demonstrate the practicality of the proposed method in
 kd (x) = max (kx − xi k2 ) . (8)
 xi ∈Nk (x;X) industrial environments, its computational performance on an
 edge device was evaluated.
 3) Compute the local reachability density of x as
 A. Data Preparation
 P −1
 xi ∈Nk (x;X) RD (x, xi ) To demonstrate the generalization ability and stability of the
 LRD (x) = (9)
 |Nk (x; X)| proposed method, we employed three machine fault datasets:
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

 TABLE III
S UMMARY AND C ATEGORIZATION OF A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODELS
 FOR P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

the UOS dataset [11], Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (HUST) gearbox dataset [43], and Xi’an Jiaotong
University and Changxing Sumyoung Technology (XJTU-SY)
dataset [44]. The UOS and HUST datasets were used to
evaluate the performance of our approach under varying oper- Fig. 3. Data preparation for tenfold cross-validation process. (a) Overview
ating conditions. The UOS dataset contains multiple rotating of tenfold cross-validation. (b) Data separation procedure.
speeds and bearing types, and the HUST dataset includes
diverse rotating speeds and motor load conditions. However, initial failure occurred was not specified in the dataset. To
these datasets include only the data collected from artificially estimate this point, the amplitude of the envelope spectrum at
generated faults. To ensure a comprehensive consideration each fault frequency was analyzed. The initial fault point was
of real-world industrial scenarios, we additionally used the determined as the moment when the amplitude at the fault
XJTU-SY dataset, which includes a run-to-failure scenario frequency exceeded the 3σ threshold. Based on this criterion,
under accelerated degradation tests. 30 measurements from the beginning of the data collection
 Vibration signals in the UOS dataset were collected from were selected as healthy samples, and 30 measurements from
the testbed operating at six different rotating speeds (600, 800, the initial fault point were used as faulty samples. Any case
1000, 1200, 1400, and 1600 RPMs) and with three bearing containing fewer than 30 measurements of either the healthy or
types (deep groove ball, cylindrical roller, and tapered roller faulty condition was excluded from the experimental analysis.
bearings). For each operating condition, 32 machine condition To ensure the reliability of the experiment, a tenfold crossscenarios are provided, namely, the healthy state, three bearing validation was conducted. According to the general k-fold
fault states, seven rotor fault states, and 21 compound fault cross-validation method, illustrated in Fig. 3(a), the dataset
states, which are combinations of bearing and rotor faults. The was first divided into tenfold, and then the model was evaludataset also includes data measured with two sampling rates ated ten times. In each evaluation, onefold was used for testing,
of 8 and 16 kHz. Among them, the 16-kHz data were selected whereas the remaining ninefold was used for training. The
for the performance evaluation. three datasets contain data segments corresponding to different
 In the HUST dataset, vibration signals were collected at five operating conditions and fault types. These data segments were
rotating speeds (1200, 1500, 1800, 2100, and 2400 RPMs) and first divided into ten subsegments, each assigned to a different
five motor loads (0, 0.113, 0.226, 0.339, and 0.452 Nm). The fold. The subsegments were further partitioned into smaller
testbed for this dataset consists of a motor, coupler, and gear- data samples with a length L and shift size S. The length L
box, and the dataset covers two types of gear faults: broken was set to the smallest power of 2 which allowed capturing
tooth and missing tooth. Vibration signals were sampled at of at least one full rotation under all operating conditions.
25.6 kHz, and the data were collected for 10.2 s for each The shift size S was initially set equal to the data length L
experiment. by default. However, in cases where an imbalance occurred
 Unlike the UOS and HUST datasets, the XJTU-SY dataset between healthy and faulty samples in a dataset, the value of S
contains vibration signals collected until the end of the for a specific health state was reduced to maintain the balance
lifetime of the bearing. Therefore, this dataset facilitates between the number of healthy and faulty samples. The data
the observation of real-world natural bearing faults. In the separation process is illustrated in Fig. 3(b), while Table IV
dataset, data were recorded at a sampling rate of 25.6 kHz, summarizes the values of L, S, and number of samples per
with a measurement period of one minute and an individual fold.
recording duration of 1.28 s. Five run-to-failure experiments
were conducted at three rotating speeds (2100, 2250, and B. Experimental Setup
2400 RPMs). Although the type of bearing fault was identified The model performance was evaluated using accuracy,
at the end of each experiment, the exact moment when the recall, false positive rate (FPR), precision, F1 score, and
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IV learning rate of 0.001. This setup is based on the benchmark
DATA S LICING PARAMETERS AND D ISTRIBUTIONS OF THE UOS, HUST, results of Lee and Kim [45], which evaluated optimizers
 AND XJTU-SY DATASETS and hyperparameters across various fault diagnosis model
 architectures.
 For the methods using machine learning algorithms, including iForest, OC-SVM, LOF, DSVDD, DASVDD, and the
 proposed method, the decision thresholds were set to the
 default values provided by the scikit-learn library. For reconstruction methods, such as DAE, ATF, USAD, and GANomaly,
 the thresholds were calculated as Q3 + 1.5IQR based on the
 anomaly score distributions of the training dataset, following
 the approach outlined in [46]. The details of the experimental
 TABLE V environment are summarized in Table V.
 E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT

 C. Performance Comparison Results
 The average and 95% confidence intervals of the evaluation
 metrics for each model are presented in Table VI. In most
 cases, the proposed approach outperformed all other models
 used for comparison in this study across all metrics. On the
 XJTU-SY dataset, OC-SVM achieved a higher recall, and LOF
 showed better FPR and precision than our method. However,
 OC-SVM had a much higher FPR, and LOF exhibited a
 lower recall, indicating that they struggled to balance fault
area under the curve (AUC) score. Accuracy represents the detection accuracy and reduction of false alarms. In contrast,
proportion of correct predictions among all samples. Although our method achieved the highest accuracy, F1 score, and AUC,
accuracy is one of the most commonly used metrics, the highlighting its overall effectiveness in anomaly detection.
accurate identification of faulty samples is more crucial than Among the machine learning-based methods, LOF showed
the overall accuracy in machine fault diagnosis. Therefore, the best anomaly detection performance, supporting the
recall, which indicates the proportion of correctly identified hypothesis that density-based models are well-suited for hanfaulty samples among all actual faulty samples, was also dling data from diverse operating conditions. Nevertheless,
evaluated. its accuracy and recall remained significantly lower than
 However, a strict decision threshold to maximize the recall those of the proposed approach, especially in the case of
increases the likelihood of false alarms. Therefore, precision the XJTU-SY dataset. The reconstruction and self-supervised
and FPR were reported to evaluate the tradeoff between accu- learning-based methods struggled to maintain consistent perrate fault detection and reduction of false alarms. Precision formance across various datasets. The performance of the
represents the proportion of correctly identified faulty samples reconstruction methods was significantly lower on the UOS
among all samples classified as faulty, whereas FPR indicates and HUST datasets when compared with that on the XJTU-SY
the proportion of incorrectly identified healthy samples among dataset. Conversely, the self-supervised learning-based models
all actual healthy samples. The F1 and AUC scores were also exhibited lower performance on the XJTU-SY dataset than on
used as evaluation metrics. The F1 score, calculated as the the UOS and HUST datasets.
harmonic mean of precision and recall, represents the balance To further analyze the model performance, the anomaly
between precision and recall. The AUC score is the area scores normalized to [−1, 1] in the test dataset and the decision
under the receiver operating characteristic curve, indicating threshold for the healthy and faulty samples are depicted
the threshold-independent model performance. in Fig. 4. Since the tenfold cross-validation results showed
 All metrics range from 0 to 1. A lower FPR value or minimal performance fluctuations, the results for fold 5 were
higher values of the other evaluation metrics indicate improved selected as the representative results. In the figure, the blue
performance. For the performance evaluation, the average and vertical line indicates the decision threshold, with samples to
95% confidence intervals of these metrics were obtained from the left classified as healthy and those to the right classified
tenfold cross-validation. as faulty.
 In the performance evaluation, all methods were trained The iForest model frequently misclassified faulty samples as
exclusively on the healthy data from the training folds. For healthy. In the case of OC-SVM, the decision threshold was
machine learning-based methods, including iForest [15], OC- set too low relative to the distribution of healthy data, which
SVM [16], and LOF [14], the statistical features outlined in resulted in a high number of false positives and, consequently,
Table II were used as the input features, and each method the lowest precision score among all models. LOF demonwas trained based on its original implementation. In contrast, strated a clearer separation between healthy and faulty samples
deep learning-based methods were trained on raw vibration than iForest and OC-SVM. However, it generated more false
signals for 100 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a negatives than our method, which led to a lower recall rate.
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

 TABLE VI
 A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD C OMPARED W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

 TABLE VII Unlike the reconstruction methods, the anomaly scores of
 I NFERENCE T IME M EASUREMENT R ESULTS ON R ASPBERRY P I 4B healthy samples generated by self-supervised learning-based
 methods formed an unimodal distribution across all datasets.
 They outperformed the reconstruction methods on the UOS
 and HUST datasets. However, in the XJTU-SY dataset, the
 anomaly scores of many faulty samples were below the
 decision threshold, leading to a significantly lower recall rate
 and degradation of the overall anomaly detection performance.
 This result underscores their limitations in accurately classifying the natural machine fault in the initial stages. In contrast,
 our method consistently achieved superior anomaly detection
 performance across all datasets.
 In the UOS and HUST datasets, the anomaly scores of
healthy samples derived from most reconstruction methods,
except for DSVDD, exhibited a multimodal distribution with D. Real-Time Performance Evaluation
multiple peaks. Furthermore, some distributions extended In a real-world industrial setup, sensor data are acquired
beyond the decision threshold, which led to performance from edge devices with limited hardware resources. Moredegradation. This suggests that the low performance of recon- over, fault detection plays a crucial role in ensuring the safe
struction methods is primarily due to the complexity of the operation of mechanical systems. Therefore, achieving realhealthy data distribution. Since DSVDD uses the features time responsiveness on resource-constrained edge devices is
from a neural network trained to project normal data into a essential for the practical deployment of an anomaly detection
hyperspherical region, the anomaly scores of healthy samples method. To assess the real-time performance of our method,
in this method formed an unimodal distribution. However, we measured the inference time of the model on a Raspberry
many faulty samples were assigned anomaly scores below the Pi 4B.
decision threshold, indicating that these models struggled to Table VII presents the average, minimum, maximum, and
effectively distinguish between healthy and faulty samples. standard deviation of the inference time measured over 100
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 4. Visualization of decision threshold and anomaly score distribution of healthy and faulty samples for comparison models. (a) UOS dataset. (b) HUST
dataset. (c) XJTU-SY dataset.

computations after 1000 warm-up runs. The results showed anomaly detection on edge devices before the next data sample
that our method completed the anomaly detection process is collected.
in a maximum of 6.77 ms, even without additional model
optimizations. This is a sufficiently short time when compared V. A NALYSIS OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
with the data measurement durations of the datasets: 128, This section presents two analyses to demonstrate the advan-
80, and 40 ms for the UOS, HUST, and XJTU-SY datasets, tages of the proposed hybrid feature. First, the performance
respectively. Consequently, our method can perform real-time of the hybrid feature was compared with that of alternative
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

 TABLE VIII
 R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDIES ON I NPUT F EATURES OF THE LOF A LGORITHM

feature sets through ablation studies. Next, its effectiveness individual contributions to the fault discrimination. Second,
was evaluated by visualizing the statistical features, auxiliary to demonstrate the effectiveness of the hybrid feature for
classifier outputs, and the hybrid feature. All experiments in fault discrimination, we visualized and compared the statistical
this section were conducted using the same setup described in features, auxiliary classifier outputs, and the proposed hybrid
Section IV. feature in the latent feature space.
 To demonstrate the fault-discriminative ability of the indi-
A. Ablation Studies
 vidual features, histograms of the features derived from the
 The performance of the hybrid feature was compared with statistical parameters and auxiliary classifier are illustrated in
those of the following three alternative feature sets: statistical Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. Fig. 5 shows the histograms of six
features (Stats.), auxiliary classifier outputs (Aux.), and the statistical features for healthy and faulty data. The distributions
combination of the Stats. and rotating speed (Stats. + Rot.). of µ and skew showed minimal differences between faulty
These alternative feature sets were derived by either omitting and healthy samples across all datasets. In contrast, the values
or substituting specific components of the hybrid feature. To of pk and rms were consistently higher in faulty data across
ensure a fair comparison, the LOF algorithm was used as the all datasets, and CF and kurt served as fault-discriminative
anomaly detector across all feature sets. indicators in the UOS and HUST datasets. This indicates that
 Table VIII presents the comparison results between the machine faults in the datasets typically amplify the magnitude
feature sets. Our proposed hybrid feature consistently outper- and frequency of extreme values in the vibration signals,
formed all alternative feature sets in most cases. In contrast, enabling the statistical features to differentiate faulty data
the alternative feature sets exhibited inferior performance, from healthy data. However, because the signal shapes are
particularly in terms of recall, which directly affected the affected not only by machine faults but also by the operating
overall anomaly detection accuracy. Although the Stats. + Rot. conditions, overlaps between the features of healthy and faulty
feature showed a slightly higher FPR on the HUST dataset and data were observed. Therefore, relying solely on statistical
the Stats. feature achieved better FPR and precision on the features is insufficient for distinguishing between healthy and
XJTU-SY dataset, these performance gains were negligible faulty data.
compared to the substantial improvements provided by the The outputs of the auxiliary classifier, which was trained
hybrid feature. to classify rotating speeds, exhibited distinct distributions for
 Moreover, the hybrid feature led to significantly higher different rotating speeds. Fig. 6(a)–(c) presents the histograms
accuracy, F1 score, and AUC, confirming its superiority in of the auxiliary classifier outputs for the UOS, HUST, and
overall performance. The ablation study results highlight that XJTU-SY datasets collected at 1600, 1200, and 2250 RPMs,
the hybrid feature is the most effective combination, signif- respectively. As described in Section III-A, each zi value in
icantly enhancing the anomaly detection performance when the figures represents the logit for the ith rotating speed class.
compared with the other feature sets. For the healthy data, the outputs corresponding to the actual
 rotating speed class were the highest among all class outputs,
B. Feature Visualization Analysis typically greater than 0, whereas most outputs for the other
 To further understand the performance enhancement classes were below 0. Conversely, because faulty data were not
attributable to the hybrid feature in the proposed method, included in the training dataset, their outputs were noticeably
this section analyzes the fault-discriminative ability of the different from those of the healthy samples.
individual and hybrid features through visualization tech- These results reveal that the classifier outputs derived from
niques. First, the statistical features and auxiliary classifier faulty data exhibit patterns distinct from those of outputs
outputs were analyzed using histograms to understand their derived from healthy data. This pattern remains consistent
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 5. Comparison of statistical feature distributions between healthy and faulty samples. (a) UOS dataset. (b) HUST dataset. (c) XJTU-SY dataset.

Fig. 6. Comparison of auxiliary classifier output distributions between healthy and faulty samples. (a) UOS dataset (1600 RPM data). (b) HUST dataset
(1200 RPM data). (c) XJTU-SY dataset (2250 RPM data).

across all rotating speeds and datasets, indicating that the auxiliary classifier outputs are useful for machine anomaly
auxiliary classifier outputs can effectively separate faulty data detection, neither feature by itself is sufficient to clearly
from healthy data. However, some faulty data samples exhib- distinguish faulty samples from healthy ones under diverse
ited feature patterns similar to those of the healthy data operating conditions.
samples, causing partial overlaps in the histograms shown To demonstrate the effectiveness of the hybrid feature for
in Fig. 6. As a result, although both statistical features and fault discrimination, we compared the statistical features,
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

Fig. 7. Comparison of features for fault discrimination capabilities using t-SNE visualization (UOS dataset). (a) Statistical features. (b) Auxiliary classifier
outputs. (c) Hybrid feature (proposed).

Fig. 8. Comparison of features for fault discrimination capabilities using t-SNE visualization (HUST dataset). (a) Statistical features. (b) Auxiliary classifier
outputs. (c) Hybrid feature (proposed).

Fig. 9. Comparison of features for fault discrimination capabilities using t-SNE visualization (XJTU-SY dataset). (a) Statistical features. (b) Auxiliary classifier
outputs. (c) Hybrid feature (proposed).

auxiliary classifier outputs, and the proposed hybrid feature local structure of the data while reducing their dimensionality.
in the latent feature space. Figs. 7–9 illustrate the 2-D pro- Therefore, high-dimensional data characteristics can be effecjections of these three features using t-distributed stochastic tively visualized in a lower-dimensional space. In the figures,
neighbor embedding (t-SNE) on the UOS, HUST, and XJTU- the first row presents the density maps of each feature derived
SY datasets, respectively. The t-SNE algorithm retains the from the training dataset. In the second row, the detection
3540215 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

results of faulty samples in the test dataset generated by [4] W. Zhang, G. Peng, C. Li, Y. Chen, and Z. Zhang, “A new deep learning
the LOF algorithm are overlaid on the corresponding density model for fault diagnosis with good anti-noise and domain adaptation ability on raw vibration signals,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 425,
maps. Because the LOF algorithm relies on the local density Feb. 2017.
of the training data to detect anomalies, samples located in [5] S. Lee and T. Kim, “FRFconv-TDSNet: Lightweight, noisesparser regions are more likely to be identified as faulty. Blue robust convolutional neural network leveraging full-receptive-field
 convolution and time-domain statistics for intelligent machine
dots indicate the correctly predicted faulty samples, whereas fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13,
red dots represent the misclassified faulty samples. 2024.
 The t-SNE visualization results showed that when individual [6] A. Shenfield and M. Howarth, “A novel deep learning model for the
 detection and identification of rolling element-bearing faults,” Sensors,
features were used, many faulty samples were mapped into vol. 20, no. 18, p. 5112, Sep. 2020.
the high-density regions of the healthy data, leading to a low [7] H. Fang et al., “CLFormer: A lightweight transformer based on convorecall rate. For example, as shown in Figs. 8(a) and 9(b), lutional embedding and linear self-attention with strong robustness for
 bearing fault diagnosis under limited sample conditions,” IEEE Trans.
using the statistical features in the HUST dataset and the Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–8, 2022.
auxiliary classifier outputs in the XJTU-SY dataset resulted in [8] J. Tang, G. Zheng, C. Wei, W. Huang, and X. Ding, “Signal-transformer:
significantly lower recall rates than that observed when using A robust and interpretable method for rotating machinery intelligent fault
 diagnosis under variable operating conditions,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
the hybrid feature. By contrast, as illustrated in Figs. 7(c), 8(c), Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022.
and 9(c), the hybrid feature provides much clearer separation [9] D. Neupane, M. R. Bouadjenek, R. Dazeley, and S. Aryal, “A comparbetween healthy and faulty samples across all datasets, leading ative study of semi-supervised anomaly detection methods for machine
to the highest recall rate. These results suggest that the mag- fault detection,” in Proc. PHM Soc. Eur. Conf., Prague, Czech Republic,
 Jun. 2024, pp. 1–10.
nitude and shape information from the statistical features and [10] M. A. Panza, M. Pota, and M. Esposito, “Anomaly detection methods
the operating condition-related fault characteristics captured for industrial applications: A comparative study,” Electronics, vol. 12,
by the auxiliary classifier outputs complement each other in no. 18, p. 3971, Sep. 2023.
 [11] S. Lee, T. Kim, and T. Kim, “Multi-domain vibration dataset with
effectively representing the characteristics of machine faults. various bearing types under compound machine fault scenarios,” Data
 Brief, vol. 57, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 110940.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [12] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, p. 38,
 This study proposes a novel machine anomaly detection 2021.
method to overcome two key challenges in deploying deep [13] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
learning-based fault diagnosis for rotating machinery in real- survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
world industrial settings: the scarcity of labeled faulty data and [14] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
the variability of machine operating conditions. To overcome Data, Dallas, TX, USA, 2000, pp. 93–104.
these challenges, we first designed a pretext task to classify [15] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
rotating speeds measured by Hall sensors and trained the aux- IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Pisa, Italy, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 [16] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
iliary classifier through this task. Then, based on the auxiliary “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
classifier outputs, we proposed a hybrid feature integration Process. Syst., Denver, CO, USA, Nov. 1999, pp. 582–588.
approach that combines them with vibration statistics. [17] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
 using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, pp. 1–18,
 To evaluate our method under diverse machine operating Dec. 2015.
conditions and fault types, experiments were conducted on [18] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
the following three datasets: UOS, HUST, and XJTU-SY. The “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Mining, New
proposed method consistently outperformed 11 comparison York, NY, USA, 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
models across all datasets and enabled real-time anomaly [19] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
detection on a Raspberry Pi 4B. Moreover, extensive ablation Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
 14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis. Comput. Vis. (ACCV), Perth, WA,
studies and feature visualizations confirmed the effectiveness Australia, May 2019, pp. 622–637.
of the hybrid feature. The analysis revealed that the hybrid [20] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf.
feature effectively compensates for the limitations of individual Mach. Learn., Stockholm, Sweden, Jul. 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
statistical features or auxiliary classifier outputs, enabling a [21] S. Albelwi, “Survey on self-supervised learning: Auxiliary pretext tasks
 and contrastive learning methods in imaging,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 4,
clear separation between healthy and faulty data. p. 551, Apr. 2022.
 In future work, we aim to develop a more robust anomaly [22] G. de Novaes Pires Leite et al., “A robust fleet-based anomaly detection
detection algorithm capable of handling extended machine framework applied to wind turbine vibration data,” Eng. Appl. Artif.
 Intell., vol. 126, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 106859.
operating conditions, limited data availability, and constrained [23] Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, H. Wu, X. Chen, Q. Xiao, and Y. Yu, “Fault
hardware resources for efficient unsupervised on-device fault anomaly detection of synchronous machine winding based on isolation
diagnosis. forest and impulse frequency response analysis,” Measurement, vol. 188,
 Jan. 2022, Art. no. 110531.
 [24] D. Hu, C. Zhang, T. Yang, and G. Chen, “An intelligent anomaly
 R EFERENCE detection method for rotating machinery based on vibration vectors,”
[1] P. Laggan, “Vibration monitoring,” in Proc. IEE Colloq. Understand. IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 14, pp. 14294–14305, Jul. 2022.
 Your Condition Monit., Chester, U.K., Apr. 1999, pp. 3–1–3-11. [25] I. Ahmed, M. Ahmad, A. Chehri, and G. Jeon, “A smart-anomaly-
[2] S. Nandi and H. Toliyat, “Fault diagnosis of electrical machines—A detection system for industrial machines based on feature autoencoder
 review,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electr. Mach. Drives Conf. (IEMDC), Seattle, and deep learning,” Micromachines, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 154, 2023.
 WA, USA, May 1999, pp. 219–221. [26] J. H. Choi, S. K. Jang, W. H. Cho, S. Moon, and H. Kim, “Motor PHM
[3] S. A. McInerny and Y. Dai, “Basic vibration signal processing for on edge computing with anomaly detection and fault severity estimation
 bearing fault detection,” IEEE Trans. Educ., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 149–156, through compressed data using PCA and autoencoder,” Mach. Learn.
 Feb. 2003. Knowl. Extraction, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1466–1483, Jun. 2024.
LEE AND KIM: HYBRID APPROACH FOR MACHINE ANOMALY DETECTION ACROSS DIVERSE OPERATING CONDITIONS 3540215

[27] B.-S. Kim and S.-K. Ro, “Development of a real-time anomaly detection [42] J. K. Sinha, Vibration Analysis, Instruments, and Signal Processing, 1st
 system for dry vacuum pumps using low-cost IoT devices and machine ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2015.
 learning,” Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 2133–2143, [43] C. Zhao, E. Zio, and W. Shen, “Domain generalization for cross-domain
 Jun. 2024. fault diagnosis: An application-oriented perspective and a benchmark
[28] Y. Zhao, H. Hao, Y. Chen, and Y. Zhang, “Novelty detection and study,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 245, May 2024, Art. no. 109964.
 fault diagnosis method for bearing faults based on the hybrid deep [44] B. Wang, Y. Lei, N. Li, and N. Li, “A hybrid prognostics approach
 autoencoder network,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 13, p. 2826, Jun. 2023. for estimating remaining useful life of rolling element bearings,” IEEE
[29] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time Trans. Rel., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 401–412, Mar. 2020.
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. 10th [45] S. Lee and T. Kim, “Impact of deep learning optimizers and hyperpa-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–20. rameter tuning on the performance of bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE
[30] R. Liu, D. Xiao, D. Lin, and W. Zhang, “Intelligent bearing anomaly Access, vol. 11, pp. 55046–55070, 2023.
 detection for industrial Internet of Things based on auto-encoder Wasser- [46] T. Crosby, “How to detect and handle outliers,” Technometrics, vol. 36,
 stein generative adversarial network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 315–316, Aug. 1994.
 no. 13, pp. 22869–22879, Jul. 2024.
[31] G. Liu, Y. Niu, W. Zhao, Y. Duan, and J. Shu, “Data anomaly
 detection for structural health monitoring using a combination network
 of GANomaly and CNN,” Smart Struct. Syst., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 53–62,
 2022.
[32] T.-W. Tang, W.-H. Kuo, J.-H. Lan, C.-F. Ding, H. Hsu, and H.-T. Young,
 “Anomaly detection neural network with dual auto-encoders GAN and
 its industrial inspection applications,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 12, p. 3336, Seongjae Lee received the B.S. degree in mechani-
 Jun. 2020. cal and information engineering from the University
[33] H. Hojjati and N. Armanfard, “DASVDD: Deep autoencoding support of Seoul, Seoul, South Korea, in 2019, where he
 vector data descriptor for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree (integrated
 Eng., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 3739–3750, Aug. 2024. master’s and doctoral program) with the Department
[34] D. Yoon and J. Yu, “Machinery fault signal detection with deep one-class of Mechanical and Information Engineering and
 classification,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 221, Dec. 2023. Smart Cities.
[35] W. Du, Z. Guo, C. Li, X. Gong, and Z. Pu, “From anomaly detection to His research interests include parallel computing,
 novel fault discrimination for wind turbine gearboxes with a sparse iso- deep learning, and on-device AI systems.
 lation encoding forest,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10,
 2022.
[36] Z. Yang et al., “A novel fault detection method for rotating machinery
 based on self-supervised contrastive representations,” Comput. Ind.,
 vol. 147, May 2023, Art. no. 103878.
[37] L. Cui, X. Tian, Q. Wei, and Y. Liu, “A self-attention based contrastive learning method for bearing fault diagnosis,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 vol. 238, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 121645.
[38] X. Wang et al., “Generalized out-of-distribution fault diagnosis
 (GOOFD) via internal contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., Taehyoun Kim (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
 vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 9987–9996, Aug. 2024. M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering
[39] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea,
 internal contrastive learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. in 1994, 1996, and 2001, respectively.
 (ICLR), Apr. 2022, pp. 1–26. From 2001 to 2005, he was a Research and
[40] E. Di Fiore, A. Ferraro, A. Galli, V. Moscato, and G. Sperlı̀, “An Development Manager with the SoC Division, GCT
 anomalous sound detection methodology for predictive maintenance,” Research, Inc., Seoul. Since 2005, he has been
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 209, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 118324. a Professor with the Department of Mechanical
[41] R. Giri, S. V. Tenneti, F. Cheng, K. Helwani, U. Isik, and and Information Engineering, University of Seoul,
 A. Krishnaswamy, “Self-supervised classification for detecting anoma- Seoul. His current research interests include reallous sounds,” in Workshop Detect. Classif. Acoust. Scenes Events, Tokyo, time embedded systems, application-specific GPU
 Japan, Nov. 2020, pp. 1–5. optimization, and on-device AI systems.