IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025 5079

 HyperEye: A Lightweight Features Fusion Model
 for Unknown Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
 Xiaodong Zang , Zilong Zheng, Haosheng Zheng, Xuan Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Muhammad Khurram Khan , Senior Member, IEEE, and Weiwei Jiang

 Abstract—Recently, effectively identifying encrypted malicious identifying malicious behavior accurately and quickly from
traffic without decryption in consumer applications relies heavily massive encryption traffic in consumer applications is one of
on high-quality labeled traffic datasets. However, this harms the keys to defending against cyber attacks [3], [4].
models for incorrect labeling and requires more efficient real-time
identification of encrypted unknown ones. This paper proposes Many previous works applied machine learning, knowledge-
HyperEye, a real-time, unsupervised, encrypted malicious traffic based, and graph-based analysis methods for encrypted
detection system. It can detect unknown traffic patterns by malicious detection [1], [3]. The knowledge-based methods
analyzing the fused traffic features in-depth. Precisely, we used prior knowledge to accomplish traffic analysis tasks.
extract protocol-agnostic numerical and protocol-specific text The machine learning-based methods need complex feature
features and devise a cross-term fusion algorithm to obtain
a comprehensive traffic behavior description. We designed a engineering to obtain manually crafted features as input [5].
genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN (GA-DBSCAN) parameter Both are inefficient in identifying unknown encrypted malicious
optimization algorithm to enhance the quality and stability in traffic due to the need for prior knowledge of known attacks.
identifying malicious traffic. Extensive experimental results with The graph-based methods [6], [7], [8] are proposed to capture
open-world and real-world datasets demonstrate that our work the flow interaction patterns. However, the graph structure built
outperforms other state-of-the-art malware detection systems,
achieving an average 11.95% improvement in the F1-score. upon the traffic patterns requires much time, which makes it
Besides, experimental results with the real-world dataset demon- challenging to build a graph for real-time detection.
strate that our system applies to the dynamic nature of consumer After investigating these works, we find two challenges that
applications and can safeguard users’ data and privacy. must be tackled: (1) Real-time detection, (2) Unknown malicious
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic, consumer applications, traffic identification. We analyze the packet header information
NetFlow, features fusion, threat detection. and cooperate with existing on-path monitor tools to throttle
 the detected malicious one after identifying it. We focus on
 identifying active attacks caused by attackers without detecting
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 the passive ones (e.g., eavesdropping and intercept attacks) as
 ITH the increase of new networking paradigms, e.g.,
W the Internet of Things (IoT), the Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), and 5G and 6G cellular networks, Internet traffic
 they do not cause apparent traffic variance in the backbone.
 To achieve real-time detection, we devise a cross-term
 fusion algorithm by analyzing the protocol-agnostic numerhas grown exponentially [1]. In order to ensure information ical and protocol-specific text features in-depth to capture
security and data privacy, encrypted traffic protocols have been the behavioral footprints comprehensively. We convert the
widely adopted, e.g., (SSL/TLS and HTTPS) [2]. However, protocol-agnostic numerical features into traffic maps and
encryption-based techniques for such protection are double- use 2D-CNN to extract the traffic information to obtain the
edged, as the attackers can also use them to conceal their high-level representation corresponding to the image. For
malicious behaviors, e.g., C&C communication. Therefore, the protocol-specific features, we use TF-IDF to measure
 the importance of the extracted text features and trans-
 Received 8 December 2024; revised 9 February 2025; accepted 29
March 2025. Date of publication 8 April 2025; date of current version
 form protocol-specific features into vector representations. To
14 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the King Saud University, achieve unknown malicious traffic identification, we designed
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Project RSP2025R12; in part by the Yangzhou a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN parameter optimization
Science and Technology Plan Project under Grant YZ2023200; and in part
by the Self-Developing Experimental Instrument and Equipment Project of
 method to find the optimal parameter combination in ample
Yangzhou University under Grant zzyq2023zy06. (Corresponding authors: parameter space automatically. It reduces the complexity of
Haosheng Zheng; Xiaodong Zang.) artificial parameter adjustment and improves the quality and
 Xiaodong Zang, Zilong Zheng, and Haosheng Zheng are with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu 273165,
 stability of identifying malicious traffic samples.
China (e-mail: xdzang@qfnu.edu.cn; hszheng815@163.com). We conduct extensive experiments on two open-world and
 Xuan Liu is with the College of Information Engineering (College of two real-world datasets to evaluate the generalization ability.
Artificial Intelligence), Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225127, China.
 Muhammad Khurram Khan is with the Center of Excellence in Information
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
Assurance, King Saud University, Riyadh 11653, Saudi Arabia. (1) We devised a novel feature fusion model by analyzing
 Weiwei Jiang is with the School of Information and Communication the protocol-agnostic numerical features and protocol-
Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China.
 specific text features in-depth to obtain a comprehensive
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3558353 behavior description of traffic behavior.
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5080 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 (2) We designed a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN method
 to enhance the quality and stability of identifying malicious traffic samples.
 (3) We conducted extensive evaluations and found that our
 system’s overall detection rate is 99.8%, and its false
 alarm rate is less than 0.05%, outperforming other stateof-the-art alternatives. We also applied it to IoT malicious
 detection with State Grid traffic to verify that it is suitable
 for the edge of the IoT environment.
 Organization: In Section II, we survey the malware traffic
detection methods and give a detailed comparison. Section III Fig. 1. Methodology of Flow Diagram.
elaborates on our methodology. In Section IV, we conduct
extensive experiments with different datasets to verify the
superiority of our approach. Finally, we present the conclusion. extracted content and statistical information into three-channel
 RGB images from encrypted traffic. Although it benefits
 II. R ELATED W ORKS from the advantage of deep learning for encrypted traffic
 analysis, it is an open issue of improving its interpretability
 In this section, we survey encrypted malicious traffic
 and understanding of the reasoning in anomaly detection [16].
detection works and broadly classify them into knowledge,
traditional machine learning, deep learning, and graph-based
detection methods. D. Graph-Based Detection Methods
 With increasing attention to the traffic flow interaction
A. Knowledge-Based Detection Methods patterns of encrypted traffic, graph structures are applied
 Knowledge-based detection methods contain the knowledge to represent encrypted traffic data and devised different
base and the inference engine. They identify the malicious graph algorithms for encrypted malicious traffic detection
traffic with prior knowledge. In the last few years, researchers [6], [7], [8]. For example, [6] designed a real-time unsuhave used pre-established rules or similarity analysis [10] to pervised malicious traffic detection system by analyzing
achieve traffic classification or malicious traffic identification. the graph’s connectivity, sparsity, and statistical features.
For example, [10] proposed a maliciously encrypted traffic Hong et al. [8] presented MalDiscovery by constructing an
detection framework with a causality explainable inference attribute KNN graph. However, a more significant number
engine. Their experimental results provide causal traceability of graph edges brings a higher time cost, which makes it
for malicious encrypted traffic. However, the completeness of challenging to deploy in large enterprise network environments
the knowledge base requires regular updates. with high bandwidth and realize online detection.
 We survey the state-of-the-art malware traffic detection
 methods and compare them in Table I, where Y indicates the
B. Traditional Machine Learning-Based Detection Methods corresponding column meets the conditions, N is unsatisfied,
 Traditional machine learning techniques are essentially and P is partially satisfied.
shallow learning. They require manual feature extraction and
selection [18], [19]. Reference [20] designed a tree-based
algorithm to identify malicious traffic with the extracted III. F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW
statistical features, such as flow length and packet length. In this section, we introduce HyperEye, a lightweight
Experimental results show that its detection rate reaches 90%. model for unknown encrypted malware traffic detection, which
Reference [11] used machine-learning models that could rely mainly contains four parts: Data processing, Feature extracon human expertise to extract valuable and informative fea- tion, Feature fusion, and Traffic clustering, as illustrated in
tures and identify encrypted malicious HTTP traffic. Although Fig. 1.
traditional machine-learning techniques have high detection
accuracy, they must obtain complete statistical characteris- A. Data Processing
tics by collecting long-term streams, limiting their real-time
 Our original real traffic is pcap files. We clean data to
detection and generalization abilities.
 remove incomplete, invalid, or unnecessary packets, such
 as traffic with no payload. Additionally, when processing
C. Deep Learning-Based Detection Methods industrial data transmitted from the edge tier, there are often
 Deep learning methods have recently been widely used consistency issues (e.g., signal loss or deviations in sensor
in encrypted traffic identification without decryption. Deep readings at specific points). We clean the industrial data by
learning techniques have automatic feature extraction ability, eliminating infinite and ‘NaN’ values to address this. We use
which enables raw traffic representation as input [14], [21], randomness-testing for the unknown encrypted traffic to assess
[22], [23]. For example, Lin et al. [15] devised a feature fusion their randomness and diversity [25]. The DNS traffic is not
model that combines data timing, byte, and other statistical filtered, as malware masters always use it to conceal their
features as valid information input. EETC [24] transformed the C&C.
ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL 5081

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISONS OF THE R ELATED W ORKS

 TABLE II TABLE III
 P ROTOCOL -AGNOSTIC F EATURES P ROTOCOL -S PECIFIC F EATURES

 protocol). We initially quantified the differences in features
 by calculating the mean and standard deviations between normal and malicious traffic and subsequently removed features
 with low variance. We utilize the Gradient Boosting Feature
 Selection (GBFS) algorithm to experimentally select the top 33
B. Feature Extraction protocol-agnostic numerical features and the top 25 protocol-
 Each pcap file corresponds to a specific application, a related features apart from five-tuple features, as shown in
traffic category, or an encryption technique. In the pcaps, there Tables II and III. We put the extracted protocol-agnostic
are TCP-based features, UDP (QUIC, HTTP/3) based and numerical features (33 dimensions) in an IP flow and transform
TLS 1.3. We split each pcap file to unidirectional a 5-tuple these protocol-agnostic numerical features into images. Every
flow (source IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, numerical feature becomes a pixel in the image.
5082 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 1) CNN-Based Feature Extraction: We convert the numer- position in the image obtained after pooling. (u, v) represents
ical features to traffic maps and use 2D-CNN to capture the index in the pooled window, which is used to traverse
its latent relationships. We introduce flow-slicing and flow the elements in the pooled window. The input image is the
cleaning to ensure the consistency and purity of the data. output of the previous convolutional layer. (i, j) indicates the
 (1) Flow slicing. We collected the real traffic at CERNET. starting position in the input image for the region to which
The timestamp is attached to the metadata at the time of its the maximum pooling operation is applied. s is the step
collection. Namely, the timestamp information of the IP traffic length of the pooled window, which represents the distance
is located within the five-minute collection period. Considering of each slide of the pooled window. We use the flatten layer
that a complete network traffic session contains a large amount to transform multidimensional inputs X into one-dimensional
of data, it may be practical to process only some of it directly. inputs and use the fully connected layers to learn the nonlinear
Therefore, each network traffic session is sliced according to a dependencies of the data.
fixed time window, and each slice is treated as an independent
 Z =W ∗X+b (5)
processing unit. This step helps break up long sessions into
smaller pieces that are easier to manage and handle. where Z is the output of the fully connected layer, W is the
 weight matrix. X is the input vector (the flattened eigenvector),
 and b is the offset.
 Slices = Slice(Session, Windowsize) (1)
 2) TF-IDF-Based Feature Extraction: Traffic packets typwhere Session represents a network traffic session, Windowsize ically contain IP address, port number, MAC address,
is a pre-defined time window size. handshake information, and other fields. Some fields may
 (2) Flow cleaning. Traffic cleaning is done after traffic slic- directly affect the detection algorithms’ accuracy, while others
ing to remove redundant and irrelevant information that may do not. After the feature engineering on the traffic data, the
affect the classification effect, including removing protocol digital form characteristics are input for the machine learning
header non-payload and potentially noisy data from traffic model. As the extracted protocol-specific text features are not
data. quickly processed for the general machine learning method,
 we use the TF-IDF model to transform the text features into
 Cleaned − Slices = Clean(Slices) (2)
 digital vectors.
 We then transform the numerical features into grayscale TF-IDF is a commonly used method for feature extraction
images to better learn the correlation between the features. of text data [27]. The main idea is that if a word has a high
However, generating grayscale maps can result in a loss of frequency (TF) in the current document and a low frequency
information. We adopt the hash function method to reduce this (IDF) in the whole corpus, it is regarded as distinguishable
loss, as it has good collision resistance. and suitable for text classification tasks. TF represents the
 We use the 2D-CNN model to extract features from frequency of keywords appearing in the text, and IDF repreeach processed image as it has been frequently used for sents reverse file frequency. The calculation methods for TF
two-dimensional signal processing, such as image recognition and IDF are as follows.
[26]. Assuming that the convolution kernel of the input nij
 TFij =  (6)
5*5*3 gray-scale images is W, the deviation is b, and the step k nkj
size is s, the output calculation formula for each position is
 where nij is the number of occurrences of the word i in the
as follows:
 file j, and the denominator is the sum of occurrences of all
 k−1 
  k−1 
 c−1
 the words in the file j.
 Fij = σ I(i∗s+u),(j∗s+v),d ∗ Wu,v,d + b (3)
 N
 u=0 v=0 d=0 IDF(x) = log (7)
where Fij is the value at position (i, j) in the output feature N
map of the convolution layer. σ is an activation function, such where N represents the total number of texts in the corpus,
as ReLU. I is the input grayscale images. k is the size of the and N(x) represents the total number of texts containing the
convolution kernel, and c is the number of channels of the word x in the corpus.
input grayscale images. We use the TF-IDF model to transform the extracted top
 After each layer of convolution, a pooling layer is added. 25 text features into digital forms. To simplify, assuming that
To better distinguish the similarity of different protocols, we the sampled dataset has 5,842 encrypted traffic data. After
adopt maximum pooling to help improve the most significant converting, the resulting data set is a matrix of 5,842*25,
features and add Dropout layers to prevent overfitting. We Fig. 2 shows the calculation process.
chose maximum pooling because it more effectively retains
key features while ignoring irrelevant background noise. C. Feature Fusion
The calculation formula for maximum pooling is shown in In the last section, we use 2D-CNN and TF-IDF to vectorize
Equation (4). the original traffic characteristics with different perspectives.
   We design a cross-term fusion algorithm to obtain more
 Oij = maxu,v I(i∗s+u),(j∗s+v) (4)
 effective abstract features and their correlation. We enhance
where Oij is the value at position (i, j) in the output image the expressive ability of the model by combining crossof the maximum pooling layer, namely, the value at this generating new features to capture interactive information
ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL 5083

 D. Traffic Clustering
 In this section, we enhance an unsupervised learning method
 to tackle the limitation of detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real-time.
 We employ the DBSCAN algorithm to capture the similarity
 of fused traffic features to achieve unknown traffic identification in an unsupervised learning way. We chose the DBSCAN
 algorithm because it does not need to determine how many
 unknown protocols are in real traffic. However, in the realworld network, the data changes dynamically with time, and it
 is challenging to select the initial parameter of neighborhood
 radius “eps” and the minimum core number “MinPts” of
Fig. 2. Text information and reconstruct feature based on TF-IDF. DBSCAN. We designed a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN
 (GA-DBSCAN) parameter optimization method to address this
 challenge. Our optimized DBSCAN algorithm contains three
 steps.
Algorithm 1 The Pseudocode of Cross-Term Fusion Firstly, we initialing the population. The population consists
Algorithm of several individuals, each representing a set of DBSCAN
Input: cnn_vector = {v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vn } parameter combinations, namely “eps” and “MinPts.” The
 tfidf_vector = {v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vm } initialization ranges for “eps” and “MinPts” in the genetic
Output: merged_vector = cross_features + tfidf_vector algorithm were determined by analyzing the dataset’s statisti-
 1: cross_features = [] cal characteristics. The range for “eps” was set by examining
 2: for i = 1 to len(cnn_vector) do the distribution of distances between points in the dataset,
 3: cross_feature = [] ensuring that the values captured typical clustering densities
 4: if i > 0 then without being overly restrictive or too loose. For “MinPts”,
 5: for j = 1 to len(tfidf_vector) do we considered the average density of points in the dataset
 6: t_feature = cnn_vector[i] × tfidf_vector[j] to ensure that the genetic algorithm could effectively explore
 7: cross_feature.append(t_feature) the parameter space, converge efficiently, and produce robust
 8: end for clustering results.
 9: cross_features.append(Max(cross_feature)) Then, we designed the fitness function to evaluate the merits
10: else of each individual (i.e., each set of DBSCAN parameters).
11: for j = 1 to len(tfidf_vector) do We design a multi-objective fitness function f (xi ) using intra-
12: t_feature = cnn_vector[i] + tfidf_vector[j] cluster tightness (f1 ), inter-cluster separation (f2 ), and contour
13: cross_feature.append(t_feature) coefficient (f3 ) to measure the clustering effect more com-
14: end for prehensively. Intra-cluster tightness measures the tightness of
15: cross_features.append(Min(cross_feature)) samples within a cluster, inter-cluster separation measures
16: end if the separation degree between different clusters, and contour
17: end for coefficient comprehensively measures the tightness of points
18: return merged_vector within a cluster and the separation degree between clusters.
 The equations are as follows.
 k 
 
 f1 = ||x − μi || (8)
 i=1 x∈Ci
between features and promote the model to learn the correlation and nonlinear relationship between them. where, Ci is the ith cluster, and μi is the center of it.
  
 Our cross-term fusion algorithm constructs a multi- f2 = minμi − μj  (9)
dimensional representation of network behavior. It i=j
comprehensively considers the traffic overview reflected where, μi and μj is the center of cluster i and cluster j,
by numerical features and the protocol details in text respectively.
features. Through cross-term features, the algorithm can
 (bi − ai )
trace the impact of original features on the model output, f3 = (10)
identify key factors, and then clearly demonstrate the models max(ai , bi )
decision-making process by visualizing the weights of cross- where, ai represents the average distance between sample i
term features, thus enhancing interpretability. Comprising and other samples in its cluster, and bi represents the average
feature concatenation algorithm [15], it does not consider distance between sample i and the sample in the nearest
the mutual influence or correlation between features. The cluster.
pseudocode of the cross-term fusion algorithm is shown as We combine the above indicators in a weighted way,
follows. assuming that the weight of each indicator is w1 , w2 , and w3 ,
5084 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

and the summation of w1 , w2 , and w3 is one, respectively. We Algorithm 2 The Pseudo-Code of Optimized DBSCAN Based
get the final fitness function f (xi ) as follows. on Genetic Algorithm
 Input: Dataset X, [epsmin , epsmax ], [MinPtsmin , MinPtsmax ],
 fxi = w1 ∗ f1 + w2 ∗ f2 + w3 ∗ f3 (11) Generationsmax G, Mutation rate rmut , Weights w1 , w2 , w3
 Thirdly, we use selection, crossover, and variation to Output: epsbest , MinPtsbest
optimize the population from generation to generation. The 1: Initialize population P of size N with random individuals
selection operation is used to select individuals from the (eps, MinPts)
current population as parents to generate the next generation 2: Initialize an empty list to store fitness scores S
of individuals. Assuming the fitness of the ith individual is fxi , 3: for each generation g from 1 to G do
its probability of being selected is Pi . 4: for each individual (eps, MinPts) in population P do
 5: Run DBSCAN with (eps, MinPts) on dataset X
 fx
 Pi = n i (12) 6: Calculate the following metrics:
 j=1 fxi 7: Intra-cluster Compactness, f1
 We use cross-operation to combine the genes of two parents 8: Inter-cluster Separation, f2
to produce a new offspring. For DBSCAN parameters “eps” 9: Silhouette Coefficient, f3
and “MinPts”, we use a single-point crossover approach. If the 10: Combine metrics using the weighted fitness funcparent is x1 =(eps1 , MinPts1 ) and x2 =(eps2 ,MinPts2 ), then the tion f (xi )
two children are y1 =(eps1 , MinPts2 ), y1 =(eps2 , MinPts1 ). 11: Add f (xi ) to S
 We use mutation operations to randomly adjust the gene 12: end for
values of the offspring to prevent excessive perturbation. 13: Select parents based on fitness scores S using roulette
Assuming that the offspring is yi =(epsi , MinPtsi ), and the wheel selection
mutation operation can randomly change its parameter values, 14: Initialize an empty list Pnew for the next generation
epsi =epsi + eps, MinPtsi =MinPtsi +MinPts, where eps 15: for each pair of selected parents (eps1 , MinPts1 ) and
and MinPts are small random perturbations, preventing (eps2 , MinPts2 ) do
the algorithm from falling into local optimal solutions. The 16: Perform crossover to produce offspring
pseudo-code of its optimization is shown in Algorithm 2. (epsc 1, MinPtsc 1) and (epsc 2, MinPtsc 2)
 17: Apply mutation to offspring with mutation rate
 IV. E VALUATIONS rmut
 18: Add offspring to Pnew
 We conduct our experiments on an Intel Xeon E5-2680 19: end for
v4 CPU with a memory size of 64GB. We use open- 20: Update population P ← Pnew
source datasets(CICIDS 2017, CICDDoS 2019) and real-world 21: end for
traffic(CERNET, State Grid) to verify the performance and 22: Find the best individual (epsbest , MinPtsbest ) with the
scalability of our work. highest f (xi )
 23: Return (epsbest , MinPtsbest )
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
 CICIDS 2017. University of New Brunswick released the
open-source datasets CICIDS 2017 and CICDDoS 2019 to
validate the performance of the designed intrusion detection The State Grid traffic. We collected traffic in the platform
algorithms and research on the application of machine learning tier control area of the distribution master station at the
algorithms in network traffic analysis and anomaly detection. State Grid in Jining City from 10/1/2024 to 10/7/2024. We
The dataset contains Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, DoS, collected 2.39 TB packets in ten days. After preprocessing
Heartbleed, Web Attack, Infiltration, Botnet, and DDoS. We the raw traffic, we obtained 29.73 GB of traffic. We also
randomly selected 1.98GB of traffic in the experiment. injected eight types of attacks to simulate the real-world
 CICDDoS 2019. The CIC-DDoS 2019 dataset contains scenario: Web vulnerability scanning, network scanning, SQL
benign traffic samples and the latest common DDoS attack injection, directory brute force, account discovery, account
samples, covering reflective DDoS attack types such as brute force, backdoor attacks, and other forms of malicious
PortMap, MSSQL, UDP, SYN, NTP, etc. We collected 2.67GB activity. We obtained the ground truth dataset with expert
of network traffic and combined it with the detection results analysts manually labeling it by identifying malicious activities
of the tag-based network traffic analysis tool (CICFlowMeter- based on predefined indicators such as abnormal commu-
V3). nication sequences, protocol misuse, and attack signatures.
 The CERNET traffic. We collected the traffic at CERNET The labeling results were cross-validated using the Maltrail
from 10/1/2024 to 10/7/2024 [28]. During one week, we have malicious traffic detection tool [29], which cross-referenced
captured 4.12 TB packets. After preprocessing, we obtained malicious traces from publicly available blocklists, antivirus
50.12 GB encrypted traffic, e.g., TLS traffic and Https traffic, reports, and custom user-defined lists, ensuring the accuracy
for the experiment. The topology of CERNET can be found and reliability of the labels. Table IV shows the details of realon Fig. 3. world datasets.
ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL 5085

 TABLE IV
 T HE D ETAILS OF R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS

 Fig. 4. The relative importance of each feature.

 Purity refers to the percentage of correctly clustered samples
 compared to all samples during the clustering process. TP, FP,
 TN, and FN denote true positive, false positive, true negative,
 and false negative, respectively.

 1   
 k
 Purity(W, C) = maxj ωi ∩ cj  (15)
 N
 i=1
 where W={ ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωk } is the set of clusters, C={ c1 , c2 ,
 . . . , ck }is the set of classes, and N refers to the total number
 of samples under clustering.

 B. Performance Analysis of HyperEye
 We conduct extensive experiments for performance evaluation in the section, including different cluster algorithm
 comparisons, feature subset selection, and system performance
 analysis.
Fig. 3. The overall architecture of CERNET. Firstly, we applied the GBFS algorithm on our dataset with
 different tree values: 100, 500, 700, and 1000 to obtain the
 most promising features. The different tree values can assess
 We use Recall, Accuracy, Precision and F1-Score to evaluate how increasing the number of trees impacts feature importance
the performance and effectiveness of our algorithm. We also and model performance. Fig. 4 shows that most tree values’
introduce the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), the Fowlkes- top 58 features remained consistent.
Mallows Index(FMI), and Purity as the evaluation criteria [30]. Subsequently, we compared four classical optimization
The ARI score is a similarity metric between two clusters, algorithms, e.g., the genetic algorithm (GA), the simulated
which counts the number of data points correctly classified. A annealing algorithm (SA), the ant colony optimization algohigher ARI value indicates a higher similarity of the clusters. rithm (ACO), and the particle swarm optimization algorithm
 (PSO), respectively. After several iterations, we found that the
 2 ∗ (TP ∗ TN − FN ∗ FP) GA’s runtime is the lowest, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, we
ARI =
 (TP + FN) ∗ (FN + TN) + (TP + FP) ∗ (FP + TN) chose GA to capture the best neighbourhood radius “eps” and
 (13) the minimum core number “MinPts” of DBSCAN.
 Then, we compare different cluster algorithms, including
 FMI is the geometric mean of precision and recall with k-means, fuzzy c-means (FCM), spectral clustering (SC),
ranges from 0 to 1. It is a similarity metric between two hierarchical clustering (HC), Gaussian mixture model (GMM)
clusters considering the number of TP, FP, TN, and FN. A models, DBSCAN, MCOSC [31], and our improved DBSCAN
higher score indicates a higher similarity between the clusters. algorithm(GA-DBSCAN) with the fused characteristics to
 verify the superiority of our GA-DBSCAN. In k-means, a
 √ TP suitable k value range can fully demonstrate its performance.
 FMI = Precision ∗ Reacll = √
 (TP + FP) ∗ (TP + FN) A low value of it will quickly assign different samples to the
 (14) same cluster. However, a high one will cause much larger
5086 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE V
 C LUSTERING M ODEL C OMPARISONS U NDER D IFFERENT DATASETS

Fig. 5. The runtime of different optimization algorithms. Fig. 7. Purity of different clustering algorithms under CERNET.

Fig. 6. Clustering purity with different k values. Fig. 8. Time consumption of different clustering algorithms under CERNET.

clusters than actually. Therefore, A low value will affect We also evaluate each clustering algorithm’s purity and
the algorithm’s accuracy, while a high one will affect its time consumption under the same number of clusters.
practicability. Fig.7 shows that with the increased number of clusters, our
 Fig. 6 shows the purity of k-means under four different improved DBSCAN algorithm obtains high clustering purity
datasets. When k increases, the clustering purity naturally and achieves a high value after the number of clusters exceeds
shows a steady growth trend. However, when it is above 153, 60.
the purity curves under different datasets slows and becomes In addition, Fig. 8 shows their time consumption. In
stable. Therefore, we set the range of k ∈ [5,153] in the most cases, the clustering time increases with the number
following experiments. The reason why k is equal to 5 is that of clustering numbers. K-means obtain less time than other
we preconfigured five unknown traffic types. clustering algorithms. Although the time consumption of our
 After that, we compare our clustering model with the other GA-DBSCAN algorithm is bigger than k-means, the gap
seven clustering algorithms to show its advantages under is insignificant. What is more, the purity, ARI score, FMI
different datasets. Table V shows each clustering algorithm’s score, Overall Accuracy, and F1-score of our algorithm are
clustering purity, ARI score, FMI score, Overall Accuracy, and better than it. Therefore, according to clustering purity and
F1-score. We find that SC and FCM cluster algorithms show time consumption, our cluster algorithm is superior to other
poor performance. The GA-DBSCAN algorithm obtains the alternatives.
highest clustering accuracy, while others show close detection Finally, after evaluating our clustering algorithm, we verify
accuracy. the superiority of our feature-fusing algorithm under four
ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL 5087

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS U NDER THE S TATE G RID
 T RAFFIC

Fig. 9. The evaluation of feature-fusing algorithm under different datasets.

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS U NDER THE CERNET
 T RAFFIC

 Fig. 10. The training and testing time of detection models.

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION A FTER A DDING N OISE DATA U NDER THE
 S TATE G RID T RAFFIC

data sets. We have verified five types of features: raw single
features extracted based on CNN (RawF-CNN), raw single
features extracted based on TF-IDF (RawF-TFIDF), concatenated features by concatenating RawF-CNN and RawF-CNN
(ConFeature), dimensionality reduction features based on PCA
(features-PCA), and our cross-term fusion features (Cross-TF).
We took them as input for our clustering algorithm in the
experiment. Fig.9 shows that the overall results of cross-TF different traffic traces, we replicated their methodology with
and features-PCA are better than others, which proves that CERNET traffic for normalization. The results are shown
our cross-term fusion feature algorithm can effectively capture in Fig. 10. With the gradual balancing of data, there has
critical information. been improvement in the detection performance across various
 methods. Although the training phase incurs some overhead,
C. Comparative Experiments making our training time not the shortest, our cross-term
 fusion algorithm can reduce the feature dimensions by 32%,
 We use ARI, FMI, Purity, Accuracy, and F1 to verify
 which enables efficient filtering of malicious traffic. Therefore,
the superiority and scalability of our model. State-of-thethe memory overhead is significantly reduced.
art research focuses on these metrics and is a significant
 Finally, we label-flip some of the malicious data as noise
indicator of network traffic clustering. We use four datasets to
 data mixed into benign traffic to test the robustness of
evaluate the state-of-the-art works and verify the superiority
 our approach against evasion attacks. Table VIII shows the
of our model. They are [19], [23], [32], [33] and [15]. For
 detection accuracy of the different methods after adding the
convenience, we use “A1”, “A2”, “A3”, “A4”, and “A5”
 noise data. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
for short. Since their source code is not publicly available,
 can effectively filter noise data and has excellent detection
we replicate their methodology with real-world traffic for
 performance against evasion attacks.
normalization.
 Since different parameters make it difficult to compare,
we compute the highest value of clustering purity under V. C ONCLUSION
different clustering numbers and choose the highest value In this paper, we propose HyperEye, a lightweight, realfor evaluation. When the cluster numbers equal to 63(Ours), time, unsupervised, encrypted malicious traffic detection
42(A2), 38(A1), 44(A5), 42(A3), and 35(A4), our algorithm algorithm that fuses the protocol-agnostic numerical and
outperforms other methods obviously, as shown in Tables VI protocol-specific text features to identify unknown encrypted
and VII. traffic. We convert protocol-agnostic numerical features to
 We also evaluated the time consumption of the different grey-scale maps and use 2D-CNN to capture their latent reladetection models. As the compared algorithms above used tionships. We use TF-IDF to transform the protocol-specific
5088 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

text features into vector representations and devise a cross- [19] D.-J. Kim, N. G. B. Amma, and V. Sarveshwaran, “A novel split
term fusion algorithm to obtain a comprehensive behavior learning-based consumer electronics network traffic anomaly detection
 framework for smart city environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
description of traffic behavior. Finally, we design a genetic vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4197–4204, Feb. 2024.
algorithm-based DBSCAN parameter optimization method to [20] G. Dogan, “ProTru: A provenance-based trust architecture for wireless
find the optimal parameter combination of clustering results sensor networks,” Int. J. Netw. Manag., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 131–151, Mar.
 2016.
automatically. We conducted extensive experiments, and the [21] G. D’Angelo, M. Ficco, and F. Palmieri, “Malware detection in mobile
results show that HyperEye has 99.8% precision and 99.4% environments based on autoencoders and API-images,” J. Parallel
purity, outperforming other baseline methods. Distrib. Comput., vol. 137, pp. 26–33, Mar. 2020.
 [22] H. Ma et al., “Deep-learning–based app sensitive behavior surveillance for android powered cyber–physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5840–5850, Aug. 2021.
 R EFERENCES [23] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
 [1] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network Nov. 2023.
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., [24] X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei, Y. Jin, D. Gu, and R. Wang, “EETC: An
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019. extended encrypted traffic classification algorithm based on variant
 [2] M. Husák, M. Čermák, T. Jirsík, and P. Čeleda, “HTTPS traffic analysis resnet network,” Comput. Security, vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103175.
 and client identification using passive ssl/tls fingerprinting,” EURASIP [25] A. Rukhin et al., A Statistical Test Suite for Random and Pseudorandom
 J. Inf. Security, vol. 2016, pp. 1–14, Feb. 2016. Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications, vol. 22, U.S. Dept.
 [3] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. Modelo-Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava, Commerce, Technol. Admin., Washington, DC, USA, 2001.
 “Hunting for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,” [26] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462, industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
 Jan./Feb. 2023. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
 [4] Z. Deng, K. Chen, G. Meng, X. Zhang, K. Xu, and Y. Cheng, Jul./Aug. 2022.
 “Understanding real-world threats to deep learning models in android [27] H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “Malicious encryption traffic
 apps,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2022, detection based on NLP,” Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–10,
 pp. 785–799. Aug. 2021.
 [5] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF [28] X. Zang, J. Gong, M. Wang, P. Gao, and G. Zhang, “IP traffic behavior
 beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and characterization via semantic mining,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 213,
 classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103603.
 classification,” Comput. Security, vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103000. [29] “Malicious traffic detection tool.” Maltrail. 2024. [Online]. Available:
 [6] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown https://github.com/stamparm/maltrail.
 encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, [30] S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Sang, “Towards unknown traffic identification
 no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Mar. 2024. via embeddings and deep autoencoders,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf.
 [7] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based Telecommun. (ICT), 2019, pp. 85–89.
 network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions [31] L. Pan, Z. Han, Z. Shanshan, and W. Feng, “An optimal allocation
 Defenses, 2022, pp. 495–509. method for power distribution network partitions based on improved
 [8] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted spectral clustering algorithm,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, Aug.
 malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,” 2023, Art. no. 106497.
 Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229. [32] J. Li, G. Cheng, Z. Chen, and P. Zhao, “Protocol clustering of unknown
 [9] X. Yang, S. Ruan, Y. Yue, and B. Sun, “PETNet: Plaintext-aware traffic based on embedding of protocol specification,” Comput. Security,
 encrypted traffic detection network for identifying cobalt strike https vol. 136, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103575.
 traffics,” Comput. Netw., vol. 238, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 110120. [33] Y. Fu, X. Li, X. Li, S. Zhao, and F. Wang, “Clustering unknown network
 traffic with dual-path autoencoder,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 35,
[10] Z. Zeng, P. Xun, W. Peng, and B. Zhao, “Toward identifying malicious
 pp. 8955–8966, Jan. 2023.
 encrypted traffic with a causality detection system,” J. Inf. Security Appl.,
 vol. 80, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103644.
[11] A. S. Shekhawat, F. D. Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of
 encrypted malicious traffic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141,
 Jul. 2019. Xiaodong Zang received the Ph.D. degre from
[12] Z. Wang and V. L. Thing, “Feature mining for encrypted malicious traffic the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 detection with deep learning and other machine learning algorithms,” Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2020. He is
 Comput. Security, vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103143. a Postdoctoral Fellow with the College of Electronic
[13] Y. Javed, M. A. Khayat, A. A. Elghariani, and A. Ghafoor, “PRISM: Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts
 A hierarchical intrusion detection architecture for large-scale cyber and Telecommunications University, Nanjing. He is
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, currently a Lecturer and a Master Supervisor with
 pp. 5070–5086, Nov./Dec. 2023. the School of Cyber Science of Engineering, Qufu
[14] “DISTILLER: Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask Normal University. His research interests include
 deep learning,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, computer networks and security, intrusion detection,
 Art. no. 102985. network traffic, and host profiling.
[15] K. Lin, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “MFFusion: A multi-level features fusion
 model for malicious traffic detection based on deep learning,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 202, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108658.
[16] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-Transformer:
 Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification Zilong Zheng received the B.S. degree in computer
 by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, software from Qufu Normal University, Qufu, China,
 vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024. in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the M.D.
[17] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classifi- degree. His current research focuses on computer
 cation is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. networks and security and intrusion detection.
 Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
[18] Z. Liu, L. F. Zhang, and Y. Tang, “Enhancing malware detection
 for android apps: Detecting fine-granularity malicious components,”
 in Proc. 38th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng. (ASE), 2023,
 pp. 1212–1224.
ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL 5089

 Haosheng Zheng received the B.S. degree in com- Muhammad Khurram Khan (Senior Member,
 puter software from Qufu Normal University, Qufu, IEEE) is currently working as a Professor of
 China, in 2024, where he is currently pursuing the Cybersecurity with the Center of Excellence in
 M.D. degree. His current research focuses on com- Information Assurance, King Saud University, Saudi
 puter networks and security, and intrusion detection. Arabia. He is the Founder and the CEO of the
 ‘Global Foundation for Cyber Studies and Research,’
 an independent and non-partisan cybersecurity thinktank in Washington, D.C, USA. His research areas
 of interest are cybersecurity, digital authentication,
 IoT security, biometrics, multimedia security, cloud
 computing security, cyber policy, and technological
 innovation management.

 Weiwei Jiang received the B.Sc. degree in electronic
 engineering and the Ph.D. degree in information and
 communication engineering from the Department
 Xuan Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
 Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineering
 Beijing, China, in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He
 from Southeast University, China, and he is currently
 is currently an Assistant Professor with the School
 a Lecturer and a Master Supervisor with the College
 of Information and Communication Engineering
 of Information Engineering (College of Artificial
 and the Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless
 Intelligence), Yangzhou University, China. His cur-
 Communications, Ministry of Education, Beijing
 rent research interests include network architecture,
 University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
 in-network computing, and cyberspace endogenous
 current research interests include artificial intelsafety and security.
 ligence, machine learning, big data, wireless communication, and edge
 computing.