14610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

 IIIM-SAM: Zero-Shot Texture Anomaly Detection
 Without External Prompts
 Zhe Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yuhang Zhou , Jiahe Yue, Runchu Zhang, and Jie Ma

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial aspect in ensuring anomaly detection algorithms based on foundation models, our
the reliability of industrial products in smart manufacturing. method’s most significant uniqueness is without any expert
Despite employing unsupervised anomaly detection methods to knowledge and the absence of any external text prompts. Through
mitigate the challenges associated with obtaining defect data, comparisons with four advanced methods on six instances using
there remains the challenge of adapting anomaly detectors to two evaluation metrics, the results demonstrate the outstanding
drift within normal data distributions, especially when there anomaly detection capability of our approach.
are significant intra-class variations in normal samples. Consequently, zero-shot anomaly detection techniques, which do not Index Terms—Smart manufacturing, texture anomaly detecrequire training data and thus avoid interference from training tion, prompt engineering, foundation model, SAM.
data, have emerged as a new research direction. Meanwhile, the
zero-shot segmentation capability demonstrated by the Segment
Anything Mode (SAM) visual foundation model has further I. I NTRODUCTION
fueled our research enthusiasm. In this paper, we focus on texture
images and propose a no-external prompt SAM-based method for
zero-shot texture anomaly detection, called Image Internal Information Mining SAM (IIIM-SAM). We utilize the Image Internal
 I NDUSTRIAL anomaly detection aims to identify defects
 on the surface of industrial products, which holds significant importance in ensuring product quality in industrial
Information Mining Prompter to mine relationships between production [1], [2]. In contrast to common computer vision
internal regions of the image, identifying specific background tasks, data for industrial anomaly detection is highly imbaland potential defect points. The two types of prompt points are anced and acquiring anomaly data is extremely challenging.
fed into the SAM model in different stages, imparting the SAM Even for normal (non-defective) data of the same product type,
with incorporating category information segmentation capability.
Unlike current methods, our zero-shot texture anomaly detection significant intra-class variations often occur due to changes in
method requires no external prompts or expert knowledge, consumer demands. Furthermore, with the widespread adopand also avoids the uncertainty introduced by text prompts tion of intelligent dark factories and the implementation of
necessary for CLIP-based approaches. Our experimental results flexible manufacturing, there is a growing demand for anomaly
demonstrate the superiority of our zero-shot texture anomaly detection methods that can rapidly adapt to different types of
detection method compared to other approaches. Specifically, in
the texture subset of MVTecAD/KolektorSDD2, our IIIM-SAM products. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, the automatic optical
achieves 99.2%/93.6% image-level AUROC and 98.6%/92.3% inspection (AOI) system in flexible manufacturing requires
pixel-level AUROC. inspecting multiple types of industrial products on the same
 production line without changing the algorithm of AOI.
 Note to Practitioners—The motivation of this paper arises
from a practical challenge in anomaly detection in smart flexible Therefore, adaptation to different products with trainingmanufacturing—customized customer demands lead to signifi- free has become a significant challenge in the current field
cant intra-class variations and even entirely different types of of anomaly detection. Specifically, there are three key points:
products. Currently, most anomaly detection methods struggle 1) No need for repeated training according to different
to adapt quickly to this challenge, severely impeding production products. 2) Effective anomaly detection capabilities across
efficiency. This paper proposes a zero-shot texture anomaly
detection method based on SAM, which automatically generates multiple products. 3) Inference without the need for external
background and potential defect points through an image internal expert knowledge prompts. Clearly, both conventional superinformation mining prompter. Compared to existing zero-shot vised anomaly detection methods [3], [4] and the prevailing
 unsupervised learning methods [5], [6], [7], [8], which fit prob-
 Received 3 July 2024; revised 26 September 2024, 21 November 2024,
and 19 February 2025; accepted 14 April 2025. Date of publication 17 April ability distributions using normal samples, cannot meet the
2025; date of current version 2 May 2025. This article was recommended for requirements of the latest and challenging demands. Naturally,
publication by Associate Editor X. Li and Editor J. Li upon evaluation of the zero-shot anomaly detection has piqued our research interest.
reviewers’ comments. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U1913602 and Grant 61991412 and The cold-start characteristic of zero-shot anomaly detection
in part by the Foundation of Equipment Pre-Research Area under Grant means it can be directly applied to surface inspection without
50911020603. (Corresponding author: Jie Ma.) the need for retraining or target samples as references.
 The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Science
and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School In recent years, some foundational vision models have
of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University demonstrated surprising capabilities in detecting unknown
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: objects and out-of-distribution data. For instance, the visualzhangzhe1997@hust.edu.cn; zhouyuhang@hust.edu.cn; yuejiahe2000@
hust.edu.cn; runchuzhang@hust.edu.cn; majie@hust.edu.cn). language models [9], [10] have demonstrated outstand-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2025.3561776 ing performance in zero-shot classification tasks. Through
 1558-3783 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14611

 background texture interference with distinct edges in anomaly
 detection and the lack of well-defined defect edges pose
 significant challenges to SAM’s segmentation capabilities, as
 shown in Fig. 2 (b). Overall, the performance of SAM in
 anomaly detection largely depends on the type, location, and
 number of prompts.
 In this paper, we focus on texture anomaly detection [15],
 [16] and strive to achieve the first fully automated zeroshot anomaly detection without external prompts, as shown in
 Fig. 3. To leverage SAM’s sensitive target perception ability
 in anomaly detection and make it practically valuable, it
 is necessary to investigate how to obtain accurate prompts
 without external knowledge. Secondly, we design a suitable
Fig. 1. Zero-shot anomaly detection samples from automatic optical inspec- anomaly detection framework based on SAM.
tion (AOI) system deploying Image Internal Information Mining SAM
(IIIM-SAM). The motivation for our internal image information mining
 prompt method is based on two observations regarding defect
 features compared to defect-free features of the same image:
large-scale learning from millions of image-text pairs, they 1) The inter-class relationship difference is greater than the
learned expressive representations capturing a wide range of intra-class relationship difference. 2) Defect features are fewer
concepts. Such models exhibit remarkable zero-shot transfer than defect-free features. We propose a prompter network for
capabilities for downstream tasks, including image classifi- internal information mining, which combines the advantages
cation [11], object detection [12], and segmentation [13]. of convolutional structures and transformer structures. By
However, it should be noted that these models require dividing the input image into blocks, the network explores the
appropriate textual prompts including inspected categories, mutual relationships between blocks and judges defect-free
inspected status, and more detailed description templates to regions and potential anomaly regions based on the principles
extract knowledge effectively, ensuring optimal performance of approximating the maximum and the strongest approximate
in downstream tasks. Numerous studies have indicated that relationship. Thus, two types of prompts are provided. We
the performance of visual-language models varies significantly further design a two-stage mask decoder architecture based
depending on the different text prompts. However, using on the difference in confidence levels between the two types
appropriate text prompts to inject external expert knowledge of prompts to achieve a more effective anomaly detection
into the model increases the skill requirements for operators in framework. As an example, Figure 1 illustrates our approach
practical applications. It also significantly limits the methods’ qualitative detection results for a few cases.
ability to quickly adapt to the surface inspection across dif- To summarize, our main contributions are:
ferent products. Therefore, the problem we aim to address is 1) Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection without External Prompts:
large-model-based zero-shot anomaly detection which is free To the best of our knowledge, our proposed method is
from the constraints of external prompts. the first large-model-based zero-shot anomaly detection
 Segment Anything Model (SAM) is another open-source that does not require external textual prompts. Unlike
foundational vision model, which exhibits exceptional gen- existing methods, our approach eliminates the reliance
eralization capability to segment any object in any image on external prompts, does not require additional training,
without additional training [14]. This advancement provides and does not need defect samples as references. Therea new research foundation for zero-shot anomaly detection. fore, our algorithm is more universal and generalizable.
Nevertheless, when SAM is directly applied to anomaly detec- 2) Prompt Points Mining Principle: We propose a principle
tion, it exhibits two significant gaps: 1) SAM is an interactive for discriminating regions based on the relationships
framework that requires predefined prompts such as points, between internal regions of the image. By jointly conbounding boxes, or masks. This does not align with the zero- sidering the strength of inter-region relationships and the
shot anomaly detection requirement in real-world scenarios, number of strong relationships, the principle determine
where no external expert knowledge is available. 2) It is whether the area is the defect-free background or the
a category-agnostic segmentation method, which prevents us defective foreground. This principle allows for the minfrom clearly discerning whether the segmented result repre- ing of prompt points for downstream large models based
sents a defect or background local structure. Specifically, we solely on the inspected input image.
expect the SAM to perceive and segment the entire image as 3) Prompter Network Design: We design an internal
defect-free after receiving background prompt points. How- information mining prompter network (IIIM-prompter)
ever, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), even when we provide accurate based on prompt points mining principle. IIIM-prompter
background prompt points (indicating no defect information), organically combines the advantages of convolutional
the native SAM still segments out local regions in the defect- structures and transformer structures, and utilizes the
free image, resulting in false positives. These limitations make weight information of the attention mechanism to rep-
SAM unsuitable for fully automatic comprehension of indus- resent the interrelationships between regions. Through
trial product surface images. Additionally, we observe that the aforementioned design, the IIIM-prompter can more
14612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 2. The results of anomaly detection on the native SAM with manually provided point prompts for defect-free or anomalous regions, where the blue
boundaries represent the segmented regions. (a) For defect-free images, providing prompts with defect-free information can also achieve segmentation results
(False Positive Examples); (b) For defect images, the interference from background texture can severely impact the anomaly localization performance of the
native SAM (Mislocalization); (c) Our method can accurately locate defects without manual intervention.

 (11 million images, including over a billion masks) and
 demonstrates robust generalization capabilities. However, it is
 a task-agnostic segmentation model that requires interactive
 prompts, such as prior points, bounding boxes, or masks. This
 characteristic makes it less conducive to end-to-end automatic
 target segmentation. In this paper, we explore the potential
 of harnessing SAM’s general segmentation capabilities for
 detecting anomalous regions. Additionally, the proposed Image
 Internal Information Mining Prompter can be extended to other
 foundational vision models for other downstream tasks.
Fig. 3. Characteristics comparison with different anomaly detection methods. (a) shows unsupervised anomaly detection method; (b) shows current
zero-shot anomaly detection method; (c) shows the features and unique
characteristics of our zero-shot method (IIIM-SAM). B. Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection Method
 Zero-shot anomaly detection methods often rely on the
 accurately provide the SAM model with accurate strong generalization capabilities of models to detect unseen
 prompts containing category information without relying anomalies [16], [20]. Early research in zero-shot anomaly
 on external knowledge or additional dataset training, detection was conducted based on CLIP, such as CLIP-AD
 enabling it to be applied to specific texture defects. [21], ZOC [22]. WinCLIP [23] introduces a groundbreaking
 4) Optimization of SAM Architecture for Anomaly Detec- work, which uses a large number of manually crafted text
 tion: We develop a two-stage mask decoder architecture prompts and involved forward passes for multiple image
 that processes the prompts in different stages, effectively blocks. Building on WinCLIP, the first-place method of VAND
 utilizing the category information embedded within competition [24] introduces a learnable linear projection techthe prompts. This architecture significantly improves nique to enhance the modeling of local visual semantics.
 the anomaly detection amidst complex backgrounds, MVFA [25] is a multi-level feature adaptation and comparison
 through bidirectional cross-validation of two different framework, which leverages a pre-trained vision-language
 types of information (anomaly and background). Exper- model to achieve generalizability in zero/few-shot medical
 imental results indicate that our approach demonstrates anomaly detection scenarios. However, these methods are
 the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. influenced by the lack of universally embedded text prompts,
 reducing their performance in identifying anomalies related
 to various unseen object semantics. Additionally, the use
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 of text prompts injects extra knowledge into the model.
A. Foundation Model Anomaly-Clip [26] is the most advanced zero-shot anomaly
 In recent years, the emergence of foundation models has detection method, which significantly improved the issue of
attracted the attention of almost all artificial intelligence information leakage caused by manually preset text prompts
researchers. These models are trained on large amounts of data by introducing learnable text prompts. LTAD [27] is method
and exhibit impressive “emergence capabilities” across various for long-tail anomaly detection, which also improves model
scenarios, i.e. zero-shot generalization capabilities [10], [17], performance by learning learnable text embeddings. However,
such as chat-GPT [18], GPT-4 [19], CLIP [11]. these methods still require the presetting of hyperparame-
 Inspired by the tremendous success of foundation mod- ters such as the length of the learnable text prompts and
els in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), necessitates training the learnable part of the text prompts
researchers have started building large-scale foundation mod- on relatively similar domain data. MuSc [28] utilizes mutual
els for computer vision and exploring the boundaries of scoring of unlabeled images and designs an innovative zerozero-shot capabilities of these models. The SAM model shot anomaly detection method. However, the drawback of
[14] uniquely leverages an extensive collection of masks MuSc is that the inspected images must have a substantial
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14613

Fig. 4. Overview of the Image Internal Information Mining SAM (IIIM-SAM) structure.

quantity and small intra-class variation to enable effective
mutual comparison. AnomalyGPT [29] is a parallel work
utilizing foundation model for anomaly detection, but it is
designed for unsupervised/few-shot anomaly detection with
manually crafted prompts. SAA+ [30] is a zero-shot anomaly
detection method based on the SAM foundation model, but
unfortunately, it inevitably requires the use of highly specialized external knowledge. In summary, current zero-shot
anomaly detection methods all necessitate the injection of
external information. Fig. 5. Principle of internal information mining based on feature relationships.

 III. BACKGROUND AND C ORE P RINCIPLE
 the anomaly detection problem can be viewed as an image
A. Zeor-Shot Anomaly Detection Setting
 segmentation problem to distinguish between foreground and
 In this paper, we want to emphasize a unique zero- background. Thus, as shown in Fig. 5 we partition the
shot anomaly detection task setting, where the products are inspected image, calculate the similarity between regions, and
inspected without introducing any external expert knowl- rank them based on the degree and quantity of similarity. This
edge. External expert knowledge includes rich predefined text approach allows us to identify multiple definite background
prompt templates, anomaly appearance description, and so on. regions and one most likely foreground region.
This task setting aligns more closely with the automation and
rapid production transition requirements in practical applications. IV. I MAGE I NTERNAL I NFORMATION M INING S AM
 A. Framework Overview
B. Discrimination of Internal Regions Based on Feature As shown in Fig. 4, Image Internal Information Mining
Relationships SAM (IIIM-SAM) consists of four main parts: the image
 We recognize that anomalies on the surface of industrial encoder, prompt encoder, mask decoder, and image internal
products often result from accidents during the manufactur- information mining prompter. The image encoder, prompt
ing process or occasional events due to process instability. encoder, and each mask decoder are components of the
Therefore, the number of pixels in anomalous regions is open-source SAM model. The image is processed by the
relatively small compared to the anomaly-free regions (i.e., image internal information mining prompter, which provides
defect-free areas). Even though there may be variations in the three definite background prompt points and one potential
surface texture of the product, for a given detection image, the foreground prompt point based on the strength of region
dissimilarity between anomalous and non-anomalous regions relationships. Considering the varying reliability of informamust be greater than the dissimilarity between non-anomalous tion carried by background and foreground prompt points,
regions from feature statistics perspective. By treating anoma- we design a two-stage mask decoder scheme to validate the
lies as foreground and defect-free regions as background, anomaly detection results. Finally, based on the segmentation
14614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 6. The detail structure of the image internal information mining prompter. The lower-left part illustrates the internal structure of low-level feature encoder;
the middle-bottom part shows the internal structure of global feature modeling, and the lower-right part depicts the internal structure of token-relation decoder.

results of the background and foreground, the decision is made effectiveness of convolutional operations in extracting lowon whether the test image contains defects. The whole process level features by performing feature encoding on the input
can be expressed as follows: image to form the initial tokens. As shown in the upper
 part of Fig. 6, the prompter consists of three main parts:
 Fimg = fi−encoder (I), (1) Low-level Feature Encoder, Global Feature Modeling, and
 Pb , P f = fIII M−prompter (I), (2) Token-Relation Decoder.
 F prompter = f p−encoder (Pb , P f ), (3) 1) Low-Level Feature Encoder: In this stage, we focus
 on the feature extraction of background texture information.
 Result = Det( fm−decoder (Fimg , F prompter )), (4)
 Numerous studies have demonstrated the inherent advanwhere I denotes the detected image, Fimg represents the image tage of the CNN architecture in local information extraction
features encoded by SAM image encoder, Pb , P f are sets compared to the Transformer architecture [31], [32], [33].
of prompt points mined by the IIIM-prompter. Pb represents Additionally, the translation invariance of convolutional netthe determined background points, while P f represents the works contributes to improving generalization. Therefore, we
potential foreground points. Furthermore, F prompter refers to exclusively employ the CNN architecture in Low-level Feature
the representation extracted by the prompter encoder, and Det Encoder to utilize the local information extraction capability
refers to determining the presence of defects based on the and translation invariance characteristics of CNNs. To enhance
segmentation information obtained from the mask decoder. the representation of low-level features in the encoder’s output,
 we adopt a design with residual skip connections. The specific
 structure of the low-level feature encoder is illustrated in the
B. Image Internal Information Mining Prompter lower-left part of Fig. 6.
 In this subsection, we will provide a detailed introduction 2) Global Feature Modeling: As shown in the detailed
to the Image Internal Information Mining Prompter (IIIM- structure in the lower part of Fig. 6, for the embedding of
prompter) constructed based on the principles of internal low-level features, we further enhance the embedding channel
region relationships discussed in Section III. In summary, we dimensions to increase the dimensions available for evaluating
first process the image by dividing it into patches and represent features and facilitate the comparison of token relationships
the mutual relationships between patches through attention in the next stage. Subsequently, the feature embedding is
weights in the network. Therefore, we choose the Transformer processed into feature tokens through spatial attention, comarchitecture as the foundation of our prompter network. How- plemented by two layers of Transformer layers for advanced
ever, we also recognize that the texture information contained semantic modeling of low-level features. It is worth noting
in the defect carrier (non-defective background) often plays that, to maintain the stability of spatial positional information,
a crucial role in discriminating anomaly features. Neglecting the generation of subsequent spatial attention weights is based
the extraction of texture information would be a fatal flaw on the tokens before the first Transformer layer. The process
for anomaly detection. The ability to extract low-level feature of Global Feature Modeling can be expressed as follows:
(detailed texture information) is evidently a challenge for
 F = Conv( f ), (5)
the Transformer architecture. To address this, we design a
prompter network that combines the Convolutional Neural T 1 = S OFT MAXHW (F · A s (F)) · F, T
 (6)
Networks (CNN) with Transformer. We first fully utilize the T T = T rans f ormer(T 1 ), (7)
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14615

 tokens are considered as three determined background regions.
 The token at the bottom of the ranking is considered as the
 potential foreground (defect) region.
 4) IIIM-Prompter Training: We have designed a contrastive
 learning training method that is more in line with the goals
 of internal information mining. Unlike the common practice of applying data augmentation combinations to images
 within a batch for contrastive learning, we aim to align the
 information scale during the learning process with the task
 objectives. Therefore, we propose a training approach, called
 internal region contrastive learning. We divide an image into N
Fig. 7. Visualization of normalized relationships between tokens. On the left
are segmented blocks, and on the right are pairwise relationships between patches, p, and apply different data augmentation methods to
blocks converted into tokens. Specifically, each value represents the rela- these patches to obtain p0 . Specifically, we selected the color
tionship between the token in the corresponding row and the token in the distortion, random rotation, and Gaussian noise as the data
corresponding column.
 augmentation methods in the training. We then input these
 pairs (p, p0 ) into the previously mentioned IIIM-prompter.
 T 2 = S OFT MAXHW (T T · A s (T 1 ))T · T T , (8) Finally, we obtain a 2N ×2N relationship matrix. By selecting
 T out = T rans f ormer(T 2 ), (9) the lower-left N × N matrix, we acquire the pairwise similarities between p and p0 . Each matrix’s diagonal position
where f are the features extracted from Low-level Feature represents the similarity between p and p0 , while the others
Encoder, A s denotes the spatial attention weights. It is impor- represent the similarity between p and N-1 negative examples.
tant to note that the sources of information for obtaining the For each row, we apply softmax classification, utilizing
spatial attention weights in the two stages are different. The cross-entropy loss as the loss function. Ultimately, the loss
first stage is sourced from F, while the second stage is sourced for internal region contrastive learning is expressed as:
from T 1 .
 exp (sim (p, p0 ) /τ)
 3) Token-Relation Decoder: After the patch of each image L p = − log PN , (11)
region undergoes processing in the first two stages, it is i=1 exp (sim (p, pi ) /τ)
encoded into tokens corresponding to the number of blocks. where τ is the temperature in the loss.
These tokens are then collectively fed into the Token-Relation
Decoder to distinguish whether each patch belongs to the C. Two-Stages Mask Decoder for Zero-Shot Anomaly
background or foreground of the image. Specifically, we Detection
input the tokens into a standard self-attention layer to extract In this section, we will outline the observed segmentation
attention weights Ai j between tokens. After normalization, the drawbacks of applying the original SAM model to anomaly
final relation decoding is accomplished by sorting the relation detection, as well as the design of a two-stage mask decoder
weights. structure tailored to address the identified characteristics of the
 In Fig. 7, we present the visualization of normalized rela- original SAM.
tionships between tokens. It is evident that there is a clear 1) The Segmentation Performance Characteristics of the
distinction in the strength of relationships between regions Original Sam: Firstly, we observed that SAM tends to struggle
with and without defects, and strong mutual relationships in capturing the global background when faced with textures
exist between regions without defects. This further validates with pronounced edges. It often gets trapped in local structural
the correctness of the principle of distinguishing between textures, a phenomenon we refer to as “over-segmentation”,
defective and background (defect-free) regions, demonstrating as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, when dealing with textures
the effectiveness of the image internal information mining exhibiting clear and structured edges, a joint prompting of
prompter designed based on this principle. multiple points is required.
 As formed as Equation 10, we assign equal importance Secondly, while joint prompting with multiple points effecto the strength of relationships and the quantity of strong tively alleviates the “over-segmentation” issue in SAM, our
relationships in the sorting process, aligning with the two experiments revealed that certain types of defects without
distinguishing principles stated in Section III. disrupting the texture structure and only color changes, are
 Pn ! !
 j Ai j · wi j
 easily overlooked by SAM. Hence, we design a step that we
 Relation = sort Pn , (10) refer to as “retrospective checking” to mitigate instances of
 j wi j i=1,2...,n false negatives.
 where n is the number of the tokens. The parameter wi j 2) Structural Detail: Due to the mentioned drawbacks
is assigned different weight values based on the strength of exhibited by the native SAM in texture anomaly detection,
the relationship between tokens. Through the variation of this we design a two-stage mask decoder structure, as shown in
parameter, tokens with higher similarity in relationships are Fig. 4. This structure cleverly combines the uncertainty of
given greater attention. background points and foreground prompting in its design.
 In the end, after calculating and sorting the relationships Specifically, since the category of the three background points
between tokens, the regions corresponding to the top three are determined, the first-stage mask decoder only takes these
14616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 8. Qualitative comparison of anomaly detection results on different datasets. * indicates training with only one sample, and ** indicates zero-shot method
using simple text prompts, such as, “defective.” Our method is zero-shot without any external prompt.

three background point prompts as input. Subsequently, the indeed defect-free. Ultimately, the judgment of the existence
second-stage mask decoder, based on the results from the first of anomalies is based on the segmentation results verified by
stage, introduces the potential foreground point prompt for a the second-stage mask decoder.
defect-checking phase. The purpose of retrospective checking
is to further confirm the detection results from the first stage
of the model, avoiding missed detection of defect region D. Anomaly Decision and Segmentation
in the first-stage decoded mask. If the defect exists in the
image, the lowest-ranked area based on the interrelationship We summarize the anomaly decision and segmentation
scores within the image will definitely be a defect area. The pipeline of the proposed method with Pytorch-style pseumissed defect will be naturally detected. In cases where the docode in Algorithm 1. For images without anomalies, our
potential foreground point does not belong to the foreground IIIM-SAM will not segment out local regions and produce
(defect) area, the retrospective check will not be affected the segmentation results without targets (the segmentation map
either. Because, the decoding process will return large and will be entirely black). For images with anomalies, our method
scattered segmentation results when the proposed point is will segment out local regions after inputting prompts from
from background region, which indicates that the image is IIIM-prompter, and output the segmentation maps with targets.
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14617

 a) MVTecAD Dataset: MVTecAD dataset is the most
 widely used and authoritative benchmark for anomaly detection. The dataset is divided into two major anomaly detection
 categories: texture and object. In this study, we focus on
 texture anomaly detection, consisting of sub-datasets for five
 product classes, namely Grid, Leather, Tile, Carpet, and Wood.
 The defects collected in the texture set include various sizes,
 shapes, and categories, amounting to a total of 25 defect types.
 Therefore, evaluating our IIIM-SAM and other methods on
 this dataset provides a comprehensive assessment of algorithm
Fig. 9. The comparison of removing low-level feature encoder and global
feature modeling. (a) is retaining the two components. (b) is removing the two performance.
components and token features are extracted from the SAM image encoder. b) KolektorSDD2 Dataset: KolektorSDD2 defect dataset
 is constructed from images of defected production items that
Algorithm 1 Pseudo Code for IIIM-SAM were provided and annotated by Kolektor Group. KolektorSDD2 dataset consists numerous types of defects and their
 images including 356 images with defects and 2979 images
 without defect. The images in this dataset are captured by
 a visual inspection system in a controlled environment, and
 they have similar dimensions. Defects vary in shape, size, and
 color, ranging from small scratches and spots to large surface
 defects. Experiments on KolektorSDD2 dataset demonstrate
 that texture anomaly detection algorithms are not limited to
 product types similar to those showcased in MVTecAD. Users
 can capture surface images of industrial structural components
 through a professional visual inspection system, enabling the
 application of our IIIM-SAM method.
 c) DAGM Dataset: The DAGM dataset is a classic
 texture defect detection dataset widely used in the field of
 anomaly detection. It includes a variety of material surfaces
 and defect types. The defect regions are annotated using
 segmentation masks in the dataset. Each image in the dataset
 has a resolution of 512 × 512. The characteristics of the
 DAGM dataset differ significantly from the two previously
 mentioned datasets. Performance evaluation on DAGM allows
 for a more comprehensive demonstration of our algorithm’s
 V. E XPERIMENTS generalization capability.
 We conduct a series of comparative experiments to assess 2) Evaluation Indicators: We consider that image-level
the zero-shot anomaly detection performance of IIIM-SAM. In classification metrics are the primary aspect for evaluating the
addition, we compare the zero-shot IIIM-SAM with few-shot method, because it is more crucial from a practical perspective.
anomaly detection methods that require additional training After all, practitioners only need the detection system to
and the state-of-the-art (SOTA) zero-shot anomaly detection accurately identify images containing anomalies for automated
methods. We also perform extensive ablation studies to vali- defective product removal. So, we use the area under the
date the individual effectiveness of the proposed components. receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) at the image
The detailed setups, e.g., datasets, metrics, introduction to level as the evaluation metric following the literature [37],
the compared methods, and other implementation details, are [38]. To observe potential data imbalance more clearly, we
given in this section. also employ the F1-score at the optimal threshold (F1-max)
 [39]. To more clearly and comprehensively demonstrate the
 superiority of our IIIM-SAM, we also use pixel-level AUROC
A. Dataset Description and Evaluation Indicators and PRO metrics to evaluate its anomaly localization and
 1) Dataset Description: We evaluate our approach in var- segmentation capabilities.
ious real-world texture defect detection scenarios, including
MVTecAD [34], the whole KolektorSDD2 [35] and DAGM
[36] datasets. Both datasets contain high-resolution images. B. Introduction to the Compared Methods
The input resolution is 1024 × 1024 for MVTec-AD and We selected six of the latest and representative anomaly
roughly 230 × 640 for KolektorSDD2 dataset. To ensure a detection methods for comparison with our proposed IIIMfair comparison, we maintain the same input resolution for SAM, including PaDim [37] (2021), PatchCore [38] (2022),
both our proposed method and the comparison methods in all ACR [20] (2024), WinClip [23] (2023), WinClip+ [23] (2023),
experiments. and Anomaly-Clip [26] (2024). Overall, PaDim, PatchCore,
14618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

and ACR are non-language-guided anomaly detection meth- TABLE I
ods, while WinCLIP and AnomalyCLIP are language-guided A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD
anomaly detection methods based on large vision-language- DATASET ON I MAGE -L EVEL . † I NDICATES THE ACCURACY R EPORTED
 IN THE PAPER
models. Specifically, PaDim and PatchCore are advanced
few-shot anomaly detection methods learning from defect-free
samples, but they lack zero-shot detection capabilities. ACR is
the current state-of-the-art non-vision-language-model-based
method for zero-shot anomaly detection. WinClip is the
first zero-shot anomaly detection method based on large
vision-language-model (VLM), marking a milestone in the
field. WinCLIP+ is an improved version of WinCLIP. This
method enhances detection capability by utilizing few-shot
normal samples, enabling more efficient defect localization. TABLE II
Anomaly-CLIP is the latest state-of-the-art VLM-based zero- F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD DATASET ON
shot anomaly detection method. Therefore, the five selected I MAGE -L EVEL
comparison methods provide a comprehensive performance
evaluation from different perspectives against our proposed
method. The comparison with these five methods fully demonstrates that our IIIM-SAM not only performs zero-shot
detection without the need for external expert knowledge, such
as text prompts, but also achieves optimal performance in zeroshot detection.
 It is worth noting that, to compare more fairly with our
zero-shot method without external information prompts, we
only allow PaDim and PatchCore methods to be trained with
one and three defect-free images, respectively (i.e., 1-shot and comparative methods (Padim in Wood, Grid, Tile, Kolek-
3-shot). For the zero-shot anomaly detection method WinClip, torSDD2; Patchcore in Grid; WinClip in KolektorSDD2), we
we restrict the method to use rich information text prompts and demonstrate a more sensitive anomaly detection capability.
only allow WinClip to use simple and generic prompt texts, Specifically, it can be observed that the PaDim and Patchsuch as “defect” or “anomaly”. The above settings apply to Core methods experienced varying degrees of failure in
all our experiments. anomaly localization on the wood, grid, tile, and KolektorSDD2 datasets. This is because these methods require a
 large amount of anomaly-free image samples for learning
C. Implementation Details and do not have inherent zero-shot detection capabilities. The
 WinClip method, using a generic text prompt, showed some
 We implement our models in Python 3.10 and PyTorch 1.13.
 anomaly response capability in the presented examples, with
Experiments are run on 2 Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU on Ubuntu
 only one case of anomaly response failure. However, it is
18.04 Linux. For all experiments, we choose the sam-vit-h
 evident that the anomaly heatmaps of WinClip is weak and
weights as our pre-trained SAM. IIIM-prompter is trained on
 diffused, making it difficult to distinguish from the background
the ImageNet dataset [40] and trained by stochastic gradient
 response. This demonstrates that zero-shot anomaly detection
descent (SGD) optimizer with Nesterov momentum. We use an
 methods based on vision-language models, like WinClip, must
initial learning rate of 0.01, a momentum of 0.9, and a weight
 rely on injecting a large amount of matching expert knowledge
decay of 0.0001. We train for 150 epochs with the learning
 through text prompts to work effectively. In contrast, our IIIMrate multiplied by 0.1 at 90 and 120 epochs. For the attention
 SAM method eliminates the need for external prompts and
values greater than 0.5 in the Token-Relation Decoder, we set
 leverages the strong perception capabilities of the improved
wi j to 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively.
 SAM model. As a result, our method is more versatile. We
 can accurately locate defects across different products, and
D. The Qualitative Anomaly Detection Results Comparison produces highly distinguishable anomaly response peaks (with
on Different Datasets a clear distinction from background response).
 We first present visualizations of anomaly detection using
four state-of-the-art methods on different datasets. As shown E. The Quantitative Anomaly Detection Results
in Fig. 8, we display detection cases for six product categories 1) Results on MVTecAD: We first presented the quantion two datasets. The first five rows show cases from the tative anomaly detection results on the MVTecAD dataset.
MVTecAD dataset, while the last row presents two cases from Table I and Table II show the anomaly detection performance
the KolektorSDD2 dataset. measured using image-level AUROC and F1-MAX metrics,
 Qualitatively, it is evident that our zero-shot IIIM-SAM respectively. We compared our method with other zero-shot
method exhibits excellent generalization and anomaly detec- and one-normal-shot anomaly detection methods. The first
tion capabilities. According to some failure cases in the four five rows represent the image-level metrics for five texture
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14619

 TABLE III TABLE V
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2
 DATASET ON P IXEL -L EVEL . † I NDICATES THE ACCURACY R EPORTED DATASET ON I MAGE -L EVEL
 IN THE PAPER

 TABLE VI
 F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASET
 ON I MAGE -L EVEL

 TABLE IV
PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD DATASET ON P IXEL -
 L EVEL

 TABLE VII
 A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2
 DATASET ON P IXEL -L EVEL

subcategories, while the last row shows the average detection
 TABLE VIII
results across all categories.
 PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASET ON
 It can be observed that our IIIM-SAM method performs P IXEL -L EVEL
exceptionally well, achieving superior average performance
under both evaluation metrics. Specifically, for the imagelevel AUROC metric, our method achieves detection scores
above 98% in all five categories, while other methods show
significant performance disadvantages in at least one category.
In terms of average performance, our method holds a clear
advantage, outperforming the WinClip method, which uses
simple prompts, by 19.9%. Even compared to Anomaly- of-the-art methods, our approach offers higher interpretability
CLIP, which requires an auxiliary training set to optimize and reliability in determining defective samples.
text prompts, we achieve a 0.5% improvement. The balanced 2) Results on KolektorSDD2: The KolektorSDD2 dataset
performance of our method is even more evident under the includes more challenging samples for anomaly detection. The
F1-MAX metric, which effectively avoids the evaluation bias defects in the KolektorSDD2 dataset are more complex and
caused by unbalanced test data. For example, other comparison less visually distinct from the background compared to other
methods show a significant performance drop in the wood datasets. This complexity makes it difficult for various methods
category. This further comprehensively validates the superior to accurately identify and detect defects. From Table V and
anomaly detection performance of the IIIM-SAM method. Table VI, we can observe severe performance degradation
 Next, we used pixel-level AUROC and PRO metrics to mea- in terms of AUROC and F1-max for the five compared
sure the anomaly region segmentation ability of our method methods. Specifically, language-guided VLM-based zero-shot
and the comparison methods. The anomaly segmentation anomaly detection methods struggle to adapt and effectively
results of Table III and Table IV demonstrate the advantage of detect anomalies because the morphology and semantics of
our IIIM-SAM method for anomaly localization. Specifically, defects are more abstract and diverse, making it difficult
we surpassed four categories in pixel-level AUROC, with for text descriptions to provide effective prompts. However,
the highest lead of 3.3% compared to the next best method, since our IIIM-SAM does not rely on external prompts and
and an overall average lead of 1.4%. In terms of the pixel- includes a self-derived prompting method, our approach still
level PRO metric, we achieved comprehensive superiority. demonstrates competitive detection performance, consistently
This reflects that once our method detects the presence of an maintaining evaluation results above 90%.
anomaly, it locates the anomaly region with high precision. As shown in the Table VII and VIII, the advantage of mining
In contrast, even when other comparison methods correctly prompt information within the image is further reflected in
detect anomalies, they exhibit more erroneous responses in pixel-level metrics, which indicate anomaly localization and
the anomaly regions. In other words, compared to other state- segmentation capabilities. Compared to the next best zero-
14620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

 TABLE IX TABLE XIII
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET T HE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT N ETWORK S TRUCTURE C ONFIGURATIONS ON
 ON I MAGE -L EVEL M INING I NTER -R EGIONAL R ELATIONSHIPS OF IIIM-P ROMPTER

 TABLE X
F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET ON
 I MAGE -L EVEL

 encoder. Taking an example with Wood images containing
 hole defects, Fig. 9 illustrates the visualization of token relationships for IIIM-prompter with retained Low-level Feature
 Encoder and Global Feature Modeling (part a) and IIIMprompter with SAM’s image encoder as a replacement (part
 TABLE XI
 b). It is evident that the IIIM-prompter with retained Low-
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET
 ON P IXEL -L EVEL level Feature Encoder and Global Feature Modeling (part a)
 shows a more pronounced difference between defective tokens
 and non-defective tokens. Specifically, the contrast degree of
 defect token is 23.11% and the range of normalized crosscorrelation is from 0.47 to 0.89. Conversely, using SAM’s
 image encoder to replace Low-level Feature Encoder and
 TABLE XII Global Feature Modeling in IIIM-prompter (part b) exhibits
PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET ON P IXEL - a less clear distinction in token relationships. Specifically, the
 L EVEL contrast degree of defect token is just 10.40% and the range of
 normalized cross-correlation is from 0.82 to 0.91. Through this
 ablation study, it is shown that our IIIM-prompter combining
 Low-level Feature Encoder and Global Feature Modeling
 module has a stronger ability to mine the interrelationships
 within image regions.
 2) The Impact of Different Network Structure Configshot method, IIIM-SAM outperforms with a 2.4% lead in
 urations on Mining Inter-Regional Relationships of IIIMpixel-level AUROC and a 5.6% lead in PRO metric. The
 Prompter: To further demonstrate the advantage of the
experimental results on the challenging KolektorSDD2 dataset
 combined convolutional and Transformer structure on mining
further demonstrate the stability and generalization of our
 internal image relationships, we conducted the ablation expermethod, showcasing its stronger zero-shot detection capabiliiments on the IIIM-prompter using the MVTecAD dataset.
ties.
 We compared the combined structure with networks using
 3) Results on DAGM: To further demonstrate that our
 either CNN or Transformer alone. The difference in regional
method’s anomaly detection capability is independent of prodrelationships was quantitatively represented by the contrast of
uct categories, we also conduct experiments on the DAGM
 inter-class (anomaly and background) similarity to intra-class
dataset. As shown in Table IX –XII, our method is superior
 (background and background) similarity. For the experimental
to other SOTA methods in terms of both anomaly detecresults, a higher value indicates a more pronounced differtion and anomaly location capabilities. Specifically, compared
 ence. The average results of the experiments are shown in
with the second-best method, our method achieves at least
 Table XIII. Compared with the configurations of CNN or
1% improvement on the anomaly classification (image-level)
 Transformer only, the CNN union Transformer configuration
metric and more than 1.7% improvement on the anomaly
 yields the highest value. Specifically, the configuration using
localization (pixel-level) metric. These results further highlight
 only CNN lacks the ability to model global relationships,
the robustness and excellent generalization ability of our
 resulting in a 0.139 decrease in the similarity ratio. On
approach for texture anomaly detection, attributed to the image
 the other hand, using only the Transformer structure clearly
internal information mining mechanism without relying on
 lacks the ability to extract local low-level features and spatial
external information learning.
 invariance, leading to a similarity ratio lower than 0.1. This
 indicates that there is almost no distinction between anomalies
F. Ablation Studies and the background. By combining the strengths of both the
 1) The Impact of Removing Low-Level Feature Encoder and CNN and Transformer structures, our method can achieve a
Global Feature Modeling: We excluded the Low-level Feature clearer resolution of the anomaly regions.
Encoder and Global Feature Modeling from IIIM-prompter, 3) The Impact of Background Prompt Point Number: We
and instead directly used features extracted by the SAM image investigated the impact of different numbers of background
ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS 14621

 TABLE XIV customer requirements. Ensuring that the nonwoven fabric is
T HE I MPACT OF BACKGROUND P ROMPT P OINT N UMBER ON A NOMALY free of defects is crucial for guaranteeing the medical protec-
 D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS tive performance of the produced masks. During a trial run
 of the inspection line, a total of 1611 images were analyzed,
 and our method achieved an accuracy of 98.94%, a missed
 detection rate of 1.93%, and a false alarm rate of 0.84%.
 The primary cause of missed detections was that certain oil
 stains became indistinguishable from the background after
 drying. In general, the detection performance of our method
 has met the performance requirements of practical application
 TABLE XV
 in nonwoven fabric inspection.
T HE I MPACT OF R EMOVING THE P OTENTIAL F OREGROUND P ROMPT
 P OINT ON A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we introduced a zero-shot texture anomaly
 detection method using image internal information mining
 prompt. The key uniqueness of this method is without relying on any external expert knowledge to zero-shot anomaly
 detection, which effectively addresses the challenges of rapid
prompt points on the final detection performance. Table XIV
 product changes and iterations in industrial production. The
presents quantitative anomaly detection results for IIIM-SAM
 convenience of our IIIM-SAM method is primarily reflected
on the MVTecAD and KolektorSDD2 datasets using three,
 in its usage after deployment, eliminating the need for external
two, and one background prompt points. The results indicate
 prompts or expert intervention, thus making it more convenient
that, on the MVTecAD dataset, using two background prompt
 and scalable for industrial applications in the real world.
points leads to a certain decrease in detection performance,
 We began by presenting the principles of image internal
while using only one background prompt point results in a
 information mining, followed by the design of the Image
more noticeable performance decline. The reason for this per-
 Internal Information Mining Prompter to operationalize these
formance drop is that SAM’s segmentation performance tends
 principles. In addition, we discussed the limitations of the
to be limited to local structure interference of the complex
 native SAM model when applied to texture anomaly detection
backgrounds, and increasing the number of prompt points
 and overcame these challenges by using multiple background
encourages SAM to have a global perception of the tested
 and foreground points for joint prompting through a two-stage
image. Since the KolektorSDD2 dataset’s texture background
 mask decoder. The experimental results indicate that our prolacks interference from local structures, changing the number
 posed IIIM-SAM outperforms current CLIP-based zero-shot
of background prompt points does not significantly impact the
 anomaly detection methods. Additionally, compared to SAM
detection results.
 with manually input defect and background location prompts,
 4) The Impact of Removing the Potential Foreground
 there is only a localization performance difference of no more
Prompt Point: Table XV shows the impact of removing
 than 0.5% in terms of pixel-level AUROC. In the test of
potential foreground prompt points on the anomaly detection
 inference speed, our method achieves 2.2 FPS on the computer
capability of IIIM-SAM. On the MVTecAD and Kolekwith single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. In future deployment,
torSDD2 datasets, both AUROC and F1-max indicators exhibit
 depending on the actual production requirement, the faster
a significant decrease in detection performance. The input
 SAM variants can be used to accelerate the computation speed.
of potential foreground prompt points corresponds to the
 In fact, we believe that large foundation models already
second stage of the two-stage mask decoder in the IIIM-SAM
 possess sufficient perceptual capabilities for the environment.
structure. The input of potential foreground prompt points is
 The reason they may not be directly applicable to specific tasks
designed to avoid SAM ignoring anomaly regions with comlies in the lack of organized and inferred perceptual informaplex backgrounds due to multiple background prompt points
 tion for those tasks. Through the IIIM-SAM architecture, we
and serves as a verification. Therefore, removing potential
 aim to showcase the true zero-shot anomaly detection capaforeground prompt points in IIIM-SAM makes it susceptible
 bilities of large foundation models. Of course, our IIIM-SAM
to missing defects, such as color similar to the background or
 also has its limitations. Our method can only be effectively
light color on product surface, leading to an overall decrease
 applied to texture anomaly detection scenarios, such as fabric
in detection performance.
 manufacturing, wooden flooring, and steel rail inspection. The
 primary limitation stems from the fact that our method relies
G. Performance Evaluation in Real-World Industrial on internal relationships within the image to mine prompt
Scenarios points. However, in object anomaly detection scenarios (e.g.,
 We evaluated the performance of our method on a real defects in products with complex structural variations, such
industrial nonwoven fabric inspection line, as shown in Fig. 1. as toothbrushes, cables or others with mechanical parts), the
The factory often uses nonwoven fabric materials with dif- method faces challenges. This is because objects often have
ferent textured backgrounds for mask production based on diverse local structures and internal components, which can
14622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

weaken the internal relationships between regions. Conse- [17] H. Nori, N. King, S. M. McKinney, D. Carignan, and E. Horvitz,
quently, our method struggles to identify reliable background “Capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems,” 2023,
 arXiv:2303.13375.
and foreground prompt points, making it difficult to guide [18] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with
SAM to accurately segment anomalous regions. The exper- human feedback,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
iments on the object categories of the MVTecAD dataset also pp. 27730–27744.
 [19] J. Achiam et al., “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774.
show that our method’s average image-level AUROC is only [20] A. Li, C. Qiu, M. Kloft, P. Smyth, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Zero-
30.4%, which is 63.1% lower than the current SOTA method. shot anomaly detection via batch normalization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
In future work, we will further explore potential strategies to Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2023, pp. 40963–40993.
 [21] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, K.-R. Müller,
extend the applicability for zero-shot anomaly detection with- and M. Kloft, “Exposing outlier exposure: What can be learned from
out introducing external knowledge. For example, introducing few, one, and zero outlier images,” 2022, arXiv:2205.11474.
more image preprocessing stages to transform object anomaly [22] S. Esmaeilpour, B. Liu, E. Robertson, and L. Shu, “Zero-shot out-ofdistribution detection based on the pre-trained model CLIP,” in Proc.
detection into texture anomaly detection, and introducing more Conf. AAAI, Jun. 2022, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 6568–6576.
feature information to accurately mine the prompt points in [23] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer,
complex object structures. “WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 2023, pp. 19606–19616.
 R EFERENCES [24] X. Chen, Y. Han, and J. Zhang, “A zero-/few-shot anomaly classification
 and segmentation method for CVPR 2023 and workshop challenge tracks
[1] W. Luo, H. Yao, W. Yu, and Z. Li, “AMI-net: Adaptive mask inpainting 1&2: 1st place on zero-shot ad and 4th place on few-shot ad,” 2023,
 network for industrial anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. arXiv:2305.17382.
 Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 22, pp. 1591–1605, 2025. [25] C. Huang, A. Jiang, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and Y. Wang,
[2] C. Wang et al., “Real-IAD: A real-world multi-view dataset for bench- “Adapting visual-language models for generalizable anomaly detection
 marking versatile industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. in medical images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., vol. 35, Jun. 2024, pp. 22883–22892. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 11375–11385.
[3] Y. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Gao, and X. Li, “A graph guided convolutional [26] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Objectneural network for surface defect recognition,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. agnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
 Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1392–1404, Jul. 2022. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2023.
[4] Q. Xie, D. Li, J. Xu, Z. Yu, and J. Wang, “Automatic detection [27] C.-H. Ho, K.-C. Peng, and N. Vasconcelos, “Long-tailed anomaly
 and classification of sewer defects via hierarchical deep learning,” detection with learnable class names,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1836–1847, Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 12435–12446.
 Oct. 2019. [28] X. Li, Z. Huang, F. Xue, and Y. Zhou, “MuSc: Zero-shot industrial
[5] X. Dong, C. J. Taylor, and T. F. Cootes, “Defect classification and anomaly classification and segmentation with mutual scoring of the
 detection using a multitask deep one-class CNN,” IEEE Trans. Automat. unlabeled images,” 2024, arXiv:2401.16753.
 Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1719–1730, Jul. 2022. [29] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT:
[6] H. Yao et al., “Dual-attention transformer and discriminative flow for Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,” in
 industrial visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., Proc. Conf. AAAI, Mar. 2024, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1932–1940.
 vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 6126–6140, Oct. 2024. [30] Y. Cao et al., “Segment any anomaly without training via hybrid prompt
[7] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, regularization,” 2023, arXiv:2305.10724.
 “Beyond dents and scratches: Logical constraints in unsupervised [31] Z. Dai et al., “CoAtNet: Marrying convolution and attention for all
 anomaly detection and localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 4, data sizes,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2021,
 pp. 947–969, Apr. 2022. pp. 3965–3977.
[8] X. Li et al., “PromptAD: Learning prompts with only normal samples [32] J. Guo et al., “CMT: Convolutional neural networks meet vision
 for few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 16848–16858. Jun. 2022, pp. 12175–12185.
[9] J.-B. Alayrac et al., “Flamingo: A visual language model for few- [33] J. Li et al., “Next-ViT: Next generation vision transformer for efficient
 shot learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, deployment in realistic industrial scenarios,” 2022, arXiv:2207.05501.
 pp. 23716–23736. [34] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
[10] C. Jia et al., “Scaling up visual and vision-language representation comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 learning with noisy text supervision,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 Learn., vol. 139, 2021, pp. 4904–4916. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[11] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural [35] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacelanguage supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021, defect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
 pp. 8748–8763. Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.
[12] X. Gu, T.-Y. Lin, W. Kuo, and Y. Cui, “Open-vocabulary object detection [36] M. Wieler and T. Hahn, “Weakly supervised learning for industrial
 via vision and language knowledge distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. optical inspection,” in Proc. DAGM Symp., vol. 6, 2007, p. 11.
 Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021. [37] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis-
[13] M. Xu et al., “A simple baseline for open-vocabulary semantic segmen- tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
 tation with pre-trained vision-language model,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
 Comput. Vis., Tel Aviv, Israel, Oct. 2022, pp. 736–753. [38] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
[14] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
 Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 4015–4026. Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
[15] H. Yang, Y. Chen, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “Multiscale feature-clustering- pp. 14318–14328.
 based fully convolutional autoencoder for fast accurate visual inspection [39] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotof texture surface defects,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 3, the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
 pp. 1450–1467, Jul. 2019. segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
[16] T. Aota, L. T. T. Tong, and T. Okatani, “Zero-shot versus many-shot: [40] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
 Unsupervised texture anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 5564–5572. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.