394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 IIT: Accurate Decentralized Application
 Identification Through Mining Intra- and
 Inter-Flow Relationships
 Qianwei Meng , Qingjun Yuan , Weina Niu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yongjuan Wang ,
 Siqi Lu , Guangsong Li, Xiangbin Wang, and Wenqi He

 Abstract—Identifying Decentralized Applications (DApps) I. I NTRODUCTION
from encrypted network traffic plays an important role in areas
 LOCKCHAIN technology has rapidly developed in recent
such as network management and threat detection. However,
DApps deployed on the same platform use the same encryption
settings, resulting in DApps generating encrypted traffic with
 B years because of its decentralization, anonymity and
 auditability [1]. This has also brought about the rise of decengreat similarity. In addition, existing flow-based methods only tralized applications (DApps). However, malicious developers
consider each flow as an isolated individual and feed it sequen- may create seemingly legitimate DApps but plant fraudulent
tially into the neural network for feature extraction, ignoring
other rich information introduced between flows, and therefore or scammy behavior behind them. Surprisingly, finance-related
the relationship between different flows is not effectively utilized. DApps account for more than 70% of the total number of
In this study, we propose a novel encrypted traffic classification DApps, and there are DApps in these categories that contain
model IIT to heterogeneously mine the potential features of unfair rules or constitute Ponzi schemes or financial fraud. As
intra- and inter-flows, which contain two types of encoders
based on the multi-head self-attention mechanism. By combining
 a result, DApps have been subjected to a variety of attacks
the complementary intra- and inter-flow perspectives, the entire by cybercriminals for profit [2], and many high-impact realprocess of information flow can be more completely understood world attacks against DApps have caused losses of millions of
and described. IIT provides a more complete perspective on dollars [3]. Therefore, in order to effectively achieve network
network flows, with the intra-flow perspective focusing on management and threat detection for DApps, it is crucial to
information transfer between different packets within a flow, and
the inter-flow perspective placing more emphasis on information classify DApps encrypted traffic from the traffic aspect.
interaction between different flows. We captured 44 classes of For this purpose, various methods for encrypted traffic
DApps in the real world and evaluated the IIT model on two classification have been proposed [4]. They can be broadly
datasets, including DApps and malicious traffic classification grouped into two categories: Intra-flow based methods and
tasks. The results demonstrate that the IIT model achieves
 Inter-flow based methods. These two categories of methods
a classification accuracy of greater than 97% on the realworld dataset of 44 DApps, outperforming other state-of-the-art deal with different objects. Intra-flow based methods focus
methods. In addition, the IIT model exhibits good generalization on mining intra-flow features, while inter-flow based methods
in the malicious traffic classification task. start to consider utilizing inter-flow features.
 Index Terms—Decentralized applications, encrypted traffic, In general, to efficiently represent a flow, many previous
blockchain, transformer, deep learning. studies used hand-designed features as Intra-flow features.
 Typically, these are statistical features [5], [6], [7] that are
 subsequently fed into machine learning algorithms. In deep-
 Received 27 March 2024; revised 9 July 2024; accepted 9 October
2024. Date of publication 11 October 2024; date of current version
 learning-based methods, no matter what form a flow is
14 March 2025. This work is supported by The National Key Research and represented in, such as a feature vector or a graph, each flow
Development Program of China No.2023YFB2705000 and National Natural is treated as an isolated individual and sequentially fed into
Science Foundation of China 62276091. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was L. Cui. the neural network for feature extraction [8], [9]. Therefore,
(Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan.) the relationships between flows are not effectively utilized.
 Qianwei Meng, Yongjuan Wang, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li, Xiangbin In contrast, Inter-flow based methods place greater focus
Wang, and Wenqi He are with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network
Cryptography Technology and the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, on underutilized inter-flow features. For example, MT-
Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: mengqw20@ FlowFormer utilizes the mechanism to extract deep-level
163.com; pinkywyj@163.com; 080lusiqi@sina.com; lgsok@163.com; features from the flow sequence, which can effectively distin-
Moskyes@outlook.com; hewenqixd@163.com).
 Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and guish the relevance and importance of different flows in the
Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China, and also flow sequence [10]. Yao et al. and Vaswani et al. treats the
with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology and the stream sequence as a time sequence and used attention-based
Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, Zhengzhou
450001, China (e-mail: gcxyuan@outlook.com). LSTM to learn the temporal relationships among network
 Weina Niu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, flows [11], [12]. However, the above methods have spatio-
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610056, temporal limitations when dealing with flow sequences or
China (e-mail: niuweina1@126.com).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3479150 time-induced flow segments [13].
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 395

 To solve the above-mentioned problem, we design Intra- and DApp classification methods. Many studies have utiand Inter-flow Attention Blocks to heterogeneously mine intra- lized machine- and deep-learning approaches to address the
and inter-flow features, which are neglected by previously Web and mobile application-encrypted traffic classification
developed methods. Network flows provide hierarchical problem. Here, as shown in Table I, only works that are closely
information about network events (intra-flow) and events in related to this study will be reviewed.
communication flows (inter-flow). The Intra-flow Attention
Block can automatically consider the relationship between A. Web and Mobile Application Classification Methods
two arbitrary features within a flow. In contrast, the Inter-
 Although an increasing number of applications are adoptflow Attention Block can overcome spatial and temporal
 ing SSL/TLS to protect their traffic, it is still possible to
constraints to efficiently determine the correlation between any
 obtain large amounts of side-channel data information from
two different flows.
 encrypted traffic, such as packet lengths, directions, and TCP
 In this study, we design a novel network traffic clastimestamps. Methods for classifying Web and mobile applisification method referred to as Intra-flow and Inter-flow
 cations using side-channel information are the focus of this
Transformer (IIT). To achieve this, two types of side-channel
 review.
information [14], namely the packet length sequence and
 Many statistical features can be obtained from the sidepacket arrival timestamp sequence, are used to represent a
 channel data sequences, including the maximum, minimum,
network flow. The model then maps each discrete value
 mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis, and percentile. These
into a fixed dimensional vector through an embedding layer.
 statistical features can subsequently be used as inputs for
Next, the Intra-flow Attention Block extracts the features
 machine- or deep-learning algorithms. AppScanner uses
for each flow, and the Inter-flow Attention Block learns
 54 statistical features of mobile app network flows as a
the dependencies between flows. Ultimately, for each flow
 Random Forest (RF) input to realize the real-time identipassing through the embedding and Attention modules, a set
 fication of mobile app network flows [5]. BIND extracts
of distinguishing features is learned. Using weight adaptations
 characteristics from encrypted traffic by utilizing the data
via the self-attention mechanism, important features can be
 dependencies that occur during the sequential transmissions of
efficiently extracted and larger weights can be assigned to the
 network packets [6]. Subsequently, RF was used to identify
more discriminative features, thereby realizing more effective
 website and app fingerprinting. CUMUL abstracted the loading
feature extraction.
 process of a webpage by generating a cumulative behavioral
 The main contributions of this study are summarized as
 representation of its trace, for example, packet ordering or
follows:
 burst behavior, which was fed into an RF classifier [7].
 • We proposed an end-to-end novel model, IIT, for DApps
 Besides, deep learning has also been widely used for
 encrypted traffic classification, which can enhance the
 encrypted traffic classification. FS-Net was based on the
 capability of DApps encrypted traffic classification by
 encoding layer of a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (GRU)
 exploiting the intra-flow packet-to-packet and flow-tofor automatic modeling of deep fingerprints in encrypted
 flow relationships with the help of the self-attention
 traffic sequences to improve the discriminative ability of the
 mechanism.
 fingerprints [17]. Deep fingerprinting uses packet direction
 • We designed Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Block to
 sequences as inputs to convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
 extract the features of intra- and inter-flow information in
 to identify traffic that accesses different websites via Tor [16].
 a heterogeneous manner to learn more representative flow
 ACID relies on low-dimensional embeddings trained using
 features. This process avoids the influence of irrelevant
 a lightweight neural model that is comprised of multiple
 features on the classification effect of the model.
 kernel networks that optimally separate samples of different
 • We constructed a dataset of 44 classes of DApps
 classes to classify malware traffic using an adaptive clustering
 traffic on which model performance was evaluated.
 network [19]. ProGraph is a graph-based approach that uses
 The proposed method outperformed other state-of-the-art
 destination, certificate, and domain features to ensure robust
 methods, achieving a 97.164% accuracy. In addition, the
 network traffic classification in various network environmodel exhibited the best generalization performance on
 ments [22]. In addition to utilizing packet payloads, EBSNN
 the task of classifying malicious traffic.
 uses side-channel information and a hierarchical attention
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
 network to learn high-level representations of packets to
background and related work on DApp-encrypted network
 classify network traffic [25]. FA-Net adopts two hierarchical
traffic classification and the focused problems are discussed in
 multi-head self-attention encoders to completely enumerate
Section II. The proposed IIT model is introduced in detail in
 all potential intra-burst features and inter-burst dependencies
Section III. The proposed method and state-of-the-art baselines
 to avoid heavy dependence on professional experience [26].
are analyzed and the experimental results are presented in
 TFE-GNN fuses packet header and payload information to
Section IV. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VI.
 construct point-wise mutual information (PMI)-based graphs
 for stronger feature representation [8].
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 This study focused on the accurate classification of B. DApp Classification Methods
encrypted DApp traffic. Prior methods for encrypted traffic The aforementioned studies made important research conclassification generally fall into two categories: Web/mobile tributions to the field of encrypted traffic classification.
396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 T HE C OMPARISON W ITH THE E XISTING M ETHODS

Due to the fact that different classes of DApps show C. Summary
great similarity in packet lengths during the TLS hand- There are two limitations to existing methods. First, the trashake, the above methods perform poorly in solving DApps ditional machine-learning classifier approach relies on expert
encrypted traffic classification. Moreover, these studies did experience, the design of the classifier is task oriented, and
not pay adequate attention to the network traffic gener- classifier generalization is weak. Moreover, feature extracated by a large number of DApps on the Internet and the tion from the model is time-consuming. Second, methods
new challenges that DApp traffic brings to encrypted traffic using deep neural networks typically use flows as inputs,
classification. and existing methods rarely comprehensively consider intra-
 In 2020, Wang et al. focused on the classification of DApp- and inter-flow relationships. Intra- and inter-flows represent
encrypted traffic for three application scenarios: DApp, DApp different levels of information that should be processed hetuser behavior, and general user behavior classifications [27]. In erogeneously.
2021, Wang et al. applied metric learning to DApp-encrypted
traffic classification and proposed CQNet, which could easily
filter out samples and learn more restrictive relationships using III. M ETHODOLOGY
hard samples [18]. In 2019, Shen et al. used a feature selection This section describes the design process of the IIT model
function to generate statistical features from packet lengths, in detail. A comprehensive overview of the IIT is presented
packet bursts, and time series [28]. They then filtered the in Fig. 1.
features suitable for the fusion function and adopted the fused First, the encrypted DApp traffic is collected and the packet
features in a machine-learning algorithm. In 2022, Hu et al. sequence is parsed into flows. The packet length, arrival time,
proposed an Ethereum traffic identification system in which a and length cumulative sum (CS) sequences are employed
library of active nodes was built to filter potential Ethereum to represent each network flow. Subsequently, the numerical
traffic [29]. Subsequently, a machine-learning classifier was features of each flow are mapped to fixed-dimensional vectors
used to further determine the potential Ethereum traffic based through an embedding layer. Second, the embedded network
on the extracted Ethereum traffic features. In 2024, Zhou et al. flow is fed into the Intra-flow Attention Block, which is the
proposed the CapsuleFormer model, which used capsule neu- transformer’s encoder. Each feature in the embedded network
rons to extract potential features from the encrypted traffic flow learns its relationship with the rest of the features and
patterns of DApps [24]. assigns a larger weight to the important features and a smaller
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 397

Fig. 1. System overview of the IIT model.

 flows using only a sequence of packet lengths does not completely represent the rich information contained in the network
 flow. Although graphs can represent richer information in
 a network flow, the graph construction process consumes
 more computational resources than vectors [15], [31], [32].
 Additionally, generating a corresponding graph with network
Fig. 2. The client-server interaction process. flows requires considerable preprocessing time as the size of
 the dataset increases, which is highly undesirable.
 The majority of packets in the network flow complete
 transmission within the first 5 s in most different classes of
weight to the noise. The input to the Inter-flow Attention Block
 DApps. Different DApps have various flow durations, but most
consists of a batch of flow features that passed through the
 packets of DApp network flows finish transmission before
Intra-flow Attention Block. Finally, each network flow learns
 the 10th second. However, Tether still has a large number
a robust feature representation that is fed into the multilayer
 of packets in transit after the 10th second. This suggests
perceptron (MLP) for correct classification.
 that the packet arrival timestamp sequence for DApps is a
 distinguishing feature that can be used for classification.
 A relatively simple structure was used in this study to
A. Flow Relationship Representation & Network Flow represent the network flow. Here, meta information such as the
Embedding packet length, direction of flow, and arrival timestamp were
 The DApps network flow representation and flow embed- utilized without decrypting the packet. First, the packet length
ding is detailed in this section. The data interactions of sequence of the DApp network flow, as shown in Fig. 2, is
DApps are performed through smart contracts, and when a expressed as:
user utilizes a particular DApp service it may be concurrently
generated into multiple network flows that collaboratively ps = [−52, 44, −40, −557, 40, 1500, 389, −40, −104, 40,
provide the service, as shown in Fig. 2 [30]. From the Node1’s − 132, . . . , ]. (1)
perspective, the lengths of the uplink and downlink packets
are set to positive and negative values, respectively, with each Subsequently, each packet has an arrival timestamp, and its
packet having a packet arrival timestamp. sequence is expressed as:
 In the existing literature, a network flow containing k packets is typically represented as a packet length sequence ps = pts = [0, 0.1731, 0.1732, 0.1734, 0.1735, 0.3558,
[p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ] [5], [16], [17]. However, representing network 0.3561, 0.3562, 0.3663, 0.3662, 0.3665, . . . , ]. (2)
398 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 [[CLS], fi1 , fi2 , . . . , fi3k ]. E represents a module that embeds
 each feature into a d-dimensional space, using a different
 embedding function for each feature value in sample fi [34].
 Subsequently, for a given fi ∈ R3k , we get E (fi ) ∈ R(3k +1)·d .
Fig. 3. The network flow representation. The embedding module can then be expressed as:
  
 E (fi ) = E [CLS], fi1 , fi2 , . . . , fi3k = [mlp0 ([CLS]),
The packet-length CS sequence is expressed as:    
 mlp1 fi1 , . . . , mlp3k fi3k , (5)
 CS sequence = [−52, −8, −48, −605, −565, 935, 1324, 1284,
 1180, 1220, 1088, . . . , ]. (3) where mlpj denotes the mapping mlpj : R → Rd .
The DApp network flow as a vector is expressed as:
 B. Attention Module
 f = psptsCS sequence = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ][pt1 , pt2 ,
 The first and second sub-layers are the Intra- and Inter-
 . . . , ptk ][p1 , p1 + p2 , . . . , p1 + · · · + pk ], (4) flow Attention Blocks, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 The attention module is described in more detail below.
where len(f ) = 3k.
 Intuitively, a network protocol can be considered as a
 Only the first k packets in the flow are used if the number
 language for communication between network entities, and
of packets in the DApp flow is greater than k, where k is a
 packets can then be viewed as sentences obeying the grammathyperparameter. The length of the insufficient packets is set
 ical rules of that language. Therefore, the packet length and
to 0 if the number of packets in the DApp flow is less than
 arrival time sequences in DApp network flows have certain
k, and the packet arrival timestamps are also replaced by 0.
 temporal and semantic characteristics. The self-attention layer
Thus, it is straightforward to represent the arbitrary network
 is one of the most important structures in a transformer
flow as a vector f. The DApp network flow representation is
 network that uses residual connections followed by layer
shown in Fig. 3.
 normalization. The essence is to use the similarity between the
 Benefits of flow relationship representation:
 query and key vectors as the weight and perform a weighted
 The vector f is more suitable for representing DApp network
 summation on all value vectors. In this study, the encoder
flows. Overall, there are three benefits to using the vector f to
 module in the transformer was used to efficiently extract
represent the features of DApp network flows, each of which
 information from different dimensions of space. That is, the
has a significant benefit for traffic classification. These benefits
 intra- and inter-flow information was used to capture richer
are:
 feature information through the mechanism of multi-head self-
 1) Vector f can extract the features of DApp traffic from
 attention.
four aspects, each of which has been proven to be valuable
 1) Intra-Flow Attention Block: The purpose of the Intrafor traffic classification: packet direction, length, arrival time,
 flow Attention Block is to establish the relationship between
and length CS information.
 any two features in a DApps network flow representation
 2) The vector representation of DApp network flows is simvector fi , that is, to capture the intra-flow information. An
ple, easy to compute, and fast, which is different from methods
 Intra-flow Attention Block with a multi-head attention mechbased on graphical representations. Graphical representations
 anism can assign various attention weights to different feature
contain richer information about DApp network flows but these
 information of fi in the vector to realize reasonable and
methods require more computational and storage resources
 effective feature extraction of the vector fi .
when representing network flows, which implies that the
 For a given fi ∈ R3k , we get E (fi ) ∈ R(3k +1)×d . If only
classification speed will be relatively slow.
 one head exists, then:
 3) The representation of DApp network flows only utilizes
the packet length, time of arrival, direction of transmission, q = Wq · E (fi ), k = Wk · E (fi ), v = Wv · E (fi ), (6)
and statistics of the data flow visible to the DApps-encrypted  
traffic as a means of inferring the specific class of DApps softmax q · k T
 attn = √ , (7)
to which the network flow belongs. This representation does d
not involve information in packet-specific fields or encrypted
 where Wq , Wk , and Wv denote learned parameter matrices.
payloads, and it can be migrated to other encrypted traffic
 It is worth noting that the attention matrix attn reflects
classification tasks.
 the relationship between two arbitrary elements of the input
 Inspired by the word embedding technique in natural lansequence fi . The single-head attention formula can then be
guage processing, the purpose of the embedding module is to
 expressed as:
accelerate model convergence by mapping each feature in the
  
network flow f to a vector of fixed dimensions. softmax q · k T
 Inspired by BERT [33], we introduce a class token to Attention(q, k , v ) = √ · v. (8)
 d
represent the entire sample sequence, denoted as [CLS],
which is a learnable embedding that is added to each sample. An illustration of how the intra-flow attention was performed
At this point, the sample fi can be represented as fi = on a single head is shown in Fig. 4.
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 399

 Algorithm 1 Workflow of the IIT Model. For Simplicity, We
 Describe Just One Head
 Input: The raw training dataset D = {(fi , yi )}ni=1 , embedding size d, packet number k and batch size.
 Output: The trained model IIT.
 1: for data in enumerate(train_dataloader) do
 2: Optimizer.zero_grad()
 3: for each i ∈ [1, batch] do
 4: fi = E(fi )
 5: end for
 6: /* Intra-flow Attention Block */
 7: cls = E(zeros([batch, 1, d ]))
 8: f = cat((cls, f ), dim = 1)
 9: f = attention_1(f )
 10: f = feedforward_1(f )
 11: /* Inter-flow Attention Block */
 12: batch, 3k + 1, d = f .shape
Fig. 4. Intra-flow single-head self-attention.
 13: f = reshape(f , (1, batch, (3k + 1) · d ))
 14: q, k , v = mm(Wq , f ), mm(Wk , f ), mm(Wv , f ) √
 2) Inter-Flow Attention Block: An Inter-flow Attention 15: attn = softmax(mm(q, Transpose(k , (0, 2, 1)))/ d )
Block was designed to focus on the relationships between 16: out1 = mm(attn, v )
different flows. The difference here is that the attention scores 17: f = feedforward_2(out1 )
are computed across different flows in a given batch instead of 18: out2 = reshape(f , (batch, (3k + 1), d ))
limiting the focus to the intra-flow [35]. Unlike existing studies 19: representation = out2 [:, 0, :]
that focused on flow sequences, the Inter-flow Attention Block 20: youts = mlp(representation)
proposed in this study overcomes the temporal limitation of 21: loss = CrossEntropyLoss(youts , yground _truth )
flow sequences. That is, the Inter-flow Attention Block can 22: loss.backward()
compute a temporally-similar flow sequence to obtain the 23: Optimizer.step()
 24: end for
relationship of each flow with other flows within the context of
the current flow sequence. More importantly, given a specific
flow, the Inter-flow Attention Block can break through the
time constraints and allow all features from different samples class token is passed through a simple MLP with a single
to communicate with each other. An illustration of how the hidden layer and rectified linear unit activation to obtain the
inter-flow attention is performed in a single head is shown in final output. Because the final embedding of [CLS] class
Fig. 5. token is informative about the input flow. Ultimately. the
 In the single-head case, for an embedded flow of a batch, classification process is then optimized by minimizing the
we first get (batch, 3k + 1, d) = f.shape, which differs from cross-entropy loss between the predicted distribution y and
the Intra-flow Attention Block in that each Embedded flow is the true label y. The workflow of the IIT training phase is
regarded as q, k, v. The relationships between the different presented in Algorithm 1.
network flows are computed based on this and expressed as:
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
 f = reshape(f , (1, batch, (3k + 1) · d )), (9)
 The effectiveness of the IIT model for classifying DApp
 q = Wq · f , k = W k · f , v = W v · f , (10)
  √  traffic was evaluated using real-world network-traffic data. The
attn = softmax mm(q, Transpose(k , (0, 2, 1)))/ d , (11) dataset and experimental setup used for the evaluation are
 described in the following sections. The hyperparameters of
 out = mm(attn, v ), (12)
 the IIT model were tuned, and the performance of the IIT
where mm denotes matrix multiplication and Transpose model was compared with those of state-of-the-art models by
denotes a function that swaps the dimensions of an array. defining suitable metrics. In addition, it was demonstrated that
 In the multi-head case, q, k, and v are projected onto the d/h the IIT model exhibited excellent generalization capabilities
dimension instead of the d dimension, where h is the number for malicious traffic classification. Furthermore, an ablation
of heads. The updated vectors vi are then concatenated to study was conducted to determine the importance of each
obtain a vector of length d. component in our proposed model. Finally an explanation of
 the model’s classification behavior was given.
C. Classification Module
 The final component of the IIT model is the classification A. Dataset Collection
module, which is essentially an MLP. For the final prediction Network traffic was captured and non SSL/TLS encrypted
step, the embedded value corresponding only to the [CLS] traffic was filtered out when a user accessed DApps using
400 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 5. Inter-flow single-head self-attention, where batch = 3 and embedding dimension d = 3.

 TABLE II
 D ETAILS OF THE DA PPS DATASET

 The top 44 DApps on Ethereum with the highest number of users were selected to construct a dataset that
 consisted of 14 categories, including Exchanges, Finance,
 Games, and High_risk. A total of 258,471 flows were
 collected, and the number of flows for each DApp are
 summarized in Table II. The number of flows of different
 classes of DApps varied significantly, that is, there was class
 imbalance [36].
 A public dataset of malicious traffic (Malicious_TLS)
 containing 92,034 network flows was used to test the generalization ability of the model [37]. This dataset contained traffic
Fig. 6. Process of DApps traffic capture. generated by 23 families of malicious code active between
 2018 and 2021. All traffic was collected from a real network
Chrome on a personal computer, as shown in Fig. 6. and encrypted using TLS.
Bidirectional flows were considered in this study. The network
packets were divided into flows according to the five-tuple.
Subsequently, the flow relationship representation module was B. Methods in Evaluation
used to obtain the feature vector f corresponding to each The following eleven state-of-the-art approaches were leverflow, and the feature vector f and corresponding label y were aged for evaluation to fully demonstrate the performance of
imported into a comma-separated value (CSV) file. the IIT model.
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 401

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE OF THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

 AppScanner [5] uses 54 statistical features of mobile app cross-validation and obtain the average and standard deviation
network flows as app fingerprints, which are used as inputs to of metrics to measure the performance of IIT. All experiments
an RF to realize real-time identification of mobile app network were carried out on the same platform equipped with an Intel
flows. 12700KF@3.60GHz, 32GB RAM, and an NVIDA GeForce
 GraphDApp [15] transforms the packet length sequence of RTX 3070Ti.
a DApps network flow into a traffic interaction graph, converts
the DApps network flow classification problem into a graph
classification problem, and designs a graph neural network- C. Evaluation on DApps
based classifier using MLP. The evaluation of the effectiveness and efficiency of the IIT
 DF + D [16] uses packet direction sequences as inputs to model is presented in this section. The dataset was essentially
CNNs to identify traffic accessing different websites via Tor. a multi-classification problem where each DApp was a label,
 DF + L [16] uses the same neural network structure as as listed in Table II. The goal was to deduce the DApp to
DF+D. However, the input is a sequence of packet lengths which the flow belonged. ‘
used to classify different Web traffic. 1) Effectiveness: The Acc, Prec, and F1 were utilized as
 FS-Net [17] uses packet-length sequences of encrypted metrics to measure the performances of all methods. The
traffic as input and classifies SSL/TLS traffic by learning the weighted Acc, Prec, and F1 of the ten models are listed in
feature representation of the flow sequences through a multi- Table III.
layer bi-GRU encoder and decoder. The following key observations can be deducted from
 CUMUL [7] abstracts the loading process of a webpage by Table III.
generating a cumulative behavioral representation of its trace, (1) The IIT model outperformed all other methods with the
such as packet ordering or burst behavior, which is fed to an highest Acc (97.164%), Prec (97.275%), and F1 (97.241%).
RF classifier. AppScanner achieved the second-highest Prec (97.318%), but
 BIND [6] extracts characteristics from encrypted traffic by its Acc was only 84.284% because it classified well in some
utilizing data dependencies that occur during the sequential categories but not in others. A total of 19 DApps had Recall
transmissions of network packets. RF is then used to identify values of less than 0.8. For example, the classification effect
the website and app fingerprinting. was the worst for Gandhji, Harvest, Livepeer, nexo, and
 ACID [19] relies on low-dimensional embeddings learned nftegg, whose Recall values were less than 0.6. However, the
using a lightweight neural model comprised of multiple kernel proportion of the number of flows accounted for by these five
networks that optimally separate samples of different classes to DApps reached 5.7%.
classify malware traffic using an adaptive clustering network. (2) Traditional classifiers based on machine-learning meth-
 ProGraph [22] proposes a graph-based approach that uses ods, such as AppScanner and BIND, obtained relatively good
destination, certificate, and domain features to ensure robust results for DApps classification, and AppScanner outpernetwork traffic classification in various network environments. formed DF+D. Compared with DF+D, DF+L used packet
 RoFi [23] uses Traffic Aggregation Matrix (TAM) to repre- length sequences as inputs to the CNN-based classifier. DF+L
sent network flows which is a novel attack model for website outperformed DF+D, indicating that packet length sequences
fingerprinting. were a more effective flow representation than packet direction
 FastTraffic [38] uses the raw bytes in the packet as sequences for the DApps classification task. In addition, this
input and uses only three layers of MLP to accomplish fast proved that the flow representation in this study was effective.
classification. (3) FS-Net and GraphDApp did not perform as well as the
 Three widely used metrics were employed to evaluate proposed IIT model. Although GraphDApp represented the
the performance of IIT: Accuracy (Acc), Precision (Prec) flows by constructing a traffic interaction graph (TIG) with
and F1-Score (F1). We divided the dataset into training, rich information, different DApps used the same cryptographic
validation and testing in the ratio of 8:1:1. We resort to 10-fold protocols that were deployed on the same blockchain platform.
402 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS ON C OARSE -G RAINED DA PPS

 TABLE V
Consequently, the similar handshaking process and data inter- AVERAGE T ESTING T IMES OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS
actions lead to very similar TIGs being constructed by different
DApps flows. Consequently, it was difficult to achieve better
classification accuracy. FS-Net lacked the learning of interflow relationships even when it achieved a classification
accuracy of 84.822%. Conversely, IIT learned intra- and interflow relationships, and therefore performed better.
 An experiment was designed in which the labels of all
the flows belonging to the DApps in a broad category were
set to the same labels. This was done because there was a
great similarity in the behavioral patterns of DApps in the
categories of Finance, Gambling, Games, and High_risk [39].
There were a total of 14 broad categories of DApps, as listed
in Table II. The experimental results are listed in Table IV.
The IIT model was optimal for classifying the Finance and
Gambling classes of DApps. The clustering-based ProGraph
method achieved 98% accuracy in recognizing the DApps of
the Game class, and the machine learning-based BIND method However, FastTraffic had the smallest CPT since it uses only
achieved 99.205% accuracy in recognizing the DApps of the three layers of MLP for traffic prediction.
High_risk class. Overall, IIT achieved the best classification Overall, the maximum and minimum total times used to
results for broad category DApps. predict an unknown flow of DApps across all methods were
 2) Efficiency: The testing times of all methods were com- 21.25 and 0.28 ms, respectively. The CNN-based models
pared after being trained on the DApps dataset to test the (DF+D and DF+L) had similar total times. GraphDApp
actual detection speed of each method. The concepts of feature had the largest total time owing to its time-consuming FET.
extraction time (FET) and classifier prediction time (CPT) FS-Net had the second-longest prediction time owing to its
were used in GraphDApp [15]. Prediction time refers to the complex structure, and AppScanner had the third-longest total
time required to discriminate each flow, and total time refers time because it needed to compute 54-dimensional statistical
to the sum of the FET and CPT. The testing times for all features. The FET for the IIT model only involved calculating
methods are listed in Table V. the CS of the packet length sequences and writing them to
 GraphDApp exhibited the longest FET because building a CSV file, which was accomplished in only 0.74 ms. This
a flow into a TIG is an extremely time-consuming process was the highest accuracy discrimination for unlabeled DAppsthat requires operations to add edges and nodes. The FET encrypted traffic.
of AppScanner was the second longest because of the need 3) Summary: This section presents a summary of the
to utilize the packet length to compute the 54-dimension experimental results on the effectiveness and efficiency of all
statistical features. The FET for the IIT model was slightly methods tested on the DApps dataset. It was verified that the
more complex than those of the DF+D and DF+L because proposed model completed the classification of an unlabeled
it needed to compute the cumulative sum of packet length flow of DApps in the shortest possible time with the most
sequences, which is a process used to compute the statistical accurate identification results. Here, t-SNE [40] is used to
characteristics of the packet length. Among all the deep- provide a more intuitive understanding of the classification
learning-based methods, ProGraph exhibited the longest CPT results and visualize the ability of the IIT model, as shown in
because of its complex model structure. DF+D shares the Fig. 7.
same model structure as DF+L, with only the inputs different. At the fifth epoch, most DApps were mixed together and
Therefore, these classifiers had the same prediction time. difficult to distinguish. At the tenth epoch, DApps of different
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 403

Fig. 7. Visualization to demonstrate the performance of the IIT model using t-SNE.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 PARAMETER S ELECTIONS E FFECTS OF THE N UMBER OF L AYERS L ON ACCURACY
 W HEN h = 4, d = 8

 The effect of other important hyperparameters on model
 complexity and accuracy were also investigated, as outlined
 below.
 2) Depth and Attention Heads: Embedding Size: The IIT
 training process involved the following hyperparameters:
 L, which denotes the number of layers in the attention
 module. The depth of the neural network model is critical for
 classification, and intuitively increasing the depth of the model
 improves classification accuracy. In the IIT model, the model
classes gradually moved away from one other, and those of the
 depth was increased by continuously overlaying one Attention
same class gradually came closer together. The classification
 module on top of another.
results improved as the number of epochs increased when
 h, which denotes attention heads in the multi-head selfepoch > 30.
 attention mechanism. This hyperparameter allows the model
 to use multiple self-attention sub-layers in the same layer with
 different query, key, and value projections in each sub-layer.
D. Parameter Tuning This allows the model to focus on different primitive features
 Determining the optimal hyperparameters for the IIT model separately in different representation subspaces.
is discussed in this section. d, which denotes the embedding dimensions of each feature.
 1) Parameters Selection: The most important step in train- Previously, each one-dimensional feature was mapped to a ding transformer-based neural network models is parameter dimensional vector. The experiments proved that the parameter
tuning, which aims to trade-off the model complexity, clas- d affected the model classification accuracy. In the case of the
sification accuracy, and speed to obtain an optimal set of multi-head self-attention mechanism, the Inter-flow Attention
hyperparameters. Finding the optimal set of hyperparameters Block projects q, k, v onto the d/h dimension instead of a
is a challenging task owing to the extensive number of given dimension d, where h denotes the number of heads. All
IIT hyperparameters and large training datasets. Therefore, updated vectors vi are then concatenated to obtain a vector of
an optimal set of hyperparameters was selected from an length d. This requires that h|d, that is, h, can only be a factor
interval. Specifically, for a fixed hyperparameter, a larger of d when the embedding dimension d of the feature is fixed.
interval was first considered and then it was determined The experimental results for different values of the above
whether the hyperparameter should be increased or decreased hyperparameters are presented in the following section.
according to the model performance. Then, small intervals First, the effect of the number of Attention module layers
for each hyperparameter were considered that improved the L on the classification accuracy of the model is discussed.
performance of the model. Finally, the combination of values The model classification accuracy for a fixed set of h and
in these small intervals constituted the candidate set of optimal d decreased when L increased, as shown in Table VII. The
hyperparameters. Accuracy was used as the evaluation metric. model will be more complex if the number of stacked layers L
 The hyperparameter candidate intervals and final selected is larger. Consequently, the model training time will be longer.
values are listed in Table VI. A learning rate of 0.00005, batch Therefore, 1 was chosen as the value of L.
size of 32, 100 epochs, and a loss function for cross-entropy In the following, L = 1 was fixed and the effects of the
were finally chosen for the IIT model. attention heads (h) and embedding size (d) on the model
404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE VIII
 E FFECT OF d AND h ON ACCURACY (%), W HERE
 h M UST BE A FACTOR OF d

 Fig. 8. Accuracy of different models on Malicious_TLS dataset.
 TABLE IX
 E FFECTS OF THE N UMBER OF PACKETS k ON ACC W HEN
 L = 1, h = 4 AND d = 8 features in each of the representational subspaces in the highdimensional vectors.
 In addition to this, the number of model parameters is
 quadratically related to the model input dimension, with a
 larger model input dimension leading to a dramatic increase
 in the number of model parameters. For example, when
 k = 25, the number of model parameters is 6.8M, and when
 k = 45, the number of model parameters reaches 20.6M. The
 proposed model achieved acceptable accuracy for the 44 class
classification performance were studied. The h and d values classification. Only the first 40 packets of the flow were used to
exhibited a significant impact on model performance for a avoid introducing more packets into the input features, which
fixed L = 1. The highest classification accuracies occurred would make the model highly complex for trivial performance
at (h, d) = (4, 4), (4, 8), (3, 12), and (16, 16), which gains.
were 96.111%, 97.164%, 96.777%, and 97.761%, respectively,
as listed in Table VIII. It is worth noting that the model
 E. Evaluation on Malicious Traffic Classification
parameters increased as d and h increased. The accuracy
improved by 1% for (h, d) = (4, 8) compared with that of (h, Although the IIT model was designed to identify specific
d) = (4, 4). However, the increase in the model parameters DApps, its powerful feature extraction capabilities were also
did not result in a large performance improvement if (h, d) applicable for classifying malicious traffic. Experiments were
was (3, 12) or (2, 16). conducted using a publicly available Malicious_TLS dataset
 In addition, the classification accuracy of the model to evaluate the generalization ability of the IIT model for
decreased if the h and d values were very small. This malicious traffic classification. The Malicious_TLS dataset
suggests that an appropriate number of heads and embedding contains 92,034 flows with 23 classes of malicious traffic,
dimensions are crucial for model performance in a multi-head such as burpsuite_scan and nessus_scan. It should be noted
self-attention mechanism. In summary, h = 4 and d = 8 were that only packet-length sequences were used from the dataset.
selected as the final hyperparameter settings. The classification results of the different methods are shown
 3) Packet Number: The first k packets of the TLS flow in Fig. 8.
were used for DApp traffic classification in the IIT model. GraphDApp, BIND, and ACID exhibited classification accu-
It should be noted that the hyperparameter k will have a racies greater than 95%, indicating that their extracted features
significant effect on the model classification performance, as were sufficient for identifying malicious traffic. Compared
shown in Table IX. First, the IIT accuracy values generally with the results listed in Table III, the accuracy of CUMUL
decreased for lower values of k. Second, the time overhead of decreased by 30% because most of the malicious traffic flows
the DApps classification model increased with the number of were short and contained only a few packets, and it is difficult
packets considered per DApp flow. An interesting phenomenon for CUMUL to extract discriminative features. The accuracy of
is that the accuracy of IIT also decreased if the value of k was the IIT model exceeded 98%, outperforming all other methods,
too high. This was because the hyperparameters used in the indicating that it could also be effectively applied to malicious
experiment at this point were L = 1, h = 4, and d = 8, and traffic classification.
an increase in the number of packets led to an increase in the
dimensions of the feature vectors. Additionally, the number of F. Ablation Studies
attention heads in the multi-head self-attention mechanism was The classification results were also affected by the structure
not sufficient enough to pay attention to the different original of the neural network and model input sequence, such as the
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 405

 TABLE X
 I MPACT OF D IFFERENT F EATURES AS W ELL AS D IFFERENT M ODULES ON IIT P ERFORMANCE

Fig. 9. Similarity measurements with silhouette coefficient metrics for different intra-flow and inter-flow features among 44 DApps. The orange line denotes
the separating line for silhouette coefficient = 0.1.

Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Blocks. Therefore, the impact result. A point is more likely to be assigned to the wrong
of the structure is discussed in detail in this section. All the label if the silhouette coefficient is less than 0. The silhouette
experiments were conducted using the DApps dataset. measurements are shown in Fig. 9.
 The ablation results are presented in Table X. Intra-flow The average silhouette coefficient for most of the 44 DApps
and inter-flow indicate that the Attention modules of the IIT was less than 0.1 when only the Intra-flow Attention Block
contained only the Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Blocks, was used. The average silhouette coefficient for more than
respectively. The IIT model performed the best, regardless 90% of the DApps was greater than 0.1 when the Intra- and
of the model input sequence. Compared with the IIT model, Inter-flow Attention Blocks were used, which was an obvious
the intra-flow and inter-flow models showed different degrees improvement.
of performance degradation. Specifically, the inter-flow model The quantitative measures showed that the learned intraperformed the worst. It is worth noting that the performance flow and inter-flow features displayed more separation for
of the three models declined the most if the model input flows from different DApps and more similarity for flows from
sequences were stripped of temporal information, suggesting the same DApp. Thus, the proposed IIT model achieved a
that the packet arrival timestamp sequences are important considerable performance improvement.
pieces of information.
 Quantitative measures were used to provide a more intuitive
understanding of the Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Blocks. G. Understanding Classifier Behavior
An ideal intra-flow representation ensured a flow similar to that The design of the Attention module in the IIT model could
from an identical DApp but different from those of different easily obtain the importance of different features in the flow
DApps. The silhouette coefficient was employed as a similarity vector f [42]. The behavior of the proposed model using the
metric [41]. The silhouette coefficient simultaneously consid- attention output of the IIT is discussed in this section.
ers the inter- and intra-class distances, in contrast to other As described in the Attention Module, the outputs of
metrics (such as the Euclidean distance) that evaluate the two the Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Blocks were similar to
separately. The silhouette coefficient was calculated for each the weighted adaptation of the input features. The attenbi −ai
sample point i as samplei = max(a , where ai denotes the tion weights estimated the degree of importance of each
 i ,bi )
average distance from sample point i to other sample points in feature in the classification task. There were two types of
the same class (closeness), and bi denotes the minimum value attention encoders in the IIT. The output of the Intra-flow
of the average distance from sample point i to all sample points Attention Block was the weighted adaptation of the hidden
in the other classes (separateness). samplei takes a value in representations of all features in the flow, which measured
the range of [-1, 1], and it is important to note that the closer the importance of each feature for the classification task.
the silhouette coefficient is to 1, the better the classification The Inter-flow Attention Block determines the relevance and
406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 10. Attention map of the IIT model on different DApps.

importance between arbitrary flows, obtaining a comparison different DApps deployed on the same blockchain platform
of the flow with flows of the same and different classes. Thus, showed great similarity. The packet lengths of different DApps
the importance of different features within the flow could be were very different from the tenth to the twentieth packet.
determined. Therefore, the IIT model paid more attention to these distin-
 Typical cases that explain the IIT learned information are guishing features. The first ten features of the packet arrival
shown in Fig. 10. Each image is 120 × 120 px and represents timestamp sequence were more important for Aelf, which
120 samples. Each sample is represented by a 120 dimensional explains why the removal of this class of features from the
vector. The background color indicates the importance of packet arrival timestamp sequence in the ablation experiments
the features, and each pixel point in the image represents a resulted in a more dramatic model decay.
feature. The redder the color, the more important the feature, The proposed method focused on the most distinguishing
and the darker the color, the less important the feature. The features of different DApps. The IIT model provided a more
results demonstrated that the proposed IIT model could suc- complementary perspective on treating intra- and inter-flow
cessfully focus on important features and assign them greater relationships as complementary to each other to fully exploit
weights. their relationships.
 Overall, it can be seen from these six graphs that the
IIT model exhibited different focuses for different classes
of DApps. IIT exhibited the worst classification effect for V. D ISCUSSION
Superrare, with only a 90.62% F1 score. In addition, the Our approach currently has two limitations, the first one
features of the package length CS sequence of the tenth to is that model training consumes large GPU memory, which
twentieth dimensions were the most important features. A bet- limits efficient deployment on low-resource devices. We can
ter classification performance was exhibited for Cryptokitties, appropriately reduce the model’s GPU memory through model
with a 99.23% F1 score. Furthermore, the IIT model paid quantization without degrading the model’s performance. The
attention to the features of the packet length, arrival timestamp, second limitation is the class imbalance problem. Fig. 11
and length CS sequences, which were significantly different shows the confusion matrix of IIT. It can be seen that 8
from the rest of the DApps. These three types of features classes of DApps have a classification accuracy of less than
of Cryptokitties exhibited a strong distinguishing ability. For 90%, among which Ampleforth has the worst classification
Decentral and Ddgeless, the tenth to twentieth features of result with an accuracy of 76.70%, while its total sample
the packet length sequence were more important owing to size is only 2,167 flows. We can solve the class imbalance
the captured DApps traffic being TLS traffic. In addition, the problem by using a combination of resampling techniques or
interaction process of the first ten packets were regarded as a synthetic sample generation methods, which in turn improves
TLS handshaking process, thus the handshaking processes for the performance and usefulness of the overall model.
MENG et al.: IIT: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION 407

 [8] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
 [9] J. Li et al., “Packet-level open-world app fingerprinting on wireless
 traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp. (NDSS), 2022.
 [10] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT-
 FlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic
 classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 Min., 2022, pp. 2576–2584.
 [11] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
 [12] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–15.
 [13] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2019.
 [14] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted
 TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023.
 [15] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate Decentralized
 application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
 neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 [16] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,”
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2018,
Fig. 11. Confusion Matrix of IIT. pp. 1928–1943.
 [17] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [18] Y. Wang, G. Xiong, C. Liu, Z. Li, M. Cui, and G. Gou, “CQNet:
 A clustering-based quadruplet network for decentralized application
 In this study, a novel encrypted traffic classification model classification via encrypted traffic,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Disc.
IIT was proposed to heterogeneously mine the potential Databases. Appl. Data Sci. Track Eur. Conf., 2021, pp. 518–534.
features of intra- and inter-flows for classifying DApps. [19] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
Compared with existing encrypted traffic classification meth- Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
ods, the proposed model did not rely on expert experience [20] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A datato manually design features, and it utilized two encoders, efficient website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” 2018,
 arXiv:1802.10215.
Intra- and Inter-flow Attention Blocks, to mine intra- and [21] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level
inter-flow relationships, respectively, for effective potential relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, Nov.
feature extraction. Based on the results of the DApps dataset, 2022, Art. no. 109309.
 [22] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
it is demonstrated that the accuracy and efficiency of IIT is network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
significantly improved over the state-of-the-art methods. In Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
addition, experiments demonstrate that it also shows excellent [23] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting website
 fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
generalization ability on the malicious traffic classification USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2023, pp. 607–624.
task. [24] X. Zhou et al., “CapsuleFormer: A capsule and transformer combined
 model for Decentralized application encrypted traffic classification,” in
 Proc. 19th ACM ASIA Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2024, pp. 1–12.
 [25] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
 R EFERENCES Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538,
 [1] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview of
 Sep./Oct. 2022.
 blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends,” in
 [26] M. Jiang et al., “FA-Net: More accurate encrypted network traffic
 Proc. IEEE Int. Congr. Big Data (BigData Congr.), 2017, pp. 557–564.
 classification based on burst with self-attention,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
 [2] C. Lin, D. He, X. Huang, M. K. Khan, and K.-K. R. Choo, “DCAP: Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2023, pp. 1–10.
 A secure and efficient decentralized conditional anonymous payment [27] Y. Wang, Z. Li, G. Gou, G. Xiong, C. Wang, and Z. Li, “Identifying
 system based on blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, DApps and user behaviors on Ethereum via encrypted traffic,” in Proc.
 vol. 15, pp. 2440–2452, 2020. 16th EAI Int. Conf. Security Privacy Commun. Netw., 2020, pp. 62–83.
 [3] L. Su et al., “Evil under the sun: Understanding and discovering attacks [28] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted traffic
 on Ethereum decentralized applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security classification of decentralized applications on Ethereum using feature
 Symp. (USENIX Security), 2021, pp. 1307–1324. fusion,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Qual. Service, 2019, pp. 1–10.
 [4] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescape, “AI- [29] X. Hu et al., “Identifying Ethereum traffic based on an active node
 powered Internet traffic classification: Past, present, and future,” IEEE library and DEVp2p features,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 132,
 Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 168–175, Sep. 2024. pp. 162–177, Jul. 2022.
 [5] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner: [30] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Security Privacy (EuroS P), 2014, pp. 781–789.
 pp. 439–454, 2016. [31] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
 [6] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi- traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Security Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
 Appl., 2016, pp. 177–188. [32] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Towards early
 [7] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc. and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 NDSS, 2016, pp. 1–15. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

[33] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training Weina Niu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, software and theory from the University of Electronic Science and Technology
 arXiv:1810.04805. of China in 2018, where she is currently an Associate Professor with the
[34] X. Huang, A. Khetan, M. Cvitkovic, and Z. Karnin, “TabTransformer: School of Computer Science and Engineering. Her research interests include
 Tabular data modeling using contextual embeddings,” 2020, malware analysis, network attack detection, and data security.
 arXiv:2012.06678.
[35] G. Somepalli, M. Goldblum, A. Schwarzschild, C. B. Bruss, and
 T. Goldstein, “SAINT: Improved neural networks for tabular data via
 row attention and contrastive pre-training,” 2021, arXiv:2106.01342.
[36] M. A. S. Saber, M. Ghorbani, A. Bayati, K.-K. Nguyen, and M. Cheriet,
 “Online data center traffic classification based on inter-flow correla- Yongjuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree from Information Engineering
 tions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 60401–60416, 2020. University in 2009, where she currently works with the Henan Key Laboratory
[37] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main research interests include
 on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Security, vol. 131, Aug. 2023, cryptographic analysis and cyberspace security.
 Art. no. 103300.
[38] Y. Xu, J. Cao, K. Song, Q. Xiang, and G. Cheng, “FastTraffic: A
 lightweight method for encrypted traffic fast classification,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 235, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109965.
[39] T. Min and W. Cai, “Portrait of decentralized application users: An
 overview based on large-scale Ethereum data,” CCF Trans. Pervasive Siqi Lu received the Ph.D. degree from the Henan Key Laboratory of Network
 Comput. Interact., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 124–141, 2022. Cryptography Technology, Ministry of Education, where he is a Lecturer.
[40] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. His research interests include blockchain security, formal methods, security
 Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008. protocol, and big data security.
[41] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation
 and validation of cluster analysis,” J. Comput. Appl. Math., vol. 20,
 pp. 53–65, Nov. 1987.
[42] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in
 multimodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Guangsong Li received the Ph.D. degree from the Henan Key Laboratory
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023. of Network Cryptography Technology, Ministry of Education, where he is a
 Professor. His research interests include blockchain security, security protocol,
 information security, and formal methods.

Qianwei Meng is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Henan Key
Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering
University. His research interests include network security and unknown traffic Xiangbin Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Henan Key
detection. Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Ministry of Education.
 His research interests include network traffic classification and artificial
 intelligence.

Qingjun Yuan was born in 1993. He received the Ph.D. degree in
cyber security from Information Engineering University in 2023. He is
currently a Postdoctoral Researcher with the MoE Key Laboratory for
Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, and Wenqi He received the M.S. degree from Zhengzhou University, China,
also a Lecturer with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography in 2020. She currently works with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network
Technology, Information Engineering University. His research interests Cryptography Technology, Ministry of Education. Her research interests
include side-channel analysis and encrypted traffic analytics. include area of network security and complex data analysis.