IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025 8205

 Integrating ML and Blockchain for
 Consumer-Centric Approaches in Securing
 Data Transmission on IoT Networks
 Bo Yuan and Faguo Wu

 Abstract—Data security and privacy are becoming more between suppliers and customers, creating a more sophisessential due to the quick expansion of “Internet of Things ticated, efficient system with higher service quality and
(IoT)”, particularly in consumer-focused applications. To improve financial advantages [2]. As IoT networks get expand, the
the security of data transmission in IoT networks, this study
provides a novel architecture that combines Blockchain with security and privacy of transmitted data become complex,
Machine Learning (ML) to address critical security threats like so it requires effective protection mechanisms to address
data integrity breaches, unauthorised access and cyber-attacks. the cyber threats and unauthorized access. As all of this is
The suggested solution uses a hybrid blockchain paradigm that going on, artificial intelligence (AI) enables these consumer
combines public and private blockchain capabilities to ensure devices to become increasingly sophisticated and capable of
data integrity and safe access management. Machine learning
algorithms, including anomaly detection and classification tech- making judgments on their own by learning from the data
niques, are utilised to quickly monitor and analyse network they gather [3]. Machine Learning (ML), particularly anomaly
traffic, identify possible risks, and enhance the system’s resilience detection and classification models plays important role in
against cyber-attacks. The platform also uses neural networks monitoring IoT network traffic and helps to reduce the possible
based on transfer learning for dynamic trust validation and threats in real time. Though these methods have advanced
IP rotation using moving target defense (MTD) mechanisms
to reduce attacks and strengthen the security. Also, optimised but, they also have disadvantages, particularly in handling
resource management techniques are used to improve stability large scale security challenges. For instance, traditional cenand reduce computational complexities. Combining these tech- tralized security mechanisms struggle with scalability and
nologies strengthens data security while giving users more control dynamic access control in IoT networks. To address these
over their data. This method offers a workable solution for the concerns blockchain technology acts as an important role [4],
safe implementation of IoT networks in consumer applications
by addressing the issues of scalability, latency, and energy which is crucial to consumer electronics because it increases
efficiency. efficiency, security, and transparency. One of its essential
 applications is making sure Internet of Things (IoT) devices
 Index Terms—Blockchain, data transmission, Internet of
Things, anomaly detection, machine learning, security. are secure. Manufacturers may use blockchain technology to
 create tamper-resistant systems that lower the possibility of
 unauthorized access or manipulation [5]. Moreover, blockchain
 I. I NTRODUCTION provides control over personal data and improves privacy due
 HE TOTAL automation of the communication system
T without the need for outside engagement has been made
possible by technological modernization as a smooth and
 to decentralized Manufacturers may use blockchain technology
 to create tamper-resistant identity verification [6]. It reduces
 processing complexity and communication overhead compared
effective means of enhancing human comfort. IoT technologies to the traditional centralized method [7]. Hybrid blockchain
also aid in the creation of an enduring urban model and models combines public and private blockchain abilities which
the maintenance of superior quality of life by providing improves both security and computational efficiency. Again,
secure and efficient data exchange [1]. These technologies the edge caching considerably enhances end users’ overall
include trackers, actuators, sensors, alarms, and sirens that service experience by utilizing edge nodes’ caching and data
offer dependable, two-way energy transfer and data sharing processing capabilities to deliver lower latency and more
 Received 13 August 2024; revised 13 March 2025 and 5 May 2025;
 robust services [8]. The fundamentals of digital money and
accepted 14 June 2025. Date of publication 20 June 2025; date of cur- the viability analysis of intelligent operating systems are only
rent version 7 November 2025. This work was supported by the Beijing two sectors in which blockchain technology’s three functions
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing.
(Corresponding author: Bo Yuan.)
 have expanded its frontiers. Conversely, safety is ensured
 Bo Yuan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, the by blockchain technology [9]. A communal data structure
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, and the Beijing called a blockchain was created to hold every transaction.
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: boyuan@buaa.edu.cn). The references between the blocks from the chain. We refer
 Faguo Wu is with the Key Laboratory of Mathematics, Informatics and to the first blockchain as genesis. The three components of
Behavioral Semantics, the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and the Beijing every block are the transaction, block subtitle, and oper-
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: faguo@buaa.edu.cn). ation counter [10]. It functions as a dispersed structure
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3581570 for data storage. Blockchain security is predicated on the
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
8206 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

concept of “proof of work (PoW)”, whereby communication sharing, is often restricted in IoT devices. This lack of
is deemed valid as long as the system can demonstrate transparency and control may impact consumer adoption
that approved nodes complete sufficient computing tasks. and acceptability of IoT technology, which may give rise
The miner, responsible for creating blocks, continuously uses to problems with trust and worries about data exploitahash calculations to try and solve cryptographic problems or tion.
proof of work [11]. Blockchain requires expensive storage for
massive numbers of data. However, it works well to store B. Research Contribution
data hashes in the ledger rather than the actual data [12].
 The innovative points offered for safe cloud comput-
Therefore, we combine Blockchain and Machine Learning to
 ing security services are mentioned. The following are the
provide Consumer-Centric Solutions for Safe Data Transfer
 research’s principal contributions:
on IoT Networks. By considering the decentralized ability,
 • The hybrid blockchain architecture presented by this
transparency and secure data transferring ability we chosen the
 research combines the advantages of private and pubblockchain technology specifically in this study. Apart from
 lic blockchains. Cloud Service Providers (CIP) play an
the advantage that blockchain is not sufficient individually
 important role in the approach, the paradigm addresses
to fully secure the IoT networks. It requires complementary
 scalability challenges and improves data security and
security strategies to reduce attack surfaces and improve
 integrity, making it appropriate for managing the Internet
system resilience. Therefore, we integrate the machine learning
 of Things network’s high throughput and low latency
techniques to address the need for intelligent decision making
 strain.
such as anomaly detection, pattern recognition and adaptive
 • The paper presents a unique access control approach
optimization in resource constrained and dynamic IoT envithat dynamically manages policies by leveraging machine
ronments.
 learning methods like Fuzzy Inference Systems (FIS),
 which allows the system to make more accurate and
A. Motivation efficient access control decisions based on the fuzzy
 logic. Role-based and attribute-based access controls are
 Despite the significant challenges of implementing
 supported by this framework, ensuring flexible and secure
blockchain technology, many previous studies have contributed
 data access according to specific user requirements and
to cloud computing security through various technologies,
 network roles.
including “machine learning (ML)” and blockchain. However,
 • The application of advanced machine learning methods
the problems associated with cloud computing security have
 to track and examine IoT network traffic, such as neural
not yet been resolved. The primary issue that these studies
 networks and anomaly detection algorithms, is a signifhave addressed is as follows:
 icant addition. Due to this integration, the system can
 Data Security and Privacy Concerns: Data transmission
 instantly identify and react to security threats, enhancing
and storage volumes have risen dramatically with the increase
 the network’s overall resilience.
in the Internet of Things strategy. This data is a prominent
 • The proposed model integrates MTD mechanisms of
target for cyberattacks as it frequently contains sensitive perdynamic IP rotation to reduce attack surfaces and prevent
sonal information. It is tough to ensure the privacy, accuracy,
 adversaries from exploiting static network risks. By utiand accessibility of this data.
 lizing a Domain Name System (DNS) pool, the system
 • Ineffective and Exposable Access Control Systems:
 continuously rotates the service IP address to avoid
 Because they are frequently centralised and based on prepotential attackers.
 established rules, traditional access control solutions do
 • The study uses optimisation techniques to improve
 not quickly adapt to the dynamic nature of the Internet
 resource management and allocation effectiveness in the
 of Things settings. These systems lack the flexibility to
 Internet of Things environment. Proof of Work (PoW)
 accommodate a wide range of user needs and responsimechanisms are involved to provide a layer of security.
 bilities and may be open to unwanted access.
 One example is using machine learning-based techniques
 • Problems with Scalability in Blockchain-Based Systems:
 to minimise computational overhead and energy con-
 Blockchain technology presents substantial scaling issues
 sumption in feature selection and decision-making.
 despite its high-security characteristics, such as trans-
 • By integrating blockchain’s immutability and transparency and immutability. Large-scale IoT networks may
 parency properties, the proposed system improves
 find it difficult to use public blockchains because of their
 customer control over their data. Through Cloud Service
 high latency and low throughput.
 Providers (CSP) users obtain better control over the
 • Complexity of Identifying and Reacting to Anomalies: The
 collection, storage, and sharing of information. It builds
 massive volume of data generated by IoT devices and
 confidence and promotes the wider use of IoT technology
 their diverse nature makes it more challenging to identify
 by allowing users to control permissions and monitor how
 irregularities and security concerns. Current machine
 their data is used.
 learning techniques may need a lot of resources and may
 not function well, particularly in contexts with limited
 resources. C. Paper Organization
 • Absence of Consumer Data Control: Customers’ control The outstanding section of this work are approved as
 over their data, including its collection, storage, and follows: Section II presents an overview of previous research
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8207

gaps and works on service allocation and intrusion detection networks. The proposed system is predicated on nodes’ altruisin cloud and IoT environments; Section III offers a detailed tic actions. BeRout, to node’s previous behaviour and actions,
clarification of the suggested work, complete with equations to achieve a high delivery ratio in IoT opportunistic network
and an appropriate diagram; Section IV describes the simu- scenarios. A buffer management method has been presented to
lation setup of the recommended work, the reproduction tool effectively and efficiently use buffer space [21]. In this study,
and its simulation parameters; Section V provides an overall they propose a revolutionary method to ensure transparent and
summary of the proposed work and compares it to existing safe communication in consumer electronics. To improve the
works. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. security and precision of the system, they provide a weighted
 product model and a multi-criterion decision-making model
 named TOPSIS. The research [22] presents a novel security
 architecture for intelligent healthcare that uses blockchain
 II. R ELATED W ORK technology to identify and counteract ransomware threats,
 This section covers a study of the literature on blockchain- which we call BSFR-SH. The consequences of the security
based secure data transfer on IoT networks and machine learning exhibit that the suggested BSFR-SH is secure from
learning. Blockchain-based IoT cloud platforms are employed ransomware assaults.
for security and privacy in innovative healthcare, according In this research [23], they introduce a novel two-level
to this article’s proposal for a secure architecture supported privacy-preserving system. They choose this structure above
by federated learning and blockchain [13]. Scalable machine other approaches like differential privacy and completely
learning applications, such as healthcare, use federated learn- homomorphic encryption because it synergises “federated
ing technologies. In this paper, they propose to use blockchain learning” with incompletely homomorphic encryption. They
technology to defend FL technologies running in the “Internet suggested the AI-enabled deep learning model-based zero
of Things (IoT)” strategy from assault. Securing the integrity trust security (AIDL-XTS) architecture for device, user, and
of the trained models is made possible by integrating FL with application authentication and verification at each access
Blockchain, hence averting model poisoning incidents [14]. request stage. They employ a Deep CNN-BiLSTM network
With this research, extensive data analytics services that are to authenticate users based on smartphone sensor data. In
safe and maintain privacy may be obtained by integrating addition, they suggested using a trust score based on the Bayes
Blockchain technology with FL. Fuzzy hashing is our sug- theorem to assess the security of zero trust [24], [25]. All
gested method to recognise variation and irregularity in the users, devices, and apps are assumed to be untrusted in this
FL-trained model against poisoning attempts, safeguarding proposed architecture, necessitating verification and authentithe truthfulness of user data and the qualified model. They cation for each access request, irrespective of the user’s device
tell a wireless sensing framework that supports CIoT devices or location. They suggest a methodology called Auditable
by utilising semantic capabilities [15], [16]. CIoT devices Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning (AP2FL), specifically
can reduce energy usage by transmitting just the small-sized designed for medical device use [26]. Data leakage concerns
retrieved information taken from raw data, allowing for the are successfully mitigated by AP2FL, which uses Trusted
extraction of semantically meaningful information. They have Execution Environments (TEE) to enable safe preparation and
also created a multi-dimensional contract incentive mechanism aggregation operations on the consumer and server sides. In
that, considering the existence of information asymmetry, the suggested system, batch normalisation (BN) approaches
provides suitable incentives for various categories of CIoT are applied to find data similarities and condense user updates,
devices based on their computation and communication costs. and the “Active Personalized Federated Learning (ActPerFL)”
 The secure architecture for the DTs’ cooperation in con- model is used to manage non-IID data. Furthermore, they
sumer electronics is provided in this work [17]. Then, using a provide audit technology in AP2FL that exposes each client’s
consensus model that integrates blockchain, digital twins, and input to the FL procedure, allowing the universal represenreal-time consumer device monitoring, they have developed an tation to be updated across various data distributions and
access control mechanism. Blockchain technology is employed kinds. They provide a safe fitness framework built on an
in the proposed framework to enable consumer electronics Internet of Things-enabled blockchain network and machineproducts based on digital twins. They specifically developed learning techniques [27]. The proposed architecture consists of
a cooperative blockchain architecture that prioritises real-time two modules: an enhanced relationship and inference engine
access control and a distributed chain code model based on enabled by smart contracts to extract meaningful information
manufacturer, merchant, and device users. To shield the health- and hidden insights from IoT and user device network data
care sector against phishing attempts, a suggested machine and an IoT network established by blockchain to provide
learning (ML) technique was trained on a sizable dataset to security and integrity to sensing data. The upgraded smart
identify the traits that separate phishing from non-phishing contract aims to give consumers practical applications by
URLs [18], [19]. The model was trained using the characteris- providing simple access, control, real-time monitoring, and
tics extracted from the URLs. Individuals and businesses can immutable logs of devices dispersed across different domains.
take proactive steps to safeguard themselves from the harmful The inference engine module looks for important information
impacts of phishing assaults by recognising phishing URLs in and underlying patterns in data gathered from IoT settings to
real time. This paper suggests [20] BeRout, a unique message- provide simple services and enable effective decision-making.
forwarding technique, for consumer-centric IoT opportunistic They describe intrusion detection estimation-enabled private
8208 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the suggested design.

 the password is accurate; authentication is unsuccessful. The
 IAES method generates a long-term secret key for examination
Fig. 1. Integration of blockchain and machine learning techniques. verification, which the protected representative supplies. The
 password, secret key, and user and examine recommendations
 are encrypted and stored in the Cloud Chain to improve
blockchain-based smart home network architecture for the security. The exclusive step of the method is similar, but the
Fused Real-Time Sequential Deep Extreme Learning Machine alteration is occurring, as shown in the following phases.
(RTS-DELM) system model [28]. This research examines the The algorithm is connected through supplemental key cre-
RTS-DELM approach used in blockchain-established elegant ation and adds key steps.
homes to look for potentially harmful activities. The decision- Step 1: Using the registered credentials, generate the key.
level and data fusion techniques are also applied to improve Step 2: A 256-bit key matrix is produced using an 8-bit
accuracy. LSFR based on registered IDs.
 Step 3: 8-bit linear feedback squelch with maximum dura-
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD tion G8 + G8 + G8 + G8 + 1, that produces 28 − 1 = 2558-bit
 FSR is a maximum length feedback polynomial with random
 The most important objective of the suggested study is outputs.
to secure data transfer on “Internet of Things networks” by Step 4: Using LFSR, which indicates the key from the key
integrating blockchain knowledge and “machine learning’. The matrix, create a random integer at each round.
integration of both these technologies provides a secure and Step 5: The XOR operation processes the registered credenintelligent framework. Where blockchain ensure data integrity, tials, m1 and m2, at the addition round key phase.
and machine learning helps to enhance the system adaptability Step 6: Reduce the number of rounds to half of the initial
in real-time conditions. The planned work’s general architec- round. Based on the random number, select one key from the
ture is seen in Fig. 1 and the integration of blockchain and key array.
machine learning is shown Fig. 2. The master key M, which is a 256-bit key in key expansion,
 is used by the AES algorithm to secure itself as it generates
A. Imagine Authentication With a Password a key schedule using an essential expansion routine. Ti: The
 The secure agent gives a four-digit number based on a first sub-key generated by the key expansion is the initial
picture for authentication. Every user first registers with the key, which yields an 11-sub-key array with a 16-length that
secure agent with their login credentials, which include their is functional for the digits. An identically sized sub-key is
user ID, password, role, and fingerprint. Services then register generated for each encryption round. A substitution table is
their credentials with the secure agent, providing their service used as input to carry out a one-by-one byte value replacement
ID, name, location, and service categories. After the registra- process utilizing the nonlinear and invertible S-box. Table I
tion procedure is finished, the authentication process starts. displays the parameters for the AES algorithm.
Throughout the login procedure, users enter their password
visually. One hundred pictures are in a 10*10 image grid on
the login page. There are three copies of each picture, and B. User Demand Exploration
users must specify a password consisting of four numbers Following verification, the gateway looks into userthat they can choose from the photos by clicking on the examined requirements to make sure the CSP isn’t being
picture grid. The secure agent identifies the user as valid if hacked. The gateway first verifies whether an incoming request
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8209

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for Encryption where ψ0 a threshold for is classifying these examples with
Input: Registered credentials strong confidence in their lesson  
  tags; nt,m is the predicted
Output: ω nt,1 and N
 label of nt,m that results from  t is the collection
Begin of pseudo-labelled information examples that come from Nt ,
State = Initstate-run (pictxt, secretM) with Ft being the conforming quasi labels. Tasters who satisfy
 Add key (state, sk0 ) disease are not part of or related to the data. The quasi-labels
 For j=1 to ge -1 do associated with this data are appended to  Ft .
 Sub Bytes (state) Consider using these anticipated labels to tell the database,
 Shift Dins (state) for instance, about the exceptional tasters of Nt . Thus
 Mix Columns (state) employing these instances in advance to obtain dishonourable
 Add key (state, mj ) information.
 Sub bytes (state)
 R (nt,m )
 Shift Rows (state) ϕ2R (nt,m ) = R 2 j (2)
 Add Key (state, mtj−1 ) j=1 2 (nt,m )
End for
 The sickness 7 score assesses whether the samples match
End
 the quasi-code tags based on surety ratings.
 TABLE I if( t ∪
 t ← N
 Ft,m = arg(ϕ2u (nt,m ))) then((N
 IAES A LGORITHM PARAMETERS
 Ft ← 
 {nt,m };  Ft ∪ {nt,m })) (3)
 When nt,m is included in complaint number 3, it might be
 utilised to indicate that the parties involved are unable to agree
 on the period label for nt,m . Because of this, mmust be handed
 down and cannot be used to mount embarrassment.
 The current knowledge series is completed to the method
 after Nt and Ft have been eliminated, and if the location of
 the mass statistics is available, it is (t ← t + 1).
 This integrates the idea that every unlabelled trial at the
 policymaking stage should have a fresh, well-read awareness
is valid or fraudulent. Based on parameters like examin- from the unlabeled data into the resolution-making course
ing innovation rate, discussing needs, and time trudge, the label t. This accepts the possibility that both copies have been
suggested work uses a fuzzy presumption organization to prepared.
validate the arriving packets. The used FIS comprises two 
 ωR (n)
 ϕ2R (n) + 
self-organized evolving FIS and a conclusion producer that,  ∗ ∗
 F = R ; R = argmax (4)
when combined, provide better accuracy and computational R=1,2....R 2
efficiency when making judgments based on user requests. The process and customer demand resolution that enabled
The fraudulent requests are discarded in this step, and only illogical assumptions about the objective and the development
authentic requests are submitted for service classification. of the most recent wisdom judgment, as well as the assignment
 A coarser semi-supervised learning process is necessary for of partial tasks along with copies, allowed for route junction
healthy models to perform equally well as supervised and and learned reproductions, which in turn started the expecsemi-supervised models. However, the optimal configuration tation of the administrative lecture and amenity assortment
may be troublesome in rural areas. manner for fulfilling employee wish cares.
 During this step, the supervised and semi-supervised The gateway itself additionally categorises the valid requests
deuce sub-models are certified using the information as responsive and non-sensitive queries. The suggested work
chunks N1 , N2 , . . . , NT with the associated tag values uses an improved machine learning technique called SCSVM,
F1 , F1 , . . . , , FT The following stage and twitch to be trained which was established in the examiner category to carry out
from unlabeled data hunk come after the algorithm process efficient, valid request categorization. Using SCSVM instead
labeled with tagged data. of traditional SVM is justified because it reduces undesired
 At this point, the information base is being advanced computation and does not require a model training procedure.
by quasi-classification of the unlabeled pieces. If we Examples of standard datasets are allowed to be L =
have a new information hunk Nt (t > T), we may crop [1 , 2 , .., t ] ∈ IH×F and the hyperplane for aim resolution be
    grades to get
the confidence  an example of Nt . ωt = G() = ψϑ() − δ = 0. we make the following assumption and
 ω nt,1 , 
  ω(ntPt, ) in support of dishonorable
 ω nt,2 , . . . ,  break down the hard optimization:
supplementary information.
 H
 1 1
 if ( max ( t ← N
 ω(nt,m )) ≥ ψ0 ) then (N t ∪ min ψ2 + ζj − δ
 i−=1,2,...R ψ∈G,ζ ∈J ,δ∈J 2
 H HE
 j=1
 Ft ← 
 {nt,m };  nt,m })
 Ft ∪ { (1) s.t. ψϑ(j ) ≥ δ − ζj , ζj ≥ 0 (5)
8210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 For the overhead equality, H stands for the keep-fit dataset C. Secure and Optimal Service Selection
charity, E for the regularisation constraint, ζj for the floppy After legitimate requests are classified as sensitive or nonflexible agreement to any dataset, δ for the decision flat outside sensitive, the recommended work is to perform the best and
that possibly will be evident by distribution, and ϑ for the safest service selection for the sensitive and non-sensitive
way of spatial mapping the statistics. By making known to requests, respectively. More specifically, a request from a
multipliers ζj ≥ 0 as well as λj ≥ 0 and interpreting the sensitive user in the CSP is matched with the best and safest
Lagrange balances, the classic is decoded eventually. sensitive service, and a request from a non-sensitive user
 H
 is matched with the best and safest non-sensitive service.
 1 1 Ant colonies are optimised based on service availability, trust
 F(ψ, ζ, ς, λ) = ψ2 + ζj − δ
 2 HE ratings, QoS, and user input to achieve the best and safest
 j=1
 possible service allocation. These metrics offer weight values
 H H
 and rankings to collect responsive and non-sensitive services in
 − ςj [ψϑ(Lj − δ + ζj ] − λ j ζj (6)
 the CSPs. A sensitive request from the ranking set is assigned
 j=1 j=1
 to the highest-rated sensitive service, while a non-sensitive
 Utilizing the fractional discrepancy of the variables in the request is assigned to the highest-ranked non-sensitive service.
comparison beyond, one may acquire the pairwise custom of In the end, the suggested work implements the “Moving
the optimization unruly [7]: Target Defence (MTD) mechanism”, which involves the MTD
 representative, a blockchain-deployed agent switching service
 min ς Yς (7) IP addresses based on gateway data to prevent external
 ς
 attackers’ attacks on the services provided by cloud ser-
 H
 1 vice providers. The MTD agent dynamically rotates the IP
 s.t. ≤ ςj ≤ , ςj = 1 (8) addresses of the services from the pool of “IP addresses in the
 HE
 j=1
 Domain Name Server (DNS). Through MTD, attacker costs
 Y is found inside the kernel matrix of Yji and Yji can be can grow without affecting user quality of service (QoS) in
uttered as: CSPs”.
 Often employed as a metaheuristic to solve combinatorial
 Yji = P(j , i ) = ϑ(j )ϑ(i) (9) optimisation issues such as the Optimal Path Problem or
 the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), the “Ant Colony
  
 In this gaussian and genuine kernel principle, P j , i is Optimization (ACO)” approach is inspired by the foraging
the kernel collecting. For the RBF essential part purpose, behaviour of ants. Applying ACO typically entails stating the
for instance, the organised diagram is presented with the problem, graph-spatializing it, initialising pheromone levels,
kernel function’s adjacent unique parameter, ω, continuously using virtual ants to build solutions, evaluating the quality of
indicating the RBF kernel function’s width. the solution, updating pheromone levels, iterating, coming to
 an end based on a stopping criterion, and optionally post-
 −j ,i 2
 processing the work. The ACO algorithm’s steps are listed in
 P(j , i ) = M 2ω2 (10) the following order. Here, we use pheromone trail matrix in
 ACO denotes the accumulated pheromone levels on the edges
 It is possible to solve ς and multiply ψ and δ separately
 of a search space, which guides the ants to reach the better
by figuring out the excessive quadratic indoctrination trick:
 solution. ACO is applied to improve service allocation by
 H simulating the foraging behavior of ants. This can efficiently
 ψ= ςj ϑ(j ) (11) matching the sensitive and non-sensitive request based on QoS.
 j=1 Startup: Configure the early pheromone following a tem-
 H plate, the number of iterations, and the number of ants. The
 δ= ςj ϑ(j , i ) (12) pheromone trail matrix stores the quantity of pheromone on
 j=1 every border of the grid.
 2. Creation of candidate solutions: Using a grouping of the
 From the disentangled ψ and δ, an overexcited resolution pheromone follow and the reserve between the present node
plane in the astronomical article may be established.  and the subsequent node, each ant repeatedly chooses which
 It is customary to organize the test sample G Qp ( = node to visit next to generate candidates. The primary goal
0, 1, .., E) in support of the exercise setQ = [Q1 , . . . ., QE ] ∈ of probabilistic rules is to assess the chance of occurrences
IE×F using an assessment job H(Pq)(q = 0, 1, . . . , F) based or outcomes established on existing facts and make wellon the detachment of Euclid. informed predictions or judgments in undecided situations. A
 probabilistic rule, provided by:, is used to make the selection.
 G(Qp ) = sigt(ϑψ(Qp ) − δ) (13)

 The trial illustration Qp ’s supervisory role G(Qp ) is private
as a positive session, and it is arranged by arranging the cir- [τji ]α .[ηji ]β
 Qji =  α β
 (14)
cumstances of Qp concerning the pronouncement hyperplane. m∈Vunvisite [τjm ] .[ηjm ]
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8211

 The pheromone following on the border (j, i) is represented in two flavours: hybrid IDS-based user revocation and attribute
by τ j, i, and Qj, i is the likelihood of selecting node i, known revocation.
that the ant is presently at node i. The reserve among nodes Because a vast quantity of data comes from many sources,
i and j is reciprocal and is represented by the ηji . α is the RNN autoencoder compresses the input data. Therefore,
the pheromone follow significance feature, β represents the adopting data compression to save hardware storage is crucial.
collection of unvisited nodes, where unvisited is the heuristic Increased communication bandwidth may also benefit the
information significance factor. It refers to the influence of system’s performance.
additional problem specific information, which helps ants to In addition, the decoder uses the compressed input data
make more informed decisions. to synthesize new data. Assume for the moment that the
 3. Pheromone trails are updated based on the efficacy of malicious contents from the link to be written as follows were
the remedies found once the ants have finished their journeys. extracted ω using the auto-encoder β. $$ = 1 2 , . . . , k !!.
Higher pheromone trails are given to reasonable solutions, For each link, k represents the total amount of harmful
whereas lower pheromone trails are given to wrong solutions. materials.
As stated by the updated rule After eliminating the hidden harmful contents from the link ,
 the auto-encoder βe deduces the malicious contents Dk , which
 τji = (1 − ρ)τji + τji (15) is then formulated as βe : → ω. Meanwhile, the decoder
 βc rebuilds the link and writes βe : ω→ after that. In the
 The measure of pheromone stored on the border (j, i) is
 case of the auto-encoder and auto-decoder, where ω: content
represented by τji , whereas ρ represents the evaporation rate.
 illustration for the connection.
 4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 as needed until the stopping criterion
 After being taught, the RNN autoencoder βe Fig. out how
is met. The number of iterations, the longest time restriction,
 likely it is to identify harmful connections. The RNN may
or the calibre of the answers discovered can all be used as the
 trigger the link’s whole, harmful content and involves the
stopping criteria.
 hidden state Vg . Thus, every time step n, computed by –18,
 5. Pick the optimal course of action: The tour’s duration or
 updates the input and output hidden states of the RNN.
other objective function is used to determine the best outcome.
 The ACO optimisation technique employs a pheromone Vg (n) = f (βe)(Zj • Vg (n − 1) × n ) (16)
trail to direct an ant colony toward optimal solutions. The
 f (n) = f (o)(Zo • Vg (n − 1) × n ) (17)
pheromone trail, which is modified by the algorithm according
to the calibre of the solutions found, impacts the ants’ Once the link has been accessed, the final hidden state of
choice of the subsequent terminal. The applicability of the the RNN is applied as a content illustration ω for the link.
technique is well suited to large search regions. While they GRU is used in conjunction with RNN to reduce computational
are distinct algorithms used in artificial intelligence and opti- complexity, enhance memory capacity, facilitate successful
misation, Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) techniques have model training, and provide early observation if a situation
many similarities. These parallels include the capacity to be arises that calls for early observation in order to make future
applied to intricate issues, the ability to balance exploration predictions.
and exploitation, the potential for distributed and parallel To ascertain the likelihood of harmful information, an
processing, iterative improvement, and stochastic optimisation. automated encoder βe obtains the input link J(n) from the
 Relatively tiny jumps indicate the tomtit moment. Using GRU. The input to the subsequent hidden state, Vg (n) − 1,
a phase scope f, one may achieve this solution by adding is processed using the sigmoid function. Until the output
numerically. If some people arrange success in terms of decision βe(n)O about the harmful contents from the provided
education, then the group leader should be positioned at this link is achieved, this procedure keeps going. To identify any
boundary, and the followers should be placed first to get the potentially harmful information in the following URL, the
best outcome. encoder is reset. The encoder has updated features Eβe(n) that
 are necessary for updating the subsequent layer. Furthermore,
D. Adaptive Access Control and Dual Revocation Bβe(n) the process can be activated by the encoder.
 We first allocate the services to the right users and then cre- The following is the formula for content detection using
 automated encoding with the GRU: In this case, at first for
ate a new access control mechanism based on role, trust, and
attribute in that sequence. Service type and user roles are taken n = 0 and βe(n)O = 0, Therefore, it may be ascertained as:
into account. The user’s attributes are displayed, including Eβe(n) = σsigmoid {(∀ρ.Eβe(n, )
user ID, role, password, and biometrics. The Recurrent Neural
 +(∀ ∪ .Eβe(n, Vg (n − 1) )+∀.Eβe(n)} (18)
Networks technique may be used to define trust based on the
characteristics and roles of the users. The suggested access Rβe(n) = σsigmoid {(∀ρ.Rβe(n).l)
control system uses RNN to build dynamic access restrictions +(∀ ∪ .Rβe(n).Vg (n − 1)+∀.Rβe(n)} (19)
that take into account the users’ current status. RNN are used Bβe(n) = ϕg{(βe(n)O.l)(∀B ∪ .Bβe(n)×(Rβe(n)
for detecting anomalies in incoming request. Based on the
 ⊕Vg (n − 1) )+∀.Vg } (20)
dynamic policies, we also create an access control map. Illegal
access may be quickly identified by creating an access control βe(n)O = {(1 − Eβe(n))
map, and it can be lessened by reversing two times. Revocation ⊕(βe(n)O − 1)+(Eβe(n)⊕Bβe(n))} (21)
8212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

where Vg (n)ϕg is the hyperbolic tangent and σsigmoid is the input data is added to the memory information stream at each
sigmoid iteration. This is how the procedure is expressed:
 The auto-encoder’s parameters, ∀ρ, ∀∪, and ∀, are utilized
to aid in the detection of malicious data. j = σ (Zn .[gn−1 , yn ] + j ) (28)
 A potential value for the memory unit in the present Dn is
 ω = βe(n, ∀ρ) (22)
 determined by:
 One crucial component that takes the ω as an input to
 Dn = tang(Zd .[gn−1 , yn ] + d ) (29)
start the construction process is the decoder. To generate the
malicious output content sequence, another
  RNN is utilized  in where in tang (·), the hyperbolic tangent function, has values
the construction of the decoder βc. j = j1 , j2 , . . . , jk With between –1 and 1.
every time step n, the decoder’s concealed state is triggered. e − e−
 tang () = (30)
 Vg (n) = f (βe)(Zj • Vg − 1, j ) n
 (23) e + e−
 To manage the material transferred to the following
 The total likelihood of creating the malicious output
 iteration, or the memory unit’s output state value, the LSTM
sequence that generates the input link is
 model employs an output gate. An output gate’s calculation is
 k as follows:
 (j(|;θc |) = (jn |jn − 1|, jn − 2, . . . j1 , ω, θc ) (24)
 j=1
 on = σ (Zo .[gn−1 , yn ] + o ) (31)

where θc : the decoder’s argument The corresponding bias vector of the affine transformation
 To lessen the negative impact of the probability p for all of is o , and Zo is the output gate’s weight matrix. When is
the malicious contents of the connection, the auto-encoder’s used as the point multiplication operation, the memory unit’s
components mutually train with each other. state value is modified as follows:
 D n = fn Dn−1 + jn Dn (32)
 k
 k
 (∀ρ, ∀∪, ∀,θc ) = − log (jn |n ;ρ, ∀∪, ∀,θc ) (25) Ultimately, the value of the output is computed by:
 n=1
 gn = on .tang(Dn ) (33)
The trust model may forecast each node’s trust if the normalized trust complies with the input data for the LSTM Furthermore, infectious strictures were excisioned covertly.
architecture-based trust modeling. Consequently, the contrastive model’s knowledge route
 A recurrent neural structure makes up the LSTM model. becomes less necessary to accomplish firm mining, causing
 Cell states, which preserve context from previous observa- the exercise duration to slow down.
tions to more accurately forecast future states, compose its
fundamental structure. Give the input and output data at time IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
n, yn and gn , respectively. Three gating mechanisms make In this part, we offer the suggested consumer-centric
up the model: j, f , and o stand for contribution gateway, approaches to data transmission security on IoT networks,
not remember gate, and output gate, correspondingly. Dn which integrate blockchain technology and machine learning.
represents the memory cell’s state value at time n. The There are three subsections in this experimental study: comfollowing steps comprise the updating process of an LSTM parative analysis, simulation setup, and explicit. As may be
unit: seen from the results section, the suggested work performs
 The forget gate is utilized by the LSTM layer to ascertain better than earlier efforts.
the information required to discard the input Ytn at the current
step, as well as gn−1 from the previous iteration. The impact of A. Simulation Setup
past data on the current memory unit’s state value is managed
 The NS-3.26 network simulator is used to implement the
by the forget gate. The procedure’s purpose is:
 simulation result of this suggested work with IoT simulation,
 fn = σ (Zf .[gn−1 , yn ] + f ) (26) which enhances the performance of this study. Our approach
 produces higher performance, as demonstrated by comparing
where the forget gate’s bias vector is denoted by f and its the suggested framework with other performance indicators.
weight matrix is represented by Zf . With a range of 0 to 1, σ (·) The setup of the system is shown in Table II.
represents the logistic sigmoid commencement purpose. Total
memory is represent by a value of 1, and zero signifies that B. Comparative Analysis
all data should be discarded.
 In this segment, we presented the comparative study of
 1
 σ () = (27) two current works, AP2FL and Cloud-IoT, with the suggested
 1 + e− ML and Blockchain for Consumer-Centric Approaches in
 Using the input gate, which regulates how the current input safeguarding Data transmission over IoT Networks. The most
affects the memory unit’s state value, the LSTM chooses what important objective of this research is to develop an access
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8213

 TABLE II
 S YSTEM PARAMETER

control organization based on safe cloud security services.
In terms of attack detection rate, overhead, unauthorized Fig. 3. Attack detection rate.
access, throughput, traffic rate, and latency, the suggested work
performed better.
 Impact of attack detection rate: The rate at which attacks
are detected in cloud security services is estimated using this
KPI. This may be described as follows: the ratio of detected
attacks to the growing number of users is commonly used to
depict this.
 ϕh
 Uo = (34)
 G
where Uo indicates how often the assault is detected. This
indicates the ever-increasing number of users that the system
with a high detection rate may reach to obtain a safe cloud
security service. It also explains the assaults detected G . The
assessment of the uncovering rate and numeral of requirements
for both the suggested and current mechanism is shown in
Fig. (3). Compared to previous work on AP2FL and Cloud-
IoT, the evaluation result shows that the suggested has a higher Fig. 4. Overhead.
recognition rate. Our approach involves photo verification of
the pictures by the protected agent to verify that together, the
consumer and the examiner are real. This helps to decrease where JW represents the sent packet, and xeu shows the overharmful traffic in the network by excluding illegitimate users. head packets that are sent during overhead. Fig. (4) compares
In addition to avoiding traffic in the network, which raises the number of requests and overhead for the proposed and
transfer masses and results in inefficient load balancing, the completed works. The comparative analysis reveals that the
current approach pays little attention to legitimate users. proposed approach has achieved lower overhead compared to
However, some environment users may be sending fraudulent the ongoing work on AP2FL and Cloud-IoT. We carry out
traffic over the network. the optimum service selection by the secure choice for the
 When comparing the suggested Integrating ML and sensitive and non-sensitive services in the CSP for a non-
Blockchain approach to the shortened 52, where the sensitive user request to obtain the optimal secure service
performance of the outgoing works is 40, and the AP2FL is 35, allocation using those metrics. We assign weight values and
the show aggression recognition rate is raised. The suggested rank the set of sensitive and non-sensitive items. While
work’s average attack detection rate for 500 requests is 96, determining the cloud service allocation characteristic, the
indicating that it outperforms previous work like AP2FL’s 85 current work assigns services by considering less the service
and Cloud-IoT’s 70. The numerical data displayed in the graph selection values of the ideal metrics that may be allocated to
suggest that our suggested approach outperforms the current low features of determinants of the optimal features allocation.
work. When comparing the suggested technique to the shortened
 Impact of overhead: The overhead refers to the ratio 7, where the existing work performs 12 and Cloud-IoT does
of lost bandwidth needed to transfer the payload. The extra 14, the overhead is decreased. The average overhead of the
information given to the packet header above the payload proposed work for 500 requests is 15, indicating that we
ensures that a packet reaches its intended recipient. outperform existing work, with scores of 23 for AP2FL and
 xeu 28 for Cloud-IoT. The graph’s numerical results show that our
 OG = (35) recommended task performs better than the existing endeavour.
 JWh
8214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 5. Throughputs. Fig. 6. Delay.

 Impact of throughput: The quantity of data packets that rate.
are successfully transferred during a specific amount of time N
 i=1 (Treceived,i − Tsent,i )
is known as throughput, and it may be expressed as, D= (37)
 N
 sucx ∗avgxe The comparison between the number of requirements for
 NQ = × 100% (36) both planned and accessible mechanisms and the delay is
 o
 shown in Fig. 6. The comparative result shows that the
where sucx the packet stands for the successful packets, o for suggested has reduced overhead compared to the current work
the average packet size, and t for the entire amount of time on Cloud-IoT and AP2FL. Our approach involves thwarting
was transmitted. The throughput and number of requests for external attackers’ attacks on cloud service providers’ services.
both the proposed and current works are compared in Fig. The system we propose to implement does this by randomly
(5). The comparative result shows that, when compared to assigning service IP addresses based on gateway information.
the previous work on Cloud-IoT and AP2FL, the suggested The IP addresses of the services are dynamically rearranged by
has achieved reduced overhead. To effectively decide, we the agents from the DNS pool of IP addresses. By using CSP
utilize FIS, composed of two self-organised developed FIS services, the attacker’s expenses rise without compromising
and a decision maker, based on user demands, which offer the users’ quality of service. Attacks on the services that were
enhanced accuracy and computing efficiency, respectively. provided, as well as the providers’ disregard for the network
Genuine requests are submitted for service categorisation in attacker, cloud service comparison, and the attackers’ provided
this phase, with the fraudulent requests being rejected. Valid quantity of the environment’s structural and functional capabilrequests are also divided into sensitive and non-sensitive ities of the delay procedures of the identified attackers’ cloud
categories by the gateway. The current method investigates services, were conducted in the work that has already been
user requests with less attention to user requests. It makes done.
decisions on user requests that consider limited features, In contrast to the shorter 110, where the current works do
which offers less accuracy and throughput while using a basic 125 and 135 jobs, the proposed approach reduces delay in
machine learning algorithm that varies slightly from the user- task completion. Based on the average delay of the proposed
assigned process of that work. It is not yet possible to classify work for ten requests, which is 150, we surpass existing work,
a user who may be inadequately supplying packet services such as AP2FL, which is 180, and Cloud-IoT, which is 192.
based on their valid requests to get the users’ access to the The numerical results shown in the graph indicate that our
resources. proposed method performs better than past efforts.
 The throughput of the suggested technique is higher than Impact of unauthorized access: Processing a storage
the existing works’ 32 and 28 when compared to the truncated request involves using technology to compute and store data.
50. We surpass the present work, which is 290 for Cloud-IoT A computer’s storage system allows it to store data for a
and 310 for AP2FL, with an average throughput of 342 for 500 temporary or permanent period.
requests in the proposed work. The numerical data displayed The contrast between the amount of requests for both
in the graph suggest that our suggested approach outperforms proposed and current works and illegal access is shown in
the current work. Fig. (6). The comparative result shows that the suggested has
 Impact of delay: The stoppage indicates how long it took reduced overhead compared to the current work on Cloudfor the suggested employment to upload and download the IoT and AP2FL. At work, we employ an access control
services, respectively, and the user request. The delay time map that shows odd versions for a given value if a user’s
needs to be reduced as much as feasible to enhance the data attribute expires before the time stamp that is set. Rather
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8215

 Fig. 9. Comparative analysis with state of art methods.

Fig. 7. Unauthorized access.

 Fig. 10. Comparison of pheromone trails and heuristic information in service
 selection using ACO algorithm.
Fig. 8. RNN based trust mechanism.

 optimization (ACO) [30], miner revenue optimization algorithm (MROA) [31], Genetic Algorithm based ant Lion
than penalizing, the proposed work informed that attribute
 Optimization Energy Efficient Multipath routing protocol
variation performs attribute updating. Furthermore, a virtual
 (GALOEEM) [32]. When compared with these models the
firewall, a hybrid intrusion detection system, is installed in
 suggested model outperforms with the existing model in terms
the cloud environment to monitor user storage request traffic
 of security, QoS, and resource efficiency.
and differentiate between safe and dangerous requests. The
 Figure 10 shows the service selection process based on
suggested work’s qualities and distribution are used for user
 ACO algorithm which illustrates the selection frequency
identification in the current work, which improves power
 and attractiveness of services like A) authentication serdistribution and preserves the work’s determinacies.
 vice, B) Encryption service C) Request verification service
 When compared to the shortened 15, wherever the exit
 D) Service classification service E) MTD service over 100
mechanism performs 25 and 35, the proposed technique
 iterations.
performs illegal access lowered. Our work outperforms prior
work such as AP2FL, which has an attack detection rate of
65, and Cloud-IoT, which has an attack detection rate of 85, V. C ONCLUSION
with an average of 35 for 250 storage requests. Our suggested This study presents a comprehensive approach to enhance
work outperforms previous work, according to the numerical data security and privacy in Internet of Things networks
findings displayed in the graph. through the combination of Blockchain and Machine Learning
 Figure 8 shows trust score based on the changes in user technologies. Key issues with data integrity and safe access
behavior. Initially, the trust score is set at the base level,finally control are addressed by the suggested hybrid blockchain
it fluctuates based on the user interactions. approach, which combines public and private blockchain
 Figure 9 shows the overall comparison analysis with the functionality. The system can promptly identify and address
state of art methods of Ant Colony optimization with Multi possible security risks by utilizing machine learning algo-
Kernel Support Vector (ACOMKSVM) [29], Ant colony rithms that incorporate sophisticated anomaly detection and
8216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

classification methods. To further ensure that the system [10] O. A. Alzubi, J. A. Alzubi, K. Shankar, and D. Gupta, “Blockchain
adjusts to changing security situations and offers strong and artificial intelligence enabled privacy-preserving medical data transmission in Internet of Things,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol.,
defense against cyberattacks, neural networks based on trans- vol. 32, no. 12, 2021, Art. no. e4360.
fer learning are used for dynamic trust validation. The [11] H. Vargas, C. Lozano-Garzon, G. A. Montoya, and Y. Donoso,
integration of hybrid blockchain models ensures that the “Detection of security attacks in industrial IoT networks: A blockchain
 and machine learning approach,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 21, p. 2662,
security mechanisms scale efficiently when the IoT networks 2021.
expand. With the ability to handle large volumes of data and [12] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framedevices, the system can maintain high throughput by reducing work using blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart
latency. Also, the use of machine learning algorithms, allows cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341,
 Jul.–Sep. 2021.
the system to continuously respond to user behavior and attack [13] S. Singh, S. Rathore, O. Alfarraj, A. Tolba, and B. Yoon, “A framework
patterns, which ensures continuous security in a changing envi- for privacy-preservation of IoT healthcare data using federated learning
ronment. Incorporating advanced optimization methods for and blockchain technology,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 129,
 pp. 380–388, Apr. 2022.
resource management balances scalability, latency, and energy [14] D. Unal, M. Hammoudeh, M. A. Khan, A. Abuarqoub, G. Epiphaniou,
consumption concerns while simultaneously increasing system and R. Hamila, “Integration of federated machine learning and
performance. Also, proposed model effectively protects against blockchain for the provision of secure big data analytics for Internet of
 Things,” Comput. Secur., vol. 109, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 102393.
DDoS, man-in-the middle and data manipulation issues. [15] D. Ye, X. Huang, G. Cheng, and M. S. Hossain, “Multi-dimensional
 All things considered, this research provides a workable contract design for energy-efficient wireless sensing in consumer-centric
and novel approach to IoT network security, especially for E-commerce systems,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4,
 pp. 6883–6891, Nov. 2024.
consumer-focused applications. It increases the overall relia-
 [16] S. Sathesh, S. Maheswaran, P. Mohanavenkatesan,
bility of IoT devices and gives consumers more control over M. Mohammed Azarudeen, K. Sowmitha, and S. Subash, “Allowance
their data. The results of this study open the door for a of driving based on drowsiness detection using audio and video
wider acceptance and implementation of IoT technologies in processing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Data Sci., 2022,
 pp. 235–250.
numerous consumer and industrial applications by supporting [17] A. Sasikumar, L. Ravi, M. Devarajan, S. Vairavasundaram, K. Kotecha,
the continuous efforts to create more secure, effective, and and N. Herencsar, “Sustainable Electronics: A blockchain-empowered
user-friendly IoT environments. Future research could focus on digital twin based governance system for consumer electronic products,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4968–4975,
enhancing these technologies and investigating their potential May 2024.
integration into intricate and expansive IoT networks. [18] P. K. Roy, A. Kumar, and A. Singh, “Advanced learning for phishing
 URLs detection to secure consumer-centric applications,” IEEE Trans.
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5756–5763, Aug. 2024.
 R EFERENCES [19] S. Sathesh et al., “Smart medicine kit using embedded IoT for visually
 and hearing-impaired patients,” Nat. Volatiles Essent. Oils J., vol. 8,
 [1] G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, C. T. Calafate, and M. S. Halimi, no. 5, pp. 127–138, 2021.
 “SecureBlock: An ML-blockchain consumer-centric sustainable solution [20] P. Kumar, N. Chauhan, N. Chaurasia, K. K. Agarwal, A. Vidyarthi, and
 for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, D. Gupta, “Benevolence behavior based message forwarding scheme
 pp. 1452–1462, Feb. 2024. for consumer-centric IoT opportunistic networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 [2] M. F. Ayub, X. Li, K. Mahmood, S. Shamshad, M. A. Saleem, and Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 6892–6900, Nov. 2024.
 M. Omar, “Secure consumer-centric demand response management
 [21] A. Kumar, G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, M. Bilal, and T. R. Gadekallu,
 in resilient smart grid as industry 5.0 application with blockchain-
 “A secure architectural model using blockchain and estimated trust
 based authentication,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
 mechanism in electronic consumers,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 pp. 1370–1379, Feb. 2024.
 vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 996–1004, Nov. 2023.
 [3] Y. Li, J. Shen, P. Vijayakumar, C.-F. Lai, A. Sivaraman, and
 [22] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchain-enabled
 P. K. Sharma, “Next-generation consumer electronics data auditing
 security framework against ransomware attacks for smart healthscheme towards cloud-edge distributed and resilient machine learncare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
 ing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2244–2256,
 Feb. 20223.
 Feb. 2024.
 [4] S. Bhardwaj, S. Harit, and A. Yadav, “Towards a software-defined [23] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
 networking model for consumer-centric content delivery network for “Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
 IoT,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 35, no. 1, 2024, detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Art. no. e4903. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
 [5] P. Tiwari, A. Lakhan, R. H. Jhaveri, and T.-M. Grønli, “Consumer- [24] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. S. Thangakrishnan, T. V. Ramana,
 centric Internet of Medical Things for cyborg applications based on A. K. Bashir, and A. A. AlZubi, “Artificial intelligence based zero
 federated reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., trust security approach for consumer industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 756–764, Nov. 2023. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5411–5418, Aug. 2024.
 [6] J. K. Mudhar, J. Malhotra, and S. Rani, “Blockchain-based decentral- [25] M. Shanmugam, I. Natarajan, V. Balasubramaniam, R. D. Gomathi, and
 ized access control framework for enhanced security and privacy for S. Shanmugam, “Smart lights for smart city,” in Smart Cities: Concepts,
 consumer electronic devices,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, Practices, and Applications, 1st ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
 no. 1, pp. 6944–6951, Nov. 2024. 2022, pp. 223–243.
 [7] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola, [26] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “AP2FL:
 and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in Auditable privacy-preserving federated learning framework for elecconsumer-centric Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., tronics in healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, Feb. 2024. pp. 2527–2535, Feb. 2024.
 [8] G. Liu, G. Bao, M. Bilal, A. Jones, Z. Jing, and X. Xu, “Edge data [27] F. Jamil, H. K. Kahng, S. Kim, and D.-H. Kim, “Towards secure fitness
 caching with consumer-centric service prediction in resilient industry framework based on IoT-enabled blockchain network integrated with
 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1482–1492, machine learning algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 1640, 2021.
 Feb. 2024. [28] M. S. Farooq, S. Khan, A. Rehman, S. Abbas, M. A. Khan, and
 [9] A. Shankar and C. Maple, “Securing the Internet of Things-enabled S. O. Hwang, “Blockchain-based smart home networks security empowsmart city infrastructure using a hybrid framework,” Comput. Commun., ered with fused machine learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 12, p. 4522,
 vol. 205, pp. 127–135, May 2023. 2022.
YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES 8217

[29] B. Le Nguyen et al., “Privacy preserving blockchain technique to achieve Faguo Wu born in Anqing, Anhui, China. He
 secure and reliable sharing of IoT data,” Comput., Mater. Continua, received the Ph.D. degree. He is an Associate
 vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 87–107, 2020. Professor. His research direction is anti quantum
[30] C. Zhou and Z. Jiang, “Computer network communication computing, artificial intelligence, blockchain, and
 security encryption system based on ant colony optimization information security.
 algorithm,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 228, pp. 38–46, Nov. 2023.
[31] Y Chen et al., “Miner revenue optimization algorithm based on Pareto
 artificial bee colony in blockchain network,” EURASIP J. Wireless
 Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, p. 146, Dec. 2021.
[32] A. R. Ponjothi and P. Parwekar, “Bidirectional blockchainbased secure
 data transfer using GALOEEM routing protocol in WSN,” J. Comput.
 Sci., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 964–976, 2023.

 Bo Yuan is currently pursuing the Doctoral degree
 with the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
 Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, where he
 is a Senior Engineer. His research interests include:
 blockchain, information security, and computing
 network.