IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 1909

IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid Network Intrusion Detection
 System in IoV Using Large Language Models
 Mengyi Fu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Pan Wang , Member, IEEE, Minyao Liu , Ze Zhang ,
 and Xiaokang Zhou , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The traditional vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) Experiments demonstrate that IoV-BERT-IDS outperforms in CIgradually evolved into the Internet of Vehicles (IoV), which has also CIDS, BoT-IoT, Car-Hacking, and In-vehicle network intrusion
become a potential target for attacks and faces security challenges detection challenge (IVN-IDS) datasets and shows good generalin an open network environment. Intrusion detection systems (IDS) isation capabilities to in-vehicle networks of different vehicles.
based on machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are introduced to mitigate security threats. However, existing ML/DL-based Index Terms—BERT, intrusion detection system, Internet of
IDS suffer from challenges in IoV environments. First, due to the Vehicle, large language model, pre-training model.
limitations of ML/DL-based methods, classification performance
is unsatisfactory when they extract only unidirectional contextual I. INTRODUCTION
features or spatial characteristics. Second, existing research on
 ITH the increasing demand for road and in-vehicle status
in-vehicle network IDS often limits validation and testing to a static
dataset of a single vehicle model. This approach may not adequately
address diverse potential attacks in a dynamic environment. Third,
 W monitoring, smart connected cars are equipped with intelligent systems, remote communication applications, and senfew studies of hybrid IDS can simultaneously implement in-vehicle
and extra-vehicle network intrusion detection. Large language
 sors. By combining smart connected vehicles [1] with the new
models (LLM) have shown outstanding applications in fields such generation of information and communication technologies, the
as natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV). traditional Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) has gradually
In particular, bidirectional encoder representations from trans- evolved into the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [2]. As shown in
formers (BERT) obtain new state-of-the-art results on eleven fa- Fig. 1, the IoV can be divided into two main components: the
mous NLP tasks. Consequently, this paper introduces a hybrid
network IDS in IoV utilising LLM, denoted as IoV-BERT-IDS. This
 extra-vehicle and in-vehicle networks. Extra-vehicle network
framework encompasses four modules: semantic extractor (SE), refers to Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X), covering Vehicle-toinput embedding, IoV-BERT-IDS pre-training, and IoV-BERT-IDS Vehicle (V2V) [3], Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) [4], Vehiclefine-tuning. To conform to the BERT model, the semantic extractor to-Network (V2N), and Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P). In conis introduced to transform traffic data devoid of apparent semantics trast, the in-vehicle network [5] refers to the network structure
into contextual semantics, comprising bidirectional and unidirectional SE. Through SE, controller area network (CAN) data is
 inside the vehicle, which contains various hardware, subsystems,
transformed into a CAN byte sentence (CBS), while extra-vehicle and their communications inside the vehicle. In a narrow sense,
network traffic data is transformed into a traffic byte sentence the extra-vehicle network mentioned in this paper focuses on
(TBS). Additionally, two pre-training tasks, the masked byte word the traditional internet network, and the in-vehicle network
model (MBWM) and next byte sentence prediction (NBSP) are refers to the in-vehicular CAN bus network. Multiple network
proposed to acquire bidirectional contextual features from contextual semantics. These features can be adapted to downstream tasks
 connections are created between different types of terminals,
in both in-vehicle and extra-vehicle networks through fine-tuning. and multiple transmission protocols exist. Under terminal quantisation, network heterogeneity, and connection diversification
 in IoV, vehicle-road-cloud messaging may be eavesdropped,
 Manuscript received 11 January 2024; revised 24 April 2024; accepted tampered with, and blocked, resulting in privacy leakage of
27 April 2024. Date of publication 17 May 2024; date of current version
14 February 2025. This work was supported in part by Future Network Innova- multiple parties and even causing serious traffic accidents [6].
tion Research and Application Projects under Grant 2021FNA02006, in part by Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) can actively monitor network
the Development of an Ultra-large-scale Ubiquitous Network Quality Monitor- traffic without affecting network performance, detect real-time
ing System Based on Trusted Edge Intelligence under Grant SYG202311, and in
part by the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Public Big Data under Grant attacks, and respond to changing networks.
PBD2022-10. The review of this article was coordinated by the Guest Editors IDSs based on Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning
of the Special Section on Large Models for Future Vehicles and Transportation. (DL) have powerful mass data processing capability and un-
(Corresponding author: Pan Wang.)
 Mengyi Fu, Pan Wang, Minyao Liu, and Ze Zhang are with the School of known attack detection capability [7], which makes them the
Modern Posts, Nanjing University of Post and Telecommunications, Nanjing mainstreams to solve the security challenges of IoV. However,
210003, China (e-mail: 2023070802@njupt.edu.cn; wangpan@njupt.edu.cn; there are significant differences in the encoding rules for the data
1222097606@njupt.edu.cn; 1022072003@njupt.edu.cn).
 Xiaokang Zhou was with the Faculty of Data Science, Shiga University, and arbitration segments used by the Controller Area Network
Hikone 522-8522, Japan, and also with the RIKEN Center for Advanced In- (CAN) bus [8] within the in-vehicle network. Additionally,
telligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan. He is now with the Faculty as network services evolve, the network protocols used in the
of Business Data Science, Kansai University, Osaka 565-0823, Japan (e-mail:
zhou@kansai-u.ac.jp). extra-vehicle network constantly expand. The syntax structures
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3402366 of headers and payload sections in different network traffic also
 0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Extra-vehicle network vs. in-vehicle network.

exhibit notable variations. Consequently, these models demon- 1) During the pre-training process, integrating semantic instrate insufficient generalisation abilities in intrusion detection formation effectively is challenging due to the heterogewithin the IoV. Researchers such as Pan Wang have proposed neous headers and payloads in traffic data.
the method ByteSGAN [9], which utilises Generative Adver- 2) The lack of uniformity in protocols between in-vehicle
sarial Networks (GAN) to resample and generate minority- networks and extra-vehicle networks makes it difficult
class samples for data augmentation. Although these techniques to align features from both types of traffic. Encoding
enhance data diversity through resampling, the resulting aug- multi-modal IoV traffic into a common semantic space
mented samples may not accurately represent the true traffic becomes a challenge.
distribution, failing to address the model’s generalisation issue 3) Designing effective pre-training tasks to achieve contexfundamentally. Huoh et al. [10] introduced an approach combin- tual understanding and capture bidirectional context feaing the original byte-level features with meta-features related tures in traffic data is essential for addressing the context
to traffic to leverage the relationships between packets fully. dependency in traffic classification tasks.
These features are inputs to a Graph Neural Network (GNN) This paper contributes in the following aspects:
to enhance the model’s generalisation performance. While this 1) This paper introduces IoV-BERT-IDS, a hybrid network
method improves feature representation and extraction from a traffic IDS designed for both in-vehicle and extra-vehicle
structural perspective, it still relies on a substantial number of networks, leveraging the BERT model. By representing
labelled samples for fine-tuning. In scenarios where labelled raw traffic data from both networks as hexadecimal strings
samples are scarce, achieving effective model generalisation called Byte Sentences (BS, introduced in Section III), IoVremains challenging. BERT-IDS can learn a generic representation of traffic and
 Large-scale language models have recently entered an era be fine-tuned to address intrusion detection tasks for both
of rapid development in natural language processing, computer networks individually.
vision, and other fields. Google’s BERT [11] first proved the 2) IoV-BERT-IDS proposes a novel data preprocessing
strong potential of pre-trained models; OpenAI’s GPT series, method called Semantic Extractor. This method addresses
Anthropic’s Claude and so on, continue to explore the bound- the challenge of processing traffic data with ambiguous
aries of language models. Motivated by ET-BERT [12], which semantics, transforming it into contextual semantic traffic
has performed well on multiple benchmarks in natural language pairs. It comprises two components as in Fig. 2: unidiprocessing, BERT remains a suitable solution. Therefore, this rectional SE processes unlabeled packet data as USL for
paper attempts to apply BERT to the field of IoV for traffic fine-tuning, while bidirectional SE extracts labelled packet
intrusion detection. The goal is to enhance model generalisation pairs as BSL for pre-training.
under the constraint of limited labelled samples by leveraging 3) The paper introduces two pre-training tasks: the Masked
massive unlabeled pre-training and fine-tuning with a small Byte Word Model (MBWM) and the Next Byte Sentence
amount of labelled data. Prediction (NBSP). These tasks aim to learn bidirectional
 However, considering the unique characteristics of raw traffic contextual features from contextual semantics.
input and network task output, existing NLP pre-training models 4) The model is validated using diverse datasets, includcannot be directly applied to the domain of network traffic. ing CICIDS [13], BoT-IoT [14], Car-Hacking [15], and
Constructing a BERT pre-training model for network traffic In-vehicle network intrusion detection challenge (IVNfaces several challenges: IDS) datasets. Experimental results showcase the model’s
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1911

Fig. 2. The overall framework of IoV-BERT-IDS. Semantic Extractor: (a) Bidirectional SE. IoV_BERT pretraining: (a) Input embedding. (b) IoV-BERT.
(c) Pretrain tasks.

 high intrusion detection accuracy for in-vehicle and extra- and implementing necessary defensive measures to uphold
 vehicle networks. Notably, the model demonstrates well vehicle safety [16]. Li et al. [17] developed an IDS with a
 generalisation across various in-vehicle networks of dif- Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), leveraging transfer
 ferent vehicles. and ensemble learning, achieving over 99.25% detection
 The chapter organisation of this paper is as follows: Sec- rates but struggled with temporal relationships and feature
tion I is an overall introduction; Section II is related research representation. Alladi et al. [18] presented an AI-based
works; Section III is the preliminary for the subsequent sections; intrusion detection architecture utilizing Deep Learning
Section IV presents the framework and description for IoV- Engines (DLE) on Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC)
BERT-IDS; Section V illustrates the experimental setup includ- servers for cybersecurity in the IoV network. Nie et al. [19]
ing the dataset, experimental design, and evaluation metrics.; employed CNN to analyze RSU link load behaviors against
Section VI is the evaluation of IoV-BERT-IDS through experi- various attacks. Yu at al. [20] constructed a Federated Long
ments; Section VII is the conclusion. Short-term Memory (Federated-LSTM) based IDS, based on
 the periodicity of in-vehicle network message ID sequence. Li
 II. RELATED WORKS et al. [21] proposed a Multitiered Hybrid IDS (MTH-IDS) that
 incorporates signature-based and anomaly-based IDS, achieving
A. Intrusion Detection in Internet of Vehicles high F1-scores for the zero-day attack detection on vehicular
 The intrusion detection system in IoV monitors vehicle networks. With the increasing integration of Electronic Control
networks’ real-time status. Its capabilities include identifying Units (ECUs) and the lack of encryption and authentication
potential security threats like hacker attacks and virus infections in CAN, Alkhatib et al. [22] introduced CAN-BERT, a
1912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

DL-based IDS that utilises BERT to learn CAN bus arbitration III. PRELIMINARY
identifier sequences for detecting cyber attack, addressing the
 A. Problem Formulation
vulnerability of ECUs and unencrypted CAN communication.
 1) Definitions Related to Network Traffic:
 r Packet: In the extra-vehicle network, a packet represents
B. Pre-Training Model the smallest unit of a flow. The in-vehicle network refers to
 In natural language processing, the deep bidirectional pre- CAN data frames, which consist of two main parts: CAN
training model based on Transformers achieves the best results ID and Payload Data.
for multiple tasks. With this representation type and structure, r Flow: Flow and session definitions are only for extra-
Li et al. [23] presented a Unified Pre-trained Language Model vehicle networks. Flow identification is based on a quin-
(UniLM) that was achieved by employing a shared transformer tuple consisting of the source address, the destination
network and utilising specific self-attention masks to control address, the source port, the destination port, and the
what context the prediction conditions on. In sequence-to- TCP/UDP protocol. It is denoted as F = p1 , p2 , . . ., pn ,
sequence tasks, UniLM manages context exposure differently where pi represents packets with the same quintuple.
for its encoder and decoder, thus effectively controlling con- r Session: Session is also known as bi-directional flow when
text under diverse prediction conditions, enhancing the model’s the same source address, destination address, source port,
versatility and performance. In addition, the wide applications and destination port are used for up-flow and down-flow.
of pre-training models in cross-domains [24], [25], such as It is notated as S = Fsrc→dst + Fdst→src .
speech recognition and computer vision, demonstrate their ad- 2) Semantic List (SL): Semantic List (SL) is divided into
vantages of utilising unlabeled data to help learn robust fea- BSL and USL, which are the outputs of BSE and USE, reture representations on limited labeled data. A comprehensive spectively. BSL is an unlabelled bi-directional semantic list
study on unsupervised pretraining [26] for Transformer-based consisting of two fields, byte sentence_a and byte sentence_b,
speech recognition was conducted in paper [27], focusing on which corresponds to the inputs text_a and text_b of the BERT.
Masked Predictive Coding (MPC). Zhou et al. [28] presented a USL is a labelled uni-directional semantic list consisting of
unified Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) model, which was byte sentence_a and label. It can be seen that byte sentence
pre-trained on many image-text pairs. is the basic unit of composing SL. Following vehicle network,
 In network traffic classification, Hendrycks et al. [29] showed byte sentences can be classified into in-vehicle network CAN
that although pre-training may not improve performance on Byte Sentences (CBS) and extra-vehicle network Traffic Byte
traditional classification metrics, it improves model robustness Sentences (TBS).
and uncertainty estimates. Through extensive experiments on
label corruption, class imbalance, and more, they demonstrated
 B. BERT Model Architecture
large gains from pre-training and complementary effects with
task-specific methods. The first attempt was made to provide a BERT is a neural network model that relies entirely on an
generative pre-trained model, NetGPT [30], for traffic under- attention mechanism for parallel computation. Each bidirecstanding and generation tasks. Through multi-mode network tional transformer encoder has the same structure, including
traffic modeling, text input, header field cleaning, packet seg- a multi-head self-attention mechanism module, a feed-forward
mentation and label and prompt merging are unified, so as to neural network module, and a residual connection and layer noroptimize the adaptability of the pre-trained model to diverse malisation module. The transformer block used in this method is
tasks. Horowicz et al. [31] proposed using unsupervised Con- characterised by its one-to-one correspondence and the exact ditrastive Learning (CL) [32], [33] to enhance flow image samples mensions for inputs and outputs. The one-to-one correspondence
and alleviate the issue of small-sample flow classification. Lin in transformer enables it to process the positional information of
et al. [12] proposes a new traffic feature representation model each unit in the sequence through positional encoding. In addicalled ET-BERT, which extracts context packet-level representa- tion, allowing the model to compute the feature representations
tion from large-scale traffic raw packets to improve the accuracy of different positions in parallel can better handle long sequences
of downstream classification tasks. Ferrag et al. [34] proposes a and improve the training efficiency of the model compared to
novel network-based cyber threat detection method using LLMs serial sequential processing such as LSTM.
and introduces a privacy preserving encoding approach called 1) Multiple Self-Attention Mechanism: The attention mechfixed-length language encoding (FLLE). The paper implements anism is a function that maps a query Q, and a set of key-value
and trains the BERT architecture from scratch for multi-category (K-V ) pairs with M elements to a value. The existing Scaled
classification and adopts FalconLLM as an incident response and Dot-Product Attention (SDPA) is defined as follows.
recovery system.  
 In conclusion, utilising LLM is a promising approach for QK T
 AttentionSDP A (Q, K, V ) = softmax √ V (1)
achieving robust IDS in both in-vehicle and extra-vehicle scenar- dk
ios. Therefore, this paper employs LLM to implement intrusion
detection in vehicular networks, emphasising the capability where N and M denote the lengths of the query and key (or
of BERT to capture bidirectional contextual features and ef- value); Dk and Dv denote the dimensions of the key (or query)
fectively generalise. This addresses the limitations present in and value; the scaling factor √1d is used for normalisation,
 k
existing ML/DL-based IDS [35], which may overlook potential decoupling the vector dimension from the softmax distribution,
contextual features. and avoiding gradient vanishing during training.
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1913

 2) Feed-Forward Neural Network: After the self-attention this gap, we propose a Semantic Extractor module that transmechanism, the bidirectional transformer encoder includes a forms network traffic data into a semantic list. The module
feed-forward neural network. This network performs non-linear primarily consists of Bidirectional SE (BSE) and Unidirectional
transformations on the input at each position to capture more SE (USE), respectively employed during the pre-training and
complex features. The Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFN) fine-tuning stages. The present approach involves exclusively
consists of two fully connected layers. The first layer uses the utilising extra-vehicle network data for the pre-training phase.
activation function ReLU to enhance the model’s non-linear ex- Subsequently, in the fine-tuning phase, regardless of whether
pression ability. The corresponding F F N function is as follows: the data stems from in-vehicle or extra-vehicle network traffic,
 packets are processed using the USE to derive the USL, which
 is then fed as input to the model.
 F F N = max (0, XW1 + b1 ) W2 + b2 (2)
 2) Input Embedding: Input embedding involves combining
where X is the input; W1 and b1 are the learnable parameters of token, segment, and position embeddings to form a comprehenthe first ReLU fully connected layer; W2 and b2 are the learnable sive numerical representation of the input sequence. This process
parameters of the second fully connected layer. transforms the byte sentence into a format that can be effectively
 3) Residual Connection and Layer Normalization: This part processed by the IoV-BERT-IDS, preserving crucial semantic,
consists of two parts: residual connection and layer normalisa- syntactic, and positional information necessary for the model to
tion. In a residual connection, the input is added directly to the learn.
output of one layer as the input of the next layer. This approach 3) IoV-BERT-IDS Pre-Training: Given the unlabeled BSL,
is typically used for multi-layer network training and focuses the pre-trained model is required to learn a general representhe network only on the current difference. The input of each tation of traffic, completing the basic level of education durneural network layer is normalised using layer normalisation to ing the pre-training stage. To learn traffic representations with
speed up model convergence and enhance generalisation ability. relative semanticisation, two tasks are proposed as part of the
LayerN orm function is expressed as follows: pre-training phase: Masked Byte Word Model and Next Byte
 Sentence Prediction.
 X −μ
 LayerN orm(X) = α  +β (3) 4) IoV-BERT-IDS Fine-Tuning: By providing labelled USL
 σ to the pre-trained model during the fine-tuning stage, intru-
 1
 n
 sion detection for traffic at different vehicle networks can be
 μ= xi (4)
 n i=1 achieved. As input for fine-tuning the model, corresponding
  labelled data is all that is required when addressing various
  n
 1  downstream tasks.
 σ= (xi − μ)2 + ε (5)
 n i=1
 B. Semantic Extractor
where α and β are learnable parameter vectors;  denotes
 To ensure that the pre-trained model achieves a meaningful
element-wise multiplication; ε is a small constant added for
 representation of traffic in the pre-training phase, SE considers
numerical stability.
 two aspects: First, how should the data be partitioned to have
 In the transformer block, both the multi-head attention mechathe sequence’s contextual semantics? The analogy here can
nism and feed-forward neural network are followed by residual
 be drawn to how a natural language without breaks should
connection and layer normalisation, and the expression is as
 be divided into chunks of words to give it reasonably fluent
follows:
 semantics. Since pcap files usually split datagrams by double
 LayerN orm(X + M ultiHeadAttention(X)) (6) bytes, these two bytes can be regarded as one unit, and the
 two units form one word, thus transforming the raw traffic data
 LayerN orm(X + F eedF orward(X)) (7)
 into byte sentences by the USE. Second, how is the contextual
where X denotes the input of the multi-head attention mecha- relationship between traffic sequences represented? For BSE,
nism or the feed-forward neural network. successive packets in the same session can be analogised to the
 contextual relationships in an NLP paragraph.
 IV. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK: IOV-BERT-IDS 1) Unidirectional Semantic Extractor: It works by breaking
 the hexadecimal string into the smallest units, called byte units,
A. Framework
 according to every two characters and then merging BU into
 Fig. 2 visually represents the IoV-BERT-IDS framework, il- a word called Byte Word (BW). After the hexadecimal string
lustrating its four main modules: the semantic extractor, the input is processed, it is transformed into a BS made up of BW. USE
embedding, the IoV-BERT-IDS pre-training, and the IoV-BERT- converts the CAN data into CBS, while the extra-vehicle network
IDS fine-tuning for learning a general traffic representation and traffic data is converted into TBS.
performing network intrusion detection in the IoV scenario. During the fine-tuning stage, the USE takes in labelled traffic
 1) Semantic Extractor: As network traffic differs signifi- data as input and produces USL as output. USL comprises
cantly from natural language in semantics, applying BERT two components: labels and byte sentence_a. For extra-vehicle
directly to network intrusion detection is not feasible. To bridge network traffic data, the payload of each packet is extracted and
1914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

processed through USE to derive TBS, representing the value Algorithm 1: Bidirectional Semantic Extractor.
of the byte sentence_a field. As for in-vehicle network CAN Input: PCAP files
data, each CAN data point’s CAN ID and DATA[0-7] (refer to Output: BSL
Fig. 5 for the CAN data structure) undergo USE transformation 1: Initialize BSL;
to yield CBS. 2: for each PCAP do
 2) Bidirectional Semantic Extractor: The BSE builds upon 3: Initialize Sessions;
the USE by incorporating a sliding window mechanism. It se- 4: for each packet in PCAP do
lects consecutive packets within a session using a sliding window 5: ID ← [srcip, dstip, srcport, dstport, protocol]
of length 2 and step size 1, where each pair of adjacent packets 6: pl ← hex(payload)[8:]
serves as model inputs byte sentence_a and byte sentence_b in 7: if ID exists in Sessions then
Fig. 2. 8: Sessions[ID].append(pl)
 During the pre-training phase, BSE ingests unlabeled network 9: else
traffic data as its input and yields BSL as its output. The BSE 10: Sessions[ID] ← [pl]
algorithm operates as Algorithm 1. It iterates through the packets 11: end if
within PCAP files, extracting fundamental details such as times- 12: end for
tamps, source and destination IP addresses, ports, protocols, 13: for each session in Sessions do
and packet payloads. Subsequently, each session (identified by a 14: s_payload ← the number of packets in the session
unique 5-tuple) employs a sliding window mechanism to select 15: for packet index i in session do
adjacent payloads. These selected payloads are then fed into the 16: if i = (s_payload − 1) then
USE function to generate byte sentence_a and byte sentence_b, 17: // It’s not the last pair of adjacent packets.
culminating in the production of BSL. The USE function in 18: bs_a ← U SE(session[i])
this context embodies the functionality of the Unidirectional 19: bs_b ← U SE(session[i + 1])
Semantic Extractor, tasked with transforming packet messages 20: else if s_payload == 1 then
into byte sentences. Initially, the packet messages are segmented 21: // There’s only one packet in the session.
into pairs of characters, and subsequently, consecutive pairs of 22: mid ← length of session[i] / 2
characters are systematically assembled into byte sentences. 23: bs_a ← U SE(session[i][0 : mid])
 24: bs_b ← U SE(session[i][mid :])
C. Input Embedding 25: else
 26: continue
 The input sequence uses the sum of three embedding vectors 27: end if
to construct the complete token representation: token embed- 28: BSL.append([bs_a, bs_b])
ding, position embedding, and paragraph embedding. 29: end for
 r Token embedding: The payload is converted into fixed-
 30: end for
 dimensional vectors. Before this, the input data is first 31: end for
 processed by looking up the dictionary to learn the token
 representation.
 r Segment embedding: It is closely related to the token [SEP].
 [MASK] is used in the masked language modeling task to learn
 To represent the upper and lower sentences, the embedding the flow context during pre-training.
 uses only 0 and 1 based on the context sentences segmented
 by [SEP]. Segment embeddings are all-0 if there is only one
 D. IoV-BERT-IDS Pre-Training
 sentence as input.
 r Position embedding: BERT cannot encode the orderliness 1) Masked Byte Word Model: The MBWM task is similar
 of the input sequence since traffic data transmission is to BERT’s MLM, the only difference being that the MBWM
 closely related to the order. Thus, positional embedding is task is pre-trained for BW with relative semanticisation for
 needed to allow the model to learn sequential information capturing dependencies between BWs. This design allows each
 from sequences based on relative positions. BW prediction to focus on the context of the entire BS, enabling
 In this paper, we use BPE to represent tokens. Each token deep bidirectional coding capabilities. During pre-training, each
unit ranges from 0 to 65535, and the dictionary size |V | is up token in the input sequence is randomly masked with a 15%
to 65536. In addition, four unique tokens, [CLS], [SEP], [PAD], probability. As shown in Fig. 3, to be closer to the subsequent
and [MASK], are added. The first token of each sequence is downstream task fine-tuning, the following operations are peralways [CLS]. The token [PAD] is a padding symbol to satisfy formed for these 15% tokens:
the minimum length requirement. Given that all byte pairs can r With an 80% probability, the input corresponding to the
be enumerated, Out-of-Vocabulary (OOV) words may not occur token is replaced by a [MASK] token.
during token embedding. Nevertheless, a unique token [UNK] r With a 10% probability, another token randomly replaces
is introduced to address the possibility of OOV occurrences to the input corresponding to the token.
represent words not present in the dictionary. Sentence pairs are r With a 10% probability, the input corresponding to the
separated using [SEP] to represent different segments. The token token remains unchanged.
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1915

 where pi denotes the i-th sentence pair, yc indicates whether it
 belongs to a continuous pair, c = 0 means it is not a continuous
 sentence, and P (yc | pi ) represents the probability of the i-th
 sentence pair being predicted as class c.
 In summary, the final pre-training objective is the sum of the
 two losses mentioned above, which is defined as:
 L = LM BW M + LN BSP (10)

 E. IoV-BERT-IDS Fine-Tuning
 By exchanging appropriate inputs and outputs, the Transformer allows BERT to adapt to many downstream tasks,
 whether individual or pairs of texts. Thus, domain fine-tuning
 for intrusion detection tasks only requires modifying the inputs
Fig. 3. The schematic diagram of the MBWM pre-training task. and outputs of the end-to-end model. For fine-tuning, the [CLS]
 corresponding output from the last transformer encoder block is
 fed into the multi-classifier for prediction. To achieve multiclassification, we use the simplest fully connected layer followed by
 the softmax layer. Fig. 2 illustrates how fine-tuning is similar
 to pre-trained NBSP, where only the binary classifier of the
 NBSP task needs to be replaced with a multi-classifier, and the
 data preprocessing method must match the downstream task.
 In contrast to pre-trained data, fine-tuning uses labelled data
 and pre-processes datasets based on the downstream task. An
 in-vehicle network intrusion detection fine-tuning dataset can be
 created using raw CAN data preprocessed into CBS. Whether
 an in-vehicle or extra-vehicle network, the payload is essentially
 a hexadecimal string with a similar token representation after
 semantic transformation by SE. So, the IoV-BERT-IDS here can
 simultaneously adapt to in-vehicle and extra-vehicle network
Fig. 4. The schematic diagram of the NBSP pre-training task. intrusion detection.

 Simply put, the MBWM task predicts the token at the masked V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
position based on the context. The cross-entropy loss LM BW M A. Datasets
of the MBWM task is defined as follows:
 1) Pre-Training Dataset: The pre-training dataset for this
 1 
 n k
 study consists of approximately 40 G of PCAP files. These files
 LM BW M = − yjc log (P (tokenc |M ASKj ) (8)
 n i=1 j=1 were collected using Wireshark software, leveraging router port
 mirroring functionality. This functionality duplicates network
where k is the total number of tokens masked in the in- traffic from the router to the PC, allowing Wireshark to capture
put, M ASKj denotes the j-th masked token, tokenc denotes and analyse the replicated data. The captured traffic encomthe c-th token in the dictionary, and n is the batch_size. passes various communication activities from numerous mobile
P (tokenc |M ASKj ) denotes the probability that the j-th devices connected to the router. Including TCP, UDP, ICMP, and
masked token is predicted as the c-th token in the dictionary, other protocols ensures that the model, during its pre-training
and yjc is a sign function, which is 1 if [MASK] is predicted phase, can effectively learn and capture features across varied
correctly, and 0 otherwise. network communication scenarios.
 2) Next Byte Sentence Prediction: Similar to BERT’s NBSP, 2) Extra-Vehicle Network Datasets: Due to the temporary
the NBSP in this paper is also a binary classification task. For the unavailability of public datasets specifically designed for vehicmodel to understand the dependency between two BSs, we use a ular network traffic, this paper employs different network traffic
50% probability to randomly replace the sentence in the input, as intrusion detection datasets to assess the prediction performance
shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, for the NBSP task, the pre-trained of IoV-BERT-IDS in the vehicular network scenario. Given that
model needs to make a binary input prediction to determine the method outlined in this paper requires payload data from the
whether it is continuous. The cross-entropy loss function here is original traffic, two datasets, CICIDS and BoT-IoT, have been
denoted as LN BSP and defined as follows: selected for experimentation. By comparing the five-tuple of
 each packet in the CSV file and the PCAP file, we re-divided the
 1
 n
 LN BSP = − yic log (P (yc | pi )) , c ∈ {0, 1} (9) packets in the PCAP file. The following provides an introduction
 n i=1 to the two datasets.
1916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I TABLE III
 CICIDS DATASET CAR-HACKING DATASET

 TABLE IV
 IN-VEHICLE NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION CHALLENGE(IVN-IDS
 DATASET

 TABLE II
 BOT-IOT DATASET

 TABLE V
 EQUIPMENT CONFIGURATION

 TABLE VI
 EXP 1: EVALUATION METRIC COMPARISON
Fig. 5. Feature structure of CAN packets.

 CICIDS: We selected twelve attack types of PCAP files, which
are used for the fine-tuning stage of IoV-BERT-IDS in this paper.
Table I shows detailed information about the subset of CICIDS
for experiments.
 BoT-IoT: The captured PCAP files are 69.3 G large, with over HYUNDAI Sonata, KIA Soul) and various attack types (Flood-
72,000,000 records. We only select five per cent of the full BoT- ing, Fuzzy, Malfunction). Additionally, the training dataset in-
IoT datasets and detailed information is shown in Table II. cludes a Class field for each record. For reference, this dataset is
 3) In-Vehicle Network Datasets: As shown in Fig. 5, CAN abbreviated IVN-IDS. Table IV shows the details of this dataset.
dataset includes various fields:
 r Timestamp represents the recorded time in seconds; B. Experimental Environment
 r CAN ID signifies the identifier of the CAN message in
 The experimental environment is shown in Table V, the GPU
 hexadecimal format (e.g., 043f);
 r DLC indicates the number of data bytes ranging from 0 to is NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080, the GPU Memory is 16 GB,
 the version of Python used is 3.9.0, and the model building is
 8;
 r DATA[0-7] encompasses the byte-wise data values; mainly using Pytorch, the version is 2.0.1.
 r Label is the class name of CAN packet.
 C. Evaluation Metrics
 Car-Hacking Dataset: Datasets were constructed by logging
CAN traffic via the OBD-II port from a real vehicle while The performance evaluation indicators in this article include
message injection attacks were performed, which include DoS Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Accuracy derived from four
attack, fuzzy attack, spoofing the drive gear, and spoofing the parameter indicators TP, TN, FP, and FN. The following is
RPM gauge. The details of this dataset are shown in the Table III. a detailed description of this article’s performance evaluation
 In-vehicle network intrusion detection challenge [36]: For indicators.
fine-tuning purposes, this paper selects a preliminary dataset 1) Precision, also known as positive predictive value or precithat encompasses three vehicle types (CHEVROLET Spark, sion rate, refers to the proportion of true positive samples
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1917

Fig. 6. Confusion matrices of classification performance.
1918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 among the samples that we predicted as positive. The
 formula is (11), where TP is the number of true positives
 and FP is the number of false positives.
 TP
 P recision = (11)
 TP + FN
 2) Recall, also known as sensitivity or true positive rate,
 refers to the proportion of positive samples that we predicted as positive among the samples that are actually
 positive. The formula is (12), where TP is the number
 of true positives and FN is the number of false negatives.
 Fig. 7. Classification precision comparison. (a) CICIDS. (b) BoT-IoT.
 TP
 Recall = (12)
 TP + FN To provide a more intuitive and holistic understanding of these
 3) F1-score, also known as F1 value or F1 measure, is a results, Fig. 7 presents two radar charts, each axis labelled with
 weighted average of precision and recall. It can reflect tags representing different types of network traffic attacks. These
 the model’s ability to identify and distinguish positive charts visually depict the classification accuracy achieved by
 samples. The formula is (13). IoV-BERT-IDS, AE, ByteSGAN, and VAE across both datasets.
 2 × P recision × Recall Notably, IoV-BERT-IDS is represented by a distinctive red
 F 1 − score = (13) line, covering a larger area on the radar charts. This visual
 P recision + Recall
 representation signifies that the IoV-BERT-IDS model exhibits
 4) Acc, also known as accuracy or correct rate, refers to the
 higher precision in classifying various types of traffic attacks
 proportion of correctly classified samples among the total
 in the extra-vehicle network environment. This indicates that
 number of samples. The formula is (14), where TP is
 IoV-BERT-IDS outperforms other models in accurately identhe number of true positives, TN is the number of true
 tifying and categorising various network attacks, underscoring
 negatives, FP is the number of false positives and FN is
 its effectiveness in enhancing cybersecurity measures in such
 the number of false negatives:
 environments.
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (14)
 TP + TN + FP + FN B. Performance Comparison of IDS in In-Vehicle Networks
 (Experiment 2)
 VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
 To delve deeper into assessing the classification performance
 In this paper, the IoV-BERT-IDS method follows a ‘pre- of the BERT model in the in-vehicle network intrusion detection
training + fine-tuning’ approach. Consequently, we have chosen domain, comprehensive experiments were conducted utilising
ByteSGAN [9], VAE [37], and AE [38] as the comparative the Car-Hacking and IVN-IDS datasets. These experiments
methods. Unlike our approach, the first three methods rely on encompassed comparisons between multiple models, includextracted flow-level features, whereas IoV-BERT-IDS directly ing ByteSGAN, VAE, AE, and IoV-BERT-IDS, utilising solely
uses raw traffic data. CAN ID and payload data for training and testing.
 The confusion matrices for these experiments are depicted Table VII summarises the classification metrics derived from
in Fig. 6. In conclusion, the experiments demonstrate IoV- these comparative experiments, including precision, recall, F1-
BERT-IDS’s superior classification performance on IoV. Its ro- score, and accuracy. It’s evident from the table that on the
bust representation capabilities, generalisation, and adaptability IVN-IDS dataset, the IoV-BERT-IDS model achieved the highcontribute to its effectiveness in handling complex intrusion est scores across all metrics, with precision, recall, F1-score,
detection tasks. and accuracy values of 0.9996. Similarly, on the Car-Hacking
 dataset, the IoV-BERT-IDS model maintained its superiority in
A. Performance Comparison of IDS in Extra-Vehicle precision, recall, and F1-score, with values of 0.9998, 0.9998,
Networks (Experiment 1) and 0.9997, respectively. However, ByteSGAN edged slightly
 In an effort to comprehensively assess the predictive capabil- ahead in accuracy with a score of 0.9999. Overall, the IoV-BERTities of IoV-BERT-IDS when deployed within an extra-vehicle IDS model exhibited outstanding performance on both datasets,
network, a series of meticulous experiments were carried out displaying high precision, recall, and F1-scores. Furthermore,
utilizing the well-established CICIDS and BoT-IoT datasets. Fig. 8 visually represents the precision, recall, and F1-score
 Table VI demonstrates that on the CICIDS dataset, the IoV- on the IVN-IDS dataset, emphasising the exceptional perfor-
BERT-IDS model outperformed others, achieving the highest mance of the IoV-BERT-IDS model. While the ByteSGAN
scores across all metrics, with precision, recall, F1-score, and model demonstrated commendable results on the Car-Hacking
accuracy values of 0.99, 1.00, 1.00, and 0.99, respectively. dataset, the IoV-BERT-IDS model slightly outperformed it in
In contrast, the other three models lagged slightly behind. Fur- recall and overall accuracy. The significant precision and recall
thermore, on the BoT-IoT dataset, the IoV-BERT-IDS model values achieved by the IoV-BERT-IDS model imply its ability to
once again demonstrated outstanding performance. distinguish between normal operational behaviour and various
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1919

 TABLE VII
 EXP 2: EVALUATION METRIC COMPARISON

 TABLE VIII
 EXP 3: EVALUATION METRIC COMPARISON

 Fig. 9. Classification generalization in in-vehicle networks.

 Table VIII provides a detailed overview of the classification metrics derived from this comparative experiment. The
 IoV-BERT-IDS model exhibited excellent performance on the
 IVN_Exp3 dataset, particularly in identifying Flooding and
 Fuzzy attacks, with high precision, recall, and F1-scores. However, all models struggled to effectively identify Malfunction
 attacks, possibly due to Malfunction alerts resembling normal traffic.Additionally, Fig. 9 presents the performance of
Fig. 8. Classification performance comparison: Precision, Recall, F1-score. each model, highlighting the significant improvement achieved
(a) IVN-IDS. (b) Car-Hacking. by IoV-BERT-IDS in terms of model generalisation between
 different vehicle models (KIA Soul and HYUNDAI Sonata)
attack scenarios while maintaining low rates of false positives compared to other models. The results demonstrate a signifand false negatives. Such reliability is crucial when deploying icant enhancement in IoV-BERT-IDS’s model generalisation
intrusion detection systems in vehicular environments, where performance, indicating its superior capability in handling data
the consequences of security vulnerabilities can be severe. from diverse vehicle models. This suggests that IoV-BERT-IDS
 exhibits a higher level of adaptability to the CAN protocol
C. Generalization Comparison of IDS in In-Vehicle Networks and potential differences in encoding rules between vehicles.
(Experiment 3) Consequently, IoV-BERT-IDS demonstrates stronger generali-
 To further assess the extent of improvement in IoV-BERT- sation performance when detecting intrusions and anomalies in
IDS’s model generalisation performance, a specific experiment in-vehicle networks across a broader range of vehicle models.
was conducted utilising data from the IVN-IDS dataset. Specifically, data from HYUNDAI Sonata was chosen for training, VII. CONCLUSION
while data from KIA Soul was used for testing, aiming to With the rapid evolution of intelligent connected vehicles, enevaluate the model’s ability to generalise across different vehicle suring the security of vehicular networks has become a pressing
models. concern [39]. This paper addresses the limitations of traditional
1920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

security models in handling the complex and diverse connec- [14] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, and E. Sitnikova, “A new network forensic
tions within the Internet of vehicles. The proposed framework, framework based on deep learning for Internet of Things networks: A particle deep framework,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 110, pp. 91–106,
IoV-BERT-IDS, leverages BERT to acquire a universal represen- 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
tation of raw traffic data in IoV. This approach enhances accuracy pii/S0167739X19325105
through unsupervised pre-training and fine-tuning with minimal [15] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
data. Addressing the challenge of ambiguous semantics in traffic 2020, Art. no. 100198.
data, the semantic extractor transforms raw information into [16] X. Zhou et al., “Federated distillation and blockchain empowered secure
contextual semantic traffic pairs. This comprehensive approach knowledge sharing for Internet of Medical Things,” Inf. Sci., vol. 662,
 2024, Art. no. 120217.
ensures the model has a robust understanding of the contextual [17] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based
semantics inherent in IoV traffic data. Furthermore, the intro- intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
duction of two pre-training tasks enriches IoV-BERT-IDS with Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779.
 [18] T. Alladi, V. Kohli, V. Chamola, F. R. Yu, and M. Guizani, “Artificial
bidirectional contextual features, contributing significantly to intelligence (AI)-empowered intrusion detection architecture for the Inlearning and capturing contextual patterns and features. The ternet of Vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 144–149,
effectiveness of IoV-BERT-IDS is demonstrated through thor- Jun. 2021.
 [19] L. Nie, Z. Ning, X. Wang, X. Hu, J. Cheng, and Y. Li, “Data-driven inough validation of diverse datasets, including CICIDS, BoT-IoT, trusion detection for intelligent Internet of Vehicles: A deep convolutional
Car-Hacking, and IVN-IDS. Given the challenges of limited neural network-based method,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4,
resources in vehicles and roadsides, future research can explore pp. 2219–2230, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
 [20] T. Yu, G. Hua, H. Wang, J. Yang, and J. Hu, “Federated-LSTM based
more efficient and lightweight BERT models [40]. Optimising network intrusion detection method for intelligent connected vehicles,” in
model structures, parameters, and training algorithms to adapt Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 4324–4329.
to computational resource constraints in vehicular network en- [21] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
vironments. J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 [22] N. Alkhatib, M. Mushtaq, H. Ghauch, and J.-L. Danger, “Can-BERT do
 REFERENCES it? Controller area network intrusion detection system based on BERT
 language model,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl.,
 [1] X. Zhou et al., “Spatial–temporal federated transfer learning with multi- 2022, pp. 1–8.
 sensor data fusion for cooperative positioning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 105, [23] L. Dong et al., “Unified language model pre-training for natural language
 2024, Art. no. 102182. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. understanding and generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 com/science/article/pii/S1566253523004980 Syst., 2019, vol. 32, pp. 13063–13075.
 [2] S. Sharma and B. Kaushik, “A survey on Internet of Vehicles: Applications, [24] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “DataNet: Deep learning based
 security issues & solutions,” Veh. Commun., vol. 20, 2019, Art. no. 100182. encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
 [3] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. F. Juang, “Deep reinforcement learning based Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
 resource allocation for V2V communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., [25] X. Zhou et al., “Hierarchical federated learning with social context
 vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 3163–3173, Apr. 2019. clustering-based participant selection for Internet of Medical Things
 [4] Z. Du et al., “Integrated sensing and communications for V2I networks: applications,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 10, no. 4,
 Dynamic predictive beamforming for extended vehicle targets,” IEEE pp. 1742–1751, Aug. 2023.
 Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3612–3627, Jun. 2023. [26] Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Fu, Y. Ye, and P. Wang, “Network traffic classification
 [5] J. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Sun, and Y. Shi, “In-vehicle network attacks and based on federated semi-supervised learning,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 149,
 countermeasures: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31, 2024, Art. no. 103091.
 no. 5, pp. 50–58, Sep. 2017. [27] D. Jiang et al., “A further study of unsupervised pretraining for transformer
 [6] X. Zhou et al., “Decentralized P2P federated learning for privacy- based speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal
 preserving and resilient mobile robotic systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun., Process., 2021, pp. 6538–6542.
 vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–89, Apr. 2023. [28] L. Zhou, H. Palangi, L. Zhang, H. Hu, J. Corso, and J. Gao, “Unified
 [7] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based intrusion vision-language pre-training for image captioning and VQA,” in Proc.
 detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547, pp. 119–135, AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, pp. 13041–13049.
 2021. [29] D. Hendrycks, K. Lee, and M. Mazeika, “Using pre-training can improve
 [8] Y. Lee, Y.-E. Kim, J.-G. Chung, and S. Woo, “Real time perfect bit mod- model robustness and uncertainty,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 ification attack on in-vehicle CAN,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, 2019, vol. 97, pp. 2712–2721.
 no. 12, pp. 15154–15171, Dec. 2023. [30] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre- training
 [9] P. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “BytesGAN: A semi-supervised of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 generative adversarial network for encrypted traffic classification in SDN Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Hum. Lang. Techedge gateway,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, 2021, Art. no. 108535. nol., J. Burstein, C. Doran, and T. Solorio, Eds. Minneapolis, Minnesota,
[10] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/
 traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. N19-1423
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023. [31] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification
[11] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training with mini-flowpic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas.
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
 arXiv:1810.04805. [32] X. Zhou et al., “Personalized federation learning with model-contrastive
[12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A learning for multi-modal user modeling in human-centric metaverse,”
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 817–831, Apr. 2024.
 encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, [33] X. Lin et al., “CETP: A novel semi-supervised framework based on
 USA, 2022, pp. 633–642. contrastive pre-training for imbalanced encrypted traffic classification,”
[13] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generat- Comput. Secur., 2024, Art. no. 103892.
 ing a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characteri- [34] M. A. Ferrag et al., “Revolutionizing cyber threat detection with large
 zation,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, vol. 1, language models: A privacy-preserving bert-based lightweight model for
 pp. 108–116. iot/iiot devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 23733–23750, Feb. 2024.
FU et al.: IOV-BERT-IDS: HYBRID NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM IN IOV USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 1921

[35] X. Zhou et al., “Information theoretic learning-enhanced dual-generative Minyao Liu received the bachelor’s degree in manadversarial networks with causal representation for robust OOD gener- agement in 2022 from the Nanjing University of
 alization,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. Posts and Telecommunications, where she is cur-
 17, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3330864. rently working toward the master’s degree. Her re-
[36] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection search interests include traffic identification, deep
 method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh. Commun., learning, and anomaly detection.
 vol. 14, pp. 52–63, 2018.
[37] C. Liu, R. Antypenko, I. Sushko, and O. Zakharchenko, “Intrusion detection system after data augmentation schemes based on the VAE and
 CVAE,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1000–1010, Jun. 2022.
[38] G. D’Angelo and F. Palmieri, “Network traffic classification using
 deep convolutional recurrent autoencoder neural networks for spatial–
 temporal features extraction,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 173, 2021,
 Art. no. 102890.
[39] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain em- Ze Zhang was born in Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China, in
 powered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing in Inter-
 2000. He received the bachelor’s degree in network
 net of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311,
 engineering in 2022. He is currently working toward
 Apr. 2020.
 the master’s degree in information network with the
[40] X. Zhou et al., “Digital twin enhanced federated reinforcement learning
 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunicawith lightweight knowledge distillation in mobile networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
 tions, Nanjing, China. His research interests include
 Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3191–3211, Oct. 2023.
 computer networks, network security, anomaly detection and analysis.

 Mengyi Fu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree from the Nanjing University
 of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China,
 in 2022. She is currently working toward the Ph.D.
 degree with the Nanjing University of Posts and Xiaokang Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Telecommunications, Nanjing, China. Her research degree in human sciences from Waseda University,
 interests include encrypted traffic identification, deep Tokyo, Japan, in 2014. He is currently an Associate
 learning, and traffic prediction. Professor with the Faculty of Business Data Science,
 Kansai University, Suita, Japan. From 2012 to 2015,
 he was a Research Associate with the Faculty of
 Human Sciences, Waseda University. From 2016 to
 2024, he was a Lecturer/Associate Professor with the
 Faculty of Data Science, Shiga University, Hikone,
 Pan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., Japan. He has been a Visiting Researcher with the
 and Ph.D. degrees in electrical & computer engineer- RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
 ing from the Nanjing University of Posts &Telecom- (AIP), RIKEN, Japan, since 2017. He has been engaged in interdisciplinary
 munications, Nanjing, China, in 2001, 2004, and research works in the fields of computer science and engineering, information
 2013, respectively. He is currently a Full Professor systems, and social and human informatics. His research interests include
 with Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunica- ubiquitous computing, Big Data, machine learning, behavior and cognitive
 tions. From 2017 to 2018, he was a Visiting Scholar informatics, cyber-physical-social systems, and cyber intelligence and security.
 with the Department of Electrical and Computer Dr. Zhou is a Member of the IEEE CS, and ACM, USA, IPSJ, and JSAI, Japan,
 Engineering, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, and CCF, China.
 USA. He was a TPC member of IEEE CyberSciTech
 Congress. His research interests include AI-powered
networking and security in B5G/6 G/IoT/Smart Grid/CFN, and AI-enabled
Big Data analysis. He is also a reviewer for several journals, including IEEE
TRANSACTION ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSACTION
ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, IEEE INTERNET OF
THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS,
IEEE ACCESS, Computer Networks, Computer & Security, Computer Communications, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Big Data Research.