IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 12157

 Knowledge Distillation for Lightweight and
 Explainable Intrusion Detection in
 Resource-Constrained Consumer Devices
 Muhammad Umair , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Shahbaz Khan , Member, IEEE,
 Wajdan Al Malwi, Fatima Asiri , Ibtehal Nafea , Faisal Saeed , and Jawad Ahmad , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The growing demand for deploying deep learning I. I NTRODUCTION
(DL) models for cyber-attack detection on consumer devices
 HE RAPID advancement in technology has resulted in
is constrained by their limited memory and computational
resources. High-performing DL models are often too resourceintensive for on-device deployment. Knowledge distillation (KD)
 T the widespread development and adoption of consumer
 devices [1]. Consumer Internet of Things (IoT) technologies,
offers an alternative by transferring knowledge from a complex including smart home systems, wearables, healthcare monitors,
teacher model to a smaller, lightweight student model, reducing and connected appliances, play a key role in bridging the
model size and inference time with minimal accuracy loss. In digital and physical worlds [2]. Recently, IoT devices have
this paper, a KD-based framework is utilized to design and train
both teacher and student models for intrusion detection using been transitioning toward the Artificial-Intelligence-of-Things
the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets. The student model (AIoT), where AI enables intelligent decision-making locally
achieves comparable performance to the teacher, with accuracies on these devices [3]. However, integrating AI functionality
of 99.87% and 98.71% on the utilized datasets. It maintains directly onto devices introduces new security vulnerabiliaccurate classification across various attack classes, achieving ties [4]. Hackers can exploit these devices to steal sensitive
F1-scores above 0.98, while reducing computational complexity
from 263k to 120k trainable parameters, model size from 1.00 data, causing security issues for users.
MB to 471.67 KB, and inference time from 48 ms to 34 ms. Advanced deep learning (DL) algorithms are essential for
Moreover, SHAP-based explainable AI techniques are employed detecting evolving threats due to their ability to learn complex
to interpret both models, demonstrating that the distilled student patterns and update dynamically. However, their high compumodel retains key feature attributions of the teacher model. tational cost limits edge deployment, necessitating lightweight
 Index Terms—Knowledge distillation, deep learning, consumer alternatives [5]. To address this challenge, researchers have
electronics, IoT attacks, SHAP, teacher model, student model. developed several techniques for building lightweight DL
 models. A promising solution is Knowledge Distillation (KD),
 in which a large and complex teacher model is trained on the
 dataset to achieve high accuracy [6]. A smaller student model
 then learns from the teacher by mimicking its outputs and
 refining its parameters using the dataset’s labels. This process
 Received 17 January 2025; revised 11 March 2025 and 3 May 2025; transfers the knowledge from the teacher to the student,
accepted 15 August 2025. Date of publication 21 August 2025; date of resulting in a lightweight model that retains the same accuracy
current version 8 December 2025. The authors extend their appreciation to as the teacher model.
the Deanship of Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University
for funding this work through Large Research Project under grant number Recent studies have explored various lightweight models
RGP2/337/46. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Shahbaz Khan.) for intrusion detection and IoT attacks in consumer elec-
 Muhammad Umair is with the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia tronics. Most of the works [7], [8], [9] utilize DL and ML
University, Cyberjaya 63100, Malaysia, and also with the Department of
Electrical Engineering, HITEC University, Taxila 47080, Pakistan (e-mail: to reduce computational complexity while maintaining DL
17-ee-112@student.hitecuni.edu.pk). model performance. While some of the proposed DL-based
 Muhammad Shahbaz Khan is with the School of Computing, Engineering approaches [7], [9], [10], [11] exhibit strong performance
and the Built Environment, Edinburgh Napier University, EH10 5DT
Edinburgh, U.K. (e-mail: muhammadshahbaz.khan@napier.ac.uk). but most of these require large training datasets and high-
 Wajdan Al Malwi and Fatima Asiri are with the Informatics and specification hardware, which limits their suitability for
Computer Systems Department, College of Computer Science, King Khalid deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. To address
University, Abha 61421, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: Wmoalwy@kku.edu.sa;
Falmalye@kku.edu.sa). these issues, KD [6], [12], [13], [14] has therefore emerged as
 Ibtehal Nafea is with the College of Computer Science and Engineering, an alternative solution for reducing model size while retaining
Taibah University, Madinah 41477, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: inafea@ accuracy. These KD-based solutions highlight the potential of
taibahu.edu.sa).
 Faisal Saeed is with the Computer Science Department, Birmingham City distillation methods in intrusion and attack detection. However,
University, B47XG Birmingham, U.K. (e-mail: faisal.saeed@bcu.ac.uk). most of the studies are not tailored to consumer electronics
 Jawad Ahmad is with the Cybersecurity Center, Prince Mohammad and edge devices.
Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 34754, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: jahmad@
pmu.edu.sa). The key challenge addressed in this paper is developing a
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3601183 DL-based intrusion detection model that is both lightweight
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
12158 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

for resource-constrained consumer devices and explainable for B. Knowledge Distillation
improved interpretability. Conventional DL models generally The overall KD workflow for training both teacher and
exhibit high computational complexity involving complex student models on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets is
decision-making processes, making them unsuitable for on- shown in Fig. 3. Each model receives the same input samples
device deployment in sensitive IoT environments. and produces a set of logits, denoted by zT for the teacher and
 zS for the student. A softmax function converts these logits
 II. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY into class probabilities is given in (2):
 In this section, the methodology and processes employed exp(zi )
 p̂i = C  , (2)
in the study are presented. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
 j=1 exp zj
overall workflow comprises several main stages: (1) Dataset
selection, including N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023; (2) Data where zi ∈ z corresponds to the i-th logit, and C is the total
Preprocessing, encompassing outlier removal, data balancing, number of classes.
standardization, and splitting; (3) Knowledge Distillation and The student model learns directly from ground-truth labels
(4) Evaluation and Detection, in which the trained models are by minimizing the following cross-entropy (hard) loss as given
assessed for intrusion detection performance. These stages are in (3).
discussed in detail in the following subsections.
 
 C
  
 Lhard = − yi log p̂S,i , (3)
A. Dataset i=1
 This study utilizes two datasets, N-BaIoT [15], [16] and where yi is 1 for the correct class and 0 otherwise, and p̂S,i =
CIC-IDS 2023 [17], [18], to capture a wide range of IoT σ (zS )i is the student’s softmax output for class i.
attacks and everyday consumer electronics usage. N-BaIoT In addition to the hard loss, the student receives guidance
provides authentic traffic data from multiple commercial IoT from the teacher’s softened outputs via the distillation loss
devices compromised by botnets. CIC-IDS 2023, on the other LKD . Let p̂T,i = σ (zT /T)i and p̂S,i = σ (zS /T)i be the teacher’s
hand, includes various attack scenarios across an extensive and student’s probabilities at temperature T. Mathematically
IoT topology with diverse devices acting as both attackers and it is given in (4).
victims.   
 1) Dataset Preprocessing: The N-BaIoT dataset comprised LKD = α Lhard + (1 − α) T 2 KL p̂T  p̂S , (4)
7,062,606 rows×116 columns, and 11 classes, whereas
 where KL(·, ·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence [19], and
the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset contained 46,686,579 rows×47
 α balances the weight between the hard loss and the teacher–
columns, and 34 classes. However, in the CIC-IDS 2023
 student alignment term. The factor T 2 scales the divergence
dataset, several classes represented attacks that belonged to
 when T > 1.
the same category, and some classes had very few samples.
 As shown in Fig. 3, both the teacher and student models
To address these issues, such classes were merged into
 take the same inputs from the dataset. The student’s logits
their respective attack categories, resulting in a total of 6
 zS produce probabilities p̂S,i used in the hard loss Lhard
aggregated classes. Thus, for the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset,
 and the teacher’s logits zT generate soft probabilities p̂T,i .
a total of 85,915 samples among 6 classes were utilized
 The student mimics these distributions through the distillation
for this study. The raw data files were first converted into
 loss LKD . Only the student receives gradients from LKD ,
unified DataFrames for each dataset. Then, a standard scaler
 creating a smaller model with competitive performance at
was applied to normalize the features, ensuring consistent
 reduced computational cost. By combining standard crossranges across all variables and enhancing compatibility for DL
 entropy (ground-truth labels) with the soft-label guidance from
models. Furthermore, outliers were removed using IQR-based
 the teacher, the distilled student model preserves much of
filtering, and missing values were discarded to ensure quality
 the teacher’s predictive power while operating with lower
data input. Only data points that satisfy (1) are retained, which
 resource requirements. The utilized KD pipeline is given in
reduces noise without compromising the dataset’s structure.
 Algorithm 1.
 Q1 − 1.5 × IQR ≤ X ≤ Q3 + 1.5 × IQR (1) 1) The Teacher Model: The teacher model in KD is typically more complex and larger, allowing it to learn complex
 Feature selection has been performed using correlation representations from the data. In this study, the teacher
analysis, random forest feature importance, and principal model’s architecture, shown in Fig. 4, comprises multiple
component analysis (PCA). Top-ranking features identified convolutional blocks, each containing two 1D convolutional
by the aforementioned techniques undergo a majority vote, (1D-CNN) layers. The first convolutional block utilizes 32
i.e., a feature was retained if it appeared among the highest- filters with ReLU activation, while the second has 64 filters.
ranked features in at least two out of the three selection Both use a kernel size of 2 × 2 and a max-pooling operation
methods. A radar (spider) chart, shown in Fig. 2(d), compares with a 2 × 2 window. Following these convolutional blocks,
the normalized feature importance scores from each technique. two LSTM layers with 64 units each form the LSTM block.
This visualization highlights both the overlap and divergence Finally, two dense layers provide the final classification: the
among selected features during the selection process. first dense layer has 32 units, and the output layer has as many
UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION 12159

Fig. 1. Overview of the utilized methodology.

Fig. 2. Feature importance score for selected features. (a) N-BaIoT dataset. (b) CIC IDS 2023 dataset.

units as the number of classes (11 for N-BaIoT and 6 for 1) Classification Metrics: The metrics utilized in this study
CIC-IDS 2023). to evaluate the classification performance of the proposed
 2) The Student Model: The student model (as shown in model are: precision, recall, F1-score, and Accuracy. These
Fig. 4) adopts a similar structure but in a lighter configuration. metrics compare the predicted labels with ground-truth
It includes only one 1D-CNN layer in the convolutional block labels, where TP, TN, FP, and FN denote true posiand a single LSTM layer in the LSTM block, along with batch tives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives,
normalization and max-pooling. This design reduces the num- respectively.
ber of parameters significantly, resulting in a more compact 2) Reliability Metrics: In addition to standard metrics,
model suitable for resource-constrained edge deployment in this paper reports Cohen’s Kappa and Matthews Correlation
consumer electronics. Coefficient (MCC). Both are particularly useful in scenarios
 with imbalanced data: Cohen’s Kappa accounts for the possibility of agreement between predicted and true labels, while
C. Evaluation Metrics MCC measures the correlation between observed and predicted
 This section describes the metrics used to evaluate classifi- classifications, providing a more informative assessment than
cation performance and model reliability. raw accuracy when class distribution is skewed.
12160 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. The knowledge distillation workflow illustrating teacher–student model interaction.

 TABLE I
Algorithm 1 The Utilized Knowledge Distillation Pipeline P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE T EACHER M ODEL ON N-BA I OT
 DATASET
 DATA PREPARATION(D)
 Clean and remove outliers in D
 Balance classes (under-sampling)
 Standardize features
 Dtrain , Dtest ← Split(D, ρ)

 TEACHER TRAINING(Mteach )
 Mteach ← arg min LCE (Mteach , Dtrain )
 return Mteach

 DISTILLATION(M
   teach , Mstud , α, T)
 p̂T ← σ  zTT  (teacher probabilities)
 p̂S ← σ zTS (student probabilities)
  
 LKD = α Lhard + (1 − α) T 2 KL p̂T p̂S
 Mstud ← arg min LKD (Mstud , Dtrain )
 return Mstud III. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 EVALUATION(Mteach , Mstud , Dtest ) In this section, the results are presented for the teacher and
 Evaluate both models on Dtest (ACC, F1, etc.) student models. Both models are trained on 50 epochs with
 return Performance metrics the Adam optimizer (learning rate 10−4 ) and a batch size
 of 32. These parameters are selected via Keras Tuner, which
 automates hyperparameter optimization. Fig. 5(d) depicts the
 training curves for both models over epochs.
 3) Model Complexity: Model complexity is evaluated
based on the following criteria: number of parameters, where A. Performance Evaluation
fewer parameters reduce computational overhead; memory The teacher model, as shown in Table I, achieves an overall
footprint, as a smaller size enables deployment on resource- accuracy of 99.88%, and its confusion matrix is shown in
constrained devices; and inference time, since faster inference Fig. 6(a), which shows the numbers of correctly predicted
is crucial for real-time environments. samples. Its macro-average precision, recall, and F1-score
 4) Explainable AI: DL models are often complex and unin- values indicate balanced performance across all attack classes,
terpretable, making it challenging to understand and interpret including benign traffic. The results of Cohen’s Kappa (0.98)
their behavior. To address this, SHapley Additive Explanations and MCC (0.98) exhibit an overall best performance between
(SHAP) have been utilized in this study. SHAP facilitates the predicted and true labels, highlighting model’s reliability and
interpretation of the knowledge transfer process from a larger validates its performance on unseen data. In comparison,
“teacher” model to a smaller “student” model. the student Model (as given in Table II) shows a minor
UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION 12161

Fig. 4. Deep learning model architecture for teacher and student frameworks.

Fig. 5. Training and validation curves for utilized DL models. (a) Teacher Model. (b) Student Model.

 TABLE II TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE S TUDENT M ODEL ON N-BA I OT P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE T EACHER M ODEL ON CIC-IDS 2023
 DATASET DATASET

 across five classes: DDoS, DoS, Benign, Other Attacks,
 and Reconnaissance. Table III indicates better scores for
 precision, recall, and F1-scores among all classes, with most
 values exceeding 0.98. Benign and Reconnaissance categories
difference in accuracy (i.e., 99.87%) compared to the teacher demonstrate especially strong performance, each surpassing
model, confirming that much of the trained teacher model 0.99 in precision, recall, and F1-score. Its confusion matrix
knowledge has been transferred effectively through the KD has been shown in Fig. 6(c). However, the student model (as
process. The corresponding confusion matrix is shown in given in Table IV) achieves an overall accuracy of 98.71%
Fig. 6(b). with precision and F1-scores generally ranging from 0.98
 Whereas, for the CIC IDS 2023 dataset, the teacher model to 0.99. Despite a reduced architecture, Cohen’s Kappa and
achieves an overall accuracy of 98.95% (as given in Table III) MCC values, both at 0.97, further indicate best performance
12162 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Confusion matrices of teacher and student models on N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 test sets.

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE S TUDENT M ODEL ON CIC-IDS 2023 To demonstrate the statistical reliability of obtained results,
 DATASET confidence intervals (CIs) of the trained models with 95%
 CIs have been computed. For the N-BaIoT dataset (22,000
 test samples), the teacher model achieved a CI of [99.86%,
 99.90%], while the student model achieved [99.85%, 99.89%].
 On the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset (85,915 test samples), the
 teacher model yielded a CI of [98.88%, 99.03%], whereas
 the student model attained [98.63%, 98.79%]. These intervals
 reflect the reliability due to large sample sizes and support the
 robustness of reported performance metrics.
 Moreover, to assess the model’s generalizability, a 5-fold
 cross-validation on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS2023 datasets
of model between the predicted and true labels, confirming has been performed. Across all folds, the teacher model
the model’s reliability. Its confusion matrix has been shown achieved an average accuracy of 99.89% ± 0.02% ±0.07% on
in Fig. 6(d). N-BaIoT and 98.94% ± 0.10% ± 0.21% on CIC-IDS2023;
UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION 12163

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 L AYER -W ISE I NFERENCE T IMES OF T EACHER AND S TUDENT M ODELS C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ODEL (N O KD) AND KD S TUDENT M ODEL
 (∼ 120K PARAMETERS )

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON W ITH E XISTING S TUDIES

 TABLE VI
 M ODEL S IZES AND PARAMETER C OUNTS OF T EACHER
 AND S TUDENT M ODELS

 D. Comparative Analysis
 To further highlight the advantages of utilized KD approach
 beyond mere complexity reduction, we conducted additional
 experiments comparing the utilized KD student model to a
 tuned baseline model of similar size (i.e., approximately 120k
 parameters). The baseline model was trained from scratch
 without teacher logits. Both models were assessed using
 the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets, under identical
 training conditions. Table VII summarizes the key results
the student model maintained competitive results of 99.85% ± and shows that the student model outperformed the baseline
0.02% ± 0.05% and 98.70% ± 0.12% ± 0.09%, respectively. model. Furthermore, the comparison Table VIII shows that
To evaluate robustness against unseen threats, small test set KD yields a compact student network that attains 99.88%
(not utilized in the training folds) has been used. Both models and 99.87% accuracy on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023
demonstrated an accuracy over (over 98%), with only a datasets, respectively, overtaking earlier architectures such as
marginal performance drop. SkipGateNet, Deep Forest, and Deep Stack.

 E. Computational Complexity on Edge Device
B. Model Size To illustrate real-world feasibility, both the teacher and
 Ensuring a lightweight architecture is important for deploy- student models have been deployed on a mobile device
ing DL models on consumer electronics. Table VI highlights having 2 GB of RAM, a Snapdragon680 octa-core processor
the parameter counts and layer configurations for both the (max 2.40 GHz), and OS version 1.0.8.0.TGCMIXM. Using a
teacher and student models. Despite sharing similar architec- TensorFlow Lite (TFLite) application for on-device inference,
tural components, the student model reduces the total number it has been observed that the teacher model required an average
of parameters from approximately 263k to 120k and the model of 48 ms per inference and occupied 1.00 MB of storage.
size from 1.00 MB to 471.67 KB. This parameter reduction In contrast, the distilled student model achieved a reduced
enables faster inference and lower resource consumption. inference time of 34 ms and consumed a size of only 471.67
 KB. This reduction in latency and memory highlights the
 student model’s suitability for resource-constrained scenarios.
C. Inference Time
 The teacher model takes a total of 48.42 ms for a single F. Explainable AI
forward pass, which averages to 3.72 ms per layer. Whereas, In order to provide interpretability for both the teacher and
the student model exhibits a reduced inference times of student models, the SHAP technique has been utilized. Fig. 7
34.39 ms with an average of 3.44 ms per layer. Table V shows the resulting SHAP summary plots for the student
presents the inference times for both models, reflecting the model on the N-BaIoT dataset. Each horizontal “violin” corimpact of model complexity. responds to one feature, with the width of the violin indicating
12164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 [4] M. Umair, W.-H. Tan, and Y.-L. Foo, “Dynamic federated learning
 aggregation for enhanced intrusion detection in IoT attacks,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2024, pp. 524–529.
 [5] G. ALMahadin et al., “VANET network traffic anomaly detection using
 GRU-based deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–4555, Feb. 2024.
 [6] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
 survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
 [7] M. S. Alshehri, J. Ahmad, S. Almakdi, M. A. Qathrady, Y. Y. Ghadi,
 and W. J. Buchanan, “SkipGateNet: A lightweight CNN-LSTM hybrid
 model with learnable skip connections for efficient botnet attack detection in IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 35521–35538, 2024.
 [8] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
 Nov. 2023.
 [9] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep
 forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for
 consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2,
 pp. 4976–4987, May 2024.
 [10] J. K. Samriya, S. Kumar, M. Kumar, H. Wu, and S. S. Gill, “Machine
 learning-based network intrusion detection optimization for cloud computing environments,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4,
Fig. 7. SHAP summary plot for the student model. The color gradient from pp. 7449–7460, Nov. 2024.
blue (low) to red (high) reflects each feature’s original value range. [11] F. Ullah, G. Srivastava, S. Ullah, K. Yoshigoe, and Y. Zhao, “NIDS-VSB:
 Network intrusion detection system for VANET using spark-based big
 data optimization and transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1798–1809, Feb. 2024.
how the SHAP values are distributed across all test samples. [12] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-f. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion
A positive SHAP value indicates that the feature increases the detection model based on CNN and knowledge distillation,” Appl. Soft
 Comput., vol. 165, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 112118.
predicted probability of the target class, whereas a negative [13] M. A. Yagiz, P. MohajerAnsari, M. D. Pesé, and P. Goktas,
value decreases it. The farther from zero, the stronger the “Transforming in-vehicle network intrusion detection: VAE-based
influence on the prediction. knowledge distillation meets explainable AI,” in Proc. 6th Workshop
 CPS&IoT Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 93–103.
 [14] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, J. Prieto, A. G. Arrieta, and J. M. Corchado,
 “Unleashing the potential of knowledge distillation for IoT traffic
 IV. C ONCLUSION classification,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw., vol. 2,
 pp. 221–239, 2024.
 This study demonstrated and proposed a Knowledge [15] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
Distillation (KD)-based lightweight and efficient deep learning attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
(DL) model for cyberattack detection in consumer electronics. no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018.
 [16] Y. Meidan et al., 2018, “Detection_of_IoT_botnet_attacks_N_BaIoT,”
The distilled student model achieved high performance, with Dataset, UCI Mach. Learn. Reposit., doi: 10.24432/C5RC8J.
accuracies of 99.87% on the N-BaIoT dataset and 98.71% [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/442/
on the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset, and F1-scores exceeding 0.98 detection+of+iot+botnet+attacks+n+baiot
 [17] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
across multiple attack classes. The model significantly reduced A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time Dataset and benchmark for
the architectural complexity, lowering the number of trainable large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, p. 5941,
parameters from approximately 263k to 120k, decreasing 2023.
 [18] (Can. Inst. Cybersecur., Fredericton, NB, Canada). CIC IoT Dataset.
model size from 1.00 MB to 471.67 KB, and reducing 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iotdatasetaverage inference time from around 48 ms to 34 ms. For 2023.html
interpretability, SHAP-based explainable AI technique was [19] Y. Gu, L. Dong, F. Wei, and M. Huang, “MiniLLM: Knowledge
 distillation of large language models,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
utilized, revealing that the student model preserved key feature Represent., 2024, pp. 1–24. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
attributions learned by the teacher model. This balance of forum?id=5h0qf7IBZZ
high accuracy, reduced computational cost, and interpretability
highlights the effectiveness and scalability of KD for secure
and practical intrusion detection in resource-constrained edge
environments.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] S. Gnanavendan et al., “Challenges, solutions and future trends in EV- Muhammad Umair (Graduate Student Member,
 technology: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 17242–17260, 2024. IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engi-
 [2] M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. P. Singh, and A. K. Sinha, “Digital economy to neering from HITEC University, Taxila, Pakistan,
 improve the culture of industry 4.0: A study on features, implementation and the master’s degree from Multimedia University,
 and challenges,” Green Technol. Sustainabil., vol. 2, no. 2, 2024, Malaysia. He received the Graduate Research
 Art. no. 100083. Assistantship with Multimedia University, for his
 [3] D. Muhammed, E. Ahvar, S. Ahvar, M. Trocan, M.-J. Montpetit, and master’s degree. His research interests include
 R. Ehsani, “Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) for smart agriculture: machine learning, deep learning, and federated
 A review of architectures, technologies and solutions,” J. Netw. Comput. learning.
 Appl., vol. 228, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103905.
UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION 12165

 Muhammad Shahbaz Khan (Member, IEEE) Faisal Saeed received the B.Sc. degree in computreceived the B.S. degree in electronics and electrical ers (information technology) from Cairo University,
 engineering from NFC IET, Multan, in 2011, and the Egypt, in 2005, and the M.Sc. degree in information
 M.S. degree in electronics and electrical engineering technology management and the Ph.D. degree
 from HITEC University, Taxila, Pakistan, in 2015. in computer science from Universiti Teknologi
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyber Malaysia (UTM), Malaysia, in 2010 and 2013,
 security and artificial intelligence with the School of respectively. He is an Associate Professor with
 Computing, Engineering and the Built Environment, the Computer Science Department, Birmingham
 Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, U.K. He City University. He is leading the M.Sc. Artificial
 is an experienced academic and researcher with Intelligence course, Research Summer School, and
 more than ten years of experience in teaching and AI Research Cluster the Department. Previously, he
research. He has served as a Lecturer with the Department of Electrical worked as an Assistant and an Associate Professor with the Information
Engineering, HITEC University for more than eight years. His research Systems Department, Taibah University, Saudi Arabia, from 2017 to 2021,
interests include chaotic systems, chaotic image encryption, post-quantum and as a Senior Lecturer with the Information Systems Department, Faculty of
cryptography, intrusion detection, and AI for cyber security and healthcare. Computing, UTM from 2014 to 2017. His research interests include data mining, artificial intelligence, machine learning, information retrieval, and health
 informatics. He has an outstanding publication record in prestigious, high–
Wajdan Al Malwi received the B.S. degree in information systems from King
 impact journals and has presented papers at several international conferences.
Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia, in 2011, the M.S. degree in computer
 Moreover, he has secured several research funds from different funders in
science and information systems from the University of Michigan, Flint, USA,
 Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, and U.K. He served as the General Chair of IRICT,
in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree in computing science with concentration on
 ICACIN, ICOICE, and ICOTEN International Conferences, and a guest editor
human computer interaction from the University of Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K.,
 of several indexed Journals.
in 2024. Her areas of interest are human computer interaction, privacy, and
information security.

Fatima Asiri received the bachelor’s degree in information systems from King
Khalid University, Saudi Arabia, the master’s degree in information systems
from the University of Michigan, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Southampton, U.K., in 2021. She is currently
an Assistant Professor with the College of Computer Science and Information
Systems, King Khalid University. Her research interests include information
security, information privacy, Internet of Things, data analytics, and human–
computer interaction.

Ibtehal Nafea received the B.Sc. degree in computer science from the Jawad Ahmad (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
Department of Computer Science, King Abdul-Aziz University, Saudi Arabia, an experienced researcher with more than ten years
Jeddah, in 2002, the M.Sc. degree in software engineering from the School of cutting-edge research and teaching experience in
of Computing, Informatics and Media, University of Bradford, Bradford, prestigious institutes, including Edinburgh Napier
U.K., in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the School of University, U.K.; Glasgow Caledonian University,
Computing, Informatics and Media, University of Bradford in 2012. She is U.K.; Hongik University, South Korea; and HITEC
an Associate Professor with the Computer Science Department, College of University Taxila, Pakistan. He has taught various
Computer Science and Engineering, Taibah University. Her work has been courses both at undergraduate and postgraduate
published in Journal of Network and Computer Applications and International levels during his career. He has coauthored more
Journal of Parallel Programming. She is also a reviewer of Advances in than 100 research papers in international journals
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, the Concurrency and and peer-reviewed international conference proceed-
Computation: Practice and Experience Special Issue, and the Journal of ings. His research interests include cybersecurity, multimedia encryption,
Systems and Software. She is a member of artificial intelligent research and machine learning. He regularly organizes timely special sessions and
group and scientific research unit in Taibah University. She was a Technical workshops for several flagship IEEE conferences. He is an invited reviewer
Committee Member in WiDS Medina 2020 and IRICT 2020. She participated of numerous world-leading high-impact journals (reviewed more than 100
in many other conferences. journal articles to date).