16648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 Learning to Detect Industrial Time-Series
 Anomalies From Imputation Consistency
 With Sparse Observations
 Zhen Zhang , Yongming Han , Member, IEEE, and Zhiqiang Geng

 Abstract—Time-series anomaly detection plays an important W and b Weight matrix and bias vector,
role in ensuring industrial safety. Currently, many anomaly detec- respectively.
tion methods mainly target complete time series and ignore the d and h Embedding and encoder dimension,
widespread problem of data missing in the real world. Therefore,
this article proposes a novel anomaly detection method for time
 respectively.
series with sparse observations based on imputation consistency Ȟ, Ĥ, H́, and H̀ Input of encoders.
using a mixture of patch information inference network (MoPIN). Ž, Ẑ, Ź, and Z̀ Output of encoders.
Due to the robustness of the imputation method modeling to Z̄ Spatiotemporal mixture feature.
the random mask, different imputed series of the same normal U and V Output of PIML and PIMM,
time series with different random masks should have consistency. respectively.
Then, a novel imputation consistency is used to detect anomalies
in sparse observation series. Moreover, the MoPIN imputes series θ All parameters of the MoPIN.
by a two-step imputation and multiscale modeling of patch R, X R , OR , and LR Random mask matrix and time series
information. Meanwhile, the similarity of imputed series under and its corresponding observation and
different masks is used to measure imputation consistency, which delay matrix.
well constructs the relationship between sparse observation series C I and λ Imputation consistency constraint and
and anomaly scores. Finally, the MoPIN can accurately detect coefficient.
anomalies while imputing series. Extensive experiments on four
real-world benchmarks in different domains of imputation and X Imp and X Rec Imputation and reconstruction series,
anomaly detection tasks and a real fluid catalytic cracking respectively.
(FCC) process case demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed LStage1 and LStage2 Optimization target of two stages.
method. Specifically, the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mean
absolute error (MAE) relative improvement in imputation and I. I NTRODUCTION
3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly detection.
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, patch, process industry,
sparse observation, time series.
 W ITH the development of industrial technologies, the
 number of industrial devices is increasing. The occurrence of device anomalies poses a serious threat to industrial
 N OMENCLATURE safety [1]. Accurate status monitoring of these devices plays
 Abbreviation Expansion an important role in ensuring industrial production safety
 and improving production efficiency [2]. However, with a
 X, T , and C Time series and its length and large number of devices, it is difficult to monitor manually.
 dimension. Therefore, it is of practical significance to achieve accurate
 X o and X m Sets of observed values and missing and timely status monitoring through anomaly detection algovalues of X. rithms. Time series exist in various industrial scenarios and are
 ∆, O, and L Sampling interval, observation, and widely used in industrial anomaly detection, including process
 delay matrix, respectively. industries, spacecrafts, and industrial servers. However, due to
 l, s, and n Length, step size, and the number of the rarity of actual anomalies and the professional nature of
 patches, respectively. identification, labeling data are time-consuming and difficult.
 S , S t , and S s Input series of the PIML and its trend Therefore, unsupervised time-series anomaly detection is an
 and seasonal components, respectively. active research topic [3].
 Received 24 August 2024; revised 19 January 2025; accepted 3 May 2025. Currently, promising progress has been made in unsu-
Date of publication 21 May 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025. pervised time-series anomaly detection, including traditional
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of methods and deep learning-based methods [4]. Traditional
China under Grant 62422303 and Grant 62373035. (Corresponding authors:
Yongming Han; Zhiqiang Geng.)
 methods identify anomalies through spatial projection and
 The authors are with the College of Information Science and Technology, iterative partitioning. Deep learning-based methods use their
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China, and also powerful feature extraction capabilities to distinguish anomawith the Engineering Research Center of Intelligent PSE, Ministry of Edu- lies [5]. However, traditional methods ignore the inherent
cation of China, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: zhang zhen@buct.edu.cn;
hanym@mail.buct.edu.cn; gengzhiqiang@mail.buct.edu.cn). time dependencies, making it difficult to achieve accurate
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3568019 anomaly detection. Therefore, deep learning-based methods
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16649

have been widely studied, which are divided into prediction- In summary, this article introduces a patch-based approach
based methods and reconstruction-based methods [1]. The to time-series anomaly detection with sparse observations and
anomaly data are difficult to accurately predict or recon- proposes a mixture of patch information inference network
struct by the model modeled by normal data, so time-series (MoPIN) for imputation consistency learning. Specifically, a
anomaly detection methods based on recurrent neural network hybrid modeling approach based on channel independence and
(RNN) [6], graph neural network (GNN) [1], Transformer mixture for patch information is proposed. In addition, a two-
[7], and many other basic neural networks have been step time-series imputation framework is designed to achieve
proposed to realize data representation and anomaly discov- accurate imputation. Furthermore, the imputation consistency
ery through feature extraction of different dimensions and of different mask series is proposed and exploited for detectcapabilities. ing anomalies. In particular, despite the complex design, all
 However, current anomaly detection methods are all used branches of the MoPIN are implemented by simple multilayer
for complete time series, but in real industrial scenarios, perceptions (MLPs). Finally, the MoPIN can fully integrate the
data missing due to reasons such as communication inter- tasks of time-series imputation and anomaly detection, and
ruption and nonuniform sampling is very common [8]. thus realize anomaly monitoring of time series with sparse
At present, anomaly detection methods for time series with observations while performing imputation. The contributions
sparse observations often adopt a two-stage approach, which are summarized as follows.
use imputation methods to impute series and then use anomaly 1) This article proposes a novel MoPIN to realize timedetection methods to detect anomalies [9]. Obviously, the series modeling by making full use of the information
above approach breaks the connection between the data and the of time-series patches.
target of anomaly detection, hindering to accurately identify 2) The MoPIN not only accurately imputes series, but
anomalies. also uses the imputation consistency to achieve anomaly
 Benefiting from the advantages of deep learning methods detection of time series with sparse observations, thus
in deep modeling of time series, deep learning-based time- avoiding the separation between data and tasks.
series imputation methods have also achieved remarkable 3) Extensive experiments on four real-world benchmarks in
results [10]. Therefore, deep learning methods are used to different fields of series imputation and anomaly detecjointly perform two tasks of imputation and anomaly detection tion and a real chemical production application case
to achieve single-stage anomaly detection for sparse obser- demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
vation series. Time-series imputation methods use random Specifically, the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mean
masking to train models since the imputation model should square error (mse) relative improvement in imputabe robust to random masks. Moreover, due to factors such as tion and 3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly
the inherent time dependence and dimensional dependence in detection.
time series, different random mask positions in a series will The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
not cause significant changes in its imputed series. Combined reviews the related work. Section III introduces the proposed
with the idea of unsupervised time-series anomaly detection, MoPIN method. Section IV analyzes the performance of the
when only normal samples are used for modeling, anomaly MoPIN through extensive experiments. Section V verifies the
series are difficult to be accurately reconstructed or predicted. application effect of the MoPIN using an actual industrial case.
Meanwhile, for normal time series, the imputed time series Section VI draws the conclusions of this article.
with different masks should have consistency. And when the
series contains anomalies, since the model itself lacks the II. R ELATED W ORKS
ability to recover the anomaly data, it is difficult to achieve This section reviews recent related works of time-series
robust imputation under different masks. Therefore, series with anomaly detection and imputation. And also, the patch-based
anomalies will have lower imputation consistency than normal time-series modeling methods are reviewed.
series, which can be used to combine imputation and anomaly
detection tasks to achieve anomaly detection of time series
with sparse observations. A. Unsupervised Time-Series Anomaly Detection
 In addition, patch-based approach is used to implement Due to the scarcity of data labels, traditional unsupervised
series modeling, which is mainly due to its powerful local- methods often score data points at a timestamp based on
global modeling capabilities [11]. In the field of time-series density or distance. The typical method, principal component
analysis, the patch-based approach provides the time-series analysis (PCA) [14], achieves anomaly identification by promodel with partial frequency domain information at the input jecting data points into a low-dimensional space and using
level, enabling it to achieve better information extraction statistics as its distance measure [15]. The isolation forest (IF)
and utilization [12]. Most recent patch-based works use the [5] divided the data space through iterative partitioning and
channel-independence approach for series modeling, achieving calculated the local density of data points to identify anomabetter results than channel-mixture modeling. However, this lies. The recent copula-based outlier detection (COPOD)
approach ignores the feature relationship between channels method [16] and the empirical cumulative distribution-based
[13]. Therefore, this article will adopt the hybrid modeling outlier detection (ECOD) method [17] determined the anomaapproach for patch information, integrating the advantages of lies by calculating the probability density of data points.
channel-independence modeling and mixture spatiotemporal However, although traditional methods can achieve data
modeling. anomaly detection faster, they only consider the information of
16650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

data points at a single timestamp and ignore the inherent time- of series [25]. The classic mean imputation method uses the
dependent characteristics, which hinders accurate anomaly mean of the series to fill in the missing values. In addidetection. tion, some works adopt the iterative calculation approaches
 Benefiting from the powerful feature extraction capability including soft threshold singular value decomposition, matrix
of deep learning, Zong et al. [18] combined the traditional decomposition, and random forest to propose imputation
density-based method with the deep model and proposed methods such as soft imputation (SoftImpute) [26], matrix facthe deep autoencoder Gaussian mixture model (DAGMM). torization imputation (MatrixFactorization) [27], and missing
However, it still does not consider the data characteristics forest (MissForest) [28]. However, the above methods have the
in the time dimension. Recent deep learning-based methods problem of strong assumptions about missing values, which
further take the characteristics of the time dimension into introduces strong biases in imputed series.
consideration and achieve anomaly detection through series Recently, deep learning-based imputation methods have
prediction or reconstruction errors. In terms of prediction- achieved promising progress, which automatically mines the
based methods, Hundman et al. [6] used a long-short term inherent information in series through deep representation
memory (LSTM) network to build a time-series model and and data recovery, without considering the strong assumptions
detected anomalies through prediction errors. Chen et al. [3] required by traditional methods. Some researchers used bidiand Zhang et al. [1] used the GNN to construct the graph rectional RNN and hidden layer state propagation to propose
structure with a Transformer for anomaly detection (GTA) a bidirectional recurrent imputation method for time series
and the graph structure change-based anomaly detection (BRITS) [29] and multidirectional RNN (M-RNN) [30] to fill
method (GSC-MAD), and also used prediction errors to in missing values, respectively. Marisca et al. [31] proposed
detect and locate anomalies. Meanwhile, reconstruction- a novel GNN-based method with the spatiotemporal point
based methods have also been fully developed. Based on inference network (SPIN), which imputed missing values by
the widely used autoencoder, Audibert et al. [19] and learning the spatiotemporal graph representation of sparse
Tuli et al. [7] adopted adversarial training to construct the data. In addition, the TimesNet [20] was a general timeunsupervised anomaly detection (USAD) method and the series analysis tool that used convolutional neural networks
Transformer-based anomaly detection (TranAD) method, to extract the period-frequency information of series and
respectively. Wu et al. [20] transformed the series into impute in missing values. Du et al. [10] adopted the diagtwo dimensions and used a typical network framework for onal mask self-attention mechanism and combined it with
processing 2-D data to extract the frequency-periodic features weighted combination design to propose a two-step selfof the data, reconstructed the series, and used the error to attention mechanism-based imputation method for time series
detect anomalies. In addition, Han et al. [21] proposed a self- (SAITS). Yuan et al. [8] proposed the attention-based interval
supervised memory enhanced deep clustering (SMEL) method aided network (AIA-Net) combining the self-attention mechacombining temporal dimension information autoencoder and nism with the RNN, which was used for soft measurement of a
clustering idea to detect anomalies in an actual wastewater hydrocracking process. Pan et al. [32] combined data statistics
treatment process. Zhou et al. [22] also detected anomalies and autoencoders to design an adaptive learning strategy for
using clustering idea and temporal information extraction proposing the adaptive-learned median-filled deep autoencoder
based on dynamic graph and entity-aware normalizing (AM-DAE) in the soft sensor of a hydrocracking device.
technologies. The above methods are all designed for imputation, which is
 However, the above methods are all studied for complete subject to achieve better downstream tasks such as classificaseries. For series with missing values, these methods need to tion and prediction. However, as aforementioned, this two-step
fill in the series before detection, which makes it impossible to approach leads to a gap between the data and downstream
directly connect the data and the task, and the performance of tasks, making the performance of downstream tasks directly
anomaly detection is directly affected by the performance of affected by imputation. In order to improve the performance of
imputation, which hinders the performance of anomaly detec- downstream tasks, Che et al. [33] used gated recurrent units to
tion [9]. Recently, Xiao and Fan [23] integrated imputation extract features of series with missing values, while allowing
and anomaly detection process using an end-to-end frame- the network to directly participate in the calculation of classiwork (ImAD) to impute incomplete anomaly data and detect fication task, thereby improving the accuracy of classification
anomalies based on well-designed pseudo-abnormal samples. tasks. Miao et al. [24] introduced additional classifiers in the
Different from the above method, this article is characterized generative adversarial network (GAN) used for data impuby a novel imputation consistency-based anomaly detection tation, and improved the classification performance of time
condition, which jointly designs the time-series model for series with missing values through semi-supervised learning.
anomaly detection and imputation tasks to learn a direct Different from the above methods, this article uses inherent
connection between data and anomaly scores. imputation consistency in the time-series imputation task to
 detect anomalies and closely links the relationship between
B. Time-Series Imputation data and anomaly detection task in the joint optimization of
 In real-world scenarios, data missing is a common prob- the two tasks.
lem and can be solved by the imputation method, which
is divided into traditional methods and deep learning-based C. Patch-Based Time-Series Method
methods [24]. Traditional methods impute missing values by Recently, patch-based methods have shown great capacopying the observation around it or using statistical indicators bilities in the field of time-series analysis. Motivated by
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16651

Fig. 1. Time series with complete and sparse observations.

natural language processing, Nie et al. [11] divided time
series into patches, arguing that each patch could be treated
as a word, and proposed the patch time-series Transformer
method (PatchTST) for long-term time-series forecasting.
Subsequently, a wide range of patch-based methods were
proposed. Chen et al. [12] extracted interpatch and intrapatch
features based on patch segmentation, combined temporal
resolution and distance information for multiscale modeling, Fig. 2. Architecture of the PIMM.
and proposed multiscale Transformers with adaptive pathway
(Pathformer) for long-term series forecasting. In time-series which indicates the time interval between the time of the
anomaly detection, Yang et al. [4] proposed a dual-branch latest historical observation and the current time t. Suppose
attention structure based on patchwise and in-patch to learn the sampling interval is ∆, matrices O and L can be calculated by
permutation invariant representation of series, and learned the the following equations:
dual-branch difference representation under the constraint of (
 1, if xt,c is not missing
contrastive loss to perform anomaly detection. However, under Ot,c = (1)
the advantage of channel independence modeling, the above 0, otherwise
methods ignore the relationship between series channels.
 8
 <0,
 ˆ if t = 1
Unlike the previous usage of patches, the proposed MoPIN
 Lt,c = ∆, if t > 1 and Ot−1,c = 1 (2)
utilizes different advantages of channel independence mod-
 ∆, > =
 ˆ
eling and spatiotemporal mixture modeling after time-series
 :L
 t−1,c + if t 1 and O t−1,c 0.
patching, and constructs a time-series model by independent And the USAD for time series with sparse observations
modeling and result fusion to achieve full utilization of is to use {X, O, L} to determine whether the system status at
information. timestamp t is anomalous or not without labels.

 III. M ETHOD
 B. Patch Information Mixture Module
 For ease of understanding, this section describes the problem definition. Then, the patch information mixture module 1) Multiscale Modeling: The effectiveness of multiscale
(PIMM), which is the core module of the MoPIN is introduced. modeling in time-series analysis has been widely verified [20].
Furthermore, the overall design of the MoPIN is described. Therefore, multiscale modeling is introduced based on the
Finally, imputation consistency and optimization objectives are patch size in the PIMM, as shown in Fig. 2, which consists of
detailed. N independent patch information mixture layers (PIMLs), each
 of which uses patch information of different scales. Finally, the
 output of the PIMM is obtained by weighting the calculation
A. Problem Definition results of each layer.
 For a system with C variables uniformly sampled over time, Specifically, given the patch size l and the step size s,
the observation series X ∈ RT ×C over a time period of length a time series can be divided into different overlapping or
T is a full observation time series. If values of a variable nonoverlapping patch series, as shown in Fig. 3. In this way,
are not observed within time T, the observation series X = the information about different scales of the original series
{X o , X m } is a time series with sparse observations, where X o can be extracted from different patch series. In particular, after
and X m denote the sets of observed values and missing values, multiscale patch division, the positional relationship between
respectively. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of a time series of missing values and observations in the series can be wellcomplete and sparse observations containing four variables. connected. Therefore, the MoPIN can impute missing values
 In the modeling of time series with sparse observations, two well through utilizing local information around them.
auxiliary matrices are introduced to utilize the information In each PIML, patch division is performed on the input
contained in the data. The first is the observation matrix series S and the corresponding delay matrix L. The dimension
O ∈ RT ×C , which indicates whether the observation is missing size of S and L after division is Rl×n×C , where n = d((T −
at a timestamp t, and the second is the delay matrix L ∈ RT ×C , l)/s)e + 1 denotes the number of the patch in each channel.
16652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 where W1 ∈ Rd×h and W2 ∈ Rh×d are the weights, b1 ∈ Rh×1
 and b2 ∈ Rd×1 are the bias terms, and H and Z with the
 same dimension denote the input and output of the encoder,
 respectively. And d and h denote the embedding dimension and
 the hidden layer dimension of the MLP, respectively. By transforming the dimension of the input series S, the interpatch,
 intrapatch, temporal, and spatial encoders can extract the
 corresponding information Z = {Ž, Ẑ, Ź, Z̀} from the embedding H = {Ȟ, Ĥ, H́, H̀} with dimensions of RC×l×d , RC×n×d ,
 Rn×l×d , and Rn×C×d . In addition, for the spatiotemporal mixture encoding, spatiotemporal mixture feature Z̄ ∈ RC×n×l can
Fig. 3. Multiscale patch division.
 be calculated by the following equation:

 Z̄ = Transpose(Z̀ × Ź T ) (4)

 where Transpose(·) is the dimension permutation operation.
 Then, Ź, Z̀, and Z̄ are decoded and the output of the nth PIML
 Un ∈ RC×T can be calculated by the following equation:

 Un = Ž × W̌D + Ẑ × ŴD + Z̄ × W̄D (5)

 where W̌D ∈ Rl×d×T , ŴD ∈ Rn×d×T , and W̄D ∈ Rn×l×T are
 the weights of the decoder.
 3) Embedding: For different encoders, the inputs with different dimensions are embedded into the same dimension for
Fig. 4. MLP encoder. calculation via linear projection. Meanwhile, the delay matrix
 as auxiliary information is embedded to assist imputation.
Then, the PIML encodes S and L by channel-independence
 Different from previous methods that also use delay informaencoding and channel-mixture encoding, respectively.
 tion, the MoPIN embeds it through learnable parameters rather
 2) Channel Independence and Mixture Encoding: In prethan using it by concatenation. In this way, the delay matrix
vious works, both channel-independence modeling [11] and
 can make the model pay attention to its neighboring local
channel-mixture spatiotemporal modeling [1] were found to be
 observations during imputation and avoid mutations caused by
beneficial for time-series analysis. And some proposed serial
 concatenation. In addition, for the two encoders that extract
modeling approaches [13] using both of above approaches may
 temporal granularity information, the positional encoding of
lead to information leakage between channels during channelthe series is also embedded. Therefore, in addition to the
wise modeling. Therefore, the MoPIN blends the advantages of
 positional encoding, the embedding H can be calculated by
the two modeling approaches in a parallel manner. In addition,
 the following equation:
the MoPIN directly decodes the results encoded by each
encoder and then fuses them, so the MoPIN can fully utilize
 H = Transpose(S ) × WS + Transpose(L) × WL (6)
the advantages of both modeling approaches. Specifically:
 1) Channel independence encoding. This encoding module where WS and WL are the weights of the embedding
 encodes the information within the patch (intrapatch) calculation.
 and between patches (interpatch) separately. Among 4) Adaptive Aggregate: Motivated by the TimesNet [19],
 them, the interpatch encoder encodes the global gran- it can be believed that patches of different scales can better
 ularity information between different patches, and the extract different frequency-period features of the series. Thereintrapatch encoder encodes the temporal fine-grained fore, the frequency amplitude calculated by the fast Fourier
 information between different timestamps in the patch transform is used as the weight of the scale corresponding
 of a single channel. to different patch sizes, and performs adaptive aggregation
 2) Channel mixture encoding. This encoding module on the output of the PIML. For N PIMLs, the patch size
 encodes the temporal and spatial information of the set P = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lN } and the output set of PIMLs U =
 patch separately and fuses them. In detail, the temporal {U1 , U2 , . . . , U N }, the output of the PIMM V can be calculated
 and spatial encoders encode the relationships between by the following equations:
 the time and channel dimensions of the patch, separately.
 All of the four encoders are achieved by the MLPs with the A = |FFT(S )| (7)
same structure as shown in Fig. 4 and calculated in different
 WA = w1A , w2A , . . . , wNA = AP
 ˚
 (8)
dimensions to extract the multiscale information, which can
be calculated by the following equation: V = U × WA (9)

 Z = LayerNorm(Dropout(LeakyReLU(H × W1 + b1 ) where FFT(·) denotes the fast Fourier transform and WA ∈
 × W2 + b2 )) (3) RN×1 is the weight vector.
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16653

 the following equation:
 P Ro
 Rm X :, j
 X i, j = P R . (11)
 O :, j
 Compared with zero-imputation, this can better utilize the
 statistical information in series and avoid meaningless mutations caused by zero-imputation, which is very important for
 anomaly detection tasks. In addition, the series decomposition
 module uses global average pooling to extract the trend component, and the rest is considered as the seasonal component,
 which can be calculated by the following equations:
 S t = AvgPool(Pad(S )) (12)
Fig. 5. (a) Overview of the MoPIN. (b) Structure of the imputed module.
 Ss = S − St (13)
 where S, S t , and S s denote the input series, trend, and seasonal
C. MoPIN component, respectively. The AvgPool(·) and Pad(·) are the
 global average pooling and padding operations, respectively.
 Fig. 5(a) shows the overall structure of the MoPIN. Overall,
the MoPIN achieves anomaly detection while imputing time D. Imputation Consistency
series. Different from the current two-stage anomaly detection As analyzed in the Introduction, the training of impumethod for time series with sparse observations, the two stages tation models is often achieved through the recovery of
of the MoPIN are the two stages of model construction. random masked values. For a robust imputation model, dif-
In the first stage, the pretrained model F(X; θpre ) with ferent random masks usually do not cause huge changes in
parameters θpre is obtained through a two-step imputation imputed values, which is also the premise of imputation model
only with the constraint of the imputation task. Specifically, training. However, referring to the idea of unsupervised timethe second-step imputation is a modification of the first-step series anomaly detection, intuitively, when the series contains
imputation result by the same imputation module with shared anomalies, different random masks will lead to large differparameters. In the second stage, the imputation consistency ences between the imputed series. This is because anomalies
is used to constrain the model and the model F(X; θtune ) with destroy the robustness of the proposed model. Therefore, the
updated parameters θtune is trained, which is suitable for the MoPIN exploits this to detect anomalies.
anomaly detection task. Through the two-stage design, the Specifically, the MoPIN measures the imputation consis-
MoPIN closely links the imputation and anomaly detection tency of two imputed series by the mse and distribution
tasks, while directly calculate anomaly scores during the similarity between them. On the one hand, the mse is an
imputation process without the need for additional anomaly intuitive measure of the consistency of the imputation results.
detection methods. On the other hand, according to the work of Miao et al.
 In both stages, the MoPIN performs a random mask opera- [24], even with a small mse, the distribution of the imputed
tion on time series to facilitate the training of the imputation series may be significantly different from the original series.
and the calculation of imputation consistency. The random Therefore, the distributional similarity of the two imputed
mask operation can be calculated as series is incorporated as a constraint. Assume that the two
 random mask series of the time series X are X̃ and Ẍ, and the
 XR = O (1 − R) X (10) corresponding imputed series are X̃ Imp and Ẍ Imp . Then, the
 imputation consistency C I is defined as follows:
 2
where R ∈ RT ×C = {0, 1} denotes the random mask matrix, in C I = (1 − λ) X̃ Imp − Ẍ Imp 2
 m o
which 1 means the value is masked. And X R = {X R , X R } is 1
 + λ DKL (X̃ Imp kẌ Imp ) + DKL Ẍ Imp kX̃ Imp
 
the masked series and the corresponding observation matrix (14)
 2
OR and delay matrix LR are calculated by (1) and (2), respecwhere DKL (pkq) = − p ln(p/q) denotes the Kullback-
 P
tively. And the is the elementwise multiply. The mask ratio
 Leibler divergence, which is used to measure the distribuis r = (kRk1 /(T × C)).
 tion similarity of two series. And λ denotes the balance
 At any stage, the imputed module contains all the forward
 hyperparameter. The MoPIN uses the calculated imputation
propagation calculations, and its overall structure is shown in
 consistency as the anomaly score and compares it with a
Fig. 5(b). It decomposes the series into trend and seasonal
 predefined threshold for anomaly detection.
components through a series decomposition module and uses,
respectively, two different PIMMs to build decomposed series
models, and then merged their results to achieve imputation E. Optimization
and reconstruction. Here, imputation and reconstruction cor- According to different objectives of the two stages of the
 m o
respond to missing values X R and observed values X R , MoPIN, different optimization functions are designed.
respectively. In addition, in the first step, the mean of the Stage 1: The goal of the first stage is to enable the MoPIN
 o
series is used to initialize X R , which can be calculated by to effectively impute missing values. Therefore, according to
16654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 D ETAILS OF B ENCHMARKS

the two-step imputation process, the following optimization A. Benchmarks and Evaluation Metrics
function is designed. Suppose that the output of the imputation 1) Benchmark: The MoPIN is validated on four real-world
module is Y, then for observed values and missing values, the benchmarks of two typical time-series tasks, and the details
imputed series X Imp and the reconstructed sequence X Rec can are shown in Table I: 1) electricity transformer temperature
be obtained, respectively, (ETT); 2) Beijing Multi-Site Air-Quality (Air); 3) Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) and Soil Moisture Active Passive
 X Imp = Y (1 − OR ) + X R OR (15)
 (SMAP); and 4) Pooled Server Metrics (PSM). Specifically,
 X Rec
 =Y O .
 R
 (16) in order to verify the performance of the MoPIN on time
 series with sparse observations, 10% of the observations in
 Then, for the first step, the MoPIN uses L2 loss to optimize
 the benchmarks are randomly masked. And on the validation
both reconstruction and imputation tasks, and its optimization
 1 set and test set, these 10% mask observations are used as
target LStage1 is shown in the following equation:
 ground truth to evaluate. In addition, for the MSL and the
 
 Imp
  2 2 SMAP [6], only three nontrivial subsets A-4, C-2, and T-1
 1
 LStage1 = X1 −X R + X1Rec − X R 2 (17) are used because the rest of the subsets are mostly trivial
 2
 Imp
 series [7]. Furthermore, for fairness in evaluation, the length of
where X1 and X1Rec are the imputed and reconstructed series all series is set to 96, and all benchmarks are preprocessed by
for the first step. Then, for the second step, only the imputed standardization. And following the protocol of previous works
 2
series is constrained, and the optimization target LStage1 is [10], the benchmarks are split into training, validation, and test
shown in the following equation: sets chronologically by the ratio of 6:2:2 for the ETTh1 and
 
 Imp
  2 7:1:2 for the Air. For the anomaly detection task, the training
 2
 LStage1 = X2 − X R (18) data are split into training and validation sets according to the
 2
 ratio of 3:1 [1].
 Imp
where X2 is the second imputed series. Hence, the optimiza- 2) Evaluation Metrics: The standard metrics are
tion target of the first stage is shown in the following equation: utilized for evaluation. For imputation task, the mse
 (mse = (1/kRk1 )k(X Imp − X) Rk22 ), the mean absolute error
 LStage1 = LStage1
 1 2
 + LStage1 . (19) (MAE = (1/kRk1 )k(X Imp
 − X) Rk1 ), and the root-mean-square
 √
 Stage 2: For the second stage, the imputation consistency error (RMSE = MSE) are used. For anomaly detection,
is directly used as the optimization objective LStage2 precision [P = (TP/(TP + FP))], recall [R = (TP/(TP + FN))],
 and F1 score [F1 = (2×P × R)/(P + R)] are used, where
 LStage2 = C I . (20) TP and FP denote the correctly and incorrectly detected
 anomalies, respectively, and TN and FN denote the correctly
 Therefore, the MoPIN can achieve two tasks: imputation and incorrectly labeled normal, respectively. Specifically,
and anomaly detection. For the imputation, the MoPIN is due to different prediction or reconstruction performances
optimized through the LStage1 . For the anomaly detection, the between different anomaly detection methods, the previous
MoPIN uses LStage1 as the target and optimizes it a certain evaluation protocol is used, which is that the best thresholds
number of times, and then uses LStage2 to continue optimizing for all methods are selected through grid search, and the best
and the imputation consistency is used as the anomaly score performances for them are reported for all experiments [3].
to detect anomalies. In general, the two stages of the MoPIN Moreover, the point adjust strategy is used [34].
can be expressed as
 X Imp = F(X; θpre ), s.t. LStage1 (21) B. Baselines
 AnomalyScore = F(X; θtune ), s.t. LStage2 . (22) For the imputation task, the MoPIN is compared with
 12 baselines, including four tranditional methods with the
 Mean, the MissForest [28], the SoftImpute [26], and the
 IV. E XPERIMENT MatrixFactorization [27], and eight latest deep learning-based
 This section verifies the imputation and anomaly detection methods with the AMDAE [32], the BRITS [29], the MRNN
performance of the MoPIN through multiple real-world bench- [30], the AIA-GRU [8], the SPIN [31], the TimesNet [20],
marks and illustrates its effectiveness through comparative the PatchTST [11], and the SAITS [10]. Among them, the
experiments, ablation, and efficiency analysis. TimesNet is the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) method.
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16655

 TABLE II
 I MPUTATION P ERFORMANCE

Fig. 6. Critical difference diagram of the metric 1/mse.

 For the anomaly detection task, the MoPIN is compared
with ten baselines, including tranditional methods with the
KPCA [14], the IF [5], the COPOD [16], the ECOD [17],
and deep learning-based methods with the DAGMM [18],
the OmniAnomaly [34], the USAD [19], the CAE M [35],
the DCDetector [4], the TimesNet [20], and the ImAD [23].
Among them, the DCDetector and the ImAD are the current
SOTA methods for time series without and with missing
values. In particular, all the baselines except the ImAD use the
TimesNet to impute missing values before detect anomalies.

C. Implementation Details
 We implement the MoPIN, its variants, and all baselines
in PyTorch version 1.8.2 with CUDA 10.2. All experiments
are conducted on a server with Intel1 Xeon2 Silver 4210 CPU Fig. 7. Imputation result visualization on ETTh1.
at 2.20 GHz and a single NVIDIA TITAN V 12-GB GPU.
For fairness, the consistent hyperparameters are used for all both benchmarks. In addition, it is found that the performance
experiments. The random mask ratio r is set to 0.1, and the of the SoftImpute and the MatrixFactorization methods far
number of the PIMLs N is set to 2. Hence, patch sizes are exceeds the Mean and the MissingForest, which is because
set to {16, 24}, and related strides are set to {8, 12}. Moreover, these two methods gradually impute in an iterative manner and
the embedding and encoder dimensions d and h are set to achieve higher accuracy in the process of gradual correction.
16 and 8, respectively. And for the imputation consistency C I , This also provides indirect motivation support for the two-
λ is set to 0.5. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer step imputation design of the MoPIN. However, this iterative
with a learning rate of 1 × 10−3 , L2 regularization weight of approach brings a huge amount of time consumption while
5 × 10−4 , and hyperparameters β1 and β2 as 0.9 and 0.99, achieving high precision. Therefore, the MoPIN improves the
respectively. For imputation task, training iterates 300 times performance by only two-step imputation without multiple
and the early stop strategy is used with patience of 10. For iterations, making it advantageous in both accuracy and time
anomaly detection task, training iterates 8 times on stage 1 consumption.
and 30 times on stage 2 with a patience of 5. The batch size Meanwhile, among the deep learning-based methods, except
for all experiments is set to 128. for the PatchTST and the TimesNet, which are time-series
 analysis methods, the rest are ad hoc methods specially
D. Results and Discussion designed for imputation. However, except the SAITS, the other
 methods cannot outperform the PatchTST and the TimesNet.
 1) Imputation: The imputation performance is reported in
 From the perspective of method design, this can be attributed
Table II, and the related visualization of the critical difference
 to the powerful ability of series information extraction based
diagram based on the Wilcoxon pairwise signed-rank test after
 on the patch. In addition, the SAITS significantly outperforms
rejecting the null hypothesis using the Friedman test of the
 the PatchTST on ETTh1 and has similar performance on Air,
metric 1/mse is shown in Fig. 6. Compared with all baselines,
 which is because unlike other deep learning-based methods,
the MoPIN achieves the best performance. Specifically, the
 the SAITS is also designed with a multistep imputation
MoPIN outperforms the SOTA baseline by relative 22.17%
 approach, which provides it with excellent performance.
(0.083 → 0.065), 8.05% (0.189 → 0.174), and 11.81%
 In addition, for the MoPIN, compared with the TimesNet
(0.288 → 0.254) on the mse, the MAE, and the RMSE on
 and the PatchTST, the design of multiscale PIMM of the
the ETTh1. And on the Air, it outperforms the SOTA baseline
 MoPIN makes it more advantageous in extracting series inforby relative 23.21% (0.321 → 0.247), 30.36% (0.228 → 0.159),
 mation. And combined with the MoPIN proprietary imputation
and 19.44% (0.501 → 0.404) on the mse, the MAE, and
 design, it achieves the best performance on both benchmarks.
the RMSE.
 In order to clearly demonstrate the performance of multiple
 It is worth noting that since deep learning-based methmethods, Fig. 7 visualizes the results of the MoPIN and the
ods consider more information in series modeling, all deep
 other four best baselines on ETTh1.
learning-based methods outperform traditional methods on
 Furthermore, the imputation performance of the MoPIN
 1 Registered trademark. under different missing rates is verified on ETTh1. Specifically,
 2 Registered trademark. the imputation results of the MoPIN are compared with several
16656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 Fig. 10. Anomaly detection performance under different missing rates
Fig. 8. Imputation performance under different missing rates on ETTh1. on PSM.

 extra information is intolerable for the anomaly detection
 task, as it goes against the core idea of USAD. Therefore,
 the SOTA baseline DCDetector on complete series cannot
 achieve good anomaly detection on a sparse series. Although
 the baseline ImAD avoids preimputation problem, it does
 not fully use the information containing in data, while the
Fig. 9. Critical difference diagram of the metric F1. MoPIN can achieve better performance because of its mixture
 TABLE III of information modeling approach. In addition, the TimesNet
 A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%) is the best-performing baseline. On the one hand, this is
 due to the patch-based method design. On the other hand,
 the TimesNet is also used as the imputation method before
 anomaly detection and has the same model structure in both
 tasks, which gives it an advantage in task transfer. However,
 it is still a two-stage anomaly detection method. The MoPIN
 uses imputation consistency to avoid the gap between sparse
 series and anomaly detection, which is the core of achieving
 the best anomaly detection performance.
 Furthermore, the anomaly detection performance of the
 MoPIN under different missing rates is verified on PSM.
 Specifically, the anomaly detection results of the MoPIN are
 compared with several baselines at miss rates ranging from
 0.1 to 0.9 by random masking. The experimental results are
 shown in Fig. 10. From the results, it can be seen that although
 the TimesNet has a performance close to the MoPIN at a
 low missing rate, the performance of the TimesNet decreases
baselines at missing rates of 0.1–0.9 by random masking. The
 rapidly as the missing rate increases. For the ImAD, it does
experimental results are shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that
 not need a preimputation step, so it performs better on high
when the missing rate is between 0.1 and 0.4, the MoPIN has
 missing rate compared with other baselines, which further
a significant advantage. When the missing rate is between 0.5
 shows the advantage of a single-step detection strategy for
and 0.9, the MoPIN still has a slight advantage over the best
 sparse series. Overall, the TimesNet is the SOTA baseline,
baseline. In general, the MoPIN can adapt to impute in low
 benefiting from its unified model for imputation and anomaly
and extreme missing rate scenarios.
 detection. However, the performance degradation at high
 2) Anomaly Detection: The anomaly detection performance
 missing rate shows that the two-stage anomaly detection is
is reported in Table III, and the related visualization of the
 not beneficial for sparse series. The MoPIN well unifies the
critical difference diagram of the metric F1 is shown in
 relationship between anomaly detection and imputation, can
Fig. 9. Compared with all baselines, the MoPIN achieves the
 adapt to anomaly detection task in low and extreme missing
best performance. Specifically, the MoPIN outperforms the
 rate environments, and has better universality than baselines.
SOTA baseline by relative 3.74% (92.45 → 95.91) and 5.01%
 Overall, the above experimental results and analysis demon-
(89.45 → 93.93) on PSM and Spacecraft on F1 metric.
 strate the effectiveness of the MoPIN in time-series imputation
 For anomaly detection in series with sparse observations,
 and anomaly detection.
all baselines require prior imputation, which makes them
highly dependent on the performance of the imputation model.
Although the SOTA imputation baseline the TimesNet in E. Ablation Study
experiments is used, this still hinders anomaly detection To verify the motivation of the MoPIN, ablation experiments
performance because the imputed series may introduce addi- are conducted on the three main components of the MoPIN.
tional information different from the original series. This And the results are shown in Table IV.
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16657

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION R ESULTS

 Fig. 11. Ablation analysis in anomaly detection (↑) and imputation (←). For
 1) PIMM: The effectiveness of the PIMM is veri- variants w/o D-C and w/o I-C, the mse is set to be the same as the MoPIN.
fied through four variants of the MoPIN: 1) the MoPIN
without channel independence encoding (w/o C-I); 2) the
MoPIN without channel mixture encoding (w/o C-M);
3) the MoPIN without adaptive aggregating (w/o A-A); and
4) the MoPIN without multiscale modeling (w/o M-S). The
experimental results show that in both tasks, the performance
of the variants w/o C-I and w/o C-M has a significant decrease,
which shows that both channel independence and mixture
modeling play an important role in the MoPIN. In addition,
compared with the MoPIN, the performance of w/o A-A and Fig. 12. Relationships between the anomaly detection performance and model
w/o M-S has declined to a certain extent, which shows that efficiency on (a) parameters and (b) FLOPs.
multiscale modeling contributes to the MoPIN. Therefore, the
ablation experiments of the above four variants verify the role
of the PIMM module in the MoPIN. For intuitiveness, Fig. 11 summarizes the performances
 2) Two-Step Imputation: From the comparative experimen- of the above variants in two tasks, which shows that every
tal analysis, it can be seen that iterative imputation contributes component contributes to the MoPIN. In summary, the above
to the imputation performance. Therefore, the MoPIN without results and analysis prove the correctness of the motivation of
two-step imputation (w/o T-S) is used to verify its effectiveness the MoPIN.
on imputation and anomaly detection. From the experimental
results, it can be seen that the two-step imputation contributes
 F. Efficiency Analysis
to the performance of the MoPIN (0.065 → 0.093 on mse
and 95.91%→ 92.30% on F1). In particular, since the two- The number of parameters and the floating point operations
step imputation can achieve better imputation performance, (FLOPs) [36] are used to evaluate the memory and compuit enables it to have better anomaly detection performance tational cost of the MoPIN. Specifically, the above metrics
for the MoPIN, which detects anomalies using imputation are calculated using the experimental settings on the PSM
consistency. dataset detailed in Sections IV-A and IV-B, and all parameters
 3) Imputation Consistency: Imputation consistency consists in the anomaly detection process are counted. The results are
of two parts: the mse and distribution similarity of two shown in Fig. 12. A higher F1-score means a better anomaly
imputed series. The effectiveness of imputation consistency detection performance, a lower FLOPs means the less amount
is verified through two variants of the MoPIN: 1) the MoPIN of computation required by the model with better computation
without distribution consistency (w/o D-C) uses imputation efficiency, and fewer parameters means better memory cost.
error between two imputed series to detect anomalies and 1) Memory Cost: From Fig. 12(a), the MoPIN achieves the
2) the MoPIN without imputation consistency (w/o I-C) uses best anomaly detection performance, but has a high parameter
reconstruction error between the reconstructed series and orig- amount with 25.98M. However, in practical applications, the
inal series to conduct anomaly detection, which is the same memory cost of the MoPIN is still scarce since monitoring
as baselines. From the experimental results, without using algorithms are usually deployed on servers. In addition, for
imputation consistency, the F1 metric of the variant w/o I-C fair comparison, the number of parameters of the MoPIN is
using the two-stage anomaly detection strategy drops from adjusted to keep basically consistent with the baselines. Specif-
95.91% to 93.99% compared with the MoPIN, which validates ically, the embedding and encoder dimensions d and h are set
the role of imputation consistency in anomaly detection for to 3 and 4. Under this condition, the MoPIN with 10.95M
time series with sparse observations. In addition, relative to the parameters achieves an anomaly detection performance on F1
MoPIN, the F1 of the variant w/o D-C drops from 95.91% to of 93.53%, which means that the performance of the MoPIN
94.37%, which shows the importance of adding a distribution has a significant advantage under the condition of the same
consistency constraint. memory cost.
16658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 13. Relationships between the anomaly detection performance and
efficiency of variants of the MoPIN on (a) parameters and (b) FLOPs.

 2) Computation Cost: From Fig. 12(b), the MoPIN and
the TimesNet have relatively high FLOPs while achieving
significant detection performance. However, for the actual
training process, they can complete the training process in
3 min, which is little time consumption for offline modeling
and online detection methods. Similarly, after reducing the
number of parameters, the computational efficiency of the Fig. 14. Simplified diagram of the RRS.
MoPIN has also been significantly improved while maintaining
well anomaly detection performance. In addition, all models
can predict a single sample in less than 1 ms, which is fully TABLE V
sufficient for actual industrial applications. K EY VARIABLES OF THE RRS
 In summary, the MoPIN can achieve a well anomaly
detection performance while maintaining the same memory
consumption as the baselines. Moreover, by reducing certain
efficiency conditions, the MoPIN can achieve better performance. In actual application scenarios, detection accuracy is
usually more important, so tradeoffs can be made based on
the performance of the monitoring server.
 3) Component Overhead: In addition, in order to deeply
analyze the source of the overhead of the MoPIN, the overhead
contribution of each component in the ablation study is analyzed, and the results are shown in Fig. 13. Intuitively, the main
memory overhead source of the MoPIN is from the PIMM,
especially the channel independence encoding and multiscale
modeling components. And the imputation consistency can
significantly improve anomaly detection performance without requiring additional memory overhead. For computation
overhead, almost all components contribute, and the most reaction regeneration system (RRS) including the reaction and
significant computation overhead still comes from channel regeneration process is the core of the FCC. A simplified
independence encoding and multiscale modeling. In addition, diagram of the RRS is shown in Fig. 14. In this section, a case
both imputation consistency and two-step imputation strategies of the RRS of the FCC in a petrochemical plant is provided
do not require memory overhead, but both have relatively for verification of the MoPIN.
large computation overhead. However, their improvement in According to the RRS process of the plant, Table V lists
anomaly detection performance is very significant. In practical 14 key variables that can effectively reflect the operating status
applications, the parameters of each component can be traded of the RRS. And the status monitoring of the RRS is implebased on the above analysis to achieve a balance between mented based on these 14 variables. The experimental dataset
efficiency and detection performance. FCC-RRS with an average missing rate 12.8% was collected
 from the distribution control system of the petrochemical plant
 V. VALIDATION ON A R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO with a sampling period of 3 min from May to August in 2019.
 The fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) process is one of the Two tasks are conducted on the FCC-RRS. For imputation,
most important conversion processes in petroleum refining and 29811 consecutive sampled series without anomalies are split
is widely used to produce gasoline, diesel, olefin gas, and into training, validation, and test sets with 15655/5155/8905
other products. In actual industrial applications, it is of great and 10% random masks on observations are applied as label
significance to ensure the safe and stable operation of the FCC. data for evaluation. For anomaly detection, 2589 consecutive
Considering the principle and complexity of the FCC, actual sampled series without anomalies are used for modeling and
monitoring of the FCC process is often carried out on the are split into training and validation sets with 1869/624, 24882
three systems that constitute it: reaction regeneration, absorp- consecutive sampled series containing anomalies are used to
tion stabilization, and fractionation system. Among them, the test, and the anomaly ratio is 2.03%.
ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY 16659

 TABLE VI MoPIN can impute missing values well, which is beneficial
 I MPUTATION AND A NOMALY D ETECTION for further anomaly detection. And Fig. 16 shows the anomaly
 P ERFORMANCE ON THE FCC-RRS detection comparison performance of several methods by
 visualizing their anomaly scores. It can be seen that for most
 anomalies, the MoPIN has the largest anomaly score difference
 between normal and anomaly data, which can ensure both
 a high anomaly detection rate and low false alarm rate.
 In addition, it can be found that this advantage is weakened
 when not using imputation consistency, which further demonstrates its advantage.
 In summary, the experimental results and analysis on the
 actual FCC process verify the effectiveness of the MoPIN and
 show that it has practical significance in ensuring industrial
 safety and avoiding economic losses.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 This article proposes a novel anomaly detection method
 for sparsely observed time series. Patch information mixture
 modeling is suggested to fully exploit the information of
 time series for accurate imputation and anomaly detection.
 In addition, a novel imputation consistency is proposed to
 achieve a single-stage anomaly detection directly from sparse
 series to anomaly scores. Extensive experiments on four
Fig. 15. Imputation visualization of the MoPIN on FCC-RRS. real-world benchmarks in different domains demonstrate the
 effectiveness of the proposed method. Compared with baselines, the SOTA performance is achieved in both imputation
 and anomaly detection tasks. In addition, a real chemical plant
 FCC process application case is provided to verify the practical
 application significance of the proposed method. Specifically,
 the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mse relative improvement
 in imputation and 3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly
 detection.
 Furthermore, although the performance of the MoPIN has
 been verified by relatively comprehensive experiments, it is
 still lack of theory and cannot provide a good interpretation
 for detected anomalies, which is also the same as current many
 famous works. Therefore, in the future, we will concentrate
 on theoretical analysis of the MoPIN and research on interpretable anomaly detection method for industrial time series.
 In addition, the MoPIN has relatively high computation cost,
 but if reducing parameters to keep basically consistence with
 baselines, it can still achieve better performance. Meanwhile,
 how to tradeoff the efficiency and performance in a real
Fig. 16. Anomaly score comparison visualization on FCC-RRS. application is a practical problem. And refer to current works,
 a well tradeoff strategy can be made based on hardware
 The experimental result is shown in Table VI. For both performance and experiences.
tasks, the MoPIN achieves the SOTA performance compared with baselines. Specifically, the MoPIN outperforms
 R EFERENCES
the SOTA baseline by relative 10.38% (0.266 → 0.238),
12.43% (0.351 → 0.307), and 5.97% (0.511 → 0.482) on [1] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
the mse, the MAE, and the RMSE. And for the anomaly detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
detection task, it outperforms the SOTA baseline by a relative Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
 [2] K. Zhu, P. Song, and C. Zhao, “Fuzzy state-driven cross-time spatial
3.49% (95.61 → 98.94) on F1. Moreover, compared with dependence learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
the TimesNet and the DAGMM, the MoPIN can detect all IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 4532–4544,
anomalies while ensuring a low false alarm rate, which is Mar. 2025.
 [3] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
crucial for an actual industrial process. structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detec-
 In addition, for intuitiveness, Fig. 15 visualizes the impu- tion in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
tation results of three key variables. It can be seen that the Jun. 2022.
16660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[4] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual [27] Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, “Matrix factorization techniques
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly for recommender systems,” Computer, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30–37, Aug.
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery 2009.
 Data Mining (KDD), New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 3033–3045. [28] D. J. Stekhoven and P. Bühlmann, “MissForest—Non-parametric miss-
[5] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th ing value imputation for mixed-type data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28,
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422. no. 1, pp. 112–118, Jan. 2012.
[6] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and [29] W. Cao, D. Wang, J. Li, H. Zhou, L. Li, and Y. Li, “BRITS: Bidirectional
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and recurrent imputation for time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Syst., vol. 31, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2018, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
 pp. 387–395. Associates, 2018, pp. 1–11.
[7] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [30] J. Yoon, W. R. Zame, and M. van der Schaar, “Estimating missing
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. data in temporal data streams using multi-directional recurrent neural
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. networks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1477–1490,
[8] X. Yuan et al., “Attention-based interval aided networks for data model- May 2019.
 ing of heterogeneous sampling sequences with missing values in process [31] I. Marisca, A. Cini, and C. Alippi, “Learning to reconstruct missing
 industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5253–5262, data from spatiotemporal graphs with sparse observations,” in Proc. Adv.
 Apr. 2024. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
[9] Y. Zheng et al., “Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
 series anomaly detection with missing values,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 106, Associates, 2022, pp. 32069–32082.
 Jun. 2024, Art. no. 102255. [32] Z. Pan, Y. Wang, K. Wang, H. Chen, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Imputation
[10] W. Du, D. Côté, and Y. Liu, “SAITS: Self-attention-based imputation for of missing values in time series using an adaptive-learned median-filled
 time series,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 219, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 119619. deep autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 695–706,
[11] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series Feb. 2023.
 is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. [33] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–24. neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values,” Sci.
[12] P. Chen et al., “Pathformer: Multi-scale transformers with adaptive path- Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 6085, Apr. 2018.
 ways for time series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. [34] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 (ICLR), 2024, pp. 1–19. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
[13] S. Zhong, S. Song, W. Zhuo, G. Li, Y. Liu, and S.-H.-G. Chan, “A network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 multi-scale decomposition MLP-mixer for time series analysis,” Proc. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1723–1736, Mar. 2024. [35] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
[14] M. L. Shyu, S. C. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. Chang, “A novel
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in
 [36] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
 Proc. IEEE Found. New Directions Data Mining Workshop. Piscataway,
 convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference,” in Proc.
 NJ, USA: IEEE Press, Nov. 2003, pp. 172–179.
 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2017, pp. 1–17.
[15] T. Li, Y. Han, Y. Wang, and Z. Geng, “A self-attention mechanism
 integrating adaptive double subspace for fault detection in industrial
 processes,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 55, no. 1, Zhen Zhang received the B.S. degree in
 pp. 540–549, Jan. 2025. measurement and control technology and
[16] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copula- instrumentation and the M.S. degree in control
 based outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), science and engineering from Beijing University
 Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123. of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2018
[17] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. Chen, “ECOD: and 2021, respectively, where he is currently
 Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribu- pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science and
 tion functions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 25, no. 12, engineering.
 pp. 12181–12193, Dec. 2023. His research interests include time-series anomaly
[18] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsuper- detection, forecasting, and industrial process
 vised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), monitoring.
 2018, pp. 1–19.
[19] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Yongming Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
 2020, pp. 3395–3404. and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University of Chem-
[20] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: ical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2009 and 2014,
 Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in respectively.
 Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–23. He is currently a Professor with the College of
[21] H. Han, M. Sun, F. Li, Z. Liu, and C. Wang, “Self-supervised deep Information Science and Technology, Beijing Uniclustering method for detecting abnormal data of wastewater treatment versity of Chemical Technology. His current research
 process,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1155–1166, interests include power system modeling, neural
 Feb. 2024. networks, intelligent computing, data mining, and
[22] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate intrusion detection.
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024.
[23] F. Xiao and J. Fan, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in the presence of Zhiqiang Geng received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
 missing values,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., degrees from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
 2024, pp. 1–33. China, in 1997 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
[24] X. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Mao, and J. Yin, “Generative semi- degree from the College of Information Science
 supervised learning for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 8983–8991. Technology, Beijing, China, in 2005.
[25] S. Yang, M. Dong, Y. Wang, and C. Xu, “Adversarial recurrent time He is currently a Professor with the College
 series imputation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, of Information Science and Technology, Beijing
 no. 4, pp. 1639–1650, Apr. 2023. University of Chemical Technology. His research
[26] R. Mazumder, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, “Spectral regularization interests include neural networks, intelligent comalgorithms for learning large incomplete matrices,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., puting, data mining, knowledge management, and
 vol. 11, no. 80, pp. 2287–2322, Aug. 2010. process modeling.