IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025 17295

 Lightweight and Fast Time-Series Anomaly
 Detection via Point-Level and Sequence-Level
 Reconstruction Discrepancy
 Lei Chen , Member, IEEE, Jiajun Tang , Ying Zou , Xuxin Liu , Xingquan Xie , and Guangyang Deng

 Abstract—Unsupervised time-series anomaly detection (TSAD) time-series data exhibit new characteristics: complex temporal
aims to identify anomalies in industrial sensing signals to ensure dynamics, rare anomaly labels, and rapidly increasing data
production safety. As Industry 4.0 emerges, TSAD deployment volumes [2]. These characteristics undermine the effectiveness
must migrate from resource-rich cloud to resource-limited edges of traditional statistical, machine-learning-based, supervised,
for real-time and fine-grained control. In this case, it raises and semi-supervised TSAD models [3], compromising their
new targets with high accuracy, high timeliness, and low consumption for TSAD. However, existing models focus solely on
 competitiveness. As a result, unsupervised deep-learningachieving high accuracy by building neural networks with deep based TSAD models, such as those using CNN, transformer,
structures and large parameters. Consequently, these models and RNN architectures, have attracted significant attention
demand prohibitive training durations and computational over- in recent years [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. However, the existing
head, which makes them unsuitable for edge deployment. To solve unsupervised TSAD models still face two main challenges.
this issue, an unsupervised lightweight and fast TSAD model,
namely, LFTSAD, is proposed via point-level and sequence- A. Challenge
level reconstruction discrepancy in this article. First, to achieve
high timeliness and low consumption, LFTSAD uses two two- 1) Balancing Timeliness, Resource Efficiency, and Acculayer multilayer perceptron networks (MLPs) to construct a racy: Traditional deep TSAD models are typically
lightweight contrastive architecture with few parameters. Sec- deployed on resource-rich cloud servers, where they priond, leveraging the lightweight architecture, a dual-branch oritize high accuracy using deep architectures and large
reconstruction network is designed to generate corresponding parameters [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Consequently,
reconstruction discrepancies from point-level and sequence-level they require long training and detection time, along
perspectives. Finally, a novel anomaly scoring scheme is designed with significant computational and storage resources.
to combine point-level and sequence-level reconstruction discrepancies for more accurate anomaly detection. To the best of As Industry 4.0 emerges, industrial production processes
our knowledge, this is the first work to develop a lightweight require real-time and fine-grained intelligent monitoring
All-MLP-based TSAD model for resource-limited edge devices. and management. This makes it necessary to migrate the
Extensive experiments demonstrate that LFTSAD is 3–10 times TSAD models from cloud servers to edge devices. Howfaster in timeliness, consumes only 1/2 of the resources, and ever, edge devices typically have limited computational
achieves accuracy that is either comparable to or superior to and storage resources, which restricts their ability to run
several deep SOTA models. The source code of LFTSAD is here complex deep models. For example, a Raspberry Pi 4b
https://github.com/infogroup502/LFTSAD has only 2-GB RAM and 1.5-GHz clock speed. There-
 Index Terms—All-multilayer perceptron network (MLP)-based fore, unsupervised TSAD models need to find a tradeoff
anomaly detection, lightweight network and design, point- among timeliness, resource consumption, and accuracy
level and sequence-level, reconstruction discrepancy, time-series to ensure stable operation on resource-constrained edge
anomaly detection (TSAD). devices.
 2) Constructing Powerful Anomaly Scoring Scheme: An
 I. I NTRODUCTION unsupervised TSAD model typically requires an
 anomaly scoring scheme to evaluate observations at each
T IME-series anomaly detection (TSAD) aims to identify
 outliers or deviations in temporal data that record the state
of a continuous dynamic system [1]. Coming to Industry 4.0,
 timestamp and detect anomalies. The existing schemes
 can be mainly divided into three categories: reconstruction error-based [12], prediction error-based [9], and
 Received 23 August 2024; revised 29 March 2025 and 17 April 2025; hybrid error-based [10]. However, each of these schemes
accepted 27 April 2025. Date of publication 19 May 2025; date of current has limitations, which makes it difficult to achieve both
version 4 September 2025. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62103143 and Grant
 high accuracy and low time overhead, particularly when
62203164, in part by Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China handling time-series data with complex features. As a
under Grant 2024JJ5162, and in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan result, these schemes struggle to perform effectively on
Provincial Education Department under Grant 22B0471. (Corresponding resource-constrained edge devices.
author: Lei Chen.)
 The authors are with the School of Information and Electrical
Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan B. Existing Solution
411201, China (e-mail: chenlei@hnust.edu.cn; jiajuntang@mail.
hnust.edu.cn; 1040134@hnust.edu.cn; xuxinliu@mail.hnust.edu.cn; To address the first challenge, some approaches use parallel
xingquanxie@mail.hnust.edu.cn; guangyangdeng@mail.hnust.edu.cn). computing [15] or federated learning [16] to accelerate the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3565807 speed of the existing deep TSAD models. However, they
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
17296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. Illustration of three anomaly scoring schemes. (a) Reconstruction error-based anomaly scoring. (b) Association discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.
(c) Reconstruction discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.

require significant computational resources and large stor- making it challenging to simultaneously ensure high accuracy,
age due to multithreaded processing and distributed learning. fast inference, and low resource usage.
Other methods either apply compression techniques (pruning
and quantization) to reduce redundant parameters [17], [18] C. New Insight
or use shallow CNN or multilayer perceptron network (MLP) To fill such a gap, this article aims to develop an unsupernetworks to replace time- or resource-consuming modules vised lightweight TSAD model based only on the two-layer
[19], [20] in the existing deep models. In this case, model MLP architecture for deployment on resource-limited edge
parameters and computation times are reduced, achieving a devices. For this goal, two bottlenecks need to be addressed.
balance between high accuracy and high timeliness. How- The first challenge lies in how to solely use two-layer MLPs
ever, these methods still rely on deep structures, which limit to design a lightweight architecture with high speed, accutheir optimization capabilities in terms of time and resource racy, and low consumption. To address this, the association
efficiency. Thus, they are unsuitable for stable operation in discrepancy-based scoring scheme is used to guide architecresource-constrained environments. ture construction. However, traditional fine-grained association
 To address the second challenge, a novel association calculations are time- and resource-intensive, as each timesdiscrepancy-based anomaly scoring scheme is introduced in tamp must evaluate associations with all the neighbors
2022 [21], as shown in Fig. 1(b). In the proposed scheme, individually, as shown in Fig. 1(b). This complexity makes
it states that compared with normal timestamps, anomalous fine-grained association processing infeasible for a two-layer
timestamps in the time-series data exhibit stronger associ- MLP network. To overcome this, a reconstruction-discrepancyations with local neighbors and weaker associations with based scheme is proposed by fusing reconstruction-based
global neighbors. Based on this work, several advanced TSAD and association discrepancy-based scoring schemes, as shown
models, such as AnomalyTrans (ATran) [21] and DCdetector in Fig. 1(c). Instead of computing each association value
(DCDet) [22], are proposed in the past two years, achieving explicitly, we focus on learning whether a strong association
high accuracy by capturing fine-grained short- and long-term exists between a timestamp and its neighbors, significantly
contextual information. However, the computational complex- simplifying the process. Based on this approach, two two-layer
ity of fine-grained context processing leads to high time and MLPs are used to perform contrastive reconstruction learning
resource consumption. Therefore, this novel scoring scheme of “local neighbors-to-a timestamp” and “global neighborsis not well-suited for high-timeliness TSAD applications on to-same timestamp” respectively. A small difference between
resource-limited edge devices. the two reconstruction outputs indicates strong associations
 In summary, current acceleration schemes and accuracy with both local and global neighbors, suggesting a normal
optimization methods fail to achieve an effective tradeoff timestamp. In contrast, a large discrepancy is interpreted as
among speed, resource efficiency, and accuracy on resource- an anomaly. To the best of our knowledge, the fusion of
limited edge devices. To meet the demands of real-time TSAD reconstruction error-based and association discrepancy-based
at the edge devices, a more direct and effective solution is to scoring schemes has not been previously explored.
design lightweight TSAD models using simple networks and The second challenge is enhancing detection accuracy of
shallow structures. Among neural networks, MLPs are partic- the designed lightweight architecture. Typically, outliers in
ularly well-suited due to their simplicity and efficiency. This time series persist across multiple timestamps and can be
makes All-MLP architectures a promising choice for balancing categorized as explicit or implicit, as presented in Fig. 2.
timeliness, low resource consumption, and accuracy. Although In explicit outliers [Fig. 2(a)], the association pattern of
some existing TSAD models, such as PatchAD (PaAD) [19] each anomalous timestamp (x1 ) with its point-level neighbors
and USAD [20], adopt All-MLP designs, they still rely on deviates significantly from that of normal timestamps (y1 ). In
deep structures. For example, PaAD uses a deep transformer this case, the lightweight architecture can accurately identify
with MLP units, while USAD builds an autoencoder using anomalous timestamps. However, implicit outliers present a
two multilayer MLPs. Therefore, a gap remains in developing greater challenge, as only some timestamps exhibit association
TSAD models based solely on shallow All-MLP architectures patterns that significantly deviate from normal timestamps,
(e.g., one or two layers) for edge deployment. However, shal- while others appear similar. As illustrated in Fig. 2(b), the
low structures inherently offer limited representation capacity, association pattern of x2 with its point-level neighbors closely
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17297

Fig. 2. Two types of anomalies in time series. (a) Explicit outlier. (b) Implicit outlier.

resembles that of y2 , increasing the risk of misclassification. To A. Association Discrepancy-Based TSAD
address this issue, we expand the analysis beyond individual In 2022, association discrepancy-based anomaly scortimestamps. Instead of relying solely on x2 , we consider a ing scheme was proposed for unsupervised timestamp-level
subsequence centered around x2 as its substitute, as shown in anomaly detection [21]. In the past two years, several advanced
the elliptical region of Fig. 2(b). This extended view reveals TSAD models based on association discrepancy have been
that the association pattern of the substitute subsequence of x2 proposed and demonstrated strong performance [23], [24],
with its sequence-level neighbors differs significantly from that [25].
of y2 . By incorporating both the point-level and sequence-level For example, the ATran model [21] uses a learnable Gausperspectives, our lightweight architecture enhances detection sian kernel for local associations and a multihead attention
accuracy for both the explicit and implicit outliers. mechanism for global associations. The MAN-QSM model
 Based on these insights, an unsupervised lightweight and [25] adds a mask learning mechanism into the association
fast TSAD model, namely, LFTSAD, is proposed via point- discrepancy learning process to enhance detection accuracy.
level and sequence-level reconstruction discrepancy. LFTSAD The DCDet model [22] designs an attention-based dual-branch
comprises four two-layer MLPs: two form the point-level contrastive learning architecture to capture both the local and
reconstruction branch, and the other two constitute the global associations. The Dual-TF model [23] further learns
sequence-level reconstruction branch. Reconstruction discrep- time-frequency granularity discrepancies to identify anomaancies from both the branches are combined to detect lies. The SiET model [24] considers the spatial association
timestamp-level anomalies, enabling deployment on resource- of multiple variables and uses spatiotemporal association dislimited edge devices. crepancies for anomaly detection.
D. Contribution In summary, the association discrepancy-based scoring
 scheme effectively identifies timestamp-level anomalies in
 The main contributions of this work are outlined as follows. time-series data. However, the fine-grained association calcula-
 1) A lightweight All-MLP-based TSAD model LFTSAD tion is time-consuming and resource-intensive. As a result, the
 is proposed to identify anomalies quickly and efficiently existing association discrepancy-based TSAD models require
 on resource-limited edge devices. Specifically, LFTSAD extensive training and testing times, as well as substantial
 uses four parallelizable two-layer MLPs to construct a CPU/GPU and storage resources. Furthermore, these models
 lightweight dual-branch contrastive reconstruction net- are typically designed for resource-rich cloud environments.
 work from both the point-level and sequence-level Consequently, they incur higher resource consumption and
 perspectives. To the best of our knowledge, this is time overhead, making them unsuitable for stable deployment
 the first work to develop a lightweight All-MLP-based in resource-constrained edge environments.
 TSAD model for resource-limited edge devices.
 2) A novel reconstruction discrepancy-based anomaly scoring scheme is designed, which effectively combines B. All-MLP-Based Time-Series Analysis
 point-level and sequence-level reconstruction discrepan- In recent years, several deep TSAD models have used simcies to accurately identify both the explicit and implicit ple MLP networks to enhance model timeliness by replacing
 anomalies. time-consuming or resource-intensive modules. For instance,
 3) Extensive experiments are conducted on 14 public the PaAD model [19] uses MLPs to replace the attention moddatasets and two edge devices: Raspberry Pi 4b and ule, thereby reducing the time overhead of anomaly detection.
 NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX. The experimental results Similarly, the ANNet model [26] optimizes the LSTM cell
 demonstrate that LFTSAD outperforms several deep using the simple MLP. In addition, the USAD model [20]
 SOTA models in timeliness and resource consump- uses two multilayer MLPs to design an autoencoder network
 tion while achieving comparable or superior accuracy. for anomaly detection. Overall, the existing All-MLP-based
 Specifically, LFTSAD ranks first or second on more TSAD models are still in the early stages of research. Despite
 than half of the eight evaluation metrics across the 14 offering certain improvements in timeliness compared with
 datasets. Moreover, its detection time is 3–10 times other models, their enhancements remain insufficient. Morefaster than that of deep SOTA models. over, these models still rely on deep architectures, resulting in
 high resource consumption. This constraint hinders their stable
 II. R ELATED W ORK deployment on resource-limited edge devices.
 Since our model is built upon the association discrepancy- In contrast, All-MLP-based models have rapidly emerged
based scoring scheme and All-MLP architecture, related work in time-series forecasting over the past two years. For examon these two topics is summarized as follows [5]. ple, the FiLM model [27] conducts extensive experiments
17298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 learning algorithms, particularly for anomaly detection, are
 used to extract insights from the collected data. However, the
 rapid expansion of cloud tasks in Industry 4.0 brings latency
 and resource-utilization challenges. To address these issues,
 many analysis models are being migrated from the cloud to
 the edge for high timeliness performance.
 This article assumes that M sensors are used to gather the
 operating states of an industrial production process. After T
 collections, the generated data are a time series, formulated
 as X = {x1 , . . . , xT } ∈ R M×T . Specifically, a time series
 consists of a time dimension and a variable dimension. For
 the time dimension, X = {xt ∈ R M×1 }Tt=1 , where xt represents
 observations from M sensors at the tth timestamp. For the
 variable dimension, X = {xm ∈ R1×T }m=1
 M
 , where xm represents
 observations from T timestamps at the mth sensor.

Fig. 3. Industry 4.0 scenario. B. Problem Statement
 This article aims to build an LFTSAD model. First, a time
to demonstrate that MLP networks can replace the CNN or series X is divided into an unlabeled training set X1 and a
attention networks. Based on this finding, the Solar-Mixer labeled test set X2 . Second, the unlabeled X1 is used to train
model [28] constructs an All-MLP architecture to perform our lightweight model. Third, the trained model scores each
time-series forecasting. To enhance prediction performance, timestamp in X2 as follows:
the HDMixer model [29] designs a stacked-MLP network to Scoret = TSAD (xt ) (1)
learn both the temporal and spatial features among multiple
variables. However, these models still rely on deep structures where xt ∈ R M×1 denotes the observations at the tth timestamp
and large parameters. Their timeliness and resource efficiency in X2 . Finally, this score is used to determine whether a
are inadequate, making them less competitive for deployment timestamp is an anomaly, as defined below
on resource-constrained edge devices. To address this issue,
 1, if Scoret ≥ λ
 
several customized lightweight All-MLP-based forecasting ȳt = (2)
models have been proposed. For instance, the FreTS model 0, otherwise
[30] uses a shallow complex-valued MLP network to directly
learn time-series features in the frequency domain. The FITS where λ is the preset threshold, ranging from 0 to 1. If ȳt = 1,
model [31] directly uses a two-layer MLP to simulate inter- the tth timestamp is an anomaly; otherwise, it is normal. We
polation process in the frequency domain. Notably, the FITS aim for the predicted labels of each timestamp in X2 by our
model has fewer than 10 K parameters, achieving high speed, lightweight TSAD model to closely match the true labels.
low consumption, and high accuracy.
 In summary, forecasting models based on shallow All-MLP IV. P ROPOSED M ODEL
architecture demonstrate their effectiveness in timeliness, accuracy, and resource consumption. This highlights the feasibility A. Model Overview
of adopting similar architectures to design TSAD models that To pursue triple goals of high accuracy, high timeliness,
can operate stably on resource-limited edge devices. How- and low consumption, an unsupervised LFTSAD model is
ever, the existing TSAD models still rely on deep structures proposed. The overview of LFTSAD is presented in Fig. 4,
and large parameters, which prevent their direct deployment which comprises three components. Note that the first two
on resource-limited edge devices. Thus, a gap remains in components complement each other and can be executed in
developing a TSAD model that exclusively leverages a shal- parallel.
low All-MLP architecture for efficient and stable edge-based 1) Point-Level Reconstruction Discrepancy Learning: As
anomaly detection. shown in Fig. 4(a), this component generates point-level
 reconstruction discrepancy for each timestamp from a
 III. P RELIMINARY point-level perspective. Technically, a customized sampling strategy is first designed to generate point-level
A. Industry 4.0 Scenario local and global neighbors for each timestamp. Second,
 In Industry 4.0, multiple heterogeneous sensors, such as a shared two-layer MLP is used to perform “local
vibration and angle sensors, are installed at different locations neighbors-to-one timestamp” reconstruction learning.
to enable intelligent and fine-grained monitoring and manage- Third, another two-layer MLP is used to perform “global
ment of the production process, as shown in Fig. 3. Typically, neighbors-to-same timestamp” reconstruction learning.
these sensors collect different signals of industrial production Finally, the difference of two reconstruction values is
at a fixed frequency. The acquired data, encoding indus- point-level reconstruction discrepancy for a given timestrial process dynamics, are transmitted via multiple network tamp.
modalities (WiFi, 5G, Ethernet) and protocols (Modbus, UDP, 2) Sequence-Level Reconstruction Discrepancy Learning:
TCP) to resource-constrained edge gateways or hosts. At the Complementing the first component, this one genedge, sampled data are aggregated and forwarded to resource- erates sequence-level reconstruction discrepancy for
rich cloud platforms for in-depth analysis. Advanced machine each timestamp from a sequence-level perspective, as
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17299

Fig. 4. Overview of the LFTSAD model. (a) Point-level reconstruction discrepancy learning. (b) Sequence-level reconstruction discrepancy learning.
(c) Reconstruction discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.

 shown in Fig. 4(b). Specifically, a customized sequencelevel sampling strategy generates sequence-level local
 and global neighbors for each timestamp. Then, two
 two-layer MLPs are used to perform contrastive reconstruction learning on “local neighbors-to-a substitute
 sequence” and “global neighbors-to-same substitute
 sequence,” respectively. Finally, the difference between
 two reconstruction sequences yields the sequence-level
 reconstruction discrepancy for a given timestamp.
 3) Reconstruction Discrepancy-Based Anomaly Scoring:
 This one combines point-level and sequence-level reconstruction discrepancies to assess whether a timestamp is
 anomalous.
 Fig. 5. (a) Point-level and (b) sequence-level sampling.

B. Point-Level Reconstruction Discrepancy Learning
 As shown in Fig. 2, time-series data inherently exhibit var- matrix of size P1 × P2 ; and 4) local neighbors of a timestamp
ious characteristics, including seasonal and periodic patterns, at position (i, j) correspond to other timestamps in row i, while
while outliers generally span multiple timestamps and signif- global neighbors are those in column j.
icantly deviate from these normal patterns. In this context, In the 2-D matrix, timestamps in the same row share
a normal timestamp maintains associations not only with its local neighbors, while those in the same column share global
adjacent timestamps (local neighbors) but also with distant neighbors. For multivariate time series, the sampling of each
timestamps (global neighbors), reflecting periodic and seasonal variable operates independently and can be executed in paraldependencies. In contrast, an anomalous timestamp is primar- lel, further enhancing efficiency.
ily associated with its local neighbors within the same outlier 2) Local Association Learning: Association calculation is
and lacks associations with distant global neighbors. Based typically a fine-grained process in which the relationship of
on this principle, two two-layer MLPs are used to separately each timestamp with its neighbors must be assessed. For
learn local and global associations for each timestamp from example, if a timestamp has P2 neighbors, P2 associations
a point-level perspective, as presented in Fig. 4(a). Notably, must be computed. Such complexity exceeds the capability
the point-level learning process is variable-independent for of a two-layer MLP. To address this issue, this article directly
multivariate time series. In this process, each variable is uses all the neighbors to reconstruct each timestamp. Accurate
processed in parallel while sharing the same two MLPs. reconstruction indicates a strong association with its neighbors,
 1) Point-Level Sampling: A customized point-level sam- while poor reconstruction suggests a weak association. This
pling strategy is designed to quickly generate local and global approach significantly simplifies the association calculation
neighbors for each timestamp, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The process while maintaining effectiveness.
process involves four steps: 1) multiple overlapping sequences Specifically, a two-layer MLP is used to learn local assoare randomly extracted using a look-back window of length ciations at each timestamp. This shallow MLP consists of an
WIN; 2) each sequence is divided into P1 nonoverlapping input layer with P2 −1 neurons, a hidden layer with d neurons,
segments, each segment containing P2 timestamps, ensuring and an output layer with a single neuron. The input and hidden
P1 × P2 = WIN; 3) these segments are stacked into a 2-D layers form the first fully connected layer (FCL), containing
17300 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

(P2 − 1)×d trainable parameters. The hidden and output layers perform contrastive reconstruction on “local neighbors-to-a
constitute the second FCL, with d × 1 trainable parameters. substitute sequence” and “global neighbors-to-same substitute
To speed up training, dropout and ReLU activation functions sequence,” respectively. The difference between the two reconare applied to each neuron in the hidden layer. structed sequences yields the sequence-level reconstruction
 For the tth timestamp of the mth variable, its local neighbors discrepancy for each timestamp.
are defined as LP(xtm ) = {xim }t−1
 i=t−P2 ∈ R
 1×(P2 −1)
 . Its local 1) Sequence-Level Sampling: A customized sequence-level
association learning process is detailed below. sampling process is designed to quickly generate sequence-
 The P2 − 1 local neighbors are first fed into the first-FCL level local and global neighbors for each timestamp, as shown
to learn local association features in Fig. 5(b). The process also consists of four steps: 1)
 multiple overlapping sequences of length WIN are randomly
 h1 xtm = ReLU LP xtm × W11
   
 (3) extracted from the time series X in parallel; 2) each sequence is
where h1 ∈ R1×d is the output, and W11 ∈ R(P2 −1)×d are the divided into S 1 nonoverlapping segments, and each segment is
parameters of the first-FCL. further partitioned into S 2 nonoverlapping subsegments, each
 Then, h1 is input into the second-FCL to reconstruct xtm containing S 3 timestamps, ensuring S 1 × S 2 × S 3 = WIN;
 3) the S 1 segments are stacked to form a 2-D matrix of size
 x̃tm = h1 xtm × W12
 
 (4) S 1 × (S 2 × S 3 ); and 4) for a timestamp at row i and column
 j, its subsegment serves as its substitute. The remaining
where x̃tm ∈ R is the local reconstruction value, and W12 ∈ Rd×1 subsegments in row i are treated as local neighbors, while
are the parameters of the second-FCL. those in column j provide global neighbors.
 3) Global Association Learning: Another two-layer MLP 2) Local Association Learning: A two-layer MLP network
is adopted to capture global associations at each timestamp. is used to perform “local neighbors-to-a substitute sequence”
This MLP has the same structure as the first MLP, comprising reconstruction from the sequence perspective. The input layer
only two FCLs and P1 ×d parameters. For the tth timestamp of contains (S 2 − 1)×S 3 neurons, the hidden layer has d neurons,
the mth variable, its global neighbors are defined as GP(xtm ) = and the output layer contains S 3 neurons. This MLP consists
 m P1 −1 1×(P1 −1)
{xt− j×P2 } j=1 ∈ R . The global association calculation of two FCLs with a total of S 2 × S 3 × d parameters. For
process is detailed as follows. the tth timestamp of the mth variable, the value is denoted as
 The P1 − 1 global neighbors are input to the first-FCL to xtm ∈ R. Its substitute sequence is SEQ(xtm ) = {xim }ti=t−S 3 , and
learn global associated features local neighbors are LS(xtm ) = {xim }t−S 3
 i=t−[(S 2 −1)×S 3 ] . The sequenceh2 xtm = ReLU GP xtm × W21 level local reconstruction process is described below.
   
 (5)
 First, the (S 2 − 1) × S 3 local neighbors are input into the
where h2 ∈ R1×d is the output, and W21 ∈ R(P1 −1)×d are the first-FCL to learn local association features
parameters of the first-FCL.
 h3 xtm = ReLU LS xtm × W31
   
 Then, h2 is input into the second-FCL to reconstruct xtm (8)

 x̄tm = h2 xtm × W22 where h3 ∈ R1×d is the output, and W31 ∈ R[(S 2 −1)×S 3 ]×d are
 
 (6)
 the parameters of the first-FCL.
where x̄tm ∈ R is the global reconstruction value, and W22 ∈ Then, h3 is input into the second-FCL to reconstruct the
Rd×1 are the parameters of the second-FCL. substitute sequence SEQ(xtm ) of the tth timestamp
 4) Loss: The local and global association learning prog xtm = h3 xtm × W32
  
cesses form two complementary branches. To align their SEQ (9)
reconstruction values, the mean squared error (mse) loss is
 where SEQ(xg tm ) ∈ R1×S 3 is the local reconstruction sequence,
used as the contrastive learning objective 3
 and W2 ∈ Rd×S 3 are the parameters of the second-FCL.
 M WIN
 1 X 1 X m 2 3) Global Association Learning: Another two-layer MLP
 LossP = x̃t − x̄tm (7) network is used to perform “global neighbors-to-same sub-
 M WIN
 m=1 t=1 stitute sequence” reconstruction. The input layer contains
where M is the number of variables, and WIN is the number (S 1 − 1) × S 3 neurons, the hidden layer has d neurons,
of timestamps in one sample. and the output layer contains S 3 neurons. This MLP has
 Notably, for each timestamp, the difference between the two only S 1 × S 3 × d parameters. For the tth timestamp of the
reconstruction outputs defines the point-level reconstruction mth variable, its global neighbors are defined as GS (xtm ) =
 j×(S 2 ×S 3 )
discrepancy. {{xim }t− S 1 −1
 i=t− j×(S 2 ×S 3 )−S 3 } j=1 .
 First, the (S 1 − 1) × S 3 global neighbors are input to the
 first-FCL to learn the global association features
C. Sequence-Level Reconstruction Discrepancy Learning
 h4 xtm = ReLU GS xtm × W41
   
 Outliers in time series can be categorized as explicit or (10)
implicit, as presented in Fig. 2. Compared with explicit
 where h4 ∈ R1×d is the output, and W41 ∈ R[(S 1 −1)×S 3 ]×d are
outliers, implicit outliers exhibit more complex patterns. In
 the parameters of first-FCL.
implicit outliers, some timestamps share similar association
 Next, h4 is further input into the second-FCL to reconstruct
patterns with normal data, while others exhibit significant devithe substitute sequence of the tth timestamp
ations. In this context, point-level reconstruction discrepancy
may misidentify anomalous timestamps. To address this issue, SEQ xtm = h4 xtm × W42
  
 (11)
an additional reconstruction discrepancy learning process is
introduced from a sequence-level perspective to enhance detec- where SEQ(xtm ) ∈ R1×S 3 is the global reconstruction sequence,
tion accuracy. Specifically, two two-layer MLPs are used to and W42 ∈ Rd×S 3 are the parameters of second-FCL.
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17301

 Algorithm 1 LFTSAD

Fig. 6. Reconstruction discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.

 4) Loss: The mse function is used again as the contrasting
learning loss
 M WIN
 1 X 1 X g m 2
 LossS = SEQ xt − SEQ xtm . (12)
 M WIN
 m=1 t=1

D. Reconstruction Discrepancy-Based Anomaly Scoring
 As illustrated in Fig. 6, a novel reconstruction discrepancybased anomaly scoring scheme is designed.
 First, a to-be-tested timestamp xt ∈ R M×1 is input into
the point-level reconstruction discrepancy learning component,
where M variables are processed in parallel to produce M
point-level reconstruction discrepancies. The final point-level
discrepancy for xt is calculated as the average of these
values, formulated as ScoreP (xt ) = mean({ScoremP }m=1
 M
 ), where
 P
Scorem denotes the point-level discrepancy on the mth variable. Second, the to-be-tested timestamp xt is fed into the
sequence-level learning component to produce M sequencelevel reconstruction discrepancies. The final sequence-level
discrepancy is produced as the average of these values, formulated as ScoreS (xt ) = mean({ScoreSm }m=1
 M
 ). Third, the final
anomaly score for xt is generated as follows:
 reconstruction, respectively. The first MLP reconstructs
 Score (xt ) = α × ScoreP (xt ) + (1 − α) × ScoreS (xt ) (13) each timestamp using its local neighbors, while the
where α is a predefined hyperparameter within [0 ∼ 1]. Setting second MLP uses global neighbors for reconstruction.
α = 0 considers only the sequence-level discrepancy, while Both the operations are performed in parallel across the
α = 1 considers only the point-level discrepancy. Finally, the M variables to improve computational efficiency. For
anomaly score is used in (2) to determine whether timestamp local reconstruction via the first MLP, the computational
xt is anomalous. complexity is
 0 0 11
E. Algorithm and Complexity Analysis 1 × d AA
 O @T × @(P2 − 1) × d + „ƒ‚…
 B B CC
 The pseudocode for LFTSAD is shown in Algorithm 1.
 „ ƒ‚ …
 1st−layer 2nd−layer
 Complexity Analysis: The computational cost of LFT-
SAD comprises three components: point-level reconstruction, where (P2 −1), d, and 1 represent the number of neurons
sequence-level reconstruction, and anomaly scoring. in the input, hidden, and output layers, respectively. The
 1) Point-Level Reconstruction Learning: This component first and second layers contribute (P2 − 1) × d and 1 × d
 consists of three stages: point-level sampling, local operations. Similarly, for global reconstruction using the
 reconstruction, and global reconstruction. In the sam- second MLP, the complexity is
 pling stage, local and global neighbors are generated 0 0 11
 for each timestamp across all the M variables in parallel. The computational complexity of this process is 1 × d AA
 O @T × @(P1 − 1) × d + „ƒ‚…
 B B CC
 O(T × (P1 + P2 )), where T is the number of timestamps,
 „ ƒ‚ …
 1st−layer 2nd−layer
 and P1 and P2 represent the numbers of global and local
 neighbors per timestamp, respectively. Next, two inde- with (P1 −1)×d and 1×d corresponding to the operations
 pendent two-layer MLPs are used for local and global in the first and second layers, respectively. In summary,
17302 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 the overall complexity of this component is O(T ×(P1 + TABLE I
 P2 ) × (d + 1)). DATASETS
 2) Sequence-Level Reconstruction Learning: This component also includes three stages: sequence-level sampling,
 local reconstruction, and global reconstruction. First,
 sequence-level sampling generates local and global
 neighbors for each timestamp. Its complexity is O(T ×
 (S 1 + S 2 + S 3 )), where S 1 and S 2 are the numbers
 of global and local neighbors, and S 3 is the length
 of the substitute sequence. Second, the third two-layer
 MLP performs local reconstruction using sampled local
 neighbors. The complexity is
 0 0 11

 O @T × @((S 2 − 1) × S 3 ) × d + S 3 × d AA
 B B CC
 „ ƒ‚ … „ ƒ‚ …
 1st−layer 2nd−layer

 where (S 2 − 1) × S 3 , d, and S 3 represent the numbers
 of neurons in the input, hidden, and output layers,
 respectively. The first layer contributes (S 2 − 1) × S 3 × d B. Dataset
 operations, and the second layer contributes S 3 × d. In all, 14 publicly available real-world time-series datasets
 Finally, the fourth two-layer MLP performs global are used, including six univariate and eight multivariate
 reconstruction using sampled global neighbors. The datasets, as listed in Table I. These datasets span multiple
 complexity is domains to ensure fair and unbiased evaluation.
 0 0 11 1) Multivariate Datasets: MSL records the status of multiple
 sensors on the Mars rover. GECCO contains drinking water
 O @T × @((S 1 − 1) × S 3 ) × d + S 3 × d AA . quality data from IoT sensors. SWAN provides temporal data
 B B CC
 „ ƒ‚ … „ ƒ‚ … from solar photospheric vector magnetograms. PSM includes
 1st−layer 2nd−layer
 25-D monitoring data from eBay server machines. SMAP
 In summary, the overall complexity of this component presents soil samples and telemetry data from Mars rovers.
 is O(T × (S 1 + S 2 ) × S 3 × d + T × (S 1 + S 2 + S 3 )). SMD stores resource usage traces from 28 servers over five
 3) Anomaly Scoring: Based on the outputs of point-level weeks. SWAT collects 51-D sensor data from a public water
 and sequence-level reconstruction, two reconstruction treatment system. WADI offers 127-D monitoring data from
 discrepancies are computed and merged to produce the an industrial control system.
 final anomaly score for each timestamp. This score 2) Univariate datasets. ECG contains electrocardiogram
 determines whether the timestamp is anomalous. The data with ventricular premature beats. MITDB includes 48
 computational complexity is O(T × 2M), where T is the half-hour two-channel ECG recordings. SVDB consists of 78
 number of timestamps and M is the number of variables half-hour ECG tracings with supraventricular arrhythmia. UCR
 Notably, the first two components are carried out in features natural sequences with single anomalies. UCR-AUG
 parallel, and P1 + P2 < (S 1 + S 2 ) × S 3 . In summary, provides augmented data based on the original UCR datasets.
 by ignoring relatively small terms—O(T × 2M), O(T × Occupancy records the information of temperature, humidity,
 (S 1 +S 2 +S 3 )), and O(T ×(P1 +P2 )×(d+1))—the overall light, and CO2 levels.
 computational complexity of the proposed LFTSAD
 model is approximated as: O(T × (S 1 + S 2 ) × S 3 × d). C. Baseline and Metric
 This complexity is nearly linear with respect to T, since 1) Baseline: To validate the effectiveness of the LFTSAD,
 (S 1 + S 2 ) × S 3 × d  T in practical scenarios. 16 representative state-of-the-art (SOTA) models are selected
 as baselines, as listed in Table II. These baselines are selected
 based on their network structure, scoring scheme, and use of
 V. E XPERIMENT All-MLP architecture, where GDN, MAD-GAN (MGAN), and
A. Experimental Goal CSTGL are customized for multivariate time series and cannot
 be applied to univariate time series.
 The following questions are addressed in the experiments. 1) Network Structure: DCDet, PaAD, ATran, DTAAD,
 1) RQ-1 (Accuracy): Can the model outperform base- USAD, TGFLOW (MTGF), CSTGL, GDN, MGAN,
 lines on univariate and multivariate time-series anomaly OmniAnomaly (Omni), and NASA-LSTM (LSTM)
 detection? adopt deep structures with numerous parameters. In
 2) RQ-2 (Deployability and Timeliness): How efficient is contrast, IForest, FADSD, ADNEv, LTFAD, COUTA,
 the model in terms of timeliness and resource consump- and LFTSAD (Ours) use shallow structures with few
 tion on resource-constrained edge devices? parameters.
 3) RQ-3 (Ablation): Does each proposed component con- 2) Scoring Scheme: LFTSAD, ATran, DCDet, and PaAD
 tribute to overall performance? use association discrepancy-based scoring schemes. The
 4) RQ-4 (Sensitivity): How sensitive is the model to differ- other models rely on reconstruction error-based or preent parameter settings? diction error-based scoring schemes.
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17303

 TABLE II
 BASELINES

 3) All-MLP Architecture: LFTSAD, PaAD, LTFAD, and 2) Stability: LFTSAD, ADNev, ATran, LTFAD, DCdet, and
 USAD are based on All-MLP architectures. Among DTAAD show the most stable performance across eight
 them, LFTSAD and LTFAD adopt shallow architectures, metrics, followed by GDN, PaAD, FADSD, Omni, and
 whereas PaAD and USAD use deeper ones. LSTM. For example, on the ECG and UCR datasets,
 2) Metric: For comprehensive evaluation, eight widely LFTSAD ranks first three times and second once.
used metrics [2], [44], [45] are used: Accuracy (Acc), Pre- 3) Anomaly Scoring Scheme: Association discrepancycision (Pre), Recall (Rec), F1-pointwise (F1), Affiliation-F1 based models, such as LFTSAD, DCDet, Anomaly-
(F1Af ), F1-point-adjusted (F1PA ), VUS ROC (V ROC), and Trans, and PaAD, outperform others. For example, on
VUS PR (V PR). All the metrics range from 0 to 1, with the SWAT and WADI datasets, DCdet and ATran surpass
higher values indicating better TSAD performance. DTAAD, CSTGL, and Omni.
 4) Deep or Shallow Structures: Deep models generally
D. Experimental Environment outperform shallow ones (COUTA, FADSD, IForest).
 All the experiments are conducted on a Windows 11 system However, shallow models like LFTSAD, ADNev, and
with an Intel Core i7-10700KF CPU, NVIDIA GeForce RTX LTFAD outperform several deep models. For example,
3090 GPU (24-GB GPU-RAM), and 64-GB RAM. The LFT- on the Occupancy dataset, F1PA scores are 0.9919 for
SAD model is implemented in Python using PyCharm and is LFTSAD, 0.9877 for ADNEv, 0.8679 for PaAD, 0.9048
publicly available at here. Official Python implementations of for DTAAD, and only 0.6811 for IForest.
baseline models are obtained from the authors’ repositories, 5) All-MLP Architecture: LFTSAD and LTFAD are better
as listed in Table II. The grid-search-based autotuning method than PaAD and USAD.
is used to find the optimal parameters for all the models. 6) In Summary: LTFSAD achieves top-two rankings in
 more than one-half of the eight metrics, but its per-
E. RQ-1 (Accuracy) formance in traditional F1 scores is weaker. These
 To answer RQ-1, LFTSAD is evaluated against 16 baselines results highlight the effectiveness of the lightweight Allon 14 datasets, including eight multivariate and six univariate MLP architecture and reconstruction discrepancy-based
datasets, using eight evaluation metrics. scoring.
 Tables III and IV present the detection accuracy of 17
models on 14 datasets. In two tables, bold text indicates the F. RQ-2 (Deployability and Timeliness)
best performance, while underlined text denotes the second- To address RQ-2, a PC and two resource-limited edge
best performance. From two tables, several findings can be devices are selected to deploy the 17 models and detect
observed. anomalies on the MSL dataset. In edge devices, the Raspberry
 1) Overall Performance: LFTSAD, DTAAD, ADNev, Pi 4b has a 1.5-GHz ARM Cortex-A72 processor and 2-GB
 DCDet, FADSD, ATran, MGAN, LTFAD, and Omni RAM, while the Jetson Xavier NX is equipped with a six-core
 outperform other baselines. For example, on the MSL Carmel ARMv8.2 processor with 8 GB of RAM.
 dataset, LFTSAD achieves an Acc of 0.9907, Pre of 1) Timeliness and Resource Consumption: Table V lists
 0.9509, and V ROC of 0.9300, while USAD scores the timeliness and resource consumption of the 17 models on
 only 0.7299 for Acc, 0.7198 for Pre, and 0.6102 PC and two edge devices, where Ot indicates out-of-memory.
 V ROC. Several key observations are made:
17304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 TABLE III
 ACCURACY ON M ULTIVARIATE DATASETS
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17305

 TABLE IV
 ACCURACY ON U NIVARIATE DATASETS

 1) Model Parameters: IForest, FADSD, and LFTSAD have CPU usage is 38% for LFTSAD, compared with 53.8%
 the fewest and second-fewest parameters. Overall, shal- for CSTGL and 62.2% for GDN. On Raspberry Pi 4B (2
 low models require significantly fewer parameters than GB RAM), DCdet uses 402-MB RAM, while LFTSAD
 deep models. For example, the number of parameters is uses only 185 MB.
 0 for IForest, 12.6 K for LFTSAD, 4741 K for ATran, 2) Deployability: Fig. 7 shows the deployment results on
 and 258.6 K for CSTGL. Raspberry Pi 4b, where all the models except PaAD are
 2) Timeliness: Shallow models (LFTSAD, ADNEv, successfully deployed. Lightweight and shallow models are
 LTFAD, FADSD, COUTA, IForest) show faster training easier to deploy compared with deep models. Moreover, due to
 and testing times compared with deep models. On the frequent production process changes, deployed models must be
 PC, with a batch size of 128, LFTSAD completes one updated regularly. Lightweight models like IForest, FADSD,
 epoch in 26.5 s while DTAAD and DCdet take 148 and and LFTSAD can be updated directly on edge devices with
 271.8 s respectively. minimal data and communication overhead.
 3) Computing and Storage Consumption: Shallow models 3) Summary: Thanks to its lightweight All-MLP archiconsume significantly fewer CPU/GPU and RAM/GPU- tecture with four parallel two-layer MLPs, LFTSAD runs
 RAM resources. For instance, on Jetson Xavier NX, efficiently and stably on resource-constrained edge devices.
17306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 TABLE V
 T IMELINESS AND R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION A NALYSIS

 TABLE VI
 E FFECTIVENESS OF T HREE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 7. Deployment results on Raspberry Pi 4b.

G. RQ-3 (Ablation) sequence-level joint learning. Table. VI(a) presents the detection performance of the three configurations.
 To answer RQ-3, three ablation experiments are conducted.
Specifically, two univariate datasets (ECG and MITDB), three 1) Overall Performance: Joint learning consistently outpermultivariate datasets (MSL, PSM, and SWAN), and three forms individual configurations across all the metrics
metrics (Pre, Rec, and F1PA ) are chosen for this experiment. and datasets. For example, on the MSL dataset, F1PA
 1) Point-Level and Sequence-Level Learning: These two is 0.9321 for point level, 0.9480 for sequence level, and
components are essential to LFTSAD, complementing each 0.9721 for joint learning.
other to improve detection accuracy. In this experiment, 2) Comparison of Individual Configurations: Each conthree configurations are compared: 1) only point-level learn- figuration shows advantages on different datasets and
ing; 2) only sequence-level learning; and 3) point-level and metrics. For instance, point-level learning achieves better
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17307

Fig. 8. Detection results for explicit and implicit outliers. (a) Explicit outlier in the univariate dataset UCR (2180–2280). (b) Implicit outlier in the first
variable of MSL dataset MSL (62450–62560). (c) Mixed outlier in the univariate dataset UCR AUG (1600–2600).

 Pre and F1PA on MITDB, while sequence-level learning and CNNs require deeper structures and more parameperforms better on MSL. This implies that the two ters to fully exploit their capabilities.
 configurations complement each other.
To further evaluate these two components, an explicit outlier H. RQ-5 (Sensitivity)
from UCR, an implicit outlier from the first variable of MSL,
and a mixed outlier from UCR AUG are extracted. Fig. 8 To address RQ-5, two key parameters are evaluated.
shows plots of the detection results of these two components 1) Parameter α: The parameter α, ranging from [0,1],
on the three outliers. It is clear that point-level learning per- balances point-level and sequence-level anomaly scores to
forms better in detecting explicit outliers, while sequence-level generate the final score. When α = 1, only the point-level
learning is more effective for implicit outliers. For example, score is used; when α = 0, only the sequence-level score
on the explicit outlier in UCR, point-level learning accurately is applied. Fig. 9(a) shows plots of performance changes
identifies the entire outlier but misclassifies a normal times- across five datasets under α parameters. In the figure, green
tamp. In contrast, sequence-level learning partially detects lines represent univariate datasets, and red lines represent
the outlier while avoiding false positives. In summary, these multivariate datasets.
results demonstrate that point-level and sequence-level joint 1) Focusing on Univariate Datasets: All the green lines
learning enhances anomaly detection accuracy by leveraging (univariate datasets) gradually increase at first, and then
their complementary strengths. drop sharply. Their performance is relatively stable
 2) Reconstruction Discrepancy-Based Anomaly Scoring: within [0, 0.4].
This is another key component of LFTSAD. In this exper- 2) Considering Multivariate Datasets: All the red lines rise
iment, it is compared with two alternatives: the average rapidly first and then remain stable. Their performance
reconstruction error-based scheme and the maximum recon- is relatively stable within [0.7, 1.0].
struction error-based scheme. Table. VI(b) illustrates the 3) In Summary: The stable intervals for parameter α are [0,
effectiveness of the three scoring schemes. 0.4] for univariate datasets and [0.7, 1.0] for multivariate
 datasets. This finding suggests that point-level learning
 1) Overall Performance: The reconstruction discrepancy- is more effective for univariate datasets, while sequencebased scheme outperforms both the alternatives. It level learning performs better on multivariate datasets.
 achieves the highest scores across all the metrics and In univariate data, outliers typically deviate clearly from
 datasets, with an average improvement of 6.51%. normal values, favoring point-level learning. In contrast,
 2) Comparison of Alternatives: The maximum error-based multivariate outliers often span multiple dimensions,
 scheme yields better Pre on ECG, MITDB, and MSL, making sequence-level learning more suitable.
 while the average scheme achieves higher Rec and F1PA
 on MSL and SWAN. 2) Number of MLP Layers: It is another important param-
 3) In Summary: reconstruction error-based scoring is less eter influencing timeliness and resource consumption of
 effective in a two-layer All-MLP architecture, as shallow LFTSAD. Fewer layers result in a lighter model with fewer
 MLPs struggle to achieve accurate reconstruction. parameters, lower resource usage, and higher timeliness, but
 3) Lightweight All-MLP Architecture: LFTSAD uses four reduced representation capability. More layers improve repreparallel two-layer MLPs to construct a lightweight All-MLP sentation but increase parameter count, resource consumption,
architecture. This design ensures high timeliness and low and reduce timeliness. Fig. 9(b) displays how performance
resource consumption. To validate its effectiveness, two com- varies with different MLP layers. In the figure, performance
parison schemes are designed by replacing the two-layer MLPs improves initially, and then declines sharply as layers increase.
with two-layer RNNs and two-layer CNNs. Table. VI(c) lists The best results are achieved with two layers across all the
the detection performance of three schemes. datasets and metrics. Therefore, a two-layer MLP is optimal
 for the lightweight LFTSAD, as deeper networks increase
 1) Overall Performance: The two-layer MLP architecture
 overfitting risk and require higher dropout rates, while shalconsistently outperforms the other two. For instance, on
 lower ones limit learning capacity.
 MITDB, it achieves a Rec score of 1, compared with
 0.8982 for the two-layer CNN and 0.5665 for the twolayer RNN. I. Discussion
 2) Stability: The two-layer MLP architecture performs bet- This article focuses on high-speed, low-consumption, and
 ter across all the five datasets and three metrics. high-accuracy timestamp-level anomaly detection on resource-
 3) In Summary: Within a shallow architecture, the MLP limited edge devices. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
 network demonstrates higher efficiency than both the the LFTSAD model successfully achieves all the three objec-
 RNNs and CNNs. This observation suggests that RNNs tives.
17308 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 high timeliness and low resource consumption, making it
 well-suited for deployment on resource-limited edge devices.
 In addition, LFTSAD integrates point-level and sequencelevel perspectives to design a reconstruction discrepancy-based
 anomaly scoring scheme for accurate anomaly detection.
 Comparative evaluations on 14 real-world datasets and two
 edge platforms (Raspberry Pi 4b and Jetson Xavier NX)
 demonstrate its superiority. Specifically, LFTSAD operates
 3–10 times faster than deep-learning-based SOTA models on
 Raspberry Pi 4b. Accuracy results further confirm its effectiveness, with LFTSAD ranking first or second in more than
 six metrics across the UCR, UCR AUG, and MSL datasets.
 However, the proposed LTFSAD method still has several limitations. First, the performance of LTFSAD shows
 sensitivity to the parameter α on certain datasets. Second,
 spatial correlations between variables are not explicitly considered in the current model. Third, LFTSAD currently lacks
 the capability for online updates and federated distributed
 deployment. To overcome these limitations, future work will
 focus on three directions. 1) developing a more robust and
 accurate All-MLP-based model by integrating time-frequency
 learning and applying pruning or quantization techniques; 2)
 designing a spatiotemporal joint learning framework based
Fig. 9. Sensitivity analysis. (a) Parameter α. (b) Layer of MLP. on the All-MLP architecture to capture both the temporal
 and spatial dependencies; and 3) building a real-time, online
 1) High Speed: Timeliness and deployability experiments anomaly detection system that supports federated deployment
 show that LFTSAD requires significantly less detec- on resource-constrained edge devices.
 tion time compared with deep TSAD models. Roughly
 speaking, LFTSAD is 3–10 times faster than other deep
 models. This advantage stems from the LFTSAD model R EFERENCES
 being lightweight, with a shallow structure and few
 [1] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate
 parameters, using only four parallel two-layer MLPs. time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion,
 In addition, the parallel learning process across M vari- vol. 91, pp. 93–102, Mar. 2023.
 ables and two branches further enhances the speed of [2] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval-
 LFTSAD. uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
 2) Low Resource Consumption: Attributed to its shallow Jun. 2022.
 and lightweight All-MLP architecture, LFTSAD exhibits [3] G. Li, Z. Yu, K. Yang, M. Lin, and C. L. Philip Chen, “Exploring
 significantly lower resource consumption compared with feature selection with limited labels: A comprehensive survey of semiother deep models. Specifically, LFTSAD has only 126 supervised and unsupervised approaches,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 K parameters, which is 1/10–1/50 of the parameter count Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 6124–6144, Nov. 2024.
 [4] S.-E. Benkabou, K. Benabdeslem, V. Kraus, K. Bourhis, and B. Canitia,
 of other deep models. On the Raspberry Pi 4b, the “Local anomaly detection for multivariate time series by temporal
 CPU usage of LFTSAD is only half that of other deep dependency based on Poisson model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 models. This efficiency allows LFTSAD to be deployed Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6701–6711, Nov. 2022.
 on resource-constrained devices like the Raspberry Pi [5] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
 4b, which has only 2G of RAM. “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” ACM
 Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, Oct. 2024.
 3) High Accuracy: Accuracy and ablation experiments [6] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, Z. Fan, C. L. P. Chen, and K. Yang, “Adaptive memory
 show that LFTSAD ranked first or second in over half broad learning system for unsupervised time series anomaly detection,”
 of the eight metrics across most datasets. For exam- IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jun. 26, 2024, doi:
 ple, LFTSAD ranked in the top two on seven metrics 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3415621.
 for the UCR and UCR-AUG datasets and six metrics [7] W. Deng, J. Feng, and H. Zhao, “Autonomous path planning via sand
 cat swarm optimization with multi-strategy mechanism for unmanned
 for the MSL dataset. These results can be attributed aerial vehicles in dynamic environment,” IEEE Internet Things J., early
 to the accuracy-enhancing strategies: “point-level and access, Feb. 20, 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3542587.
 sequence-level contrastive reconstruction learning” and [8] D. Guo, Z. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Yang, and Y. Lin, “Integrating
 “reconstruction discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.” spoken instructions into flight trajectory prediction to optimize automation in air traffic control,” Nature Commun., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 9662,
 VI. C ONCLUSION Nov. 2024.
 [9] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with LSTM
 This article addresses the challenge of real-time, efficient neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 8,
anomaly detection in resource-constrained edge environments pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020.
by the proposed LFTSAD—an unsupervised, lightweight, All- [10] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
MLP-based anomaly detection model. Unlike traditional deep Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
neural networks with large parameters, LFTSAD uses only [11] F. Li, J. Chen, L. Zhou, and P. Kujala, “Investigation of ice wedge
four parallelizable two-layer MLP networks, offering a shal- bearing capacity based on an anisotropic beam analogy,” Ocean Eng.,
low architecture with few parameters. This design ensures vol. 302, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 117611.
CHEN et al.: LFTSAD VIA POINT-LEVEL AND SEQUENCE-LEVEL RECONSTRUCTION DISCREPANCY 17309

[12] W. Li et al., “Fault diagnosis using variational autoencoder GAN and [35] M. Pietroń, D. Żurek, K. Faber, and R. Corizzo, “AD-NEv: A scalfocal loss CNN under unbalanced data,” Struct. Health Monitor., vol. 24, able multilevel neuroevolution framework for multivariate anomaly
 no. 3, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 14759217241254121. detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Aug.
[13] M. Li, J. Li, Y. Chen, and B. Hu, “Stress severity detection in 14, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3439404.
 college students using emotional pulse signals and deep learning,” [36] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning
 IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput., early access, Mar. 4, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 TAFFC.2025.3547753. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816,
[14] H. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Li, B. Zheng, and T. Chen, “Dual-scale complemen- Sep. 2024.
 tary spatial–spectral joint model for hyperspectral image classification,” [37] H. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Jian, Q. Liao, Y. Wang, and G. Pang, “Calibrated
 IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 18, one-class classification for unsupervised time series anomaly detection,”
 pp. 6772–6789, 2025. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5723–5736, Nov.
[15] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly 2024.
 detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans. [38] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025. time series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
[16] R. Xu, H. Miao, S. Wang, P. S. Yu, and J. Wang, “PeFAD: A parameter- Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4963–4971.
 efficient federated framework for time series anomaly detection,” in [39] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 2024, pp. 3621–3632. May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[17] M. Pietroń, D. Żurek, K. Faber, and R. Corizzo, “Towards efficient deep [40] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 autoencoders for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
 Int. Conf. Comput. Sci., Jan. 2024, pp. 461–469. adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
[18] M. Pietroń, D. Żurek, K. Faber, A. Wójcik, and R. Corizzo, “AD-NEv+– 2019, pp. 703–716.
 –The multi-architecture neuroevolution-based multivariate anomaly [41] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection framework,” in Proc. Genetic Evol. Comput. Conf. Companion, detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 Jul. 2024, pp. 607–610. network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
[19] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, Y. Yang, W. Wang, and K. Yang, “PatchAD: A Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 lightweight patch-based MLP-mixer for time series anomaly detection,” [42] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 2024, arXiv:2401.09793. T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs
[20] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2018,
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020, pp. 387–395.
 pp. 3395–3404. [43] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
[21] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. [44] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and
 Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–20. M. J. Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evaluation
[22] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual measure for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, Jul. 2022.
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery [45] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
 Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045. evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
[23] Y. Nam et al., “Breaking the time-frequency granularity discrepancy in Intell., Jan. 2021, pp. 7194–7201.
 time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024,
 pp. 4204–4215.
 Lei Chen (Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
[24] W. Xiong, P. Wang, X. Sun, and J. Wang, “SiET: Spatial information
 degree in computer science and engineering and
 enhanced transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection,”
 the Ph.D. degree in automatic control and electri-
 Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 296, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111928.
 cal engineering from Hunan University, Changsha,
[25] J. Zhong et al., “A masked attention network with query sparsity
 China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
 measurement for time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2023, pp. 2741–2746.
 School of Information and Electrical Engineer-
[26] G. Sivapalan, K. K. Nundy, S. Dev, B. Cardiff, and D. John, “ANNet:
 ing, Hunan University of Science and Technology,
 A lightweight neural network for ECG anomaly detection in IoT edge
 Xiangtan, China. His current research interests
 sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 24–35,
 include anomaly detection, lightweight design, time
 Feb. 2022.
 series analysis, deep learning, and big data analysis.
[27] T. Zhou et al., “FiLM: Frequency improved legendre memory model for
 long-term time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., Jan. 2022, pp. 12677–12690.
[28] Z. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Xia, D. Wei, and Y. Niu, “Solar-mixer: An efficient Jiajun Tang received the B.Eng. degree in automaend-to-end model for long-sequence photovoltaic power generation tion from Hunan Institute of Science and Techtime series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 14, no. 4, nology, Yueyang, China, in 2023. He is currently
 pp. 1979–1991, Apr. 2023. pursuing the master’s degree in control science and
[29] K. Yi et al., “Frequency-domain MLPs are more effective learners in engineering with Hunan University of Science and
 time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. Technology, Xiangtan, China.
 2023, pp. 76656–76679. His current research interests include data-driven
[30] Y. Qin, H. Luo, F. Zhao, Y. Fang, X. Tao, and C. Wang, “Spatio-temporal anomaly detection, deep learning, and fault diagnohierarchical MLP network for traffic forecasting,” Inf. Sci., vol. 632, sis.
 pp. 543–554, Jun. 2023.
[31] Z. Xu, A. Zeng, and Q. Xu, “FITS: Modeling time series with 10k
 parameters,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2023,
 pp. 1–24. Ying Zou, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
[32] L. Chen et al., “Frequency-domain spectrum discrepancy-based fast
 anomaly detection for IIoT sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans.
 Xuxin Liu, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–16, 2025.
[33] L. Chen, X. Cao, T. He, Y. Xu, X. Liu, and B. Hu, “A lightweight all-
 MLP time–frequency anomaly detection for IIoT time series,” Neural Xingquan Xie, photograph and biography not available at the time of
 Netw., vol. 187, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 107400. publication.
[34] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based Guangyang Deng, photograph and biography not available at the time of
 Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849. publication.