IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025 2347

 Lightweight Fuzzy-Driven Intrusion Detection for
 Consumer Life-Tech Applications
 Ahamed Aljuhani , Abdulelah Alamri, and Alireza Jolfaei , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Consumer life-tech applications have significantly security solutions often fail in these scenarios. Their high combenefited from the rapid advancement of cutting-edge technolo- putational demands overwhelm resource-constrained devices,
gies, enabling the delivery of intelligent, cost-effective, reliable, leading to significant performance issues. High false positive
and sustainable solutions. As consumer life-tech applications
are being extensively embedded in innovative technologies, a rates and overly complex algorithms further complicate the
key challenge is balancing security and resource efficiency in problem, making effective intrusion detection a considerable
resource-constrained consumer devices. In this paper, we propose challenge. These challenges highlight the urgent need for a
a lightweight fuzzy-driven intrusion detection framework to lightweight, efficient, and accurate intrusion detection mechaddress these constraints by combining four key techniques: anism that can safeguard consumer health-care technologies
knowledge distillation, fuzzy logic integration, structured pruning, and quantization. We employ knowledge distillation to without straining their limited resources.
transfer decision-making capabilities from a large teacher model To address this need, this article proposes a novel approach
to a smaller student model. A fuzzy logic layer is further intro- that synergizes knowledge distillation, fuzzy logic integration,
duced to improve interpretability and robustness to uncertainties, structured pruning, and quantization to create an efficient,
while structured pruning and quantization are used to greatly robust, and lightweight intrusion detection system (IDS)
reduce the model’s computational and memory requirements.
Our method achieves over 98% detection accuracy while greatly for resource-constrained consumer technology. Transferring
reducing model size and resource usage. This work offers a decision-making capabilities from large, high-performing modpractical, interpretable, and high-performing intrusion detection els to smaller, resource-efficient ones ensures high detection
solution for deployment in resource-constrained consumer life- accuracy with reduced computational and memory demands.
tech ecosystems. The integration of fuzzy logic through a fuzzy layer handles
 Index Terms—Cybersecurity, fuzzy neural network, intrusion uncertainties in network traffic by transforming input features
detection, IoMT, knowledge distillation. into compact and informative representations. Structured
 pruning eliminates less significant neurons and connections to
 I. I NTRODUCTION lower computational overheads, whereas quantization reduces
 the memory footprint by converting model weights into lower-
 HE RAPID advancement of innovative technologies has
T transformed consumer life-tech applications, delivering
intelligent, cost-effective, autonomous, and sustainable solubit representations. This comprehensive approach enhances
 performance on resource-constrained devices such as IoMT
 gadgets and smart appliances, and improves interpretability
tions. Additionally, the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) through fuzzy logic, fostering user trust.
is a key consumer technology that has been widely used in
the health-care sector. However, security in consumer healthcare technology remain a significant challenge. For example, II. R ELATED W ORK
a hospital may use a smart health-care system to remotely
 Several studies have proposed different mitigation techmonitor patients. IoMT devices, such as wearable electrocarniques for consumer technology. Zabeehullah et al. [1]
diogram (ECG) monitors and glucose trackers, continuously
 developed an intelligent deep-learning-based model for detecttransmit vital data to central systems. A cyberattack targeting
 ing anomalies in IoMT networks, combining an autoencoder
these devices can compromise sensitive patient information
 with deep learning models and achieving an improved accuand disrupt the monitoring process. In such a situation, healthracy. Narasimhan et al. [2] proposed an unsupervised deep
care providers lose access to the critical data they need
 learning approach for IDS, using an autoencoder for feature
to make timely decisions, putting patients’ lives at risk.
 extraction and Gaussian mixture model for clustering into
To make matters worse, the attack depletes these devices’
 normal and attacks. Kalaria et al. [3] proposed the IoTPredictor
limited resources, leaving them inoperable and putting patients
 for classifying attacks in smart devices, using hidden Markov
and caregivers in a difficult position. Unfortunately, existing
 models to detect cyberattacks and obtaining 88.6% accuracy.
 Received 18 November 2024; revised 16 February 2025; accepted 11 May Alzubi et al. [4] proposed a deep learning approach for IoMT
2025. Date of publication 14 May 2025; date of current version 12 June 2025. using a hybrid technique with convolutional neural network
(Corresponding author: Ahamed Aljuhani.) (CNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM) to identify
 Ahamed Aljuhani and Abdulelah Alamri are with the College of Computing
and Information Technology, University of Tabuk, Tabuk 71491, Saudi Arabia attacks in consumer health-care networks. Rajesh et al. [5]
(e-mail: A_Aljuhani@ut.edu.sa; 421000544@stu.ut.edu.sa). proposed a threat detection model for IoT in health-care
 Alireza Jolfaei is with the College of Science and Engineering, systems, selecting features with sigmoid cosine and pigeon-
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5042, Australia (e-mail:
alireza.jolfaei@flinders.edu.au). inspired techniques and using a hybrid ensemble model
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3569886 for attack classifications. Azimjonov and Kim [6] proposed
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2348 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Proposed architecture of fuzzy logic-knowledge distillation for IDS in resource-constrained consumer technology.

an intrusion detection model for detecting cyberattacks in where x is the input, c the center, and σ determines the
IoT networks, using an importance coefficient for feature width. Fuzzified data is processed via learnable fuzzy rules,
selection and stochastic gradient descent for IoT health-care. enriching features with interpretable patterns for further clas-
Singh et al. [7] proposed a SecureFlow detection framework sification. Further, the fuzzified data are processed by a set
using SNORT and support vector machine (SVM) to provide of fuzzy rules, which are represented as learnable weights
alerts of anomalies in IoT networks, demonstrating effective- that combine the membership degrees to meaningful outputs,
ness in mitigating attacks. Some obstacles have been observed. which in turn are fed into successive layers of the student
First, consumer health-care technology’s resource constraints model for further processing through linear transformations
pose challenges to ensuring effective mitigation of cyberat- and activation functions, yielding a binary classification decitacks on consumer IoMT devices. Second, complexity and sion. By embedding fuzzy logic, it may allow the student
computational overheads lead to resource exhaustion, disrupt- model to make sense of inputs in a more human-like reaing intrusion detection operations. Third, high false positive soning manner, such as discussing events of probabilities,
rates consume processing power and resources. Fourth, high like the network packet being given classifications such as
data dimensionality affects detection performance, potentially “medium” or “high” risk, in order to modify and improve
causing overfitting and poor classifications. These issues both the interpretability of its decisions and its ability to
highlight the need for robust intrusion detection mechanisms adapt to complex input patterns. This allows the fuzzy student
suitable for consumer health-care technologies. In the follow- model to classify more knowledgeably and transparently,
ing, we aim to address these concerns. balancing accuracy, efficiency, and explainability. The loss
 function LKD due to distillation is a combination of cross-
 III. P ROPOSED F UZZY L OGIC -D RIVEN K NOWLEDGE entropy loss and KL-divergence loss between the teacher and
 D ISTILLATION FOR IDS IN C ONSUMER T ECHNOLOGY the student models on their softened probabilities. This is
 represented as
 Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed fuzzy logic-driven knowledge distillation workflow for IDS in resource-constrained LKD = α · CE(ys , ytrue )
  z   z 
consumer technology. Data pre-processing and dimensionality + (1 − α) · T 2 · KL Softmax
 t
 , Softmax
 s
 , (2)
reduction are performed using principal component analysis T T
(PCA), retaining 95% of the variance. The data is then where α balances direct supervision and distillation guidance.
shuffled, split into training/testing sets, and converted to T is the temperature for the softening probabilities. ytrue is
PyTorch tensors. A teacher-student framework is adopted, the ground truth label from dataset, ys is the prediction output
where the teacher trains a five-layer neural network from from student model. zs and zt are final layer output of student
labeled data, while the simpler three-layer student model learns and teacher models, respectively.
via knowledge distillation. A fuzzy student model further The cross-entropy loss is defined as
enhances decision-making and interpretability by incorporat- 
 CE(p, q) = − pi log(qi ), (3)
ing a fuzzy layer. This layer transforms raw inputs into
 i
linguistic membership degrees (e.g., “low”, “medium”, “high”)
 where i indexes the class labels, and pi and qi are the
via a Gaussian membership function
   target and predicted probabilities for class i. The probability
 (x − c)2 softening is controlled through a temperature parameter T = 3
 μ(x) = exp − , (1)
 2σ 2 and the relative weighting of the teaching guidance against
ALJUHANI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUZZY-DRIVEN INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER LIFE-TECH APPLICATIONS 2349

 TABLE I
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS FOR T EACHER M ODEL , F UZZY S TUDENT M ODEL , AND P RUNED & Q UANTIZED F UZZY S TUDENT M ODEL

direct supervision is given by the weighting factor α =
0.5 to provide a balanced trade-off between learning from
the teacher’s soft labels and aligning with the true labels,
yielding robust performance in our experiments. Advanced
optimization techniques improve efficiency by applying L2-
norm structured pruning, which removes 20% of the neurons
from weight matrices to reduce model size and computational
cost. Additionally, efficiency is enhanced through quantization,
where floating-point weights are converted to 8-bit integers.

 IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
 We assumed a deployment scenario where model training is
carried out on an edge or cloud-enabled device, and the trained Fig. 2. Training time and CPU utilization for models under study.
model is then transferred to a resource-constrained device
for inference. We used the RT-IoT2022 dataset, introduced
by Sharmila and Nagapadma in 2023 (Cybersecurity). Our for consumer life-tech devices, which often have limited
training and testing were conducted on our lab machine with storage and processing power. In future work, we plan to
12 logical core CPU to simulate the training and deployment explore adaptive fuzzy memberships, multi-class detection,
phases under controlled conditions. We considered various and privacy-preserving methods to further strengthen security
performance metrics, including the number of parameters, for a wide range of consumer applications.
model size, accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, testing time,
and CPU and memory usage during the training phase. Our
results are reported in Table I, showing where improvements R EFERENCES
have been achieved. Fig. 2 illustrates the training time and total [1] Zabeehullah, F. Arif, N. A. Khan, Q. M. U. Haq, M. Asim, and S. Ahmad,
CPU utilization (across 12 logical cores) for all models under “An SDN-AI-based approach for detecting anomalies in imbalance data
 within a network of smart medical devices,” IEEE Consum. Electron.
study. Our proposed model offers substantial improvements in Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 28–36, Nov. 2024.
terms of model size, memory usage, and inference speed, mak- [2] H. Narasimhan, V. Ravi, and N. Mohammad, “Unsupervised
ing it highly suitable for deployment on resource-constrained deep learning approach for in-vehicle intrusion detection system,”
 IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 103–108,
devices. While there are minor compromises in accuracy Jan. 2023.
and precision, the overall detection performance remains [3] R. Kalaria, A. Kayes, W. Rahayu, E. Pardede, and A. Salehi,
strong and comparable to the teacher model. Overall, the “IoTpredictor: A security framework for predicting IoT device behaviours
 and detecting malicious devices against cyber attacks,” Comput. Security,
proposed model achieves competitive detection performance vol. 146, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104037.
while reducing the algorithm complexity and its computation [4] J. A. Alzubi, O. A. Alzubi, I. Qiqieh, and A. Singh, “A blended deep
time for resource-constrained consumer devices. learning intrusion detection framework for consumable edge-centric IoMT
 industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2049–2057,
 Feb. 2024.
 V. C ONCLUSION [5] R. Rajesh, S. Hemalatha, S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. Omar,
 and A. K. Bashir, “Threat detection and mitigation for tactile Internet
 In this paper, we presented a fuzzy-logic-driven knowledge driven consumer IoT-healthcare system,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
distillation framework for intrusion detection in resource- vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4249–4257, Feb. 2024.
limited consumer technologies. By combining knowledge [6] J. Azimjonov and T. Kim, “Stochastic gradient descent classifierbased lightweight intrusion detection systems using the efficient
distillation, fuzzy logic, structured pruning, and quanti- feature subsets of datasets,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 237, Mar. 2024,
zation, we achieved over 98% detection accuracy while Art. no. 121493.
greatly reducing model size and resource usage. Further, [7] A. Singh, P. K. Chouhan, and G. S. Aujla, “SecureFlow: Knowledge
 and data-driven ensemble for intrusion detection and dynamic rule
the fuzzy membership functions made the system more configuration in software-defined IoT environment,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
interpretable. Our proposed model is especially beneficial vol. 156, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103404.