IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025 5403518

 Low-Light and Infrared Multimodal Remote
 Sensing in Nighttime Rescue Mission: A Review
 of Anomaly Detection Methods
 Yuting Wan , Member, IEEE, Haoyu Yao, Jiawei Liu, Chen Sun , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Ailong Ma , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yanfei Zhong , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— When facing natural disasters such as sudden floods Index Terms— Anomaly detection, image fusion, low-light and
at night, due to sudden natural disasters, high timeliness of infrared images, multimodal remote sensing, nighttime emerrescue information, and complexity and diversity of rescue gency rescue.
environment, it is difficult for ground personnel to perform
rescue operations in disaster area in time. Remote sensing
uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) technology plays an escalating I. I NTRODUCTION
role in disaster relief due to fast response and high flexibility
advantages. However, with low nighttime visibility level, complex
post-disaster environment, and numerous obstructions, traditional UAV’s visible light remote sensing struggles to achieve
 N IGHT emergency rescue scenarios pose great challenges
 for first responders and rescue teams due to the suddenness of natural disasters [1], the high timeliness of rescue
accurate rescue detection at night. Therefore, the multimodal
detection methods are investigated using low-light and infrared information [2], and the complex diversity of rescue environmodalities, exploring the integration of data fusion and detection ments [3]. Efficient and accurate rescue operations during the
in night rescue applications, and examining the advantages night require advanced technologies that can provide real-time
and disadvantages of different anomaly detection methods here. situational awareness, aid in the detection and localization
This article provides the following contributions: 1) a fully- of the disaster targets in low-light and complicated environannotated low-light infrared co-observation multimodal remote
sensing image dataset for nighttime emergency rescue detection, ments [4].
termed MRSI-NERD; 2) a benchmark test for most state-of- With the continuous development of computer vision, object
the-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods to thoroughly recognition and detection algorithms based on deep neural
explore their capability in extracting useful information from networks (DNNs) are being applied in emergency rescue
normal samples; and 3) a low-light infrared bimodal fusion scenarios [5], providing a viable solution to address issues such
method based on frequency-domain feature decomposition, which
enhances the performance of detectors. The performance of eight as the limitation of timeliness in disaster rescue [6]. The role
types of traditional or deep learning-based detection methods of remote sensing uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) technology
on the MRSI-NERD dataset is reported, including metrics such equipped with deep convolutional neural networks in rescue
as receiver operating characteristic (ROC)-area under the curve and disaster relief operations is increasingly significant [7].
(AUC), false positive rate (FPR), and true positive rate (TPR).
 In the context of remote sensing and emergency rescue
Additionally, a comprehensive analysis of the principles and
performance of each category of detection methods is provided. and search scenarios, low-light remote sensing technology and
 thermal infrared remote sensing technology are two widely
 applied and mature image recognition methods in the field
 Received 4 September 2024; revised 31 December 2024 and 9 April 2025;
accepted 6 May 2025. Date of publication 9 May 2025; date of current
 of traditional image recognition [8]. They exhibit good comversion 21 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key plementarity and integration [9]. The fusion of low-light and
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3903404, thermal infrared images has become the forefront of the curin part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
42301418 and Grant 42325105, in part by China National Postdoctoral rent discipline’s development [10]. However, traditional offline
Program for Innovative Talents under Grant BX20230275, and in part by remote sensing image recognition methods face challenges in
Hubei Provincial Science and Technology Innovation Talent Program under achieving precise detection of rescue targets under extreme
Grant 2024DJA020. (Yuting Wan and Haoyu Yao contributed equally to this
work.) (Corresponding author: Yanfei Zhong.) conditions such as low nighttime light intensity and complex
 Yuting Wan, Chen Sun, Ailong Ma, and Yanfei Zhong are with the post-disaster terrain [11].
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Map- Low-light and infrared images fusion is a branch of image
ping and Remote Sensing and the Collaborative Innovation Center of
Geospatial Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail: fusion that has significant applications in remote sensing image
wanyuting@whu.edu.cn; sunchen@whu.edu.cn; maailong007@whu.edu.cn; recognition [9]. In the context of nighttime emergency rescue,
zhongyanfei@whu.edu.cn). low-light imagery is highly sensitive to lighting conditions [12]
 Haoyu Yao is with the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China (e-mail: yaohaoyu@ but can capture spatial information, texture details more effecwhu.edu.cn). tively [13]; infrared imagery exhibits prominent targets and is
 Jiawei Liu is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, less affected by lighting conditions [14], but it typically has
Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China (e-mail: 2021302181179@
whu.edu.cn). lower image resolution and blurry target backgrounds [15].
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3568456 The fusion of the above two can effectively combine the
 1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

advantages of both [16], increase the amount of information, emergency rescue scenarios. Furthermore, some advanced
and thus improve nighttime rescue operations [17]. The fusion unsupervised anomaly detection methods were evaluated on
algorithms include traditional fusion algorithms based on the proposed low-light and infrared datasets. This contributes
spatial or transform domains [18], as well as autoencoder (AE) to the development of a nighttime remote sensing emergency
algorithms [19], convolutional neural network algorithms [20], rescue system designed for low visible light conditions. The
and adversarial neural network algorithms [21] based on deep main contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
learning. Recently, many innovative approaches have emerged 1) A Dataset of Multimodal Infrared and Low-Light Remote
in the field of image fusion. For example, the color-aware Sensing Images Simulating Emergency Rescue Scenarfusion technique [22] effectively improves the recognizability ios: To address the lack of remote sensing image datasets
of targets in low-light environments by preserving the color for nighttime emergency rescue scenarios, a highly
information and the thermal features. In addition, a hierar- realistic low-light infrared multimodal nighttime dataset
chical guided fusion network based on Laplace pyramid [23] is proposed, termed MRSRI-NERD. It includes various
enhances the complementarity of cross-modal information defects such as hypothermia [40], occlusion [41], and
while preserving image details through multiscale feature fallen rescue targets [42] and is fully annotated to
decomposition and hierarchical fusion strategies. Besides, the simulate real-world scenarios accurately [44]. To the
transformer-based large-scale models for multimodal infrared knowledge, this is currently the only available remote
and visible image fusion have also attracted significant atten- sensing multimodal dataset specifically designed for
tion. These approaches [24], [25], [26], [27], [28] leverage nighttime emergency rescue scenarios.
self-attention mechanisms to effectively integrate comple- 2) A Benchmark for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
mentary features across different modalities. Notably, Swin- Models in Emergency Rescue Datasets: In this article,
Fusion [24] implements a hierarchical attention framework a survey of unsupervised image segmentation methods in
based on Swin Transformer [25], establishing dual-stream the existing literature was conducted, identifying chalattention modules for cross-domain feature alignment. Fur- lenges and outlining future research directions. In the
thermore, DATfusion [26] is proposed to preserve important multimodal remote sensing image dataset for nighttime
features and global information through the interaction of emergency rescue detection (MRSI-NERD) dataset, four
dual attention with transformer blocks, thereby achieving categories of traditional detectors and four categories of
multimodal image fusion. In addition, recent studies have deep detectors were comprehensively evaluated, reportalso proposed a semantic-driven fusion framework [27], which ing metrics such as area under the curve (AUC) score,
further improves the fusion quality in complex scenes by intro- false positive rate (FPR), and true positive rate (TPR),
ducing semantic prior knowledge to guide the feature fusion to provide a benchmark for extensive research on unsuand provides richer semantic information for target detection. pervised nighttime multimodal detection.
PromptFusion [28] further explores a prompt-based method 3) A Dual-Stream Low-Light and Infrared Modality Fusion
for guiding image fusion from vision-language models, which Network Based on Frequency-Domain Feature Decomaims to enhance target identification and fusion quality by position: The dual-stream fusion network is predicated
leveraging semantic prompts. Although these fusion methods on frequency-domain feature decomposition with a
have achieved remarkable performance in recent decades [29], Transformer–CNN framework. This enables the extracthe existing algorithms still have limitations when it comes to tion and fusion of global and local features, ensuring
the specific scenario of nighttime emergency rescue [30]. a more accurate reflection of modality-specific and
 Anomaly detection refers to distinguishing the identification modality-shared features. Specifically, the work introand localization of anomalies in limited or even absence of duces the innovative utilization of invertible residual
prior knowledge [31]. Anomaly detection and target detec- neural network (IRNN) and Lite-transformer blocks for
tion based on high-resolution remote sensing images can optimizing the balance between fusion quality and comeffectively utilize the existing spectral information in the putational cost. The superiority of the proposed fusion
images to accurately locate rescue targets without the need method compared to existing algorithms was comprefor a large amount of prior information specifically tailored hensively validated through metrics such as entropy
to the targets [32], [33]. This approach better meets the (EN), standard deviation (SD), spatial frequency (SF),
requirements of high timeliness and accuracy in emergency mutual information (MI), sum of correlation differences
rescue missions [6]. Unsupervised anomaly detection mainly (SCDs), and structural similarity index measure (SSIM).
includes methods such as sample reconstruction, pseudo Improvements in the AUC metric are reported across
anomaly augmentation, and knowledge distillation [34], [35], multiple downstream anomaly detection algorithms, val-
[36]. Specifically in nighttime emergency rescue scenarios, the idating the effectiveness of the approach in the nighttime
complexity of background information [37], the diversity of emergency rescue mission.
anomalous samples [38], and the presence of weak target information pose challenges for the deployment and application of II. C ONSTRUCTION OF M ULTIMODAL DATASET
existing anomaly detection algorithms [39]. FOR N IGHTTIME S CENARIOS
 Considering the aforementioned issues, this article estab- Research in the field of night rescue using multimodal
lishes a synchronized low-light and infrared coaxial imaging low-light and infrared remote sensing has undergone a remarksystem and collects a dataset that simulates nighttime able evolution. Initially, the focus was primarily on the
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

Fig. 1. Construction of the MRSI-NERD dataset. The overall process is comprised of three distinct steps: data fetching, data preprocessing, and annotation.
Initially, the original low-light and infrared images were obtained from the device in four different real scenarios. For the preprocessing step, the denoised
images were then obtained by subtracting the infrared dark image (solely containing thermal noise) from the original infrared image [51]. Subsequently, the
infrared images were subjected to a process of cropping, whereby the dark edges were removed. The RIFT algorithm [52] was then employed to facilitate
the alignment of the low-light and infrared images during the registration process. Finally, the synchronized low-light and infrared images, which contained
targets, were fully annotated.

stand-alone application of low-light and infrared remote sens- in emergency rescue scenarios, where the target is in
ing technologies. Low-light remote sensing was explored for an urgent state due to hypothermia [45], but at the
its ability to capture spatial and textural detail, although it is same time, it interferes with the detection of infrared
highly sensitive to lighting conditions. Infrared remote sensing, detectors, posing a certain level of difficulty. Obtainon the other hand, was recognized for its ability to detect ing images of hypothermic individuals is not a viable
prominent targets with less dependence on ambient light, option, so this condition was simulated using insulating
although it suffered from issues such as lower resolution and foil boards, which were cropped into the shape of a
blurred backgrounds. person [46].
 As the field progressed, the concept of fusing these two 2) FAN: It refers to the scenario where the rescue target
modalities emerged. Early attempts involved traditional fusion has fallen and cannot stand up but still maintains a
algorithms based on spatial or transform domains. These normal body temperature. In comparison to FAH, the
aimed to combine the complementary features of low-light and infrared detector can detect the target, but the low-light
infrared images to enhance the overall information content. detector may not effectively capture information about
However, with the advent of deep learning, more advanced the target [47]. The FAN rescue scenario is designed to
fusion algorithms such as AE, convolutional neural network, simulate real-life conditions [48].
and adversarial neural network were proposed. These methods 3) OAH: Scenario refers to the scenario where the target is
showed promise in improving the quality of fused images and obstructed and cannot be detected. In this situation, the
extracting more meaningful features. infrared detector becomes ineffective due to the thick
 Nevertheless, the development of deep and statistical-based obstructive material providing thermal insulation. This
image recognition algorithm relies on training on a large scenario is commonly encountered in emergency rescue
amount of valid data [43], but traditional single-modal visible situations, where detecting obstructed rescue targets
light data are limited by daylight conditions and cannot meet beyond obstacles is a persistent challenge in the field of
the requirements of nighttime rescue [44]. There is a lack of emergency rescue. OAH is also widely present in actual
image data for nighttime emergency rescue scenarios. Thus, emergency rescue scenarios [49].
in this article, a fully annotated MRSI-NERD was constructed, 4) STD: It is a more general rescue scenario where the
to address the issue of data scarcity, as shown in Fig. 1. target can still stand and has a normal body temperature,
Basically, a total of 4087 frames of video stream data were showing a significant contrast with the surrounding
collected, where 4044 of them are images containing targets, environment. In this situation, the detector should exhibit
and the remaining 43 frames are background reference images high performance, serving as a criterion to verify the
without anomalies, used for training the anomaly detection effectiveness of the detector.
model. The collected data were divided into four categories A low-light and infrared co-calibrated imaging device [50]
of detection tasks: “Fallen And Hypothermic,” “Fallen And was applied to capture data from the aforementioned sce-
Normothermic,” “Obstructed And Hypothermic,” and “Stand- narios, which were processed and annotated appropriately.
ing,” abbreviated as “FAH,” “FAN,” “OAH,” and “STD,” The data processing workflow is illustrated in Fig. 1. First,
respectively. raw data were captured from the device. The resolution of
 1) FAH: It represents the scenario where the rescue target low-light images is 2048 × 2048, while the infrared images are
 has fallen and is hypothermic. This situation is common 640 × 512. The original infrared images have thermal noise,
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2. Architecture of the proposed dual-stream multimodal fusion model based on frequency-domain feature decomposition.

which must be eliminated through a process of denoising. and Iir was fed into the encoder, respectively, represented as
By deactivating the infrared sensor in an environment devoid follows:
of light exposure, an infrared dark image could be obtained
 Xvis = E(Ivis ), Xir = E(Iir ) (1)
with solely thermal noise. The denoised images were then
obtained by subtracting the infrared dark image (thermal where E( ) is the encoder and Xvis and Xir are the shared
 ∗

noise) from the original infrared image [51]. Afterward, the features extracted from low-light images and infrared images,
resulting infrared images have dark edges that need to be respectively.
cropped out. Additionally, although the low-light and infrared For the encoder, the global, regional, and local (GRL) [54]
images are aligned at the center, they have different fields of block, a state-of-the-art method adopted in the field of image
view, resulting in varying degrees of distortion at the image restoration, is selected. The reason is that GRL can efficiently
edges. Therefore, the RIFT algorithm [52] was employed for and explicitly extract high-resolution image features and perregistration. Finally, the synchronized low-light and infrared form restoration, which is beneficial for improving the quality
images were obtained. of image fusion [55].
 C. Frequency-Based Feature Extractor
 III. D UAL -S TREAM M ULTIMODAL F USION M ODEL Then, the aforementioned shallow features Xvis and Xir
 In this section, a dual-stream low-light and infrared modality were fed into a low-frequency extractor and a high-frequency
fusion network is introduced, as shown in Fig. 2, based on extractor, respectively, obtaining the corresponding frequencyfrequency-domain feature decomposition, which leverages the domain features, represented as follows:
complementary information from visible light and infrared fvis = 8(Xvis ), ψvis = 9(Xvis ) (2)
modalities to enhance the detection performance [53]. fir = 8(Xir ), ψir = 9(Xir ) (3)
 where 8(∗ ) represents the low-frequency extractor; 9(∗ )
A. Method Overview represents the high-frequency extractor; and fvis and fir are
 The model contains four components: the extracted low-frequency features of low-light and infrared
 1) an encoder–decoder module for high-fidelity reconstruc- inputs, respectively. Similarly, ψvis and ψir are the extracted
 tion; high-frequency features of low-light and infrared inputs,
 2) a low-frequency extractor for extracting global features; respectively.
 3) a high-frequency extractor for extracting local detailed A Lite-transformer-based low-frequency extractor was
 features; applied because it can improve the speed of inference [56].
 4) a dual-stream feature fusion module. The lightweight transformer module allows it to obtain more
 The overall workflow is illustrated in Fig. 2, and the network long-range information [57], corresponding to high-frequency
achieves excellent performance on the low-light and infrared information [58], while its ability to extract short-range inforfusion task. mation is reduced. This symbolizes a weaker low-frequency
 information extraction capability. For the high-frequency
 extractor, an invertible residual neural network [59] was used.
B. Multimodal Feature Encoder The convolutional structure of CNN is effective in extracting
 For the low-light and infrared inputs, a shared fea- short-range information [60], corresponding to high-frequency
ture backbone encoder was applied to help the subsequent components [61]. Invertible neural networks have the theofrequency-domain feature extractor for further processing. retical capability of lossless information compression [62],
Initially, the input pair of low-light and infrared images Ivis enabling the preservation of high-frequency information.
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

D. Frequency-Based Fusion Layer It specifies that the independence loss is computed using the
 The low-frequency features fvis and fir were first concate- cosine distance [63]
 Pxi yi
nated and then fed into the low-frequency fusion layer, while
the high-frequency features ψvis and ψir underwent the same L indep = q 2iq 2 . (8)
 Pxi P yi
operation but were fed into the high-frequency fusion layer. i i
This procession can be described as follows: In the second stage, the network was trained for multimodal
 X low = Flow (CAT(fvis , fir )) image fusion and feature extraction. The paired low-light and
 infrared images {Ivis , Iir } were fed into a well-trained GRL
 X high = Fhigh (CAT(ψvis , ψir )) (4) encoder to obtain the shallow features {Xvis , Xir }. Then, the
where Flow (∗ ) is the low-frequency fusion layer, Fhigh (∗ ) low-frequency extractor and the high-frequency extractor were
is the high-frequency fusion layer, X low is the fused low- applied to obtain the decoupled features {fvis , ψvis , fir , ψir }.
frequency feature, X high is the fused high-frequency feature, Through the fusion layer, {fmi , fir } and {ψmi , ψir } were comand CAT(∗ , ∗ ) is the channel concatenation operation. bined, obtaining the aggregated low-frequency feature X low
 The low-frequency fusion layer consists of the Lite- and high-frequency feature X high , and these combined features
transformer-based block, while the high-frequency fusion layer were then fed into the GRL decoder to produce the final fused
consists of the IRNN block, which aims to fuse low/high image Ifused .
frequency features, respectively. During this stage, the loss function is defined as follows,
 which is comprised of intensity loss, gradient loss, and independent loss:
E. Fused Feature Decoder
 The fused feature decoder is comprised of the GRL blocks. L 2 = λ1 L VISint + λ2 L IRint + λ3 L VISgrad + λ4 L IRgrad + λ5 L indep .
The frequency-based fused features X low and X high were (9)
concatenated and reduced in dimension, respectively. They
 The intensity loss L VISint , which is similar to L IRint in
were then fed into the fused feature decoder to generate the
 calculation, is described as follows:
final fused image, given as follows:
 1
 X low , X high ))
 Ifused = D(CAT(X (5) L VISint = ||Ifused − Ivis ||22 (10)
 HW
where D(∗ ) is the decoder, Ifused is the final fused image, and where H and W are the height and width of the image,
CAT(∗ , ∗ ) is the channel concatenation operation. respectively.
 The gradient loss L VISgrad , which is similar to L IRgrad in
 calculation, is described as follows:
F. Loss Function
 1
 To achieve a high-fidelity output that combines features L VISgrad = ||∇Ifused − ∇Ivis ||22 (11)
 HW
from both modalities, the network was trained in two stages.
 In the first stage, the network’s ability was trained to where ∇ represents the Sobel gradient operator and H and W
reconstruct images for each modality. This is attained by con- are the height and width of the image, respectively.
catenating high- and low-frequency features and then feeding
them into the GRL decoder. The loss function is described as IV. A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS IN E MERGENCY
follows: R ESCUE S ITUATIONS
 The typical goal of anomaly detection is to identify anoma-
 L 1 = α1 L vis + α2 L ir + α3 L indep
 lies that differ from normal samples through unsupervised or
 s.t. α1 + α2 + α3 = 1 (6) semi-supervised methods, performing binary classification or
where L vis and L ir are the reconstruction errors for low-light localizing tasks. In recent years, there has been significant
and infrared images, respectively, and L indep represents the progress in image anomaly detection techniques, yet their
loss that quantifies the independence of low-frequency repre- application in the field of emergency rescue remains unexsentations from high-frequency features. α1 –α3 are the tuning plored. In this section, unsupervised image anomaly detection
parameters, with the constraint condition of α1 + α2 + α3 = 1. methods are reviewed and categorized into traditional meth-
 For the reconstruction loss L vis , which is similar to L ir in ods and deep learning-based methods, distinguishing whether
calculation, it is conducted by mse [64], namely, (7). Among they incorporate DNNs. The overview of the image anomaly
them, Ivis is the reconstructed low-light image and Ivis is detection methods is shown in Fig. 3.
the original image, consistent with the previous definition
mentioned above, where µ is the tuning parameter A. Anomaly Detection Methods Based on Traditional
 Approaches
 L vis = ||Ivis − Ivis ||22 + (1 − µ)MSE(Ivis , Ivis ). (7)
 In this section, traditional image anomaly detection methods
 For the independence loss, assuming that each pixel of are categorized into the following types: statistical modelimage Ivis is denoted by xi and each pixel of infrared image Iir based, sparse coding reconstruction-based, decompositionis denoted by yi , the calculation of L indep can be given in (8). based, and frequency-domain analysis-based.
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 3. Anomaly detection methods overview.

 1) Statistical Model-Based Methods: Statistical model- target is present, the mean of the background becomes the
based methods typically utilize statistical models to describe feature vector s of the target. H0 represents the absence of a
the distribution of pixels or feature vectors in normal images. target, and at this time, the background follows an N (0, Cb )
Regions in images that deviate from this distribution are distribution; H1 represents the presence of a target, and the
considered anomalies. These methods typically represent the background follows an N (s, Cb ) distribution.
normal parts of images using Gaussian distributions in the For the input image that consists of P spectral bands, the
spatial or frequency domain, detecting abnormal regions based background containing N pixels can be represented as a P ∗ N
on outliers. Representative works include Reed–Xiao (RX) matrix Xb = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x N ], where xi = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x P ]T .
[65], Gaussian expectation–maximization [66], Markov ran- Under the H0 hypothesis, the mean vector µb and covariance
dom field Gaussian model [67], and so on. matrix Cb of the background are estimated as follows:
 The RX algorithm was selected as the representative method
for detailed analyses. The RX algorithm is based on two N
 1 X 1
hypotheses, H0 and H1 . Assuming that the background and µb = xi , Cb = Xb XTb . (12)
the anomaly target have the same covariance matrix Cb , if the N i=1 N
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

 For each pixel xi with P spectral bands, its RX statistic r is DEC represents classical low-rank decomposition methods.
calculated as follows, which is equivalent to the Mahalanobis For the input image, low-rank decomposition is employed
distance [68]: to decompose the original test image into a low-rank matrix
 representing the background and a sparse matrix representing
 b (xi − µb ).
 r = (xi − µb )T C−1 (13) the anomalous regions. It is represented as follows:
 Given a threshold λ , if a pixel’s RX statistic r is larger min ||L||∗ + λ ||S||1 , s.t. F = L + S (17)
than the threshold, then the pixel is determined to be an L,S

anomalous one, which conforms more to the H1 hypothesis where F represents the original image matrix; L and S
(the target is present); otherwise, it is a background pixel under represent the low-rank matrix and sparse matrix, respectively;
H0 hypothesis (the target is absent). || · ||∗ represents the rank of matrix; || · ||1 represents the L1
 2) Sparse Coding Reconstruction-Based Methods: Methods norm to approximately describe the sparsity of the matrix; and
of this kind typically involve reconstructing images using λ is the tuning hyperparameter.
sparse coding. In this process, a dictionary is learned to 4) Frequency-Domain-Based Methods: Frequency-domainrepresent normal images. Subsequently, during the testing based methods mainly manipulate the spectral information of
phase, anomaly detection is performed based on aspects an image, attempting to eliminate periodic background textures
such as reconstruction differences and sparsity. This includes to highlight anomalous regions. This method can be categomethods such as principal component analysis (PCA) [69], rized into two domains: background spectrum elimination and
independent component analysis (ICA) [70], and alternating phase-only Fourier transform. The former aims to eliminate
direction method of multipliers (ADMMs) [71]. periodic background spectral information to highlight anoma-
 Analyzing with the classical PCA algorithm as a representa- lous regions, while the latter separates repetitive background
tive, suppose that there are m normal images, and each image and anomalous regions by extracting only the phase spectrum.
is flattened into a vector x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ]T with n pixels; For the former, most existing works [75], [76], [77], [78]
then, an m ∗ n matrix X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ] can be conducted. first utilize the Fourier transform to convert the original
 For the matrix X, the covariance matrix C can be com- image into the frequency domain. After removing the spectral
puted first. The eigenvalues λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λn and corresponding components corresponding to periodic background textures
eigenvectors e1 , e2 , . . . , en of C are then computed. The top in the magnitude spectrum, the inverse Fourier transform is
k principal eigenvectors are selected with the larger eigen- applied to obtain the spatial information of anomalous regions.
values and are rearranged as the projection matrix P = For the phase-only-based methods [79], [80], [81], the
[e1 , e2 , . . . , ek ], where k is far smaller than n. amplitude spectrum is discarded, with only the phase spectrum
 In the testing phase, the flattened vector x of test image being subjected to inverse discrete cosine transform (IDCT),
can be mapped to a k-dimensional vector y in the principal as shown in (18)–(20)
component space, which is calculated by y = PT x. Then, the
reconstruction vector x′ is computed as follows: X = F(I) (18)
 where (18) denotes the discrete cosine transform (DCT) prox′ = Py. (14)
 cessing, F(∗ ) is the Fourier transform, I refers to the original
 For each pixel xi of the test image, where i = 1, 2, . . . , n, image, and X is the image in the frequency domain with r
the PCA anomaly score can be computed in a typical approach, rows and c columns
namely, weighted summation of all possible k values. Suppose X (u, v)
 X ′ (u, v) = ∀u ∈ [0, r ) ∀v ∈ [0, c) (19)
that there are q possible k values in total, the anomaly score M(u, v)
c is calculated using the following equations:
 where (19) represents the extraction of the phase spectrum,
 q
 X X (u, v) is the value at position (u, v) after the Fourier
 c= |xi − xi′ | · w p (15) transform, M(u, v) represents the amplitude value at that point,
 p=1
 Pp and X ′ (u, v) is the normalized result. This process can remove
 j=1 λ j the majority of periodic textures from the original image,
 w p = Pn (16)
 j=1 λ j
 highlighting the anomalous regions [82]

where w p is the weight of the pth possible k values, with p X ′)
 I′ = F −1 (X (20)
principal eigenvectors selected. where (20) is the IDCT process, F −1 (∗ ) represents the inverse
 3) Image Decomposition-Based Methods: Methods based Fourier transform, X ′ is the normalized image in the frequency
on image decomposition are mostly designed for the detection domain, and I′ refers to the output image through phase-onlyof small anomalous areas on surfaces with periodic textures. based methods.
Since anomalous regions typically appear randomly and have
weaker periodicity, this characteristic allows them to be distinguished from backgrounds with strong periodic textures. B. Anomaly Detection Methods Based on Deep Learning
Classical methods include hyperspectral image decomposi- Deep learning-based methods do not rely on manually
tion [72], low-rank decomposition [73], GoDec [74], and designed features; instead, they leverage DNNs to automatso on. ically learn extracting discriminative features, providing the
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 Fig. 5. Pipeline of RD4AD. The model itself consists of three components:
 a pretrained teacher encoder (T-Encoder), a trainable student decoder (D-Decoder), and a OCBE module. The OCBE module includes multifeature fusion
Fig. 4. Pipeline of RIAD. Initially, the input image is divided into n (MFF) module and the one-class-embedding (OCE) module. Also, the SSIM
patches of equal size. These patches are then subjected to random masking, loss in the illustration refers to the similarity loss.
a process that is repeated n times to yield n masked images. It is imperative
to ensure that the intersection of masked patches in each image is devoid
of any content. Subsequently, the covered portions of the n masked images illustrated in Fig. 5. For the input image, channel normalization
are reconstructed by a U-Net architecture model, and the reconstructed was first performed and then fed into the model. The model
components are then assembled to obtain a complete reconstructed image.
Finally, following evaluation of the results, an anomaly map is generated. consists of a fixed, extensively pretrained teacher encoder
 (T-Encoder), a trainable student decoder (D-Decoder), and a
algorithm with higher generalization capability. The existing one-class bottleneck embedding (OCBE). The input image is
methods can be broadly categorized into four types, namely, encoded by T-Encoder, undergoes redundancy removal through
AE-based, knowledge distillation-based, generative adversarial the OCBE module, and is then decoded by S-Decoder with the
network (GAN)-based, and memory bank-based approaches. expectation of restoring the normal image information. The
 1) AE-Based Methods: These methods typically utilize the similarity loss between encoder and decoder is calculated, and
architecture of AE [83] or variational AE (VAE) [84] to the optimization is performed by backpropagating gradients to
extract features. For an input image X, the process begins update decoder and OCBE.
by obtaining the latent code X′ of X through an encoder. 3) GAN-Based Methods: The application of GANs in image
Subsequently, X′ is decoded by a decoder to produce Y. generation is widespread. Some efforts have been made to
Due to the anomaly-free nature of the training process for constrain the generator to learn features only from northe encoder–decoder, it can only learn features from normal mal samples, preventing it from generalizing to anomalous
samples and cannot reconstruct anomalous regions. Therefore, samples. There are various works on GAN-based anomaly
the difference between Y and X can serve as an indica- detection [98], [99], [100], and here, omni-frequency channeltor for detecting anomalies. Representative works include: selection representations (OCR)-GAN was selected as a
UTAD [85], DFR [86], ALT [87], P-Net [88], EdgRec [89], representative example [100], as shown in Fig. 6.
SMAI [90], FAVAE [90], and RIAD [92]. For the generator, frequency decoupling is performed to
 For detailed analysis, RIAD was selected, as shown in decompose input images at different frequencies. This step is
Fig. 4. The input image is uniformly divided into n patches achieved through predesigned Gaussian blurring. The decouof size k ∗ k. n patches are randomly masked out, and this pled inputs are sequentially fed into generators corresponding
process is repeated n times to obtain n masked images. to different frequencies through a channel selection module to
It is ensured that the intersection of masked patches in each reconstruct the respective images. The final output is obtained
image is empty. During the model processing, the covered by accumulating these reconstructions.
portions of the n masked images are reconstructed, and the For the discriminator, it takes the original image X1 and the
reconstructed components are then assembled to obtain a reconstructed image X2 as input X1 serves as negative inputs,
complete reconstructed image. representing normal samples, while X2 and the augmented
 2) Knowledge Distillation-Based Methods: Knowledge dis- samples of X1 serve as positive inputs, representing abnormal
tillation aims to transfer the knowledge contained in the samples. During the training phase, only X1 and its augmented
pretrained teacher model to the smaller student model, thereby version (referred to as CutPaste [101] and CutOut [102] in
achieving model compression [93]. In anomaly detection, the original text) are used as positive and negative samples,
knowledge distillation is applied to constrain the generalization respectively. This is done to learn the distribution of norcapability of the encoder–decoder, disrupting the reconstruc- mal images and train the discriminator. During the testing
tion of anomalous samples, thereby magnifying the distance phase, the discriminator produces binary classification labels
between normal and anomalous samples in evaluation met- (normal/abnormal), and the location of anomalies is identified
rics [94], [95], [96], [97]. through the reconstruction error.
 To replicate the experiments on the MRSI-NERD dataset, 4) Memory Bank-Based Methods: To address the issue
the current state-of-the-art reverse knowledge distillation where neural networks can reconstruct unseen anomalous
method, namely, RD4AD [94], was selected. The process is regions, memory bank-based methods store features of nor-
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

 Fig. 7. Pipeline of SPADE. In the training stage, SPADE employs a pretrained
 ResNet to extract features from normal images. The features are subsequently
Fig. 6. Pipeline of OCR-GAN. OCR-GAN comprises two distinct steps: stored in a feature bank. During the test stage, a multiscale image alignment
frequency decoupling and reconstruction. In the frequency decoupling step, is utilized for anomaly localization. This involves querying the features in
the input image is decomposed at different frequencies through predesigned the feature bank to generate an anomaly map. In the illustration, “E” denotes
Gaussian blurring. In the reconstruction step, through a Channel Selection “extract features” and “Q” signifies “query.”
module, the decoupled inputs with different frequencies are then fed sequentially into a corresponding U-Net architecture generator. The generators are
used to reconstruct the respective images and the final output is obtained by A and B. Also, for an image I with size M × N , assuming
accumulating these reconstructions. In the training phase, the discriminator that there are L gray levels, µ I presents the mean value of the
processes the original image and its augmented version to learn the distribution image.
of normal images. In the testing phase, the discriminator produces binary
classification labels (normal/abnormal), and the location of anomalies is EN is a metric used to measure the amount of information
identified through the reconstruction loss. in an image. The formula for EN can be presented as follows,
 where p(i) represents the probability of a pixel with gray value
mal samples as prototypes. During decoding, the decoder i appearing:
indexes the stored features for reconstruction, thereby limiting L
the CNN’s generalization ability to unseen features. These X
 EN = − p(i) log2 p(i). (21)
fields include many classic works, such as PatchCore [103],
 i=1
SPADE [12], SOMAD [105], GCPF [106], SPD [107],
CFA [108], FAPM [109], and N-pad [110]. SD reflects the dispersion degree of pixel gray values in an
 Selecting SPADE as a general representative, as shown image relative to the mean value. The formula for SD can be
in Fig. 7, this method extends the KNN anomaly detec- expressed as follows:
tion algorithm from image level to pixel level. During the
 v
 u M X N
 u 1
training phase, a ResNet feature extractor pretrained on the
 X
 SD = t (I(i, j) − µ I )2 . (22)
ImageNet dataset is used to extract features from normal M × N i=1 j=1
images, and a feature bank is maintained. During the inference phase, first, image-level KNN matching is performed SF refers to the rate of change of the greyscale of an image.
to distinguish whether an image is normal or abnormal. For In general, the greater the SF, the higher the quality of the
abnormal images, multiscale image alignment is introduced for fused image.
pixel-level anomaly localization. For a normal sample that is SF includes two further elements, namely, row frequency
misclassified as abnormal, the pixel-level localization should (RF) and column frequency (CF). These are described by (23),
output a mask of all zeros. where RF and CF are calculated by (24) and (25), respectively,
 p
 SF = RF2 + CF2 (23)
 V. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS v
 u M X N
A. Experimental Settings u 1 X
 RF = t (I(i, j) − I(i, j − 1))2 (24)
 1) Datasets: In this article, the dataset was organized M × N i=1 j=1
following the format of MVTec, where each learning-based v
 u M X N
algorithm was trained on the corresponding target-free sample u 1 X
 CF = t (I(i, j) − I(i − 1, j))2 . (25)
scene classification. There are a total of four different scenes M × N i=1 j=1
for each modal, each containing 1–3 targets. To validate the
effectiveness of the fusion method, the fused data were syn- MI is used to measure the amount of information transferred
thesized using the fusion algorithm proposed and conducted from the source image to the fused image. The higher the MI
the same validation analysis. The results are presented in of the fused image, the more information is transferred from
Section V-D. the source to the fused.
 2) Metrics: For the evaluation of fusion, EN, SD, SF, The total MI can be presented in (26). For the source image
MI, SCD, and SSIM were chosen as comprehensive metrics. A, the MI between the source A and the fused image F is
Suppose that the fused image is F, and the source images are described as (27), where h A and h F denote the edge histogram
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

of them and h A,F denotes the joint histogram of the source (ROC) curve is plotted with TPR on the y-axis and FPR on
and fused images the x-axis for various threshold settings. The AUC is the area
 under this ROC curve.
 MI = MI A,F + MI B,F (26) 3) Tested Approaches: For image fusion, the proposed
 XX h A,F (i, j) method was compared with a wavelet transform and
 MI(A, F) = h A,F (i, j) log2 . (27)
 i j
 h A (i)h F ( j) the state-of-the-art deep learning-based methods, including
 U2Fusion [112], SDNet [113], TarDAL [114], and DeFu-
 SCD is a measure of the discrepancy between the fused sion [115]. For traditional anomaly detection algorithms, the
image and the source image, which is used to evaluate the following were tested: 1) RXD as a statistical model-based
efficacy of the fusion algorithm. It can be observed that an method; 2) PCA as a sparse coding reconstruction-based
elevated SCD value indicates a greater degree of information method; 3) DEC as an image decomposition-based method;
content present in the source image. and 4) POFT as a frequency-domain-based method. For deep
 The formula for SCD can be described by (28), as shown at learning-based anomaly detection algorithms, the following
the bottom of the next page, where D A,F denotes the difference were tested: 1) RIAD as AE-based methods; 2) RD4AD as
between the fused image F and the source image A (similarly a knowledge distillation-based method; 3) OCR-GAN as a
for D B,F ). For any two images X and Y, r (X, Y ) is presented GAN-based method; and 4) SPADE as a memory bank-based
in (29), as shown at the bottom of the next page. method. All parameters were carefully tuned to achieve the
 SSIM is employed to quantify the information loss and best results.
distortion during the fusion process. A higher SSIM value indi- 4) Parameter Settings: For the wavelet transform, the
cates a greater structural similarity between the two images, wavelet basis function was the second-order Daubechies
implying a lower information loss and distortion during fusion. wavelet, with the decomposition level set to 1, where the
 The total SSIM can be presented in (30), and the SSIM fusion strategy was using the average method for low frebetween two images X and Y is described as (31). σ X presents quency and the maximum method for high frequency. For the
the SD of image X (similarly for σ F ), where C1 = (0.01× L)2 deep learning-based fusion methods, the parameter settings
and C2 = (0.03 × L)2 were adjusted to be consistent with the references. For the
 SSIM = SSIM A,F + SSIM B,F (30) fusion method proposed, the number of epochs for training
 (2µ X µ F + C1 )(2σ X F + C1 ) was set to 150 with 60 and 90 epochs in the first and second
 SSIM X,F = 2 . (31) stages, respectively. The batch size was set to 32. For the
 (µ X + µ2F + C1 )(σ X2 + σ F2 + C2 )
 model hyperparameter settings, the number of GRL blocks in
 For the testing of anomaly detection, the settings of MVTec the multimodal feature encoder was 6, with eight attention
AD [111] were followed, adopting three popular metrics to heads and 64 channels. The channel of the Lite-transformget a comprehensive performance evaluation of all bench- based block was also 64 with eight attention heads. The
marks, including traditional and deep learning-based methods, configuration of the decoder is the same as that of the encoder.
namely, FPR, TPR, and AUC. Negative denotes the back- As for loss functions (6), α1–α3 were set to 0.3, 0.3, and 0.4,
ground pixels in the image without target objects. respectively. As for loss functions (7), µ was set to 0.5. As for
 FPR in anomaly detection measures the proportion of loss functions in (9), λ1 –λ5 were all set to 0.2. For the anomaly
normal data points that the model incorrectly identifies as detection algorithms, the summary of the percentage of larger
anomalies, representing the rate of false alarms in a model. eigenvalues is over 99%, the tuning hyperparameter was set
 It is described in the following equation, where false positive to 1 in DEC, and the hyperparameters in RIAD, RD4AD,
(FP) is the number of negative cases that are incorrectly OCR-GAN, and SPADE were consistent with the references.
predicted as positive and true negative (TN) is the number
of negative cases that are correctly predicted as negative: B. Comparison of the Traditional Methods
 FP As shown in Fig. 8, in the low-light modality, the traditional
 FPR = . (32)
 FP + TN methods performed poorly in all four scenarios. The binary
 TPR is a crucial metric that measures the proportion of and heat maps of POFT and PCA were complex and lacked
actual anomalies that the detection algorithm correctly identi- the ability to be recognized. The DEC resulted in almost
fies, reflecting the ability of a model to identify the positive blank binary maps, with fewer high values (i.e., hotter regions)
instances accurately. being detected. However, RXD was effective in detecting
 It is presented in (32), where true positive (TP) is the anomalies, particularly in STD scenarios, and showed subnumber of positive cases that are correctly predicted as positive optimal performance in other scenes compared to the other
and false negative (FN) is the number of positive cases that methods.
are incorrectly predicted as negative As shown in Fig. 9, in the infrared modality, the four
 methods had a superior performance than the low-light modal-
 TP
 TPR = . (33) ity in all four scenarios. It is obvious that the person was
 TP + FN easier to recognize in the heat maps of DEC and POFT, but
 AUC provides a comprehensive evaluation of the per- the binary maps of DEC were still empty. The PCA heat
formance of an anomaly detection method across different maps had less noise. In addition, the RXD exhibited superior
decision thresholds. The receiver operating characteristic performance, especially in the STD, FAN, and OAH scenes,
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

Fig. 8. Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection algorithms on the low-light dataset.

with obvious objects detected in both binary and heat maps, detected on the ground truth. The binary maps of RIAD and
where high anomaly scores (i.e., the hotter regions) were more RD4AD did not cover the person, and instead, the heat maps
concentrated on the person to be rescued. of RD4AD covered the regions of the anomaly.
 The results presented in Table I demonstrate that, among all As shown in Fig. 9, the deep learning-based methods
algorithms, the RXD algorithm achieved the best performance. achieved better performance in the infrared modality compared
PCA and DEC struggled to cope with complex nighttime to the traditional algorithms proposed above. Compared to the
rescue anomaly detection, resulting in poorer performance. low-light modality, RIAD and OCR-GAN detected more edges
This may be PCA’s inability to capture the complex non-linear of the ground truth in the binary maps. Specifically, SPADE
relationships and DEC’s difficulties due to its low-rank distri- performed poorly in the OAH scenario, detecting misplaced
bution assumptions. The POFT algorithm performed well in regions (i.e., background) in both binary and heat maps.
a few scenarios, as indicated by the AUC metric, where the The results in Table I show that the SPADE algorithm
frequency domain may contain more information and structure based on memory banks outperformed others in most of the
to detect. However, traditional detection algorithms generally recognition tasks, followed by the state-of-the-art knowledge
face challenges of high FPRs, making it difficult for direct distillation method RD4AD. On the other hand, methods based
deployment. on GAN, such as OCR-GAN, and those using E–D structures,
 such as RIAD, showed relatively poorer performance on this
C. Comparison of the Deep Learning-Based Methods dataset.
 As shown in Fig. 8, in the low-light modality, the anomaly
regions detected by the SPADE algorithm were able to encom- D. Performance of Fusion-Based Detections
pass the person to be rescued, particularly in the STD, FAN, The fusion results of the low-light and the infrared images
and FAH scenes. However, the binary maps of OCR-GAN are shown in Table II. The experimental results demonstrate
were complex, with fewer high values (i.e., hotter regions) that the proposed method has excellent performance on almost

 SCD = r (A, D A,F ) + r (B, D B,F ) (28)
 j=1 (X(i, j) − µ X )(Y(i, j) − µY )
 PM PN
 i=1
 r (X, Y ) = qP P (29)
 j=1 (X(i, j) − µ X ) j=1 (Y(i, j) − µY )
 M N 2
 PM PN 2
 i=1 i=1
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 9. Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection algorithms on the infrared dataset.

 TABLE I
 R ESULTS OF T RADITIONAL M ETHODS AND D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS IN D ETECTION

all metrics, proving that our method is suitable for various the baseline. Furthermore, the SD and SSIM of the proposed
kinds of scenarios. Specifically, the method proposed loses fusion method are less effective in the OAH scenario, which
some MI (e.g., in STD and FAH scenarios) due to indepen- is related to the inherent contrast and environmental gradients
dence loss, but it still achieves better results compared to in the OAH images.
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

 TABLE II
 R ESULTS OF F USION M ETHODS

 Fig. 10. Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection
 algorithms on the fused dataset. In comparison with the single modality, high
 TABLE III anomaly scores (i.e., the hotter regions) in the heat maps are more concentrated
 R ESULTS OF D ETECTION ON F USED I MAGES on the person to be rescued, with diminished distribution over the background.
 Furthermore, in the binary maps, the anomaly regions cover the ground truth
 more comprehensively, demonstrating the improvements with fusion.

 regions cover the ground truth more comprehensively, demonstrating the improvements with fusion.
 As demonstrated in Table III, the RXD and RD4AD algorithms, respectively, exhibit the most optimal performance
 under the STD and OAH scenarios on the fused dataset,
 whereas SPADE demonstrates superior performance under the
 FAN and FAH scenarios.
 Boldface and underline show the best and second-best
 values, respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that
 the proposed method has excellent performance on almost all
 metrics, proving that our method is suitable for various kinds
 of scenarios.
 Boldface and underline show the best and second-best
 To further evaluate the performance of the fused images, values, respectively. The SPADE outperforms in FAN and
downstream detection tasks were conducted on the fused FAH scenarios, while the RXD and RD4AD algorithms,
dataset. RXD, which performed best among traditional algo- respectively, demonstrate superior performance in the FAN and
rithms, and RD4AD and SPADE, which exhibited excellent FAH scenarios.
performance among deep learning algorithms, were selected. To facilitate a comparison of the performance of RXD,
The results of the experiment are shown in Fig. 10 and RD4AD, and SPADE in different scenarios and multimodal
Table III. datasets, a further illustration is provided in Fig. 11. The
 As illustrated in Fig. 10, the heat maps demonstrate that, quantitative comparison reveals that the detection results of
in comparison with the single-modality-based, high anomaly fusion outperform single modality in almost all scenarios. The
scores (i.e., the hotter regions) are more concentrated on the SPADE based on fused images demonstrated improving AUC
person to be rescued, with diminished distribution over the scores in all four scenarios, with higher TPR scores in STD,
background. Furthermore, in the binary maps, the anomaly FAN, and OAH scenarios. Similarly, the RD4AD method,
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 11. Comparison of RXD, RD4AD, and SPADE in different scenes and multimodal datasets. The detection results of fusion have more superior AUC and
TPR performance on almost all scenarios than single modality. The SPADE based on fused images demonstrated superior AUC scores in all four scenarios,
with higher TPR scores in STD, FAN, and OAH scenarios. Similarly, the RD4AD method, based on the fusion, exhibited enhanced AUC and TPR values in
nearly four scenarios (e.g., AUC values in the STD, FAN, and OAH). In the case of the RXD, the AUC of fusion surpassed the single modal in the STD and
OAH scenarios, and TPR scores were superior in the STD and FAH. In addition, the performance of fused images in FPR exceeds that of the single-modal
images only in certain instances (e.g., RXD in STD and OAH scenarios, and RD4AD in STD scenario).

based on the fusion, exhibited enhanced AUC and TPR values target recognition and detection in nighttime emergency rescue
in nearly four scenarios (e.g., AUC values in the STD, FAN, situations, a well-annotated and augmented dataset (MRSIand OAH). In the case of the RXD, the AUC of fusion NERD) was proposed. Considering the labor-intensive nature
surpassed the single-modal in the STD and OAH scenarios, of constructing task-specific annotated datasets in real-world
and TPR scores were superior in the STD and FAH. However, scenarios, which may not meet the timely requirements of
the performance of fused images in FPR exceeds that of the emergency rescue, pixel-wise anomaly detection algorithms
single-modal images only in certain instances (e.g., RXD in were researched. These algorithms treat a small number of
STD and OAH scenarios, and RD4AD in STD scenario), annotated samples as anomaly information and extensively
where the misplaced regions are more localized in Fig. 10. extract meaningful features from normal images. Thanks
Addressing this problem requires associating more features to the powerful feature extraction capabilities of DNNs,
with contextual relationships, which is the limitation of our deep learning-based detection methods go beyond traditional
fusion approach for anomaly detection tasks in nighttime algorithms. However, traditional algorithms based on RX
rescue missions. also demonstrate decent performance in complex detection
 tasks. Among the deep learning methods, approaches based
 VI. S UMMARY AND D ISCUSSION on reconstruction and memory bank have achieved supe-
 In this article, a fair evaluation of mainstream unsupervised rior performance. To further enhance the performance of
anomaly detection methods in the field of nighttime emer- unsupervised anomaly detection, a deep multimodal fusion
gency rescue was conducted, and a fusion algorithm based algorithm based on frequency-domain feature decomposition
on frequency-domain feature decomposition was proposed, was further proposed. Experimental results demonstrate that
which has been shown to enhance the performance of mul- this fusion strategy effectively improves the performance of the
tiple detectors. To address the issue of insufficient data for detectors.
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

 In addition, due to the complexity of natural backgrounds, R EFERENCES
it has been observed that some anomaly detection methods [1] H. Guo, “Understanding global natural disasters and the role of
struggle to meet the precision requirements for nighttime Earth observation,” Int. J. Digit. Earth, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 221–230,
emergency rescue environments. Therefore, it is hoped that Sep. 2010.
future research directions can focus on the following aspects. [2] K. Sha, W. Shi, and O. Watkins, “Using wireless sensor networks for fire rescue applications: Requirements and challenges,”
 1) Developing Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Methods: in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electro/Inf. Technol., May 2006,
 pp. 239–244.
Anomaly detection methods rely on comprehensive normal
 [3] J. Bravo-Arrabal, M. Toscano-Moreno, J. J. Fernandez-Lozano,
datasets that are thoroughly annotated and representative A. Mandow, J. A. Gomez-Ruiz, and A. García-Cerezo, “The internet
of the operational environment. However, collecting such of cooperative agents architecture (X-IoCA) for robots, hybrid sensor
datasets can be challenging in nighttime emergency rescue networks, and MEC centers in complex environments: A search and
 rescue case study,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 23, p. 7843, Nov. 2021.
scenarios due to the variability and unpredictability inherent [4] T. Oron-Gilad, J. Y. C. Chen, and P. A. Hancock, “Remotely operated
to these situations. Unsupervised domain adaptation meth- vehicles (ROVs) from the top-down and the bottom-up,” in Human
ods can effectively leverage data from both domains to Factors of Remotely Operated Vehicles. Bingley, U.K.: Emerald Group,
 2006, pp. 37–47.
learn an efficient anomaly detection model for the target
 [5] R. Bahmanyar and N. Merkle, “Saving lives from above: Person
domain [116]. Therefore, more unsupervised domain adapta- detection in disaster response using deep neural networks,” ISPRS Ann.
tion methods should be developed to promote the detection Photogramm., Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 343–350,
performance. Dec. 2023.
 [6] M. Zhao, P. Wang, Q. Zhao, X. Mao, J. Nie, and Y. Huang, “Research
 2) Developing Active Learning-Based Methods: The cur- on the route selection of emergency rescue materials based on fairness
rent process of labeling data is typically time-consuming and, and timeliness in the early post earthquake period,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Comput., Inf. Telecommun. Syst. (CITS), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–4.
as a consequence, a hindrance to the adoption of machine [7] R. Geraldes et al., “UAV-based situational awareness system using deep
learning methods for the automated anomaly detection [117]. learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 122583–122594, 2019.
Employing expert feedback, active learning is an effective tool [8] A. Villringer and B. Chance, “Non-invasive optical spectroscopy and
 imaging of human brain function,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 20, no. 10,
for building anomaly detection models. The model queries pp. 435–442, Oct. 1997.
samples that need to be labeled by experts and then retrains the [9] J. Xing, Research on Detection Probability of Infrared and Low Light
model using the samples. This approach can reduce the burden Detection Systems, vol. 2073. New York, NY, USA: AIP Publishing,
of acquiring labeled datasets while improving the anomaly 2019.
 [10] J. Zhao and W. Liu, “A fusion method of infrared and low light level
detection performance [118]. Therefore, active learning-based images based on improved NSCT,” in 9th Symp. Novel Photoelectron.
low-light and infrared remote sensing images anomaly detec- Detection Technol. Appl., vol. 12617. Bellingham, WA, USA: SPIE,
tion methods should be further developed. 2023, Art. no. 126171D.
 [11] M. Chi, A. Plaza, J. A. Benediktsson, Z. Sun, J. Shen, and Y. Zhu,
 3) Constructing Different Operators Based on Low-Light “Big data for remote sensing: Challenges and opportunities,” Proc.
and Infrared Data: Nighttime operations are typified by low- IEEE, vol. 104, no. 11, pp. 2207–2219, Nov. 2016.
 [12] N. Levin et al., “Remote sensing of night lights: A review and an
light conditions, which can significantly restrict the visibility outlook for the future,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 237, Feb. 2020,
and efficacy of conventional imaging systems. While infrared Art. no. 111443.
data offer distinct advantages in low-light settings, it neces- [13] J. Hai et al., “R2RNet: Low-light image enhancement via real-low
sitates the utilization of specialized processing techniques. to real-normal network,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent., vol. 90,
 Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103712.
The characteristics of low-light and infrared data can be [14] Z. Zhu, K. Fujimura, and Q. Ji, “Real-time eye detection and tracking
leveraged to construct operators that make full use of prior under various light conditions,” in Proc. Symp. Eye Tracking Res. Appl.,
knowledge [119]. Thus, how best to construct the different vol. 2002, pp. 139–144.
 [15] A. Jara et al., “Joint de-blurring and nonuniformity correction method
operators based on low-light and infrared data, preserving for infrared microscopy imaging,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 90,
texture details, performance, and operational efficiency, is an pp. 199–206, May 2018.
interesting topic. [16] A. M. Waxman, M. Aguilar, D. A. Fay, D. B. Ireland, and
 J. P. Racamato, “Solid-state color night vision: Fusion of low-light
 4) Coupling Physical Mechanisms and Data-Driven Meth- visible and thermal infrared imagery,” Lincoln Lab. J., vol. 11, no. 1,
ods in Low-Light and Infrared Multimodal Detection System pp. 41–60, 1998.
for Nighttime Rescue Mission: Due to the inability of captur- [17] Y. Liu, L. Dong, and W. Xu, “Infrared and visible image fusion via
 salient object extraction and low-light region enhancement,” Infr. Phys.
ing physical mechanisms present in the images, data-driven Technol., vol. 124, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 104223.
deep learning algorithms to image data frequently result in [18] K. Amolins, Y. Zhang, and P. Dare, “Wavelet based image fusion
suboptimal performance in complex scenarios [120]. Some techniques-an introduction, review and comparison,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 249–263, 2007.
traditional anomaly detection algorithms, designed based on
 [19] X. Zhang and Y. Demiris, “Visible and infrared image fusion using
statistical or physical features of the image, such as RXD, deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 8,
demonstrate performance on par with some deep learning pp. 10535–10554, Aug. 2023.
algorithms on the fused dataset. This suggests the potential [20] H. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Tian, J. Jiang, and J. Ma, “Image fusion
 meets deep learning: A survey and perspective,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 76,
to enhance the efficacy of low-light and infrared multi- pp. 323–336, Dec. 2021.
modal detection systems by coupling data-driven methods [21] P. Shamsolmoali et al., “Image synthesis with adversarial networks:
with physical mechanisms. Consequently, the combination A comprehensive survey and case studies,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 72,
 pp. 126–146, Aug. 2021.
of deep learning anomaly detection methods with physical
 [22] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Bu, S. G. Kong, and X. Zhang, “Color-aware fusion
mechanisms in low-light and infrared multimodal data could of nighttime infrared and visible images,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
be promising for further investigation. vol. 139, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 109521.
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 [23] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Bu, S. G. Kong, and J. C. W. Chan, “Laplacian [47] N. Bustos, M. Mashhadi, S. K. Lai-Yuen, S. Sarkar, and
 pyramid fusion network with hierarchical guidance for infrared and T. K. Das, “A systematic literature review on object detection using near
 visible image fusion,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., infrared and thermal images,” Neurocomputing, vol. 560, Dec. 2023,
 vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 4630–4644, Sep. 2023. Art. no. 126804.
 [24] J. Ma, L. Tang, F. Fan, J. Huang, X. Mei, and Y. Ma, “SwinFusion: [48] E. L. Lloyd, “The cause of death after rescue,” Int. J. Sports Med.,
 Cross-domain long-range learning for general image fusion via Swin vol. 13, no. S1, pp. S196–S199, 1992.
 transformer,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1200–1217, [49] L. Jia, Z. Qian, X. Feng, and J. Lijun, “Obstacle detection method
 Jul. 2022. for underwater mine emergency rescue AUV,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf.
 [25] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using Frontiers Sensors Technol. (ICFST), Apr. 2017, pp. 458–461.
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), [50] S. U. N. Aiping, G. Yangyun, and Z. H. U. Youpan, “Optical system
 Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022. design of low-light-level and infrared image fusion hand-held viewer,”
 [26] W. Tang, F. He, Y. Liu, Y. Duan, and T. Si, “DATFuse: Infrared Infr. Technol., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 712–717, 2013.
 and visible image fusion via dual attention transformer,” IEEE Trans. [51] H. Santosa, M. Jiyoun Hong, S.-P. Kim, and K.-S. Hong, “Noise
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 3159–3172, Jul. 2023. reduction in functional near-infrared spectroscopy signals by indepen-
 [27] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, S. G. Kong, and X. Zhang, “Navigating uncertainty: dent component analysis,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 84, no. 7, 2013,
 Semantic-powered image enhancement and fusion,” IEEE Signal Pro- Art. no. 073106.
 cess. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 1164–1168, 2024. [52] J. Li, Q. Hu, and M. Ai, “RIFT: Multi-modal image matching based on
 [28] J. Liu et al., “PromptFusion: Harmonized semantic prompt learning for radiation-variation insensitive feature transform,” IEEE Trans. Image
 infrared and visible image fusion,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica, Process., vol. 29, pp. 3296–3310, 2020.
 vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 502–515, Mar. 2025. [53] D. A. Kalashnikov, A. V. Paterova, S. P. Kulik, and L. A. Krivitsky,
 [29] Q. Tang, J. Liang, and F. Zhu, “A comparative review on multi-modal “Infrared spectroscopy with visible light,” Nature Photon., vol. 10,
 sensors fusion based on deep learning,” Signal Process., vol. 213, no. 2, pp. 98–101, 2016.
 Dec. 2023, Art. no. 109165. [54] Y. Li et al., “Efficient and explicit modelling of image hierarchies
 [30] A. Agarwal et al., “Comparison of the theoretical and statistical effects for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 of the PCA and CNN image fusion approaches,” in Handbook of Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 18278–18289.
 Research on Thrust Technologies’ Effect on Image Processing. Hershey,
 [55] Z. Zhao et al., “CDDFuse: Correlation-driven dual-branch feature
 PA, USA: IGI Global, 2023, pp. 193–205.
 decomposition for multi-modality image fusion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 [31] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 5906–5916.
 survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009.
 [56] Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Lin, Y. Lin, and S. Han, “Lite transformer with
 [32] H. E. Egilmez and A. Ortega, “Spectral anomaly detection using graph- long-short range attention,” 2020, arXiv:2004.11886.
 based filtering for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 [57] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2014, pp. 1085–1089.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
 [33] L. Bruzzone and S. B. Serpico, “Detection of changes in remotelysensed images by the selective use of multi-spectral information,” Int. [58] G. G. Gregoriou, S. J. Gotts, H. Zhou, and R. Desimone, “High-
 J. Remote Sens., vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 3883–3888, 1997. frequency, long-range coupling between prefrontal and visual cortex
 during attention,” Science, vol. 324, no. 5931, pp. 1207–1210, 2009.
 [34] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images:
 A systematic survey,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 199, pp. 471–478, [59] J. Behrmann, W. Grathwohl, R. T. Q. Chen, D. Duvenaud, and
 Jan. 2022. J.-H. Jacobsen, “Invertible residual networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 [35] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly Learn., 2019, pp. 573–582.
 detection,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021. [60] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 [36] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images: image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2109.13157. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 [37] U. Pietsch et al., “Efficacy and efficiency of indoor nighttime human [61] M. Ladegaard, F. H. Jensen, M. de Freitas, V. M. Ferreira da Silva,
 external cargo mission simulation in a high-fidelity training centre,” and P. T. Madsen, “Amazon river dolphins (Inia geoffrensis) use a
 Scand. J. Trauma, Resuscitation Emergency Med., vol. 28, no. 1, high-frequency short-range biosonar,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 218, no. 19,
 pp. 1–7, Dec. 2020. pp. 3091–3101, Oct. 2015.
 [38] A. M. R. Bernal, W. Scheirer, and J. Cleland-Huang, “NOMAD: A [62] L. Liu, L. Tang, and W. Zheng, “Lossless image steganography based
 natural, occluded, multi-scale aerial dataset, for emergency response on invertible neural networks,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 12, p. 1762,
 scenarios,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. Dec. 2022.
 (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 8584–8595. [63] M. Kryszkiewicz, “The cosine similarity in terms of the Euclidean
 [39] S. Leroux, B. Li, and P. Simoens, “Multi-branch neural networks for distance,” in Encyclopedia of Business Analytics and Optimization.
 video anomaly detection in adverse lighting and weather conditions,” in Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2014, pp. 2498–2508.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022, [64] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler, “Root mean square error (RMSE) or
 pp. 2358–2366. mean absolute error (MAE)?—Arguments against avoiding RMSE in
 [40] D. J. A. Brown, H. Brugger, J. Boyd, and P. Paal, “Accidental the literature,” Geosci. Model Develop., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1247–1250,
 hypothermia,” New England J. Med., vol. 367, no. 20, pp. 1930–1938, 2014.
 2012. [65] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of
 [41] S. Davies and R. M. J. Gray, “What is occlusion?” Brit. Dental J., an optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans.
 vol. 191, no. 5, pp. 235–245, 2001. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770,
 [42] T. Ono, H. Egawa, Y. Ono, and S. Ishikawa, “Detection of fallen Aug. 1990.
 persons and person shadows from drone images,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [66] T. Veracini, S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “Fully unsupervised
 Artif. Life Robot., vol. 28, 2024, pp. 890–894. learning of Gaussian mixtures for anomaly detection in hyperspectral
 [43] M. Zaabi, N. Smaoui, W. Hariri, and H. Derbel, “Deep and statistical- imagery,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Design Appl., Nov. 2009,
 based methods for Alzheimer’s disease detection: A survey,” J. Comput. pp. 596–601.
 Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2022. [67] H. Zhang, X. Jin, Q. J. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. He, and Y. Yang, “Automatic
 [44] D. Broyles, C. R. Hayner, and K. Leung, “WiSARD: A labeled visual detection system of railway surface defects with curvature filter
 visual and thermal image dataset for wilderness search and rescue,” and improved Gaussian mixture model,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 1593–1608, Jul. 2018.
 pp. 9467–9474. [68] G. J. McLachlan, “Mahalanobis distance,” Resonance, vol. 4, no. 6,
 [45] C. Frei et al., “Clinical characteristics and outcomes of witnessed pp. 20–26, 1999.
 hypothermic cardiac arrest: A systematic review on rescue collapse,” [69] A. Maćkiewicz and W. Ratajczak, “Principal components analysis
 Resuscitation, vol. 137, pp. 41–48, Apr. 2019. (PCA),” Comput. Geosci., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 303–342, 1993.
 [46] K. Wang, L. Yang, and M. Kucharek, “Investigation of the effect [70] A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: Algoof thermal insulation materials on packaging performance,” Packag. rithms and applications,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, nos. 4–5, pp. 411–430,
 Technol. Sci., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 227–236, Jun. 2020. Jun. 2000.
WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION 5403518

[71] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed [97] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
 optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
 of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, [98] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic
 2011, doi: 10.1561/2200000016. context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
[72] P. Rizk, R. Younes, A. Ilinca, and J. Khoder, “Wind turbine blade Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3110–3118.
 defect detection using hyperspectral imaging,” Remote Sens. Appl., Soc. [99] J. Song, K. Kong, Y.-I. Park, S.-G. Kim, and S.-J. Kang, “AnoSeg:
 Environ., vol. 22, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 100522. Anomaly segmentation network using self-supervised learning,” 2021,
[73] B. Shi, J. Liang, L. Di, C. Chen, and Z. Hou, “Fabric defect detection arXiv:2110.03396.
 via low-rank decomposition with gradient information,” IEEE Access, [100] Y. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Zhao, R. Wu, Y. Liu, and S. Pan, “Omnivol. 7, pp. 130423–130437, 2019. frequency channel-selection representations for unsupervised anomaly
[74] T. Zhou and D. Tao, “GoDec: Randomized low-rank & sparse detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4327–4340, 2023.
 matrix decomposition in noisy case,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Mach. [101] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self-
 Learn. (ICML) 2011, pp. 1–16. supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
[75] H. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Qi, and J. Wang, “Research of glass defects IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 detection based on DFT and optimal threshold method,” in Proc. Int. pp. 9664–9674.
 Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Process. (CSIP), Aug. 2012, pp. 1044–1047. [102] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
[76] H. Liu, W. Zhou, Q. Kuang, L. Cao, and B. Gao, “Defect detection neural networks with cutout,” 2017, arXiv:1708.04552.
 of IC wafer based on spectral subtraction,” IEEE Trans. Semicond. [103] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
 Manuf., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 141–147, Feb. 2010. P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,”
[77] D.-M. Tsai and T.-Y. Huang, “Automated surface inspection for statis- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 tical textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 307–323, 2003. Jun. 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
[78] D.-M. Tsai and C.-Y. Hsieh, “Automated surface inspection for direc- [104] J. Yoon, K. Sohn, C.-L. Li, S. O. Arik, and T. Pfister, “SPADE: Semitional textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–62, 1999. supervised anomaly detection under distribution mismatch,” 2022,
[79] C. Guo, Q. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Spatio-temporal saliency detection arXiv:2212.00173.
 using phase spectrum of quaternion Fourier transform,” in Proc. IEEE [105] N. Li, K. Jiang, Z. Ma, X. Wei, X. Hong, and Y. Gong, “Anomaly
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Anchorage, AK, USA, Jun. 2008, detection via self-organizing map,” 2021, arXiv:2107.09903.
 pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2008.4587715. [106] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Industrial image anomaly
[80] D. Aiger and H. Talbot, “The phase only transform for unsupervised localization based on Gaussian clustering of pretrained feature,” IEEE
 surface defect detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 6182–6192, Jun. 2022.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 295–302. [107] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot-
[81] D.-M. Tsai and C.-C. Kuo, “Defect detection in inhomogeneously the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
 textured sputtered surfaces using 3D Fourier image reconstruction,” segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
 Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 383–400, Nov. 2007. Springer, 2022, pp. 392–408.
[82] X. Bai, Y. Fang, W. Lin, L. Wang, and B.-F. Ju, “Saliency-based defect [108] S. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Song, “CFA: Coupled-hypersphere-based
 detection in industrial images by using phase spectrum,” IEEE Trans. feature adaptation for target-oriented anomaly localization,” IEEE
 Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2135–2145, Nov. 2014. Access, vol. 10, pp. 78446–78454, 2022.
[83] J. A. Dabin, A. M. Haimovich, J. Mauger, and A. Dong, “Blind [109] D. Kim, C. Park, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “FAPM: Fast adaptive patch
 source separation with L1 regularized sparse autoencoder,” in Proc. memory for real-time industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICASSP
 29th Wireless Opt. Commun. Conf. (WOCC), May 2020, pp. 1–5. - IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023,
[84] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection pp. 1–5.
 using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1, [110] J. Jang, E. Hwang, and S.-H. Park, “N-Pad: Neighboring pixel-based
 pp. 1–18, Dec. 2015. industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
[85] Y. Liu, C. Zhuang, and F. Lu, “Unsupervised two-stage anomaly Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 4364–4373.
 detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.11671. [111] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
[86] J. Yang, Y. Shi, and Z. Qi, “DFR: Deep feature reconstruction for comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 unsupervised anomaly segmentation,” 2020, arXiv:2012.07122. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
[87] Y. Yan, D. Wang, G. Zhou, and Q. Chen, “Unsupervised anomaly seg- Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
 mentation via multilevel image reconstruction and adaptive attention- [112] H. Qin et al., “Forward and backward information retention for accurate
 level transition,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021. binary neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[88] K. Zhou et al., “Encoding structure-texture relation with p-net for Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 2250–2259.
 anomaly detection in retinal images,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. [113] H. Zhang and J. Ma, “SDNet: A versatile squeeze-and-decomposition
 Vis. (ECCV), Glasgow, U.K.: Springer, 2020, pp. 360–377. network for real-time image fusion,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129,
[89] T. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Du, B. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Reconstruction no. 10, pp. 2761–2785, 2021.
 from edge image combined with color and gradient difference for [114] J. Liu et al., “Target-aware dual adversarial learning and a multiindustrial surface anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2210.14485. scenario multi-modality benchmark to fuse infrared and visible for
[90] Z. Li et al., “Superpixel masking and inpainting for self-supervised object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2020, pp. 1–12. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 5792–5801.
[91] D. Dehaene and P. Eline, “Anomaly localization by modeling percep- [115] P. Liang, J. Jiang, X. Liu, and J. Ma, “Fusion from decomposition:
 tual features,” 2020, arXiv:2008.05369. A self-supervised decomposition approach for image fusion,” in Proc.
[92] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skoč aj, “Reconstruction by inpainting ECCV, 2022, pp. 719–735.
 for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021, [116] Z. Yang, I. Soltani, and E. Darve, “Anomaly detection with domain
 Art. no. 107706. adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[93] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2023, pp. 2958–2967.
 neural network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531. [117] S. Russo, M. Lürig, W. Hao, B. Matthews, and K. Villez, “Active
[94] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from learning for anomaly detection in environmental data,” Environ. Model.
 one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Softw., vol. 134, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 104869.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746. [118] M. Kim, J. Kim, J. Yu, and J. K. Choi, “Active anomaly detection based
[95] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed on deep one-class classification,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 167,
 students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent pp. 18–24, Mar. 2023.
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [119] W. Ma et al., “Infrared and visible image fusion technology and
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192. application: A review,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 2, p. 599, Jan. 2023.
[96] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and [120] J. Li, X. Wang, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “One step detection
 H. R. Rabiee, “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly paradigm for hyperspectral anomaly detection via spectral deviation
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. relationship learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14902–14912. 2024, Art. no. 5517515.
5403518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

 Yuting Wan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. Chen Sun (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 degree from the School of Geosciences and Info- received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Wuhan
 Physics, Central South University, Changsha, China, University, Wuhan, China, in 2021 and 2023, respecin 2017, the Ph.D. degree in photogrammetry and tively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 remote sensing from the State Key Laboratory of degree in communication and information system
 Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and with the State Key Laboratory of Information Engi-
 Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, neering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing
 in 2022. (LIESMARS).
 He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with His research interests include multimodal object
 Wuhan University. His major research interests tracking and edge computing.
 include real-time remote sensing image processing,
evolutionary computation, neural architecture search, and disaster emergency
response.
 Ailong Ma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. degree from China University of Petroleum,
 Qingdao, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in
 photogrammetry and remote sensing from Wuhan
 University, Wuhan, China, in 2017.
 He is currently working as an Associate Professor
 at Wuhan University. He has authored or co-authored
 Haoyu Yao is currently pursuing the bachelor’s more than 30 research articles in Remote Sensing
 degree with the Remote Sensing and Informa- of Environment, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
 tion Engineering School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, and Remote Sensing, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 China. G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING, and IEEE
 His major research interests include remote sens- T RANSACTIONS ON E VOLUTIONARY C OMPUTATION. His major research
 ing, computer vision, multimodal learning, and interests include multimodal remote sensing image processing, pattern recogembodied intelligence. nition, and disaster damage assessment.

 Yanfei Zhong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. degree in information engineering and the Ph.D.
 degree in photogrammetry and remote sensing from
 Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2002 and 2007,
 respectively.
 Since 2010, he has been a Full Professor with
 the State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing
 (LIESMARS), Wuhan University. He organized the
 Jiawei Liu is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
 Intelligent Data Extraction, Analysis and Applicadegree with the School of Cyber Science and Engitions of Remote Sensing (RSIDEA) research group.
 neering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
 He has published more than 150 research papers in international journals, such
 His major research interests lie in remote sensing
 as Remote Sensing of Environment, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
 and artificial intelligence to software engineering.
 Remote Sensing, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE
 S ENSING.
 Dr. Zhong is a fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology
 (IET). He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE J OURNAL
 OF S ELECTED T OPICS IN A PPLIED E ARTH O BSERVATIONS AND R EMOTE
 S ENSING and International Journal of Remote Sensing.