348 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS, VOL. 3, NO. 2, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 LSTM Neural Networks Anomaly Detection for
 Biotic and Abiotic Early Stress Detection on
 Tomato Plants
 Federico Cum , Member, IEEE, Luca Alfarano, Massimo Pugliese , Danilo Demarchi , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Umberto Garlando , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—This study explores time series anomaly detection I. RESEARCH CONTEXT AND INTRODUCTION
using a long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network to identify
 GRICULTURE is deeply influenced by various environabnormal plant conditions—both biotic and abiotic—by analyzing
a stem frequency parameter. This parameter, closely linked to plant
stem conductivity, serves as a novel indicator of plant hydration and
 A mental factors that affect crop growth and productivity.
 Plant stresses can be divided into two main categories: biotic and
overall physiological status. Four independent experiments were abiotic stress. Biotic stresses are caused by living organisms,
conducted between 28 May 2024, and 16 December 2024, and 20
tomato plants were maintained under different conditions (healthy, such as pests, diseases, and weeds, which can significantly
biotic, and abiotic stress) to assess physiological differences and reduce crop yields and quality [2], [3]. On the other hand,
develop models for early symptom detection. We used samples from abiotic stresses arise from nonliving environmental factors, such
healthy plants to train an LSTM neural network to predict stem as drought, salinity, extreme temperatures, and nutrient defifrequency values 24 h ahead. The trained model was then used ciencies [4]. The interplay of these stressors, combined with
to forecast the behavior of stressed plants, and an anomaly was
flagged whenever the predicted values significantly deviated from challenges related to global warming and increased food demand
the measured ones. Our LSTM-based anomaly detection model due to overpopulation, poses a significant risk to food security. In
successfully detected water stress conditions several days before this scenario, smart agriculture is a promising solution to overvisible symptoms appeared. However, the algorithm struggled to come such problems. Plant yield is deeply influenced by external
distinguish early signs of Fusarium infection. Despite this limita- conditions that may cause plant stress (such as heat extremes and
tion, in most cases, the model provided early warnings of biotic
stress before any visual symptoms were evident. Future research water scarcity) or biotic causes, such as pests and pathogens. In
will focus on expanding the dataset to enhance the model’s ability this context, efficient resource management and proactive monto differentiate between various types of plant stress. This article itoring of plants are crucial to guarantee better food production
builds upon the work presented at CAFE 2024 Cum et al., 2024, and more efficient resource management. Recent advancements
utilizing the same experimental setup but exploring a completely in machine learning have introduced powerful techniques that
different approach for the early identification of stress symptoms
in tomato plants.
 can significantly enhance the agricultural sector’s productivity
 and efficiency. For example, Barradas et al. [5] used reflectance
 Index Terms—Drought, food security, Fusarium wilt, plant spectroscopy on leaves and different machine learning models to
abiotic stress, smart agriculture. automatically detect drought conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana.
 Deep learning techniques are widely used in literature to detect
 Received 28 February 2025; revised 12 July 2025; accepted 21 August 2025. pests and diseases [6]. Picon et al. [7] used state-of-the-art con-
Date of publication 25 September 2025; date of current version 10 October volutional neural networks to detect visual symptoms of diseases
2025. This work was supported in part by the Agritech National Research on different crop types. In the context of plant stress detection,
Center and received funding from the European Union Next-GenerationEU
(PIANO NAZIONALE DI RIPRESA E RESILIENZA (PNRR) – MISSIONE stem electrical impedance is emerging as a novel and promising
4 COMPONENTE 2, INVESTIMENTO 1.4 – D.D. 1032 17/06/2022, under parameter. Various researchers have highlighted its potential in
Grant CN00000022, Mission 4 - Component 2 - Investment 3.1 - Call for recent studies. For instance, Garlando et al. [8] demonstrated
tender No. n. 3264 of 28/12/2021 of Italian Ministry, in part by the European
Union – NextGenerationEU under Grant IR0000027, Concession Decree No. significant differences in stem impedance measurements when
128 of 21/06/2022 adopted, Project title: iENTRANCE. This manuscript reflects tobacco plants were exposed to varying watering conditions.
only the authors’ views and opinions, neither the European Union nor the Furthermore, studies such as those by the authors in [9] and [10]
European Commission can be considered responsible for them. This article was
recommended by Associate Editor L. Dong. (Corresponding author: Federico have explored stem electrical impedance as a feature for binary
Cum.) classifiers capable of detecting general stress in plants. Another
 Federico Cum, Danilo Demarchi, and Umberto Garlando are with interesting application for stem impedance measurements is
the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications (DET), Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy (e-mail: federico.cum@polito.it; um- detecting iron deficiency in tomato plants, as highlighted by
berto.garlando@polito.it). Hamed et al. [11], which provided promising results.
 Luca Alfarano and Massimo Pugliese are with the Department of Agri- This study aims to identify biotic and abiotic stress symptoms
cultural, Forest, and Food Sciences (DISAFA), Università di Torino, 10095
Grugliasco(Torino), Italy. in tomato plants using stem frequency, a parameter able to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAFE.2025.3605825 provide insights into plant hydration and overall health before

 2771-9529 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CUM et al.: LSTM NEURAL NETWORKS ANOMALY DETECTION FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC EARLY STRESS DETECTION ON TOMATO PLANTS 349

the visible symptoms appear on the plant (such as wilting or II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
yellow leaves). The research focuses on two types of plant stress:
 In this study, 20 tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum),
abiotic stress, induced by water deprivation, and biotic stress, initially three weeks old, were transplanted into 3.6 liter pots.
caused by infection with the pathogenic fungus Fusarium oxys-
 The plants were kept in a greenhouse under natural light, where
porum. Tomato is one of the most widely grown plants producing
 the average temperature during the day was 25 ◦ C and the
nongrain products with a worldwide production exceeding 180 temperature at night was 18 ◦ C. Relative air humidity averaged
million tonnes [12] worldwide, and pathogens such as Fusarium
 56% during the day and 61% at night.
pose significant challenges in tomato production worldwide,
 Different experiments were conducted, in particular, as folleading to a substantial decrease in production, for example, lows.
it is estimated that in India Tomato production reduced by 45%
 1) Experiment 1: From 28 May 2024 to 4 July 2024.
due to Fusarium wilt [13], the primary disease caused by this 2) Experiment 2: From 22 July 2024 to 14 September 2024.
pathogen. Fusarium oxysporum is primarily transmitted through 3) Experiment 3: From 21 September 2024 to 21 October
infected soil, plant debris, contaminated seeds, irrigation water,
 2024.
root-to-root contact, and farm equipment, allowing spread in 4) Experiment 4: From 24 October 2024 to 16 December
agricultural environments. This disease leads to different visible 2024.
symptoms, such as progressive leaf yellowing, wilting, and
 Irrigation was carried out by filling the saucer pots, and
necrosis of vascular tissues. Moreover, the infection blocks artificial infection was induced by adding 5 g/l of Fusarium
xylem vessels, preventing water transport and causing plant sample to the soil after the first week of measurements.
wilting, leading to the death of the plant. Biotic stresses such
 In total, 20 plants were analyzed under different conditions
as Fusarium wilt, combined with the increasingly frequent heat as follows.
waves and droughts caused by global warming, make early
 1) Eight plants (Healthy condition): Regular watering, no
identification of the problem imperative to prevent significant
 fungal infection.
production losses. 2) Eight plants (Drought condition): Complete water depri-
 This study employs an anomaly detection approach [14]
 vation, no fungal infection.
to detect stress-related anomalies. Anomaly detection includes
 3) Four plants (Fusarium infection): Regular watering, artivarious processes and algorithms for identifying patterns or data ficially infected with the Fusarium fungus.
that significantly deviate from expected behavior. It is widely
 The plants were monitored during all the experiment period
used in fields such as network security, fraud detection, and
 annotating the start of visible symptoms due to the applied
predictive maintenance, with statistical methods and machine stressors.
learning being extensively employed to enhance the efficiency
and accuracy of these anomaly detection systems, but many
applications can be found in the growing field of smart agri- A. Sensors Measurements
culture [15]. In this context, long short-term memory (LSTM) The plants were monitored using the system developed in [17].
neural networks are widely used to predict the expected behavior The sensors are based on a relaxation oscillator, where the plant
of a series of data [16]. The key idea in this article is to predict stem is part of the circuit. Variations in stem conductivity cause
the expected behavior of a plant parameter, the stem frequency. shifts in oscillator frequency, which is continuously measured
If it deviates, the algorithm can detect abnormal behavior. by an STM32WL55JC1 microcontroller. The recorded data
 Plants maintained under optimal conditions are used to train are transmitted wirelessly via the LoRa protocol over the free
an LSTM neural network, which models the expected behavior ISM band (868 MHz in Europe). This approach can be seen
of stem frequency in healthy plants. The trained model predicts as an indirect measurement of the stem electrical conductivity,
stem frequency values for the following day at the same hour. which can give useful insights about plant hydration conditions
These predicted values are then compared to actual measure- and its overall health. In a first approximation, a more hydrated
ments: an anomaly is flagged if the prediction error exceeds a plant offers a higher conductivity hence a bigger stem frequency,
predefined threshold or the exact value falls below a domain and vice versa. Two surgical needles were used as electrodes to
knowledge-based threshold. ensure proper electrical contact, positioned 2-cm apart. Their
 This article is an extension of the work conducted in [1]. small size was necessary due to the reduced diameter of the
In particular, a larger dataset is constructed, and a completely plant’s stems, and their biocompatibility ensured minimal physdifferent analysis is performed. iological impact on the subjects.
 This research article is organized as follows. An illustration of electrode placement is shown in Fig. 1.
 1) Section II details the experimental setup for data collection In addition to the stem frequency measurement system, soil
 and plant management. water potential [18] was measured to assess the hydration status
 2) Section III describes the methodology for data preprocess- of the plant’s surroundings [19] helping the learning algorithms
 ing and the algorithms employed. to discriminate biotic and abiotic stress. For this purpose, the
 3) Section IV presents and analyzes the results. watermark sensor [20] was selected. This sensor operates on
 4) Section V concludes the article and outlines the key find- a resistive principle, where changes in soil water content alings and implications. ter its electrical resistance. The same method used for stem
350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS, VOL. 3, NO. 2, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 baseline stem frequency was computed for each tomato plant
 by averaging measurements taken at a sampling rate of one
 acquisition every 60 min. This resulted in a total of 168 samples
 per plant during first week of acquisition. Table I presents the
 baseline values for different plants.
 After acquiring the baseline, two features were extracted from
 the stem frequency parameter as follows.
 r Relative frequency change (RFC): The relative variation in
 stem frequency concerning the initial baseline, calculated
 as follows:
 StemFreq[k] − Baseline
 RFCk = . (1)
 Baseline
 r Stem frequency slope (first order difference): The rate of
 change of the relative frequency variation during 1 h, since
 one sample is recorded every hour the result is the difference between two consecutive stem frequency samples
 StemFreq[k] − StemFreq[k−1]
 Slope = . (2)
 One sample

Fig. 1. Sensor connection with 3-D-printed support for precise needles posi- In addition, a normalization step is applied to the soil water
tioning. potential measurement. Since the employed sensor is reliable
 in a range from 0 to –200 kPa, the SWP measurement was
 normalized as follows:
frequency measurement was applied to read the watermark SWP
sensor: a relaxation oscillator, implemented using an LMC555 SWPnorm = . (3)
 200 kPa
timer, generates a square wave whose frequency depends on the
sensor’s resistance. As soil moisture levels vary, the watermark B. LSTM and Anomaly Detection
sensor’s resistance changes accordingly, leading to a measurable
shift in oscillation frequency. LSTM neural networks are recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
 Overall, throughout the acquisition period, a total of 42 053 designed to handle sequential data, making them suitable for
samples were collected across all experiments. time series prediction. The LSTM addresses the problem of
 the vanishing gradients affecting traditional RNNs. The LSTM
 III. METHODOLOGY neural network comprises a cell and three gates: the input,
 output, and forgets gates. The cell can store information over
 This section provides a detailed description of the methods time intervals, and the gates manage the data flow in and out. The
used in this research. In particular, the data preprocessing step forget gate is responsible for deciding which past information
and the statistical tests conducted to evaluate the relevance of is irrelevant; hence, it is discarded. Similarly, the input gate
the selected features and the algorithms employed for anomaly decides which new information the network has to use. This
detection are outlined. selective process allows LSTMs to maintain long-term memory
 and predict across multiple time steps ahead. In this work, we
A. Data Preprocessing decided to use LSTM networks to learn the temporal pattern of
 The data acquired across all experiments underwent a prepro- stem frequency for a healthy plant. Then, the network is applied
cessing step, as is standard in a typical machine learning pipeline. to unseen stressed plants, and anomalies are flagged whenever
The first crucial aspect to consider is the intrinsic variabil- the predicted behavior deviates from the actual one. More details
ity among different plants. During previous studies, individual about the network will be provided in Section IV-B.
plants exhibited different baseline stem frequency values, likely
attributable to inter-plant variability in stem conductivity [1]. IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Such variability may be considered a between-subject difference
 A. Explorative Data Analysis
in the same way for human patients
 To account for this, the initial preprocessing step involved An example of the collected data for different plant conditions
establishing a baseline value for each plant. The first week of is shown in Fig. 2 where three out of the 20 analyzed plants are
data acquisition was designated as a calibration period under presented. The top three plots display the relative stem frequency
the assumption that all plants were healthy during this time. change concerning each plant’s initial calibration frequency. The
Stem frequency measurements collected during this period were bottom three plots present the corresponding soil water potential
averaged to determine a baseline value for each plant. The data The green background indicates when plant is not showing
CUM et al.: LSTM NEURAL NETWORKS ANOMALY DETECTION FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC EARLY STRESS DETECTION ON TOMATO PLANTS 351

 TABLE I
 BASELINE FREQUENCY VALUES FOR EACH PLANT

Fig. 2. Example of stem frequency relative change under different conditions. The blue line shows the relative changes in stem frequency, while the red line
indicates the corresponding soil water potential. Green background areas denote periods with no visible plant stress symptoms. In contrast, red backgrounds indicate
visible stress symptoms (due to drought or Fusarium infection) from left to right: healthy, Fusarium-infected, and drought-stressed plants.

any visible symptom of stress, e.g., drought (abiotic) or Fusarium likely due to the progressive occlusion of vascular tissues by the
(biotic). Fusarium pathogen, which worsens over time as the infection
 Upon visual inspection, each tomato plant in Fig. 2 exhibits spreads.
an initial increase in stem frequency, suggesting a reduction To better understand the distribution of data for the different
in stem conductivity—likely due to increased stem diameter plant conditions, the stem frequency features (RFC and stem
(analogous to a larger wire having lower resistance and con- frequency slope) are represented on the boxplots of Fig. 3.
ducting more). In healthy plants (left most plots in Fig. 2), this Boxplots represent the distribution of a dataset using five key
increase continues until it reaches a plateau, stabilizing except statistics: minimum (lower end of the left whisker), first quartile
for natural day–night variations [21]. In contrast, plants under (bottom edge of the box), median (line inside the box), third
drought stress (an example is shown in Fig. 2, right-most plots) quartile (top edge of the box), and maximum (upper end of
initially follow a similar increasing trend but then decline in the right whisker), with the possibility of highlighting outliers,
stem frequency before the first visible symptoms appear (e.g., which are values that fall outside the so-called “whiskers” (the
wilting, yellowing leaves). This decrease suggests a decrease in horizontal lines).
stem conductivity, as observed in [21]. Similarly, plants infected Different consideration can be done for the different plots as
(an example is shown in Fig. 2, central plots) with the Fusarium follows.
pathogen also exhibit an initial increase in stem frequency, r RFC (leftmost boxplot): Plants with symptoms exhibit a
followed by a decreasing trend. However, this decline is less slightly lower median RFC than healthy plants. However,
pronounced compared to drought-stressed plants. The trend the interquartile ranges of both groups overlap signifibecomes more evident after the first visible symptoms appear, cantly, suggesting substantial variability in stem frequency
352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS, VOL. 3, NO. 2, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3. Boxplot for the different stem frequency features.

 and consequently, in stem conductivity, when the plant is 1) the prediction error exceeds a predefined threshold (eisubjected to stress. ther upward or downward), which accounts for variar Frequency slope (rightmost plot): The median frequency tions in stem frequency that may be fast, but of high
 slope values are comparable between symptomatic and value;
 nonsymptomatic plants. However, symptomatic plants dis- 2) the actual value remains consistently lower (even for a
 play a broader range and many outliers, indicating sudden small amount) than the predicted one from the network
 fluctuations in stem frequency trends, which may corre- for 12 consecutive time steps (equivalent to 12 h).
 spond to stress-induced physiological changes. The second criterion is introduced to capture cases where the
 model correctly predicts a gradual decline in frequency. In such
 scenarios, the difference between predicted and actual values
B. Forecasting and Anomalies
 may remain below the threshold defined in the first condition,
 Plants are divided into training and test datasets based on and anomalies would otherwise go undetected. This policy entheir condition: healthy plants are used for training, while plants sures that sustained negative deviations, even if subtle, are still
experiencing stress are assigned to the test dataset. The input flagged as potential anomalies since, based on prior knowledge,
to the LSTM neural network consists of 24 time steps of the such behavior does not indicate good plant health [21], [17].
selected features Plants exhibiting low or negative RFC (i.e., a decrease compared to their baseline) are likely experiencing growth issues.
 Xt = [xt−23 , xt−22 , .., xt ] (4) In contrast, healthy plants typically show an initial increase in
 stem frequency, followed by stabilization at a specific value. In
and the output of the network is the value of relative stem our case, we set the prolonged threshold value to –0.05 of RFC,
frequency change for the next day yt = xt+24 . Each plant’s data indicating a reduction of 5% compared to the initial condition of
are segmented into sequences using a sliding window approach. the plant. A higher threshold (15%) is set for anomalies in which
For the training dataset, which includes eight plants, we obtained the actual frequency value is higher than the predicted ones, since
a total of 473 sequences per plant, with each sequence consisting higher stem frequencies (hence higher stem conductivity) are
of 24 samples (24 hours). usually associated with better plant hydration and activity [17],
 For training and validation, the leave-one-group-out (LOGO) [21].
technique [22] is employed. In each iteration, all but one plant The employed network was a single-layer LSTM neural netfrom the training dataset is used for training, while the excluded work with one hidden layer with 20 neurons. The input LSTM
plant is used for validation. This process allows for performance layer processes the input sequence, capturing temporal patterns
evaluation and hyperparameter tuning. After completing this across time steps. It outputs a sequence of hidden states, one
step, the final model is trained on the entire training and valida- for each time step in the input. Then, the last hidden state of
tion samples and then evaluated on the test plants belonging to the LSTM is passed to a fully connected layer to output the
the stress groups (drought and Fusarium) which are completely prediction. The training was performed during 60 epochs, with
unseen from the model. a batch size 32 and a learning rate of 0.01. The employed loss
 The trained model is used to predict stem frequency values function is Pytorch’s mean squared error loss. The results for
24 hours ahead, which are then compared to the actual measured training and validation losses for one of the plants during the
values. An anomaly is flagged if: LOGO procedure are reported in Fig. 4.
CUM et al.: LSTM NEURAL NETWORKS ANOMALY DETECTION FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC EARLY STRESS DETECTION ON TOMATO PLANTS 353

Fig. 4. Training and validation loss over epochs for LSTM network.

 Fig. 6. Results of LSTM predictions for a plant under biotic Fusarium stress,
 highlighting detected anomalies. The blue dashed line represents the actual
 measured values, the orange line shows the network’s predicted values, and
 the red markers indicate detected anomalies.

Fig. 5. Results of LSTM predictions for a plant under drought stress, highlighting detected anomalies. The blue dashed line represents the actual measured
values, the orange line shows the network’s predicted values, and the red markers
indicate detected anomalies.

 After the training, process the LSTM model was used on
symptom plants according to the anomaly detection policy selected.
 Fig. 5–7 suggest that the network is able to capture patterns
 Fig. 7. LSTM prediction results for a healthy plant, illustrating detected
that approximate the plant’s behavior. However, at a certain point anomalies. The blue dashed line represents the actual measured values, the
(Fig. 5), the actual values deviate markedly from the training orange line corresponds to the network’s predicted values, and the red markers
examples, leading to an increased prediction error and the de- indicate detected anomalies.
tection of an anomaly. Notably, some anomalies are detected
even before visible symptoms appear in the plant (Fig. 5). This
highlights the potential of using stem frequency, combined with symptoms appear, it fails to consistently flag most of the samples
anomaly detection techniques, for early detection of drought collected when the plant is under stress. As a result, many stressstress in plants. related data points are not correctly classified as anomalies.
 Fig. 6 presents the results obtained for a Fusarium-infected The training was repeated while leaving out a plant in healthy
plant. In this case, the anomaly detection was less effective condition to validate the anomaly detection approach further.
compared to drought stress. While the algorithm successfully In doing so, we ensured the procedure did not incorrectly flag
identifies a sudden shift in the RFC before the first visible false anomalies. The results of this experiment are presented in
354 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS, VOL. 3, NO. 2, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
ANOMALY DETECTION METRICS FOR EACH PLANT, GROUPED BY CONDITION TIME DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE FIRST DETECTED ANOMALIES AND THE
 (DROUGHT OR FUSARIUM) FIRST VISIBLE SYMPTOMS FOR EACH PLANT

Fig. 7. The trained model can capture the stable upward trend
in relative frequency over time, which is expected due to plant 1, 2, and 14 (drought), where anomalies were noticed seven,
growth. four, and six days before the first visible symptoms on the
 Since the testing dataset includes multiple plants, present- plant, respectively. For Fusarium, on average the anomalies were
ing an individual plot for each one is impractical. Therefore, identified one day before visible symptoms but many anomalies
we evaluated precision and recall for anomaly detection (i.e., are not identified at all as indicated by the low recall.
stress symptoms), with the results summarized in Table II.
This evaluation considers only samples recorded after the first V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
appearance of symptoms. Symptoms are always present in this In this study, we evaluated the ability of an anomaly detecsubset, but the model does not always detect them. As a result, tion LSTM model to identify plant stress conditions based on
precision remains 1.00 for all plants, as there are no false recorded symptoms. Our results indicate that the model performs
positives, i.e., every sample in this period represents a true well in detecting drought-induced stress, achieving high recall
anomaly. and F1-scores across most plants. The overall F1-score for
 However, recall varies significantly across different plants, drought-affected plants was 0.93, making the model effective
meaning that the model’s ability to identify symptomatic cases in capturing drought-related symptoms. Conversely, the model
correctly is inconsistent in all stress conditions. Most plants struggled with identifying Fusarium-induced stress, with a lower
with drought symptoms (1, 2, 3, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19 exhibit overall F1-score of 0.65. This suggests that biotic stress symphigh recall values, indicating that the model effectively captures toms may present more subtle or variable patterns that are harder
drought stress symptoms. Conversely, the algorithm struggles to detect using the current approach. Despite the lower recall
with Fusarium-affected plants (4, 5, 6, 8), leading to lower recall for Fusarium, the early detection of anomalous behavior could
values. Since every sample after symptom onset is considered an serve as a warning signal before visible symptoms appear. By
anomaly, precision is always 1, making recall the most relevant analyzing the time at which a sufficient number of anomalies
metric for evaluating the model’s performance. In this context, were detected, we found that for most plants, early warnings
recall directly represents the proportion of actual anomalies that were triggered several days before the first visible symptoms.
were correctly identified. The overall recall for drought-stressed This highlights the potential of anomaly detection methods as
plants is 0.89, while for Fusarium-affected plants, it is 0.49, a proactive monitoring tool for plant health, allowing early
highlighting the problems of detecting biotic stress symptoms interventions before stress conditions become severe. Future
compared to abiotic stress. work should explore refinements in the model, such as incorpo-
 However, even if symptoms are not always correctly identified rating additional physiological and environmental parameters,
in biotic stress conditions, the early detection of flagged anoma- to improve sensitivity to biotic stress factors. In addition, testing
lies can serve as an early warning for the future onset of stress the approach on a larger dataset with different plant species
symptoms. The algorithm detects abnormal behavior before and stress conditions would help assess its generalizability and
symptoms become visually apparent, providing a valuable tool robustness.
for proactive monitoring.
 For this reason, we also report in Table III the time point
at which a plant accumulates a certain number of detected REFERENCES
anomalies specifically, 12 h with flagged symptoms. [1] F. Cum, L. Alfarano, M. Pugliese, D. Demarchi, and U. Garlando, “Prelim-
 In most cases, this time threshold is reached before the first inary analysis of biotic and abiotic stress on tomato plants using impedance
 measurements and time series clustering,” in Proc. Conf. Agrifood Elecnoticeable visible symptoms appear, suggesting that the model tron., 2024, pp. 125–129.
can provide early indications of plant stress even when recall [2] R. K. Peterson and L. G. Higley, Biotic stress and yield loss. Boca Raton,
is not perfect. Particularly interesting are the results for plants FL, USA: CRC Press, 2000.
CUM et al.: LSTM NEURAL NETWORKS ANOMALY DETECTION FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC EARLY STRESS DETECTION ON TOMATO PLANTS 355

 [3] P. Pandey, V. Irulappan, M. V. Bagavathiannan, and M. Senthil- [21] U. Garlando et al., “Analysis of in vivo plant stem impedance variations
 Kumar, “Impact of combined abiotic and biotic stresses on plant in relation with external conditions daily cycle,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Int.
 growth and avenues for crop improvement by exploiting physio- Symp. Circuits Syst., 2021, pp. 1–5.
 morphological traits,” Front. Plant Sci., vol. 8, 2017, Art. no. 537. [Online]. [22] Scikit-learn Developers, “Leave-one-group-out cross-validation,” 2024.
 Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/plant-science/articles/10. Accessed: Feb. 26, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-learn.org/
 3389/fpls.2017.00537 stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.LeaveOneGroupOut.
 [4] R. Kopecká, M. Kameniarová, M. Černý, B. Brzobohatý, and J. Novák, html
 “Abiotic stress in crop production,” Int. J. Mol. Sci., vol. 24, no. 7, 2023,
 Art. no. 6603. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/24/
 7/6603
 [5] A. Barradas et al., “Comparing machine learning methods for classifying
 plant drought stress from leaf reflectance spectra in arabidopsis thaliana,”
 Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 14, 2021, Art. no. 6392. [Online]. Available: https:
 //www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/14/6392
 [6] J. Liu and X. Wang, “Plant diseases and pests detection based on deep
 learning: A review,” Plant Methods, vol. 17, 2021, Art. no. 22.
 [7] A. Picon, M. Seitz, A. Alvarez-Gila, P. Mohnke, A. Ortiz-Barredo, and J. Federico Cum (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 Echazarra, “Crop conditional convolutional neural networks for massive bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electronic engimulti-crop plant disease classification over cell phone acquired images neering in 2019 and 2022, respectively, from Politectaken on real field conditions,” Comput. Electron. Agriculture, vol. 167, nico di Torino, Torino, Italy, where he is currently
 2019, Art. no. 105093. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engicom/science/article/pii/S0168169919309329 neering.
 [8] U. Garlando et al., “Towards optimal green plant irrigation: Watering and His research focuses on the development of IoTbody electrical impedance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2020, based electronic systems for advanced plant health
 pp. 1–5. monitoring and smart irrigation.
 [9] F. Cum, S. Calvo, D. Demarchi, and U. Garlando, “Machine learning
 models comparison for water stress detection based on stem electrical
 impedance measurements,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. AgriFood Electron., 2023,
 pp. 108–112.
[10] M. Barezzi, F. Cum, U. Garlando, M. Martina, and D. Demarchi, “On the
 impact of the stem electrical impedance in neural network algorithms for
 plant monitoring applications,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Metrol. Agriculture Forestry, 2022, pp. 131–135.
[11] S. Hamed, P. Ibba, A. Altana, P. Lugli, and L. Petti, “Towards tomato
 plant iron stress monitoring through bioimpedance and circuit analysis,” Luca Alfarano received a bachelor’s degree in Agriin Proc. IEEE Conf. AgriFood Electron., 2023, pp. 20–24. cultural Science and Technology in 2017 and a mas-
[12] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “FAOSTAT: ter’s degree in Agricultural Sciences in 2022, both
 Food and agriculture data,” 2025. Accessed: Feb. 27, 2025. [Online]. from the University of Turin, Department of Agri-
 Available: https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QCL cultural, Forest, and Food Sciences (DISAFA). He is
[13] R. McGovern, “Management of tomato diseases caused by fusarium oxys- currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in Plant
 porum,” Crop Protection, vol. 73, pp. 78–92, 2015. [Online]. Available: Pathology at the same department, conducting rehttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026121941500071X search on the recycling of agro-industrial byproducts
[14] B. Lindemann, B. Maschler, N. Sahlab, and M. Weyrich, “A survey on to develop new technologies for agriculture, with the
 anomaly detection for technical systems using LSTM networks,” Comput. goal of reducing chemical inputs in the sector.
 Ind., vol. 131, 2021, Art. no. 103498. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166361521001056
[15] C. Catalano, L. Paiano, F. Calabrese, M. Cataldo, L. Mancarella, and
 F. Tommasi, “Anomaly detection in smart agriculture systems,” Comput. Ind., vol. 143, 2022, Art. no. 103750. [Online]. Available: https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166361522001476
[16] A. R. S. Parmezan, V. M. Souza, and G. E. Batista, “Evaluation of
 statistical and machine learning models for time series prediction: Identifying the state-of-the-art and the best conditions for the use of each
 model,” Inf. Sci., vol. 484, pp. 302–337, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025519300945 Massimo Pugliese received the Ph.D. degree in Agri-
[17] S. Calvo, M. Barezzi, D. Demarchi, and U. Garlando, “In-vivo proximal cultural, Forestry, and Food Sciences in 2012 from the
 monitoring system for plant water stress and biological activity based University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
 on stem electrical impedance,” in Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Adv. Sensors He is currently an Associate Professor in plant
 Interfaces, 2023, pp. 80–85. pathology with the Department of Agricultural, For-
[18] M. M. Al-Kaisi, R. Lal, K. R. Olson, and B. Lowery, “Chapter 1 - funda- est and Food Sciences, University of Torino. He acmentals and functions of soil environment,” in Soil Health and Intensifica- tively collaborates with the Centre of Competence
 tion of Agroecosytems, M. M. Al-Kaisi and B. Lowery, Eds. Cambridge, AGROINNOVA in research activities, technology
 MA, USA: Academic Press, 2017, pp. 1–23. [Online]. Available: https: Transfer, and in coordinating RD projects. He is
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128053171000014 responsible for national and EU projects in the field
[19] M. Bittelli, “Measuring soil water content: A review,” HortTechnol. Hortte, of sustainable crop protection and bioeconomy. His
 vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 293–300, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://journals. research interests include the use of biofertilizers and suppressive compost
 ashs.org/horttech/view/journals/horttech/21/3/article-p293.xml against plant pathogens and their impact on soil microbial communities, modes
[20] IRROMETER Company, Inc., “Soil moisture sensors - irrometer,” 2025. of action and efficacy of biological control agents and plant protection products,
 Accessed: Feb. 20, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.irrometer.com/ and biological control of diseases in horticulture.
 sensors.html
356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS, VOL. 3, NO. 2, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

 Danilo Demarchi (Senior Member, IEEE) received a Umberto Garlando (Member IEEE) received the
 master’s degree in Electronic Engineering in 1991 and bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electronic Engia Ph.D. in Electronic Engineering in 1995, both from neering from Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, in
 Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy. He is currently a 2013 and 2015, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
 Full Professor with the Department of Electronics and electronic engineering with the VLSILab, Politecnico
 Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Torino, di Torino, in 2019.
 Italy. He is involved in smart system integration and He is currently with Politecnico di Torino, working
 IoTs for the agrifood value chain and for biomedical on CAD and EDA tools for FCN (Field coupled
 devices. He was a Visiting Scientist with the Mas- nanocomputing). He worked in the development of
 sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, the ToPoliNano framework, focusing on the simula-
 USA, in 2018, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, tion part. In 2020, he joined the electronic Life Ori-
MA, USA, for the project Smart electronic IoT SysTEms for Rehabilitation ented iNtelligent Systems (eLiONS) group (ex MiNES) as a research Associate,
sciences (SISTER). He was a Visiting Professor with EPFL Lausanne, Lausanne, where he works on a fast-growing field such as the smart-systems for agri-food
Switzerland, in 2019 and with Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, from technology.
2018 to 2021. His research focuses on wearable plant sensors. He is also
leading the electronic Life-Oriented iNtelligent Systems (eLiONS), Laboratory
of Politecnico di Torino, and coordinating the Italian Institute of Technology
Microelectronics Group at Politecnico di Torino.
 Prof. Demarchi is the Founder and Editor-in-Chief of IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON AGRIFOOD ELECTRONICS. He is also the Founder and first General-Co-Chair
of the IEEE Conference on AgriFood Electronics – CAFÉ, and Founder and
Chair of the IEEE CAS Special Interest Group on AgriFood Electronics. From
2023 to 2024, he was a Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE CAS Society. He was
a Member of the IEEE Sensors Council (2020–2023) and the BioCAS Technical
Committee (since 2013). He is or was an Associate Editor for IEEE Open Journal
on Engineering in Medicine and Biology (OJ-EMB). He was a General Chair
of IEEE BioCAS (Biomedical Circuits and Systems) Conference in 2017 in
Torino and Founder of IEEE FoodCAS Workshop (Circuits and Systems for the
FoodChain). He was a TPC Co-Chair of IEEE ICECS 2019, IEEE BioCAS 2021
and 2022 conferences. He was the General Co-Chair of IEEE BioCAS 2023.