IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2533712

 MAOTIN: A High-Accuracy and -Efficiency
 Network for Overloaded Truck Identification With
 GPS Trajectories
 Jian Liang , Jiehu Kang , Xuesen Wang , Zongyang Zhao , Chi Zhao , Siyang Zhang , Zefeng Sun ,
 Luyuan Feng , and Bin Wu

 Abstract—Overloaded truck transportation poses a significant I. I NTRODUCTION
threat to road safety. However, mainstream methods for overloaded truck identification suffer from low efficiency, limited
monitoring range, and high costs, posing obstacles to curbing
overloaded transportation. To tackle these challenges, this study
 R OAD transportation is a fundamental driver of economic
 and social development. However, the high profitability
 of overloaded transport makes it difficult to eliminate the issue
proposes a novel approach called a multiaspect overloaded of overloaded truck transportation [1]. Overloaded transport
truck identification network (MAOTIN), which achieves accurate accelerates the degradation of critical infrastructure such as
identification by analyzing truck trajectory data comprehensively. highways and bridges, increasing the risk of rollovers and loss
MAOTIN comprises three efficient and specific modules: an
overloaded feature identification module (OFIM), a trajectory of control, even severe road accidents [2].
similarity identification module (TSIM), and a decision fusion Traditionally, overloaded trucks were identified through
module (DFM). Initially, the trajectory representation method manual weighing at checkpoints. However, this method has
was designed to transform the multidimensional spatiotemporal proved inefficient and resource-intensive, and it failed to
truck trajectory data into images, aggregating overload features tackle the issue of trucks deliberately avoiding inspection by
while reducing dimensionality. Subsequently, the OFIM and
TSIM are developed to comprehensively identify overloaded taking alternative routes. Recent studies have explored new
behavior from typical overloaded features and overloaded trajec- weight-measuring technologies [3], which aim to automate
tories similarity features. Finally, the DFM adaptively and fully the inspection process. It includes dynamic and vehiclefuses feature images of different properties to obtain the ultimate mounted weighing systems [4], [5]. The dynamic weighing
identification result. To evaluate the performance of MAOTIN, method improves efficiency but suffers from limited inspection
this study conducted experiments on the constructed overloaded
truck dataset. The results indicated that the model achieves coverage. Vehicle-mounted sensors provide real-time monan accuracy of 96.4% and 316 FPS, surpassing mainstream itoring [6], [7], but their high cost and complexity limit
image classification networks. Moreover, MAOTIN performed a their practicality for large-scale deployment. On the other
precision of 97.3% on practical application testing and assisted hand, traffic management systems now collect vast amounts of
traffic police in apprehending 7591 overloaded trucks in one trajectory data from truck-mounted GPS devices. Despite its
quarter, demonstrating its high practical value. Hence, MAOTIN
enables accurate, rapid, and comprehensive identification of potential, this data remains underutilized in overloaded truck
overloaded trucks and can be effectively applied to the overloaded identification.
identification tasks in urban traffic management. Vehicle trajectory data provides valuable insights into
 Index Terms—Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), intelli- driving behavior, road conditions, and vehicle performance.
gent system application, overloaded truck identification, trajec- Mining patterns from this data has proved feasible for tasks
tory similarity. such as traffic mode identification [8], [9], [10], state prediction [11], [12], and traffic flow forecasting [13], [14].
 However, applying to overloaded truck identification remains
 Received 7 March 2025; accepted 3 May 2025. Date of publication 23 an area with limited exploration. The implicit characteristic
May 2025; date of current version 12 June 2025. This work was supported of overload-related behaviors within trajectory data and the
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant large volumes of data present significant challenges for current
52375545 and Grant 62371339 and in part by Tianjin Municipal Transportation Commission Science and Technology Development Plan Project under convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which struggle to
Grant 2022-09. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was capture these complex patterns.
Dr. Fernando J Álvarez. (Corresponding author: Jiehu Kang.) To address these challenges, this article proposes a novel
 Jian Liang, Jiehu Kang, Zongyang Zhao, Zefeng Sun, Luyuan
Feng, and Bin Wu are with the State Key Laboratory of framework for overloaded truck identification based on tra-
Precision Measurement Technology and Instruments, Tianjin jectory analysis. This framework is specifically designed
University, Tianjin 300072, China (e-mail: liangjian@tju.edu.cn; to capture the unique driving information of overloaded
zhongdian313@163.com).
 Xuesen Wang is with Tianjin Municipal Engineering Design and Research trucks. Compared with normal trucks, overloaded trucks
Institute, Tianjin 300051, China (e-mail: angle new@163.com). exhibit distinct driving patterns to avoid inspection. Moreover,
 Chi Zhao and Siyang Zhang are with the Key Laboratory of Road and overloaded truck drivers often choose routes that maximize
Traffic Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail:
siyangzhang@tongji.edu.cn). efficiency, leading to striking similarities in the trajectories
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3573008 [15]. Our framework integrates both typically overloaded
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 forms comprehensive and rapid analysis of these trajectory
 data, generating accurate overload identification results. These
 results are subsequently visualized, providing crucial decisionmaking support for traffic police officers. This integrated
 approach enables timely detection and enforcement actions
 against overload violations.
 The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
 In Section II, the article reviews the existing work related
 to the traditional overloaded truck identification and pattern
 recognition methods based on traffic trajectory data. Next, Section III outlines the methodology of our proposed MAOTIN.
 Subsequently, Section IV introduced the dataset construction
 and experimental settings, followed by the results analysis of
 the model testing experiment and practical application testing.
 Finally, the article concludes in Section V.
Fig. 1. Application process of MAOTIN. Initially, the GPS device affixed
to the vehicle acquires real-time trajectory data. Subsequently, this data is II. R ELATED W ORKS
relayed to the traffic management platform for recording and storage. Finally,
MAOTIN identifies the overloaded trucks through the data, processes the A. Traditional Methods of Overloaded Truck Identification
information, and presents the visualization results in the system.
 The traditional method of identifying overloaded trucks
 relies on weighing sensors, which can accurately measure
features and trajectory similarity features, resulting in the the weight to determine whether the truck is overloaded.
development of an accurate, efficient, and highly robust mul- Currently, most cities still use the manual weighing method,
tiaspect overloaded truck identification network (MAOTIN). which requires traffic police to individually inspect trucks at
It consists of the overloaded feature identification module fixed overload checkpoints (such as highway intersections or
(OFIM), a trajectory similarity identification module (TSIM), expressway checkpoints). The method suffers from a limited
and a decision fusion module (DFM). The OFIM captures monitoring range, low detection efficiency, significant contypical overloaded features, the TSIM identifies trajectory sumption of workforce and material resources, and inability
similarity features, and the DFM merges the outputs from both to address the issue of trucks deliberately avoiding inspection
modules to generate the final identification results. by taking alternative routes.
 The contributions of this article are as follows. Some researchers have improved the inefficiency of manual
 weighing and designed dynamic weighing devices. These
 1) This article proposes a multiaspect overloaded truck devices automatically record the weight when trucks pass
 high-precision identification network, a deep learning- through the weighing devices at checkpoints at low speeds.
 based framework that comprehensively learns and The cameras capture images of the vehicle, recording details
 extracts overloaded truck features from trajectories. To such as the number of axles, license plate number, and other
 the best of our knowledge, MAOTIN is the first model essential information, enabling determination of whether the
 to use driving trajectory data for overload identification. vehicle is overloaded. Qiao and Zhao [16] designed a dynamic
 2) This article introduces an innovative truck trajectory weighing device for the road surface using the bending plate
 representation method that transforms multidimensional sensor with strain gauges. The principle of this method is
 driving data into a 2-D image. This transformation straightforward, but its detection accuracy is compromised and
 enhances overload feature aggregation, simplifying the demands a reduced passing speed. To overcome this problem,
 training process and improving network efficiency. Lydon et al. [17] improved the system by adding fiber-optic
 3) This article designs two specialized neural network sensors, a vision system, and a new shear strain transducer,
 modules for feature extraction. The OFIM fully extracts enhancing weighing system accuracy but raising device cost.
 typical overloaded features from multiple spatial scales, While the above dynamic weighing method improves detecwhile the TSIM analyzes the trajectory similarity tion efficiency and reduces workforce costs, it is limited to
 features between current and historically severely over- fixed points, resulting in a small. Consequently, it failed to
 loaded trajectories. Together, these modules significantly solve the problem of trucks evading inspection by making
 improve the accuracy and robustness of the overload detours.
 identification process. Some researchers have sought to overcome the limitation of
 A notable advantage of our model is its practical applica- fixed monitoring points by developing vehicle-mounted load
bility. It can be seamlessly integrated into traffic management cells for real-time weight monitoring. Vehicle-mounted sensors
platforms to establish an intelligent overload detection system. operate on different principles. For example, Gaira et al. [18]
Fig. 1 depicts the application process of MAOTIN. The GPS installed laser displacement sensors on trucks to measure
devices installed on trucks continuously transmit real-time the deformation of the steel plate spring, which is then
trajectory data to the data cloud and traffic management used to estimate the truck’s weight. While the approach is
platform database for recording and storage. Our model per- straightforward, it faces challenges in accurately estimating
LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION 2533712

weight, as extensive calibration is needed to correlate spring identification network is proposed in this article. The trajecdeformation with weight, and the results are sensitive to tory representation method fully considers the truck driving
external environmental factors. Similarly, Wang et al. [19] used characteristics and converts the driving trajectory data with
onboard sensors to measure road gradient and rear suspension the image. The OFIM and TSIM form two branches of the
deformation for weight estimation. Although this method can network. They identify overload from typical overloaded feabe applied to most trucks, it requires precise sensor installation tures and trajectory similarity features, respectively. The OFIM
and is costly. Despite enabling real-time monitoring of truck acquires multiscale and accurate feature maps, and the TSIM
overload behavior, vehicle-mounted weighing systems are efficiently gets the trajectory similarity feature map. Both of
expensive and face limitations in terms of truck compatibility. them are merged in the DFM for the last results. This design
No universal vehicle-mounted weight monitoring device has introduces the specific characteristics of overloaded trucks into
been developed, limiting the scalability of these methods. the model’s structure, enhancing the accuracy and reliability of the results. In addition, the trajectory representation
B. Pattern Recognition Method Based on Traffic method helps MAOTIN apply to massive truck data processing
Spatiotemporal Trajectory Data tasks.
 Spatiotemporal trajectory data captures a wealth of behavioral features, and deep analysis of this data provides strong III. M ETHODOLOGY
support for decision-making and solving complex tasks. With A. Overview of MAOTIN
advancements in high-precision positioning technologies and
 Fig. 2 shows the overall structure of MAOTIN. The prothe Internet of Things (IoT), large volumes of valuable traffic
 cess begins with the trajectory representation method, which
trajectory data have become readily available, enhancing the
 transforms truck driving trajectory data into an image, serving
accuracy and effectiveness of traffic identification and predicas the model’s input. Then, the OFIM and TSIM identify
tion tasks.
 overload behavior from different aspects. The OFIM mines
 Analyzing and mining the information from trajectory
 multiscale typical overloaded features layer by layer. Its unique
enables the acquisition of the behavioral characteristics of
 Swin feature pyramid (SwinFP) stage and feature selection
the vehicle ontology. This process facilitates trajectory claslayer enable it to capture richer and more comprehensive
sification, anomaly detection, and prediction. Ma et al. [20]
 feature maps efficiently. Meanwhile, the TSIM analyzes the
proposed a multiattribute-based fusion network (MASO-MSF)
 similar features of driving routes and historically overloaded
and constructed an MASO structure to represent the local
 routes. It generates a similarity feature map using a full conmotion state and spatial characteristics of a GPS trajectory
 volutional Siamese network (FCSN). Following this, the DFM
segment at different spatial scales. Additionally, they designed
 comprehensively integrates the two feature maps, yielding
a multistage fusion model to accurately identify traffic modes,
 accurate overloaded identification results.
which fully considers the spatial scale information of the
features. However, the drawback of the model is complexity,
which results in poor performance when processing large B. Trajectory Representation Method
volumes of trajectory data. Yu and Huang [21] proposed The initial truck driving trajectory data is multidimena deep learning framework for driving trajectory anomaly sional spatiotemporal data (including time, position, velocity,
detection, STDTB-AD. It divides the road network into a etc.), presenting challenges due to its large volume, dimenseries of spatiotemporal units and uses the motion parameters sionality, and feature dispersion. For the above problems,
of each spatiotemporal unit to represent the driving mode a trajectory representation method is proposed. It can conand characteristics. Then, accordingly, to sense abnormal vert complex truck driving trajectories into 2-D trajectory
driving behavior. Ji et al. [22] introduced a spatiotemporal images.
self-supervised learning framework for traffic flow prediction, The trajectory representation method first defines the range
which enhances the model’s ability to represent spatial and and resolution of the trajectory image, mapping the input
temporal heterogeneity. This is achieved through adaptive truck trajectory data into the spatial domain. A transformation
data augmentation and supported by self-supervised learning model is then established to convert trajectory information into
tasks. The above methods accomplish pattern recognition by image pixels, where the number of trajectory points is encoded
designing various network structures to represent trajectory as pixel gray. After this, the method reinforces the essential
features. However, it is challenging for these networks to han- features in the generated image, and the final truck driving
dle overloaded truck identification. Unlike other traffic data, trajectory image is produced. The overall process is depicted
truck journeys often span long distances, resulting in large in Fig. 3.
volumes of data that cannot be directly processed as simple Fully analyze the truck’s driving characteristics. An excestime series. Additionally, the overloaded characteristics are sive number of points in a pixel indicates that the truck is
implicitly involved in the driving data, which cannot be simply stationary, with limited observable feature information. Fewer
described by the shape of the trajectory. The features behave points, particularly when distinct from surrounding pixels,
differently at different spatial scales, which also complicates suggest dynamic behaviors such as deceleration, turning, lane
the learning process for conventional CNNs. changing, or potential overloads, making this feature the most
 Unlike the previous methods, an accurate, efficient, and informative for overload identification. Sparse trajectory points
highly robust multiaspect overloaded truck high-precision indicate high-speed travel, with trajectory shapes providing
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Overall structure of MAOTIN. The figure comprises four distinct parts. (a) Tasked with converting trajectory data into trajectory images to serve as the
MAOTIN’s input. The remaining three parts represent the main components of MAOTIN. (b) OFIM and (c) TSIM constitute two branches of the MAOTIN,
each executing overloaded identification from unique aspects. Lastly, (d) DFM extensively integrates the identification outcomes from both branches.

Fig. 3. Truck driving trajectory image generation process. A driving trajectory image is utilized to represent the initial driving trajectory data.

more significant features. The study summarizes this into two The first is in the stage of building the transformation model,
types of pixels: differential pixels, which show significant converting the trajectory information into
differences from neighboring regions and are enhanced to
highlight key features and stay pixels, representing areas gi, j = log(1 + α ∗ Ni, j ) (1)
with excessive points that should be suppressed in the image g∗i, j = 255 ∗ Norm(gi, j ) (2)
to prevent the network from overly concentrating on these
 where i and j denote the pixel coordinates, Ni, j is the number of
regions. Considering these, the method offers special processes
 trajectory points at that pixel, g∗i, j represents the gray value, and
from global and local perspectives.
 gi, j is the unnormalized value. The hyperparameter α adjusts
LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION 2533712

the sensitivity of the gray value to the number of trajectory
points. The model differs from the normal linear transformation [23], [24]. Its unique functional properties reduce
the impact of stay pixels. The special mapping relationship
introduced by the prior information is leveraged to enhance
texture features globally.
 The local feature enhancement is involved in the feature
reinforcement stage. The individual pixels are classified into
differential pixels and stay pixels based on their density and
predefined thresholds. The type of each pixel determines
whether it should be enhanced or suppressed. The enhancement and suppression factors are defined as Fig. 4. Feature selection mechanism.
 Een = k · exp τ · (Ni − Nneighbor )
 
 (3)
  
 1
 Ewe = 1 − (4)
 1 + exp (λ (Ni − T ))
where k is a constant factor, γ controls enhancement intensity,
λ governs the width of the transition, and T is the threshold
for identifying stay pixels. These factors are applied to the
respective pixels, resulting in an enhanced trajectory image
that emphasizes the truck’s driving characteristics.

C. Overloaded Feature Identification Module
 Typical overloaded features exhibit significant disparities
across various spatial scales within truck trajectory images. Fig. 5. Structure of the Swin block.
Its complexity also brings obstacles to the learning process of
the conventional CNN. In this regard, this study designed the
OFIM to quickly and thoroughly mine the typical overloaded where m and n represent the block’s position, c is the channel
features in truck driving trajectory images. index, and µ is the mean value of the block. If the variance falls
 Fig. 2(b) illustrates the architecture of the OFIM. The below a threshold τ, the block is deemed information-weak
input, an overloaded vehicle trajectory image, first undergoes and selected for filtering. The corresponding mask positions
feature extraction through a stem layer and N consecutive are marked accordingly. As shown in Fig. 4, the resulting mask
Swin blocks. This stage generates high-resolution feature is applied to the input feature map to generate a filtered feature
maps. These feature maps are then passed through M-cascaded map.
SwinFP stages, which progressively expand the receptive field, The stem layer of the OFIM consists of a basic 3 × 3
enabling the network to capture features at multiple spatial convolution module. The core feature extraction unit of the
scales. As a result, the network produces a comprehensive OFIM is the SwinFP stage, which employs an encoderfeature map highlighting the overloaded characteristics across decoder structure. The encoder Swin blocks extract multiscale
details of various scales. features, while the decoder transition block synthesizes them
 It is important to note that vehicle trajectory images differ into a single-scale, high-resolution output. High-level (lowfrom traditional images. The valuable information within these resolution) features from earlier stages guide the learning of
images occupies a smaller portion of the frame, and back- low-level features in subsequent stages, improving the model’s
ground texture information is weak, providing limited utility ability to capture both fine-grained and global features.
for overload identification. Thus, the model incorporates a The structure of the Swin block is shown in Fig. 5. It is
feature selection layer in the backbone network to enhance referred to as the Swin Transformer block when designing
efficiency and identification performance. [25]. Two skip connections are incorporated to fuse low-
 The feature selection layer divides the feature map into level and high-level features, enhancing the model’s ability
blocks and evaluates the importance of the information in to capture richer semantic information. The Swin block proeach block. Based on these evaluations, a mask is generated cesses image data via a self-attention mechanism applied
and applied to the original feature map, filtering out unim- within local windows, progressively capturing local and global
portant features. Considering computational resources, the information. Compared to standard convolutional blocks, this
model assesses information strength within each block using approach significantly enhances the network’s capacity to
variance. This feature selection process reduces redundant handle complex image features.
information and improves identification speed. The variance With the aid of the OFIM, the typical overloaded feature
is calculated as information of multiple spatial scales is efficiently extracted
 P P from the truck trajectory image. The information is then
 1 X X (i, j) 2 represented as a feature map, serving as the primary basis
 σ2c,m,n = 2 Xc,m,n − µc,m,n (5)
 P for high-precision overloaded identification.
 i=1 j=1
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 7. Structure of the DFM.

 TABLE I
 D ETAIL I NFORMATION OF THE DATABASE
Fig. 6. Detail of the mobile and SE attention modules.

D. Trajectory Similarity Identification Module
 The TSIM extracts the trajectory similarity feature maps
between the historically severely overloaded road sections and
the corresponding driving routes in the truck trajectory images.
Based on this consideration, this study designed the TSIM to
extract the similarity information efficiently. branches, each processing a different type of feature map to
 As shown in Fig. 2(c), the extracted routes are paired with ensure that the output feature maps have the same dimensions
historical routes, forming route pairs. Pairs with low similarity for concatenation. After fusion, the features are passed through
are initially filtered out, indicating that the truck did not pass a simple classifier to produce the final prediction. The module
through those areas. The remaining pairs are used to generate incorporates both spatial and channel attention mechanisms to
feature maps for similarity calculation. The core of the TSIM selectively enhance the most relevant features. Additionally,
is an FCSN. It consists of two identical branches with the the DFM module employs depthwise separable convolution in
same network structure and shared weights. These trajectory the classifier, significantly reducing computational complexity
pairs are processed through the two branches to extract feature while preserving the model’s representational power.
maps, and a comparator is employed to assess the similarity
between the two feature maps. IV. E XPERIMENT AND T ESTING
 For feature extraction, FCSN primarily utilizes the
 To validate the multiaspect overloaded truck high-precision
lightweight mobile modules [26]. Building upon this, the
 identification network, a large-scale truck overload dataset, and
model incorporates the squeeze-and-excitation (SE) attenan experimental platform were constructed. The experiments
tion modules [27] to capture channel-wise dependencies and
 were conducted on the dataset. In addition, actual application
enhance model performance. The details of its design are
 testing was performed to demonstrate the practicability of the
shown in Fig. 6. The cosine similarity is designed as the
 model.
comparator, providing the similarity information on the feature
maps. Given two input feature maps, F1 and F2 , the output
similarity feature map Fsim is calculated as A. Experimental Preparation

 F1i, j · F2i, j 1) Dataset Construction: The database utilized in our study
 Fsimi,j = . (6) comes from the Tianjin Public Transportation Big Data Plat-
 F1i, j F2i, j form, China. The data is collected by GPS devices installed
In this equation, (i, j) represents the spatial coordinate in Fsim . on the trucks, which regularly transmit information to the
The feature map generated by the TSIM and the feature map platform for storage. The data attributes include license plate
generated by the OFIM are then transferred to the DFM for number, driving time, longitude, latitude, and speed. The
final overload behavior recognition. detailed information of the database is in Table I. All the
 behaviors of trucks in the database have undergone confirmation of their overload status through the manual checkpoint
E. Decision Fusion Module weighing method. The time range is 24 h before the inspection.
 The DFM module is designed to effectively combine feature A portion of the original file of truck driving trajectory
maps extracted from the OFIM and TSIM. The structure of data is depicted in the blue section (Fig. 8). Its data was
the DFM is shown in Fig. 7. The DFM module consists of two optimized and preprocessed based on the computing cluster.
LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION 2533712

Fig. 8. Original and optimized data file.

Fig. 9. Transformed truck driving trajectory image.

The yellow portion in Fig. 8 illustrates the optimized data
file. As shown in Fig. 9, the processed data files are converted
into truck trajectory images according to the method proposed
in Section III-B. For ease of differentiation, Fig. 9 displays
the figure after color inversion, where the darker areas in
the figure correspond to higher gray values. The trajectory
of the truck is clearly visible in the trajectory image, with
important trajectory segments enhanced. The pixel position of
the trajectory in the image represents the actual location of
the trucks, with each pixel corresponding to an approximate Fig. 10. Abnormal driving trajectory of some overloaded trucks. (a) Making
 detours. (b) Changing roads more often and driving on paths.
spatial range of 200 m. This approach not only preserves
key trajectory information but also allows for dimensionality
reduction of the trajectory data. The images are classified into
overloaded and normal categories. It includes 200000 truck position of pixel points in the truck driving trajectory image.
trajectory images, with a ratio of overloaded trucks to normal The color of each pixel denotes the driving area heat (trajectory
trucks is 1:1. 90% of the images in the dataset form the trainset point density) at that location, with the color bar ranging from
for model training, while the rest form the test set to verify dark to light, indicating increasing heat from low to high.
the model’s validity. Some high-frequency truck driving routes can be clearly seen
 It can be concluded from the trajectory data that, com- in Fig. 11, which shows that the overloaded trucks prefer
pared with normal trucks, overloaded trucks exhibit driving specific routes, leading to high similarity trajectories across
characteristics such as detours, frequent lane changes, driving different trucks. Preliminary trajectory data analysis proves
on paths to avoid inspection at overloading control points, the feasibility of overloaded identification by mining typical
and engaging in illegal transportation. Fig. 10 displays the overloaded characteristics and trajectory similarity.
abnormal driving trajectory of some overloaded trucks. Fig. 11 2) Experimental Platform Establishment: All experiments
visualizes the driving trajectory heatmap of some overloaded are conducted in a workstation with an Intel Core i7-11700
trucks. The horizontal and vertical coordinates represent the CPU @2.50 GHz, 32 GB memory, and two NVIDIA RTX
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II
 PART OF THE I NFORMATION IN THE H ISTORICALLY S EVERELY OVER -
 LOADED DATABASE

Fig. 11. Driving trajectory heatmap of some overloaded trucks.

4090 GPUs. The operating system is Ubuntu 20.04. Deep
learning models are implemented in the Python programming
language.
 In addition, a big data computing cluster was built to
preprocess massive truck trajectory data, consisting of three
host computers with AMD Ryzen 9 5950X 16-Core Processor
CPU, 128 GB RAM, and CentOS 7 64-bit system.
 3) Historically Severely Overloaded Database Establishment: The work summarized the driving routes of severely
overloaded trucks and combined them with the investigation and enforcement of traffic management departments to
establish a historically severely overloaded truck database.
It contains 5807 severely overloaded trucks (exceeding the
load capacity by more than 100%) and forms 20 severe
cargo loading areas and 71 seriously overloaded road sections.
Part of the information in the historically severely overloaded
database is shown in Table II. The database provides data
support for the TSIM in Section III-D.

B. Model Testing Experiment
 1) Model Training Details: The model was trained using Fig. 12. Confusion matrix of test results.
the constructed training set. First, the upper and lower
branches were trained separately. Then, the weights of both
branches were fixed, and the full model was assembled. process applied a ninefold cross-validation method. Model
Finally, the complete model underwent training. The model is performance is evaluated using an independent validation set,
trained using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer and the best-performing model is saved based on validation
with an initial learning rate of 0.0001, a momentum of 0.9, accuracy.
and a weight decay of 0.0004. The learning rate is dynamically 2) Model Testing Results: The model was tested on the test
adjusted following a warm-up and exponential decay strategy: set. The results show that the accuracy of MAOTIN is 96.4%,
it linearly increases from 1 × 10−5 to 4 × 10−4 over the the recall is 96.6%, and the precision is 95.9%. The confusion
first ten epochs, remains constant for the next five epochs, matrix is shown in Fig. 12.
and subsequently decays exponentially with a factor of 0.8 The comparison experiments were conducted with mainfor the remaining training period. The model is trained for stream image classification networks, and the results are
50 epochs with a batch size of 32. Input images are resized to presented in Table III. All compared networks were trained
500 × 500 pixels. Data preprocessing includes normalization with the same training dataset as our proposed network,
with a mean of 0.485 and a standard deviation of 0.229. employing the trajectory image generation method introduced
The loss function is the cross-entropy criterion. The training in Section III-B. This study’s model performance evaluation
LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION 2533712

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT T EST R ESULTS

 TABLE V
 K EY C OMPONENT C OMPARISON AND A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 13. t-SNE visualization of feature maps.

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS performance, but the accuracy is much lower than MAOTIN.
 In comparison, the accuracy of MAOTIN increased by
 11.9%, 10.5%, 10.8%, and 11.8%, respectively. Compared
 with the latest CNNs such as Regnet, Efficientnet, Repvgg,
 and Convnext, MAOTIN has a clear advantage in terms
 of accuracy and outperforms these models in identification speed and computational power consumption. Compared
 to the most advanced Transformer-based models—Swin-T,
 FlashInternImage-T, FasterViT, and ViTamin—MAOTIN still
 maintains a significant advantage in terms of accuracy. Among
 the reference models, FlashInternImage-T achieved the highest
 accuracy results. However, MAOTIN exhibits superiority over
 FlashInternImage-T, with an accuracy improvement of +6.7%,
 an increase in FPS by +35, and a reduction in Parms by −7.88.
 The results show that MAOTIN has the highest accuracy
 (96.4%) and the fourth fastest speed (316 FPS), which poses an
 excellent compromise between identification accuracy, speed,
 and computational consumption.
 3) Ablation Experiment: To better analyze the effectiveness
 of each module in MAOTIN, three diverse models were
 designed and tested, and the test data are displayed in Table IV.
 The OFOTIN, TSOTIN, and MBOTIN are the models that
 replace the corresponding modules of MAOTIN. Compared to
indices are accuracy, FPS, GFLOPs, GMacs, and Parms. The MAOTIN, the identification accuracy of the model OFOTIN
optimal results are marked in bold red. (removal of the TSIM), the model TSOTIN (removal of
 In the experiments, MAOTIN achieves the highest accu- the OFIM) decreased by 5.7% and 17.8%, and the model
racy compared to all other mainstream methods. FPS and MBOTIN (replace the DFM with simplest full connected
FLOP results of MAOTIN show that it can perform iden- layer) decreased by 1.3%, respectively. This result indicates
tification with high efficiency and accuracy when dealing that the upper and lower branches of MAOTIN can mine
with massive truck driving data. The traditional machine overloaded features from different aspects and play a role in
learning method SVM performs the worst in the experi- accomplishing the overloaded identification task. In contrast,
ments, demonstrating that it is unsuitable for overloaded the DFM module is used to fuse and classify different feature
truck identification. Earlier CNN models VGG16, ResNet- maps rather than to extract features. Moreover, the OFIM plays
101, Densenet-121, and Inception-v3 have improved compared the leading role, and the TSIM plays the supporting role. There
to SVM but are far from the requirements. MAOTIN over- are severe limitations when relying on the trajectory similarity
matches these models in identification accuracy, speed, and (TSIM) independently.
computational power consumption. The lightweight networks, In addition, the tests of the trajectory representation method
Squeezenet, Shufflenet, Mobilenet, and Ghostnet, have better and feature selection layer also have been done. The results
identification speed and computational power consumption are shown in Table V. It shows that the proposed trajectory
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE VI V. C ONCLUSION
 P RACTICAL A PPLICATION T EST R ESULTS
 This study introduces MAOTIN, a deep-learning network designed for overloaded identification using trajectory
 data. The proposed multiaspect identification framework, customized trajectory representation method, and three efficient
 modules significantly ensure the accuracy and efficiency of
 MAOTIN. The innovative trajectory representation method
 converts driving trajectory data into images, enabling efficient
 feature aggregation while preserving critical overload patterns.
 The OFIM and TSIM identify overloads from different aspects.
representation method is more applicable to the identification The OFIM leverages a unique SwinFP stage and feature selectask of truck overload, and the accuracy is improved by 4.7% tion layer to extract multiscale, typical overloaded features,
and 4.1%. After adding the feature selection layer, the model’s while the TSIM utilizes a fully convolutional Siamese network
accuracy is enhanced by 1.9%, indicating that it helps the to extract trajectory similarity features with the historically
model efficiently obtain the overload feature information from overloaded routes. Finally, the DFM integrates the feature
the feature map. maps from both the OFIM and TSIM, producing highly accu-
 4) Feature Visualization Experiment: To evaluate the fea- rate overload identification results. Experimental evaluations
ture extraction capabilities of our model, we employed on a constructed overloaded truck dataset show that MAOTIN
t-SNE [42] to visualize the high-dimensional feature space achieves 96.4% accuracy, surpassing conventional image clasextracted by MAOTIN. The features were extracted before sification networks. Moreover, real-world deployment testing
entering the classifier and reduced to two dimensions using demonstrated a precision of 97.3%, illustrating its practical
t-SNE. The perplexity was set to 30, the learning rate to 200, value for addressing truck overloading issues. Future work will
and the number of iterations to 1000. focus on enhancing the model’s performance by incorporating
 As displayed in Fig. 13, the resulting visualization shows additional data sources, such as urban road data, points of
a clear separation between classes, with minimal overlap, interest (POI) data, and sensor data, to further refine overload
indicating that the model has learned highly discriminative identification. These advancements will enable MAOTIN to
features. The distinct clustering of red and green points further play a critical role in intelligent transportation systems.
demonstrates the model’s ability to effectively differentiate
between categories. These results suggest that the network R EFERENCES
captures robust feature representations even before the final
classification layer, reinforcing the effectiveness of the learned [1] F. A. M. Saad, S. Z. Ishak, S. A. H. Sulaiman, and A. Awang, “The
 implication of overloaded truck to developing countries—A review,” in
feature space for accurate identification. Proc. IEEE 12th Control Syst. Graduate Res. Colloq. (ICSGRC), Aug.
 2021, pp. 165–170.
 [2] M. A. Recarte, “Mental load and loss of control over speed in real
 driving. Towards a theory of attentional speed control,” Transp. Res. F,
C. Practical Application Testing Traffic Psychol. Behav., vol. 5, pp. 111–122, Jan. 2002.
 MAOTIN was integrated with the traffic management big [3] X. Deng et al., “A review of 6G autonomous intelligent transportation
 systems: Mechanisms, applications and challenges,” J. Syst. Archit.,
data platform and deployed in traffic enforcement operations vol. 142, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 102929.
in Jizhou District, Tianjin, China. The model identified the [4] S.-Z. Chen, G. Wu, and D.-C. Feng, “Development of a bridge weighoverloaded trucks in a wide range to complete the initial in-motion method considering the presence of multiple vehicles,” Eng.
 Struct., vol. 191, pp. 724–739, Jul. 2019.
screening work and provided precise enforcement areas for [5] M. Adresi, M. Abedi, W. Dong, and M. Yekrangnia, “A review of diftraffic policies to stop overloaded transportation violations ferent types of weigh-in-motion sensors: State-of-the-art,” Measurement,
effectively. The results of the actual application testing from vol. 225, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 114042.
 [6] J. W. Kim, Y. B. Jho, and Y. W. Jung, “An effectiveness analysis
January to March 2024 are shown in Table VI. It is important of commercial vehicle’s loading pattern and prevention of overloading
to note that our model undergoes daily updates based on with on-board truck weight sensors,” J. Korea Inst. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
the most recent overloading conditions and data from traffic vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 153–172, Dec. 2018.
 [7] S. Stawska, J. Chmielewski, M. Bacharz, K. Bacharz, and A. Nowak,
management, ensuring its real-time accuracy and reliability. “Comparative accuracy analysis of truck weight measurement
 This quarter, MAOTIN identified 110457 trucks and helped techniques,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 2, p. 745, Jan. 2021.
traffic police apprehend 7591 trucks. The actual identification [8] G. S. R. Satyanarayana, S. Majhi, and S. K. Das, “A vehicle detection
 technique using binary images for heterogeneous and lane-less traffic,”
precision is 97.3%, proving it can be adequate for overloaded IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–14, 2021.
identification in the real world. Compared with the traditional [9] H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Cai, L. Chen, and Y. Li, “V2I-CARLA: A
manual checkpoint weighing method, MAOTIN identifies 2.7 novel dataset and a method for vehicle reidentification-based V2I
 environment,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–9, 2022.
times the number of trucks. More importantly, it helps the
 [10] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural
police catch a large number of overloaded trucks that inten- networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
tionally avoid inspection. Our method boasts rapid speed, high Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023.
accuracy, and extensive coverage. On the other hand, as our [11] T. Tran, D. He, J. Kim, and M. Hickman, “MSGNN: A multi-structured
 graph neural network model for real-time incident prediction in large
method does not require the installation of additional sensors, traffic networks,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 156, Nov. 2023,
it holds significant application value. Art. no. 104354.
LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION 2533712

[12] X. Chen, H. Zhang, F. Zhao, Y. Cai, H. Wang, and Q. Ye, “Vehicle [37] X. Ding, X. Zhang, N. Ma, J. Han, G. Ding, and J. Sun, “RepVGG:
 trajectory prediction based on intention-aware non-autoregressive trans- Making VGG-style ConvNets great again,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 former with multi-attention learning for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13733–13742.
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12, 2022. [38] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie, “A
[13] Z. Cui, R. Ke, Z. Pu, and Y. Wang, “Stacked bidirectional and unidi- ConvNet for the 2020s,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 rectional LSTM recurrent neural network for forecasting network-wide Recognit., May 2022, pp. 11976–11986.
 traffic state with missing values,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., [39] Y. Xiong et al., “Efficient deformable ConvNets: Rethinking dynamic
 vol. 118, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 102674. and sparse operator for vision applications,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[14] S. Feng et al., “A macro–micro spatio-temporal neural network for traffic Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 5652–5661.
 prediction,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 156, Sep. 2023, Art. [40] A. Hatamizadeh et al., “FasterViT: Fast vision transformers with hierno. 104331. archical attention,” 2023, arXiv:2306.06189.
[15] S. Li, J. Wang, K. Li, X. Lian, H. Ukawa, and D. Bai, “Modeling and [41] J. Chen, Q. Yu, X. Shen, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen, “ViTamin:
 verification of heavy-duty truck drivers’ car-following characteristics,” Designing scalable vision models in the vision-language era,” in Proc.
 Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 81–87, Feb. 2010. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
[16] X.-X. Qiao and Y.-D. Zhao, “Vehicle overload detection system based on pp. 12954–12966.
 magnetoresistance sensor,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron. Technol. (ICET), [42] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
 May 2018, pp. 102–105. J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008.
[17] M. Lydon, S. E. Taylor, D. Robinson, A. Mufti, and E. J. O. Brien,
 “Recent developments in bridge weigh in motion (B-WIM),” J. Civil
 Structural Health Monitor., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 69–81, Feb. 2016. Jian Liang received the B.S. degree from Harbin
[18] A. Gaira, A. Parveen, D. Dabral, J. Goyal, and M. R. Rani, “Vehicle Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2021, the
 overloading: A review,” Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol., vol. 2020, M.S. degree from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
 pp. 2321–9653, May 2020. in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[19] B. Wang, H. Wang, L. Wu, L. Cai, D. Pi, and E. Wang, “Truck mass degree with the Department of Instrumentation Sciestimation method based on the on-board sensor,” Proc. Inst. Mech. ence and Technology.
 Eng., D, J. Automobile Eng., vol. 234, nos. 10–11, pp. 2429–2443, Sep. His main research interests include deep learning
 2020. and 3-D measurement.
[20] Y. Ma, X. Guan, J. Cao, and H. Wu, “A multi-stage fusion network
 for transportation mode identification with varied scale representation
 of GPS trajectories,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 150, May
 2023, Art. no. 104088.
[21] W. Yu and Q. Huang, “A deep encoder–decoder network for anomaly Jiehu Kang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
 detection in driving trajectory behavior under spatio-temporal context,” degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
 Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 115, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103115. 2010, 2013, and 2021, respectively.
[22] J. Ji et al., “Spatio-temporal self-supervised learning for traffic He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the
 flow prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, 2023, Department of Instrumentation Science and Technolpp. 4356–4364. ogy, Tianjin University. His main research interests
[23] R. Zhang, P. Xie, C. Wang, G. Liu, and S. Wan, “Classifying transporta- include computer vision and vision measurement
 tion mode and speed from trajectory data via deep multi-scale learning,” technology.
 Comput. Netw., vol. 162, Oct. 2019, Art. no. 106861.
[24] Y. Endo, H. Toda, K. Nishida, and J. Ikedo, “Classifying spatial
 trajectories using representation learning,” Int. J. Data Sci. Anal., vol. 2,
 nos. 3–4, pp. 107–117, Dec. 2016. Xuesen Wang received the B.S. and master’s
[25] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), 2010 and 2013, respectively.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022. He is currently a Senior Engineer with Tian-
[26] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. jin Municipal Engineering Design and Research
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324. Institute Company Ltd., Tianjin. His main research
[27] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in interests include intelligent transportation.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
 pp. 7132–7141.
[28] B. E. Boser, I. M. Guyon, and V. N. Vapnik, “A training algorithm
 for optimal margin classifiers,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Workshop Comput.
 Learn. Theory, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1992, pp. 144–152.
[29] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for Zongyang Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556. in mechanical engineering from China University
[30] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for of Mining and Technology, Beijing, China, in 2020
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. and 2023, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. Ph.D. degree with the Department of Instrumentation
[31] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
 connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. China.
 Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 4700–4708. His current research interests include computer
[32] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking vision and 3-D point cloud registration.
 the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[33] B. Koonce and B. E. Koonce, Convolutional Neural Networks With Swift
 for Tensorflow: Image Recognition and Dataset Categorization. Cham,
 Switzerland: Springer, 2021. Chi Zhao received the bachelor’s degree in trans-
[34] K. Han, Y. Wang, Q. Tian, J. Guo, C. Xu, and C. Xu, “Ghostnet: More portation from Chang’an University, Xi’an, China,
 features from cheap operations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 1580–1589. with the School of Transportation, Tongji University,
[35] I. Radosavovic, R. P. Kosaraju, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, Shanghai, China.
 “Designing network design spaces,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. His main research interests include traffic safety
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10428–10436. and human factors engineering.
[36] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
 pp. 6105–6114.
2533712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Siyang Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in Luyuan Feng received the B.S. degree in meacivil engineering from the University of Missouri- surement and control technology and instruments
 Columbia, Columbia, MO, USA, in 2020, with a from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2020,
 statistics minor. where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
 She works as an Assistant Professor with the instrumentation science and technology.
 College of Transportation, Tongji University, Shang- His research interests include point cloud complehai, China. She has been dedicated to multimodal tion and 3-D optical measurement.
 transportation simulator development and application, human factors, and road traffic safety.

 Zefeng Sun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Bin Wu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
 instrumentation science and technology from Tianjin Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 1997 and 2002,
 University, Tianjin, China, in 2018 and 2024, respec- respectively.
 tively. He is currently a Professor with the Department
 He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the of Instrumentation Science and Technology, Tian-
 Department of Instrumentation Science and Tech- jin University. His main research interests include
 nology, Tianjin University. His research interests computer vision, object detection, and vision meainclude deep learning and vision measurement tech- surement technology.
 nology.