IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 1475

 TCG-IDS: Robust Network Intrusion Detection via
 Temporal Contrastive Graph Learning
 Cong Wu , Jianfei Sun , Jing Chen , Mamoun Alazab , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Yang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yang Xiang , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—In the era of zero trust security models and next- of 100 samples. Results highlight the effectiveness and efficiency
generation networks (NGN), the primary challenge is that of TCG-IDS in accurately detecting various types of network
network nodes may be untrusted, even if they have been ver- intrusions. This work significantly advances the field of network
ified, necessitating continuous validation and scrutiny. Effective intrusion detection via self-supervised temporal graph learning,
intrusion detection systems (IDS) are crucial for continuously offering a promising solution for future network security systems.
monitoring network traffic and identifying potential threats.
However, traditional IDS approaches often struggle to keep pace Index Terms—Cyber security, temporal graph neural network,
with evolving threats, requiring extensive supervised training intrusion detection system, network security.
on labeled datasets. This limitation leads to high false positive I. I NTRODUCTION
rates, low detection accuracy, and a failure to provide realtime detection, thereby undermining the security of NGNs. This
paper proposed the first self-supervised learning-based IDS,
designed on temporal contrastive graph neural network (GNN),
 T HE advent of zero trust security models and NGNs has
 underscored the need for advanced security measures in
 modern network environments [1], [2]. Conventional security
namely TCG-IDS. It innovatively integrates three contrastive
learning strategies: temporal contrasting to capture temporal
 architectures, which assume implicitly trusted devices once
dependencies, asymmetric contrasting to account for the diverse authenticated, are increasingly inadequate and pose significant
interactions within network data, and masked contrasting to security risks [1]. IDSs [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] are essential
enhance the learning of node representations by masking parts of for identifying and mitigating potential threats by monithe data during training. Performance evaluation was conducted toring network traffic for signs of malicious activities [8].
on two publicly available network traffic datasets, NF-CSE-
CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-V2. TCG-IDS achieved
 However, traditional IDS approaches, such as signature-based
a balanced accuracy of 99.48% and 91.48% on two datasets and anomaly-based detection, often struggle to keep pace
respectively, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art graph with the evolving threat landscape, resulting in high false
learning models. In multi-class detection, TCG-IDS attained a positive rates and limited effectiveness against novel attacks
mean false positive rate of 4.15% and 3.34% on the two datasets [9]. This challenge is particularly acute for NGNs, which
respectively. Besides, it exhibits high efficiency with its running
time of 0.37s and 0.51s on the two datasets to predict per batch
 demand more advanced security measures. Zero trust security
 models, emphasizing continuous, context-aware, and dynamic
 authentication, offer a promising solution by requiring ongo-
 Received 5 June 2024; revised 7 December 2024 and 6 January 2025;
accepted 10 January 2025. Date of publication 20 January 2025; date
 ing trust evaluation and leveraging AI and deep learning to
of current version 31 January 2025. This research was supported in part enhance intrusion detection and prevention [1]. Addressing
by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and the Cyber Security these aspects is crucial for securing NGNs, highlighting the
Agency under its National Cybersecurity R&D Programme (NCRP25-P04-
TAICeN); in part by the DSO National Laboratories under the AI Singapore
 importance of research on advanced IDS in this field [10].
Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-GC-2023-008); and in part by the
National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under the A. Motivations
Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) Recently, researchers have explored various learning-based
programme. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and
approving it for publication was Dr. Stjepan Picek. (Corresponding author: approaches, including feature-based, deep learning-based, and
Jianfei Sun.) GNN-based methods. Feature-based methods rely on extract-
 Cong Wu and Jing Chen are with the School of Cyber Science ing representative traffic features and using machine learning
and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail:
cnacwu@whu.edu.cn; chenjing@whu.edu.cn). classifiers, showing promise in detecting known attacks but
 Jianfei Sun is with the School of Computing and Information Sys- struggling with unseen patterns [11], [12]. Deep learningtems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 (e-mail: based methods, such as CNNs and RNNs, excel in learning
jfsun@smu.edu.sg).
 Mamoun Alazab is with the College of Engineering, IT, and Envi- complex patterns from high-dimensional data but require
ronment, Charles Darwin University, Darwin NT 0810, Australia (e-mail: extensive labeled data for supervised training [13]. GNNalazab.m@ieee.org). based methods, which naturally model the graph structure
 Yang Liu is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: of network traffic, have emerged as a promising approach,
yangliu@ntu.edu.sg). with static GNNs like GCNs and GATs learning node rep-
 Yang Xiang is with the Department of Digital Research, Swin- resentations from static snapshots [14], [15], [16], [17].
burne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia (e-mail:
yxiang@swin.edu.au). However, these fail to capture temporal dynamics. To over-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3530702 come this, dynamic GNNs incorporate temporal information,
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1476 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

either through discrete-time models learning from sequences D. Technical Novelty
of static snapshots or continuous-time models capturing the TCG-IDS addresses key limitations of existing IDS
ongoing evolution of node representations [18], [19]. Dynamic approaches with three innovative contrastive learning strate-
GNNs, while effective at capturing temporal dependencies, gies. (i) Temporal contrasting captures the temporal evolution
often rely on supervised learning, limiting their adaptability of network behavior, overcoming the static data analyto evolving threats and novel attacks. This dependence on sis issues in traditional IDS. (ii) Asymmetric contrasting
extensive labeled data and predefined signatures restricts their enhances anomaly detection by focusing on node relationships
ability to minimize false positives in real-world scenarios. and predicting neighboring embeddings, effectively identi-
 Despite advancements in machine learning-based IDS, exist- fying subtle malicious interactions. (iii) Masked contrasting
ing approaches face significant challenges [11], [12], [13], improves robustness and generalization by enabling learning
[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. Most focus on static from incomplete data, tackling the challenge of limited labeled
network data, overlooking temporal dynamics and evolu- datasets and noisy inputs. Together, these strategies reduce
tionary patterns critical to understanding network behavior. false positives and leverage self-supervised learning to ensure
Additionally, their reliance on supervised learning limits appli- effective detection with minimal labeled data, setting TCG-IDS
cability in real-world scenarios where labeled data is scarce apart from previous GNN-based IDS solutions.
or expensive. These methods also exhibit low generalizabil- The main contributions are summarized as follows:
ity, often requiring extensive training data to achieve high
 • TCG-IDS is the first IDS to integrate temporal graph
detection accuracy. Addressing these limitations necessitates
 learning with self-supervised contrastive learning, leverself-supervised learning models for NGNs, leveraging GNNs
 aging temporal dynamics and spatial dependencies to
to capture temporal patterns and enhance detection accuracy
 enhance detection robustness.
in dynamic and evolving network environments.
 • TCG-IDS employs three novel contrastive learning strategies, temporal, asymmetric, and masked contrasting, to
B. TCG-IDS enhance robustness. These enable the model to capture
 To bridge the research gap, TCG-IDS is proposed as the temporal network dynamics, node relationships, and learn
first self-supervised temporal contrastive GNN-based system from incomplete data, ensuring effective detection with
for intrusion detection that leverages temporal dynamics and limited labeled data.
spatial dependencies in network traffic data to learn robust rep- • TCG-IDS models traffic as a continuous dynamic graph
resentations of network entities and their interactions. These with temporal encoding, enabling real-time, fine-grained
representations are robust because they effectively capture the detection. This captures evolving network behaviors,
complex, evolving patterns of normal and malicious behav- ensuring accurate and timely intrusion detection.
iors in the network, enabling the model to accurately detect • Comprehensive experiments on TCG-IDS are performed
anomalies even in the presence of noisy or incomplete data. on two widely-used datasets to evaluate its performance.
It integrates three key contrastive learning strategies: temporal Results demonstrate that TCG-IDS significantly outpercontrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked contrasting. forms state-of-the-art graph learning models and IDSs,
Temporal contrasting ensures that the model captures the achieving a balanced accuracy of 99.48% and 91.48%
temporal evolution of network behavior, while asymmet- for binary detection on the two datasets, respectively.
ric contrasting focuses on the relationships between nodes,
enhancing the model’s ability to detect anomalies in node II. OVERVIEW
interactions. Masked contrasting helps the model learn from A. Threat Model
incomplete data, improving its robustness and generalization
capabilities. By incorporating these strategies, TCG-IDS can This paper focuses on an enterprise network environeffectively detect novel attacks with minimal false positives, ment where attackers, either external (e.g., malicious hackeven in scenarios with limited labeled data. ers) or internal (e.g., disgruntled employees), attempt to
 compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of
 network resources. These attackers exploit vulnerabilities in
C. TCG-IDS ’s Ability for Constructing Zero-Trust Model the network infrastructure, such as misconfigured firewalls,
 Zero trust security models require continuous validation of unpatched systems, or weak authentication mechanisms, to
all network entities, emphasizing dynamic, real-time moni- gain unauthorized access, as illustrated in Figure 1. Once
toring to detect conflicts or malicious activities. TCG-IDS inside, they may perform malicious activities like scanning
addresses this by employing self-supervised learning on unla- for vulnerable hosts, escalating privileges, exfiltrating sensitive
beled datasets, leveraging temporal and spatial dependencies data, or launching denial-of-service attacks. To counter these
through a GNN framework. Its use of temporal, asymmet- threats, the paper assumes the deployment of a network intruric, and masked contrasting strategies ensures robust node sion detection system (IDS) that monitors network traffic for
behavior representation, enabling comprehensive monitoring signs of malicious activity. IDS, positioned at strategic network
and effective detection of novel attacks with minimal false points, utilizes TCG-IDS, a framework that employs temporal
positives. This capability strengthens zero trust environments, contrastive learning and graph neural networks to learn robust
offering a scalable and reliable solution for next-generation representations of network entities and interactions over time.
network security. These learned representations are then used by the detector
WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING 1477

 transferred bytes, packets, duration, and timestamps. Advanced
 features, e.g., TCP flags, Type of Service (ToS), Autonomous
 System (AS) numbers, and application layer information, are
 also included when available. Preprocessing ensures data quality through cleaning, normalization, encoding, and sampling,
 addressing incomplete or duplicate records and scaling feature
 values. The resulting dataset, with rows representing network
 flows and columns as features, is prepared for constructing the
 temporal dynamic graphs used by TCG-IDS.

 B. Graph Builder
 The framework constructs a sequence of temporal attributed
 graphs from the preprocessed network flow data, capturing
 Fig. 1. Threat model.
 both spatial and temporal dependencies to facilitate robust
 and discriminative node representations for effective intrusion
 detection. The data is divided into T discrete time steps, each
 corresponding to a specific time window ∆t, selected based
 on the distribution of timestamps and empirical validation to
 balance temporal resolution and computational feasibility. At
 each time step t, unique IP addresses are identified to form
 the node set Vt of the graph snapshot Gt . Each node vti ∈ Vt
 Fig. 2. Overview of TCG-IDS.
 represents a device in the network at time t, with relevant
 features extracted into a feature vector xit ∈ Rd , where d
to identify potential intrusions, with the IDS continuously denotes the number of node features.
updated based on feedback from security analysts and evolving Edges Et between nodes in Vt are identified based on
threat intelligence. network flows, with an edge eti j ∈ Et existing if there is at
 least one flow between the corresponding IP addresses within
 the time window t. Relevant features for each edge eti j are
B. System Overview
 extracted into a feature vector yti j ∈ Rm , where m is the number
 As depicted in Figure 2, TCG-IDS consists of four main of edge features. Common edge features include total bytes
components: data collector, graph builder, temporal contrastive and packets transferred, duration, average bytes per packet,
GNN, and detector. Data collector is responsible for collect- average packets per second, ratio of incoming to outgoing
ing and preprocessing raw network traffic data from various bytes/packets, protocol distribution, and flag distribution. A
sources, such as packet captures or flow records, and extract- graph snapshot Gt = (Vt , Et ) is constructed for each time
ing relevant features for each network entity, such as IP step t, associating node features xit and edge features yti j with
addresses or port numbers. Graph builder then constructs a their respective nodes and edges. The sequence of T graph
sequence of attributed temporal dynamic graphs from the snapshots G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, representing the temporal
preprocessed data, where each graph snapshot represents the evolution of the network traffic, is outputted. Each graph
state of the network at a specific time step, with nodes snapshot Gt is represented as (Vt , Et , Xt , Yt ), where Xt ∈ R|Vt |×d
representing network entities and edges representing their is the matrix of node features and Yt ∈ R|Et |×m is the matrix
interactions. Temporal contrastive GNN is the core compo- of edge features. This sequence of temporal attributed graphs
nent of TCG-IDS, which learns robust representations of is then used for node representation learning and detection,
the network entities by capturing their spatial and temporal effectively capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies in
dependencies using a combination of graph neural networks, the network data. This sequence of temporal attributed graphs
temporal contrastive learning, asymmetric contrastive learning, is then used for node representation learning and detection,
and masked contrastive learning. Finally, detector utilizes the effectively capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies in
learned representations to identify malicious network behav- the network data.
ior, such as malicious activities or intrusions, by employing
supervised detection classifier.
 C. Temporal Contrastive GNN

 III. D ESIGN OF TCG-IDS This module learns robust node representations from
 temporal attributed graphs, capturing spatial and temporal
A. Data Collector dependencies for effective detection through GNN encoding,
 TCG-IDS captures and preprocesses network traffic data temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked
from various sources, e.g., routers, switches, and monitoring contrasting.
tools, to create a structured dataset for intrusion detection. 1) GNN Encoding: The GNN Encoder is responsible for
Using flow records like NetFlow, sFlow, or IPFIX, it extracts learning node embeddings for each temporal graph snapshot
key attributes, including IP addresses, port numbers, protocols, Gt . Given the dynamic nature of the network, TCG-IDS
1478 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 4. Illustration of asymmetric contrasting.

 Fig. 3. Illustration of temporal contrasting.

utilizes a Temporal Graph Network (TGN) encoder [21]
 Fig. 5. Illustration of masked contrasting.
to capture the temporal evolution of node features and
interactions effectively. It combines memory modules and
graph-based operators to process continuous-time dynamic takes the embedding of the node vti as input and predicts the
graphs. For a given graph snapshot Gt = (Vt , Et , Xt ), the embeddings of its neighboring nodes:
TGN encoder computes the node embeddings hti for each node
vti ∈ Vt as follows: ĥtj = fφ (hti ) ∈ RD , ∀vtj ∈ N (vti ) (3)

 hti = TGNθ (Gt , Xt )[i] ∈ RD (1) The asymmetric contrastive loss Lasym is formulated as:
 T
where TGNθ is the TGN encoder with learnable parameters 1 XX X
 Lasym = kĥtj − htj k22 (4)
θ, and D is the dimensionality of the node embeddings. The |V| t t t
 t=1 vi ∈Vt v j ∈N (vi )
TGN encoder leverages a combination of memory modules
and graph attention mechanisms to capture both the his- where k · k2 denotes the L2 norm.
torical context and the immediate neighborhood information 4) Masked Contrasting: To learn node representations that
of each node. The memory of each node is updated upon capture multi-facet features of the network traffic, it divides
every interaction, allowing the TGN encoder to maintain the node embeddings into multiple factors, masks each factor
long-term dependencies and provide up-to-date embeddings separately, and performs contrastive learning on the masked
even in the presence of infrequent interactions. This ensures embeddings. As illustrated in Figure 5, for each node vti at
that the embeddings reflect both the temporal and structural time step t, it divides its embedding hti into M factors:
characteristics of the network.
 hti = [cti1 , cti2 , . . . , ctiM ] (5)
 2) Temporal Contrasting: This step aims to learn temporally consistent node representations by contrasting the where ctim ∈ R D/M
 is the m-th factor of the embedding. It
embeddings of a node at different time steps. The goal is to generates M masked embeddings by replacing each factor with
maximize the similarity between the embeddings of a node a learnable mask token [MASK], formulated as Eq. 6:
at nearby time steps while minimizing the similarity between
the embeddings of a node at distant time steps. As illustrated h̃tim = [cti1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctiM ], m = 1, . . . , M (6)
in Figure 3, for each node vi , it samples a positive pair For optimizing the model, the masked contrastive loss Lmask
 i ) and a negative pair (hi , hi ), where k is a small
(hti , ht+k t t+n
 is defined as:
time lag and n is a larger time lag, ensuring that the time T M
steps are within the valid range and the node vi has varied 1 XXX
 Lmask = max(0, ∆ + sim(h̃tim , h̃tjm )
significantly. The temporal contrastive loss Ltemp is defined |V| tt=1 vi ∈Vt m=1
as Eq. 2.
 − sim(h̃tim , hti )) (7)
 1 X T −max(k,n)
 where vtj is a randomly sampled node from the same time step
 X
 Ltemp = max(0, ∆ + sim(hti , ht+n
 i )
 |V| v ∈V t, and h̃tjm is its corresponding masked embedding.
 i t=1

 − sim(hti , ht+k 5) Training Objective: The overall training objective of the
 i )) (2)
 Temporal Contrastive GNN-based Learner is a combination
where ∆ is the margin, sim(·, ·) is a cosine similarity func- of the temporal contrastive loss, the asymmetric contrastive
tion, and |V| is the total number of nodes across all time loss, and the masked contrastive loss: L = Ltemp + λ1 Lasym +
steps. λ2 Lmask , where λ1 and λ2 are hyperparameters that balance
 3) Asymmetric Contrasting: It aims to learn node repre- the contribution of the different loss terms. The Temporal
sentations that capture the local neighborhood context and Contrastive GNN-based Learner is trained end-to-end using
the asymmetric relationships between nodes. It predicts the backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent optimization.
embeddings of neighboring nodes using an asymmetric pre- The learned node embeddings hti are then used as input to the
dictor function. As illustrated in Figure 4, for each node vti at next module for identifying anomalous network behavior. By
time step t, it samples a set of neighboring nodes N (vti ) based incorporating temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting,
on the graph structure. The asymmetric predictor function fφ and masked contrasting, the Temporal Contrastive GNN-based
WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING 1479

Algorithm 1 Training Process of TCG-IDS categories like Exploits, Fuzzers, Reconnaissance, and DoS,
 1: Input: Sequence of graph snapshots G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, learning rate η, epochs and 2,295,222 normal traffic samples. It offers detailed features
 E
 2: Output: Trained model parameters θ extracted from raw network packets, including payloads and
 3: for epoch = 1 to E do flow statistics, enabling robust evaluation of intrusion detection
 4: Initialize gradient accumulators dθ ← 0
 5: for t = 1 to T do models.
 6: Extract Gt = (Vt , Et , Xt , Yt ) To address the absence of explicit timestamps in
 7: for each node vti ∈ Vt do
 8: hti ← TGNθ (Gt , Xt )[i] the datasets, we generated timestamps using FLOW
 9: for each node vi do DURATION MILLISECONDS feature. The process began by
10: for t = 1 to T − max(k, n) do
11: Sample pairs (hti , ht+k i ) and (hti , ht+n i ) assigning the first record a timestamp of 0 milliseconds
12: Compute temporal contrastive loss Ltemp as a reference point. Records were then sorted based
13: for each node vti ∈ Vt do
14: for each neighboring node vtj ∈ N (vti ) do on their occurrence in the original data file to maintain
15: Predict neighbor embeddings ĥtj ← fφ (hti ) a logical temporal sequence. For each subsequent
16: Compute asymmetric contrastive loss Lasym
17: for each node vti ∈ Vt do
 record i, the timestamp T i was calculated as the
18: for m = 1 to M do cumulative sum of the FLOW DURATION MILLISECONDS
19: h̃tim ← [cti1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctiM ]
20: h̃tjm ← [ctj1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctjM ]
 values of all preceding records, i.e., T i = T i−1 +
21: Compute masked contrastive loss Lmask FLOW DURATION MILLISECONDSi−1 , with T 0 = 0.
22: L ← Ltemp + λ1 Lasym + λ2 Lmask
23: Update parameters θ ← θ − η · ∇θ L
 For records with missing or zero FLOW
 DURATION MILLISECONDS values, the same timestamp
 as the preceding record was assigned to preserve continuity.
 This approach ensures a realistic temporal context, enabling
Learner is able to learn node representations that capture the
 a chronological train-test split that respects the temporal
spatial, temporal, and multi-facet dependencies in the network
 dynamics of network traffic.
traffic data, enabling more effective detection in TCG-IDS.
Algorithm 1 details this training process. 2) Parameters: The encoder uses a 128-dimensional
 embedding, 256-dimensional memory, and two graph attention layers with 8 heads each, employing ReLU and a 0.5
D. Detector dropout rate. Temporal dynamics are captured through time
 The detection module identifies malicious network behavior embeddings. The projector network comprises two 128-unit
based on the node embeddings {hti } learned from the Temporal fully connected layers with ReLU and batch normalization.
Contrastive GNN-based Learner. Each embedding hti ∈ RD rep- Temporal contrasting uses a margin (∆) of 1.0 with time lags
resents node vi at time t. The module outputs a score sti ∈ [0, 1], k = 5 and n = 10, while asymmetric contrasting involves a
where a higher score indicates a higher likelihood of malicious predictor with two 128-unit layers. Masked contrasting divides
activity. This study employs a supervised approach using a node embeddings into four factors, masking one at a time.
LightGBM classifier, which was chosen for its efficiency in The training combines temporal, asymmetric, and masked
handling large-scale datasets, its ability to model complex, contrastive losses (λ1 , λ2 = 0.5) and uses the Adam optimizer
non-linear relationships in the data, and its faster training (lr = 0.001, batch size 64) with gradient clipping and early
time compared to other gradient boosting methods. While this stopping to ensure effective detection in dynamic networks.
framework supports unsupervised methods such as One-Class 3) Baseline: To benchmark TCG-IDS, we compare it
SVM and Isolation Forest for scenarios with limited labeled against state-of-the-art graph-based models, including Graphdata, this work emphasizes the supervised setup, with future SAGE [16], GAT [15], and TGN [21], which are widely
directions focusing on semi-supervised methods to effectively used for network intrusion detection and related tasks. These
utilize unlabeled data and minimal labeled samples. models were selected for their graph-focused methodologies,
 complementing TCG-IDS’s temporal contrastive approach.
 IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION GraphSAGE aggregates features from a node’s local neighborhood, GAT employs attention mechanisms to weigh neighbors’
A. Experimental Setting importance, and TGN captures temporal evolution in dynamic
 1) Dataset: This study evaluates TCG-IDS using two graphs. We utilized the same hyperparameters as TCG-IDS,
publicly available network traffic datasets: NF-CSE-CIC- tuned through grid search for optimal performance, to ensure
IDS2018-V2 [22] and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 [23]. NF-CSE- a fair comparison. We focuses on comparing GNN-based
CIC-IDS2018-V2, developed by the Canadian Institute for techniques, distinct from non-GNN-based approaches. All
Cybersecurity, contains 18,893,623 records collected over evaluations were conducted on an Intel Xeon Platinum 8336C
10 days in July 2018, including 10,423,751 attack samples CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, with the
covering DDoS, DoS, Botnet, Brute Force, Infiltration, and running time per batch recorded to assess computational
Web attacks, alongside 8,469,872 normal traffic samples. It efficiency for large-scale network data.
provides rich features, e.g., statistical metrics and connection The evaluation uses a chronological split, with 70% of
details for advanced intrusion detection model evaluation. earlier timestamps for training and 30% later for testing,
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, created by the Australian Centre for preserving temporal integrity. Models are trained on graph
Cyber Security, includes 2,391,775 records collected over two snapshots, with metrics including precision, recall, F1-score,
months in early 2015, with 96,553 attack samples spanning balanced accuracy (BAC), true negative rate (TNR), and true
1480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 6. FPR/FNR under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2. Fig. 9. Distribution of prediction score under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.

 Fig. 7. FPR/FNR under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.
 Fig. 10. Overall performance under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

 Fig. 8. Distribution of prediction score under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

 Fig. 11. Overall performance under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.
positive rate (TPR) for binary detection, and mean false
positive rate (mFPR) for multi-class detection.
 TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 92.70%, recall of 90.09%,
B. Overall Performance F1-score of 91.38%, BAC of 91.48%, TNR of 92.86%, and
 1) Binary Classification: The NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 TPR of 90.09%. Although the performance is slightly lower
dataset was used to evaluate the effectiveness of TCG-IDS than on the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, these results
in identifying diverse attack scenarios. This dataset includes still demonstrate robust detection capabilities across different
a wide variety of attack types, such as DDoS, DoS, Botnet, network environments and attack scenarios. The balanced
Brute Force, Infiltration, and Web attacks, making it a compre- accuracy and recall values indicate that the system can effechensive benchmark for intrusion detection systems. As shown tively identify malicious activities while maintaining a low
in Figure 10, TCG-IDS achieved outstanding performance on false negative rate, ensuring comprehensive network protecthis dataset, with a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%, F1- tion. Figure 7 presents FPR and FNR varied with different
score of 99.23%, BAC of 99.48%, TNR of 99.75%, and TPR thresholds under the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset in detail.
of 99.21%. These results highlight the system’s capability to The FNR is 16.71% when the FPR is 3%. Figure 9 also
accurately distinguish between normal and malicious traffic, presents the prediction score distribution of TCG-IDS under
ensuring high detection rates with minimal false positives. the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset in detail.
The high precision and recall values indicate that TCG-IDS 2) Multi-Class Classification: In addition to binary clasis highly effective in identifying attacks without raising many sification, the TCG-IDS system’s performance is evaluated
false alarms, which is crucial for real-world deployment. in multi-class detection scenarios using the NF-CSE-CIC-
Figure 6 presents FPR and FNR varied with different thresh- IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. The evaluaolds under the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset in detail. tion settings involved training the TCG-IDS system on a subset
The FNR is 0.068% when the FPR is 3%. Figure 8 also of each dataset and testing its performance on the remainpresents the prediction score distribution of TCG-IDS under ing data, ensuring the results reflect the system’s real-world
the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset in detail. capability to handle diverse and complex attack scenarios. The
 Similarly, the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, which includes metrics used for this evaluation include a FPR for each class.
a mix of normal traffic and various attack types such as For the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, the TCG-IDS
Exploits, Fuzzers, Reconnaissance, DoS, Analysis, Backdoor, system was evaluated on ten different classes, including
Shellcode, and Worms, was used to further validate the robust- Benign, DDOS attack-HOIC, DoS attacks-Hulk, DDoS
ness of TCG-IDS. As shown in Figure 11, on this dataset, attacks-LOIC-HTTP, Bot, Infiltration, SSH-Bruteforce,
WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING 1481

 TABLE I
 N UMBER OF M ULTI -C LASS S AMPLES AND I TS P ERCENTAGE OF
 NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2

 TABLE II
 N UMBER OF M ULTI -C LASS S AMPLES AND I TS P ERCENTAGE OF
 Fig. 12. Multi-class FPR under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2. NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 DATASET

 in Figure 13. The results indicate that TCG-IDS maintains
 a low FPR across most classes, with particularly low rates
 for critical classes such as Exploits (1.07%), Fuzzers (2.08%),
 and Backdoor (0.51%), demonstrating its ability to accurately
 classify different types of network attacks. Slightly higher
 FPR for classes such as DoS (12.61%) and Reconnaissance
 Fig. 13. Multi-class FPR under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.
 (8.20%) suggests areas for further refinement but still indicates
 strong overall performance. These higher FPRs could be due
 to the more varied and complex nature of these attacks, which
DoS attacks-GoldenEye, FTP-BruteForce, DoS attacks- might require additional feature engineering or model tuning
SlowHTTPTest, DoS attacks-Slowloris, Brute Force-Web, to improve detection accuracy.
DDOS attack-LOIC-UDP, Brute Force-XSS, and SQL Overall, the multi-class detection results for both datasets
Injection. The system achieved the following FPR for each demonstrate that TCG-IDS can effectively distinguish between
class, as presented in Figure 12. The results highlight various attack types, maintaining low FPRs across different
TCG-IDS’s proficiency in correctly identifying various
 classes. This capability is essential for providing comprehenattack types while maintaining a low FPR. The system sive network security, as it allows for the precise identification
shows particularly low FPRs for critical classes such as and mitigation of specific threats. The system’s ability to
Benign (0.45%), DoS attacks-Slowloris (0.02%), DDOS maintain high accuracy and low FPRs across multiple classes
attack-LOIC-UDP (0.02%), and SQL Injection (0.49%), underscores its robustness and effectiveness in real-world netwhich are crucial for reducing false alarms and ensuring work intrusion detection scenarios. These findings suggest that
accurate threat detection. However, higher FPRs for classes TCG-IDS is a reliable and effective tool for enhancing network
like SSH-Bruteforce (13.37%) and DoS attacks-GoldenEye security through precise and accurate multi-class detection.
(12.29%) indicate potential areas for improvement. These
higher FPRs might be due to the complexity and similarity of
these attacks to normal traffic, requiring more sophisticated C. Ablation Study
feature extraction or advanced modeling techniques to To understand the contributions of different components
enhance detection accuracy. in TCG-IDS, an ablation study is conducted by sys-
 For the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, TCG-IDS was eval- tematically removing each component and evaluating the
uated on fifteen different classes, including Benign, Exploits, performance of the modified system. The components evalu-
Fuzzers, Generic, Reconnaissance, DoS, Analysis, Backdoor, ated include temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and
Shellcode, and Worms. The FPR for each class is presented masked contrasting. The results of the ablation study on the
1482 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE III
 B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2 DATASET

 TABLE IV
 B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 DATASET

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 M ULTI -C LASS C LASSIFICATION M FPR S OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER M ULTI -C LASS C LASSIFICATION M FPR S OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER
 NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2 NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2

 TABLE VII
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset are presented in Table III. C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-
Removing temporal contrasting resulted in a significant drop V 2 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK

in performance, with precision, recall, and F1-score decreasing to 88.74%, 85.44%, and 87.06% respectively. Similarly,
excluding asymmetric contrasts led to a reduction in precision,
recall, and F1-score to 90.05%, 87.12%, and 88.56%. When
masked contrasting was removed, the system’s performance
also declined, though it remained relatively high with a precision of 95.28%, recall of 93.45%, and F1-score of 94.35%. TCG-IDS system achieved the lowest mFPR (3.34%), under-
The full TCG-IDS system, which includes all components, scoring the importance of all components in maintaining a low
achieved the highest performance with precision, recall, and rate of false positives across multiple classes. Similarly, on the
F1-score of 99.25%, 99.21%, and 99.23% respectively, indi- NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, removing temporal contrasting
cating the importance of each component in enhancing the led to the highest mFPR (25.36%), followed by removing
overall effectiveness of the system. asymmetric contrasting (13.18%), and masked contrasting
 The ablation study results on the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 (5.49%). The full system maintained a low mFPR (4.15%),
dataset, shown in Table IV, exhibit a similar trend. Excluding indicating robust performance in detecting various attack
temporal contrasting resulted in the precision, recall, and F1- types.
score dropping to 82.92%, 80.33%, and 81.60% respectively.
Removing asymmetric contrasts led to performance decreases
with precision, recall, and F1-score at 85.77%, 83.05%, and D. Comparing With Baseline Models
84.39%. Without masked contrasting, the system’s precision, To evaluate the effectiveness of TCG-IDS over existrecall, and F1-score were 88.16%, 85.90%, and 87.02%. ing models, a comparison with several baseline models is
The complete TCG-IDS system outperformed these modified performed, including GraphSage, GAT, and TGN, on the
versions, achieving precision, recall, and F1-score of 92.70%, NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets.
90.09%, and 91.38%, respectively. These results reinforce The comparison focused on binary detection tasks, using
the critical role each component plays in maintaining high metrics such as precision, recall, F1-score, BAC, TPR, and
detection performance across different datasets. TNR. As shown in Table VII, TCG-IDS significantly outper-
 For multi-class detection, the mean false positive rates formed the baseline models on the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2
(mFPRs) for each ablation variant on the NF-CSE-CIC- dataset. GraphSage achieved a precision of 72.91%, recall of
IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets are provided 68.51%, and F1-score of 70.64%, while GAT improved these
in Tables V and VI. On the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, metrics to 79.10%, 74.35%, and 76.65%, respectively. TGN
the mFPR increased significantly when temporal contrasting further enhanced performance with a precision of 84.14%,
was removed (19.29%), followed by asymmetric contrasting recall of 79.97%, and F1-score of 82.01%. However, TCG-IDS
(14.26%), and masked contrasting (8.58%). The complete achieved the highest precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,
WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING 1483

 TABLE VIII TABLE XIII
C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-
 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK V 2 IN M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

 TABLE IX TABLE XIV
C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 IN
 V 2 IN M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK
 M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

 TABLE XV
 TABLE X
 RUNNING T IME (S ECOND ) OF TCG-IDS P ER BATCH
C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 IN
 M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

 positive rates, outperforming existing methods across diverse
 network intrusion scenarios.
 TABLE XI
C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- E. Comparing With Existing Methods
 V 2 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK
 To evaluate the performance of TCG-IDS in comparison
 to existing methods, experiments are conducted using the
 NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets
 in both binary and multi-class detection tasks. The existing
 methods compared include DLGNN [18], EgraphSage [19],
 and Sarhan et al. [7], which are representative of recent
 TABLE XII advances in graph-based intrusion detection systems.
C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 In the binary detection task, TCG-IDS demonstrated supe-
 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK
 rior performance on both the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and
 NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2,
 TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,
 and F1-score of 99.23%, significantly outperforming DLGNN,
 EgraphSage, and Sarhan et al., as shown in Table XI. Similarly,
 on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, TCG-IDS attained a precision of
 92.70%, recall of 90.09%, and F1-score of 91.38%, surpassing
and F1-score of 99.23%, demonstrating superior detection
 these baseline models (Table XII). In the multi-class detection
capabilities and robustness.
 task, TCG-IDS achieved the lowest mean false positive rates
 In the binary detection task, TCG-IDS demonstrated supe-
 (mFPRs) of 3.34% on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 (Table XIII)
rior performance on both the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and
 and 4.15% on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 (Table XIV), compared
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2,
 to higher mFPRs for DLGNN, EgraphSage, and Sarhan et
TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,
 al. These results highlight TCG-IDS’s robustness, precision,
and F1-score of 99.23%, significantly outperforming DLGNN,
 and ability to balance high detection accuracy with low false
EgraphSage, and Sarhan et al., as shown in Table XI. Similarly,
 positive rates, outperforming existing methods across diverse
on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, TCG-IDS attained a precision of
 network intrusion scenarios.
92.70%, recall of 90.09%, and F1-score of 91.38%, surpassing
these baseline models (Table XII). In the multi-class detection
task, TCG-IDS achieved the lowest mean false positive rates F. Running Time Evaluation
(mFPRs) of 3.34% on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 (Table XIII) The running time of TCG-IDS per batch is measured to
and 4.15% on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 (Table XIV), compared assess its computational efficiency. The experiments were
to higher mFPRs for DLGNN, EgraphSage, and Sarhan et conducted on two publicly available network traffic datasets,
al. These results highlight TCG-IDS’s robustness, precision, NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-V2. Each
and ability to balance high detection accuracy with low false batch consisted of graph snapshots processed by the TCG-IDS
1484 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XVI challenges compared to the more straightforward DoS and
 T IME C OMPLEXITY OF TCG-IDS DDoS attacks in NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2. Additionally, NF-
 UNSW-NB15-v2 features packet-level details that increase the
 complexity of the detection task, requiring more sophisticated
 preprocessing and fine-tuning of the model. Finally, differences
 in the distribution of attacks and traffic patterns between
 the two datasets influence the model’s ability to generalize
 effectively, further contributing to the performance gap.
 The relatively high FPRs for classes such as DoS (12.61%)
 and Reconnaissance (8.20%) highlight areas for improvement
system. Results of the running time evaluation are pre- in the model’s detection capability. While the framework
sented in Table XV. For NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, it shows strong overall performance, these high FPRs are sigachieved a running time of 0.3754 seconds per batch. For the nificant and will be addressed in future work. Additionally,
NF-UNSW-NB15-V2 dataset, the running time was slightly although the datasets used in this study are based on older
higher, at 0.5112 seconds per batch. These results demonstrate data, they remain representative of many real-world scenarios,
that it is capable of processing network traffic data efficiently, covering a wide variety of attack types and network traffic
making it suitable for real-time intrusion detection scenarios. patterns. Nevertheless, as cyber threats continue to evolve, it is
 crucial to evaluate our framework on newer datasets that reflect
G. Time Complexity recent attack techniques and network behaviors to ensure its
 continued relevance in modern network security contexts.
 The time complexity analysis of TCG-IDS reveals its effi- We reference several relevant graph-based models; however,
ciency in handling dynamic network traffic data. The TGN we specifically selected graph-based models for comparison
Encoder operates with a complexity of O(Nv + Ne ), where due to their direct relevance and proven performance in
Nv and Ne represent the number of nodes and edges, respec- dynamic graph-based tasks, particularly in network intrusion
tively, ensuring scalability with network size. The temporal detection. GraphSAGE, which aggregates features from a
contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked contrasting node’s local neighborhood, and GAT, which uses attention
components contribute complexities of O(Nv ·T ·D), O(Nv ·d̄·D), mechanisms to weigh neighbors’ importance, are both effective
and O(Nv · M · D) respectively, reflecting their operations’ for capturing node relationships in network traffic data. These
dependence on the number of nodes, temporal steps, and models are highly suitable for handling large-scale dynamic
embedding dimensions. The combined complexity, O(Nv ·(T + networks and can offer meaningful insights into detection.
d̄ · D + M · D) + Ne ), highlights the framework’s capacity Although other models may be applicable, we focused on
to efficiently process large-scale and temporally evolving net- these two because of their successful application in temporal
work data, making it suitable for real-time intrusion detection settings and their ability to capture relevant graph structures
applications. This balance between computational efficiency and temporal dynamics. In future work, we will extend this
and robust detection underlines the practical applicability of comparison to include additional models that could provide
TCG-IDS in diverse network environments. further insights.
 Detecting SSH-brute force and DoS attacks is critical for
 V. D ISCUSSION strengthening network security, as these attacks are noisy
 While temporal contrasting aims to distinguish embeddings and distinct from human behavior. However, their detection
at nearby and distant time steps, this approach may be less can be complicated by factors such as traffic burstiness and
effective in the presence of periodic patterns. For instance, network congestion, which may cause them to resemble
network traffic with regular fluctuations, such as nightly or legitimate high-volume events, increasing false positive rates.
weekend activities, may share consistent underlying patterns Addressing these challenges requires refining feature selection
across timestamps. Accounting for such periodicity could and optimizing thresholding mechanisms to improve detection
better preserve meaningful temporal correlations and refine accuracy and reduce false positives in these attack classes.
anomaly detection in dynamic networks. Another limitation It is important to note that while the goal of temporal
is the lack of comparison with existing non-GNN methods. contrasting is generally to distinguish between embeddings
While we focused on graph-based approaches due to their at nearby and distant time steps, this approach might not
relevance in modeling temporal and spatial dependencies, always be appropriate in the presence of periodic patterns.
exploring non-GNN methods could provide valuable insights For example, network traffic at specific times, such as nightly
and broaden the scope of evaluation. Future work should incor- or weekend traffic, might exhibit regular fluctuations, yet still
porate comparisons with more diverse and relevant techniques share underlying patterns across different timestamps. In such
to further validate the robustness of TCG-IDS. cases, rather than strictly minimizing the similarity at distant
 The lower performance onNF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset time steps, it may be more beneficial to account for periodicity
compared to NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 can be attributed to to preserve meaningful temporal correlations, thus refining the
several factors. First, the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset includes detection of anomalous behaviors in dynamic networks.
a broader range of attack types, such as Exploits, Back- The architecture of the proposed framework was determined
door, and Worms, which present more complex detection through a systematic tuning process, including grid search and
WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING 1485

ablation studies, to optimize hyperparameters and component VII. C ONCLUSION
selection. This iterative approach ensured that the model con-
 This paper presents TCG-IDS, a self-supervised temporal
figuration effectively balances performance and computational
 GNN-based model for network intrusion detection. It uses
efficiency, tailored to the characteristics of the datasets used in
 temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked
the study. Future work could explore automated architecture
 contrasting to capture temporal dynamics and spatial depensearch methods to further refine the framework’s design.
 dencies in network traffic. By modeling traffic as a dynamic
 graph, it enables real-time detection with minimal false pos-
 VI. R ELATED W ORK itives and improved novel attack identification. Evaluation
A. Deep Learning-Based IDS on benchmark datasets shows it surpasses existing models,
 Deep learning techniques, including Convolutional Neural offering a robust solution for modern network security.
Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
have significantly improved network IDS performance. CNNs ACKNOWLEDGMENT
excel at capturing spatial features in traffic data, while RNNs Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
like LSTMs and GRUs effectively model temporal dependen- expressed in this article are those of the authors and do
cies [24], [25]. For instance, Kitsune [26] uses autoencoders not reflect the views of the National Research Foundation
to detect anomalies, and DeepLog [27] leverages LSTMs for Singapore or the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore.
sequence modeling in system logs. However, these methods
struggle to simultaneously capture spatial and temporal depen- R EFERENCES
dencies and often require extensive labeled data. To overcome
 [1] I. A. Ridhawi and M. Aloqaily, “Zero-trust UAV-enabled and DTthese challenges, researchers are increasingly turning to graph supported 6G networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.
neural networks (GNNs) to model interactions and learn rich (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2023, pp. 6171–6176.
representations of network data for intrusion detection. [2] I. Al Ridhawi, S. Otoum, and M. Aloqaily, “Decentralized zero-trust
 framework for digital twin-based 6G,” 2023, arXiv:2302.03107.
 [3] M. Aloqaily, S. Otoum, I. A. Ridhawi, and Y. Jararweh, “An intrusion
B. GNNs and GNN-Based IDS detection system for connected vehicles in smart cities,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
 vol. 90, Jul. 2019, Art. no. 101842.
 GNNs [28], [29], [30], [31] have gained significant attention [4] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
for learning powerful representations of graph-structured data. in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.
 [5] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro,
They are broadly categorized into spectral-based and spatial- “TESSERACT: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classificabased methods. Spectral methods, like GCNs [17], perform tion across space and time,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019,
convolution in the Fourier domain using the graph Laplacian’s pp. 729–746.
eigendecomposition, but they suffer from high computational [6] E. M. Rudd, F. N. Ducau, C. Wild, K. Berlin, and R. Harang, “ALOHA:
 Auxiliary loss optimization for hypothesis augmentation,” in Proc.
complexity and limited scalability. In contrast, spatial-based USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2019, pp. 303–320.
methods, such as GraphSAGE [16] and GATs [15], aggregate [7] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
information from neighboring nodes directly on the graph set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
 vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.
structure, offering greater efficiency and scalability, making [8] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning
them suitable for large-scale and dynamic graphs, such as for network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE
in network intrusion detection. However, challenges like the Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 1st Quart., 2023.
 [9] J. Vitorino, I. Praça, and E. Maia, “SoK: Realistic adversarial attacks and
over-smoothing problem [32] and limited expressiveness in defenses for intelligent network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur.,
capturing long-range dependencies [33], [34] remain. Recent vol. 134, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 103433.
innovations like Graph Transformers [35] and Graph Con- [10] Z. Li, A. L. G. Rios, and L. Trajković, “Machine learning for detecting
 anomalies and intrusions in communication networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
trastive Learning [36] address these issues, enabling more Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 2254–2264, Jul. 2021.
sophisticated applications of GNNs in complex tasks, includ- [11] S. Muneer, U. Farooq, A. Athar, M. A. Raza, T. M. Ghazal, and S. Sakib,
ing intrusion detection. “A critical review of artificial intelligence based approaches in intrusion
 detection: A comprehensive analysis,” J. Eng., vol. 2024, no. 1, Jan.
 Existing GNN-based IDSs can be grouped into three cate- 2024, Art. no. 3909173.
gories: (1) methods leveraging Graph Convolutional Networks [12] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Fusion of statistical importance for feature
(GCNs) or Graph Attention Networks (GATs) for static graph selection in deep neural network-based intrusion detection system,” Inf.
 Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 353–363, Feb. 2023.
representation, (2) approaches incorporating temporal infor- [13] S. M. Kasongo, “A deep learning technique for intrusion detection
mation through dynamic GCNs or recurrent architectures like system using a recurrent neural networks based framework,” Comput.
LSTMs, and (3) hybrid techniques combining GNNs with Commun., vol. 199, pp. 113–125, Feb. 2023.
 [14] G. Miao, G. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Tong, and B. Lu, “AddAG-AE: Anomaly
reinforcement or adversarial learning. GCNs [37] capture detection in dynamic attributed graph based on graph attention network
local structural information, while GATs [14] use attention and LSTM autoencoder,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 13, p. 2763, Jun.
mechanisms for expressive node embeddings but lack temporal 2023.
 [15] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
considerations. To address this, dynamic GCNs [38] and recur- Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
rent models [39] integrate spatial and temporal dependencies, Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2017, pp. 1–12.
improving detection in evolving networks. Advanced methods [16] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan.
like reinforcement learning [40] for subgraph selection and 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
adversarial training [41] enhance scalability and robustness, [17] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
pushing the boundaries of GNN-based IDSs. convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
1486 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[18] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic [30] S. Siby, U. Iqbal, S. Englehardt, Z. Shafiq, and C. Troncoso,
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised “WebGraph: Capturing advertising and tracking information flows
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714, for robust blocking,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2021,
 2023. pp. 2875–2892.
[19] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E- [31] B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Wang, Q. Li, M. Xue, and S. Pan, “Securing graph
 GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system neural networks in MLaaS: A comprehensive realization of query-based
 for IoT,” in Proc. NOMS IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Apr. integrity verification,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
 2022, pp. 1–9. 2024, pp. 2534–2552.
[20] H. Gharaee and H. Hosseinvand, “A new feature selection IDS based [32] Q. Li, Z. Han, and X.-M. Wu, “Deeper insights into graph convolutional
 on genetic algorithm and SVM,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Telecommun. networks for semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 (IST), Sep. 2016, pp. 139–144. Intell., Jan. 2018, pp. 3538–3545.
[21] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and M. Bron- [33] Z. Zhang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Deep learning on graphs: A
 stein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs,” survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 249–270,
 2020, arXiv:2006.10637. Mar. 2020.
[22] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow [34] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
 datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection neural networks?,” 2018, arXiv:1810.00826.
 systems,” in Proc. 10th EAI Int. Conf. Big Data Technol. Appl., 13th [35] V. P. Dwivedi, C. K. Joshi, A. T. Luu, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and
 EAI Int. Conf. Wireless Internet (WiCON), Dec. 2020, pp. 117–135. X. Bresson, “Benchmarking graph neural networks,” J. Mach. Learn.
[23] N. Moustafa, “Designing an online and reliable statistical anomaly Res., vol. 24, no. 43, pp. 1–48, 2023.
 detection framework for dealing with large high-speed network traffic,” [36] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
 Ph.D. dissertation, School Eng. Inf. Technol., Univ. New South Wales, contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017. Process. Syst., Jan. 2020, pp. 1–12.
[24] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep [37] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020. Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
[25] J. Kim, J. Kim, H. L. T. Thu, and H. Kim, “Long short term memory [38] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 recurrent neural network classifier for intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35,
 Conf. Platform Technol. Service (PlatCon), Feb. 2016, pp. 1–5. May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[26] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [39] X. Teng, Y.-R. Lin, and X. Wen, “Anomaly detection in
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in dynamic networks using multi-view time-series hypersphere
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. learning,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Nov. 2017,
[27] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection pp. 827–836.
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM [40] J. Jiang et al., “Anomaly detection with graph convolutional
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298. networks for insider threat and fraud detection,” in
[28] G. Corso, H. Stark, S. Jegelka, T. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Graph Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Nov. 2019,
 neural networks,” Nature Rev. Methods Primers, vol. 4, pp. 1–13, Mar. pp. 109–114.
 2024. [41] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Suarez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. Barlet-
[29] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM: Ros, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for robust
 Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in intrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 49,
 Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 540–557. no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jun. 2022.