IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3522810

 MFFTD: A Multiscale Feature Fusion Transformer
 Detector for Electricity Theft Based
 on Semi-Supervised Learning
 Yufeng Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhijie Wu , Jianhua Ma , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Qun Jin , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The wide deployment of advanced metering infras- provides two-way communications between customers and
tructure (AMI) in power systems allows utility companies to utility companies [1]. Through AMI, utility companies are
automatically and accurately collect and process the time-series able to gather sequentially temporal information about indiload profiles of households, but meanwhile incurs the severe
electricity theft (ET) that some illegal residential users may
 vidual consumption, i.e., time series, and accordingly charge
manipulate their electricity consumptions to reduce their billings. customers. Wide deployment of AMI is a milestone that
Although, due to the powerful ability of modeling long-range denotes traditional power systems are evolved into smart grids,
dependencies in sequential data, transformer has been widely where pervasive control at all levels is a basic premise [2].
used for time-series modeling including ET detection (ETD), the Although many benefits have been brought by AMI, it also
significant weakpoint lies in that it only considers the atten- introduces a number of security vulnerabilities. For example,
tion weights between either points or prepatched subsequences
 adversaries can launch a variety of cyberphysical attacks
(i.e., patches) of fixed size within the input sequence, which
cannot fully characterize the relationships among multiscale against AMI devices and network components [3]. One of
temporal patches and lead to suboptimal detection performance. the main purposes of these adversaries is to manipulate their
To address the above issue, based on self-supervised feature electricity consumptions such that their billings can be lowered
extraction and supervised fine-tuning, our work proposes a novel down, so-called the behavior of electricity theft (ET) [4].
multiscale feature fusion transformer encoder (TE)-based ETD
framework, MFFTD. Specifically, our work’s contributions are
following. First, in MFFTD, a hierarchical patching enhanced A. Research Motivation
TE (HPTE) is explicitly designed, in which each layer patches
the input sequence with variable patch size. Then, through Recently, based on the massive amount of data provided by
hierarchically stacked multiple HPTE layers, the feature com- AMI, deep neural network (DNN)-based ET detection (ETD)
bining multiscale patches can be effectively extracted. Second, schemes have been widely developed [5], [6], [7], since
considering the constraint that only a small percentage of labeled DNNs can automatically extract features and have powerful
theft samples are practically available, our work first pretrains functional approximation ability, including convolutional neuthe structure parameters of MFFTD through a self-supervised ral networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs).
pretext task of forecasting the randomly masked segments in time
series. Then, the small percentage of labeled anomalous samples Technically, CNN-based detectors [8], [9] transform 1-D
is used to fine-tune the MFFTD model. Extensive experiments temporal electricity consumption data into 2-D matrix to
on multiple real datasets demonstrate our proposed MFFTD extract spatial feature. Different from CNN-based detectors,
scheme outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) transformer- long short-term memory (LSTM, a specific variant of RNN)-
based supervised and semi-supervised ETD methods. based ET detectors accept time series sequentially as input
 Index Terms— Electricity theft detection (ETD), multiscale and inherently learn the temporal dependencies of electricity
feature fusion, self-supervised learning, semi-supervised learning, consumption data [10], [11]. However, their weakpoint lies in
transformer, variable patching. that: LSTM cannot compute in parallel and cannot efficiently
 learn a long-range temporal dependencies and CNN-based
 I. I NTRODUCTION detectors mainly focus on extracting local features of the
 electricity consumption data. Although there existed work in
T HE advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) has been
 widely deployed into modern power systems, which literature that design two-level CNNs [12] or adopt ConvL-
 STM block [13] to attempt to simultaneously capture the
 Received 10 December 2024; revised 21 February 2025; accepted 7 March long-range and local features, both the structures still have
2025. Date of publication 19 March 2025; date of current version 1 April
2025. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Lei Mao. the problem of not sufficiently learning global information
(Corresponding author: Yufeng Wang.) of the input temporal sequence. Recently, transformer-based
 Yufeng Wang and Zhijie Wu are with the School of Telecom- detectors [14], [15] have been proposed to solve the aforemunications and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210049, China (e-mail: wfwang1974@
 mentioned issues. Transformer is built on multihead attention
gmail.com). mechanism and is regarded as suitable modeling time series
 Jianhua Ma is with the Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences, including ETD task: It concurrently represents each input
Hosei University, Tokyo 102-8160, Japan (e-mail: jianhua@hosei.ac.jp). sequence element by considering its context (future–past),
 Qun Jin is with the Faculty of Human Sciences, Waseda University,
Tokyo 169-8050, Japan (e-mail: jin@waseda.jp). while multiple attention heads can incorporate different repre-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3552857 sentation subspaces [16]. However, there are two limitations
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3522810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

in the existing transformer-based ET detectors. The first is that
patching with fixed size used in traditional transformer [17]
cannot sufficiently capture multiscale feature. The multiscale
feature fusion method, by combining information from different scales, can effectively improve the detection accuracy of
ETD systems. In [12] and [18], CNNs are used to extract features at different time scales from electricity consumption data.
However, the aforementioned CNN-based methods primarily
focus on local features and are not effective at capturing global
and temporal information in electricity consumption data.
 The second is the so-called insufficiency of labeled
anomalous samples. Since extensive data labeling is often
prohibitively expensive or impractical: require the knowledge
of domain expertise, therefore, it is imperative to achieve high Fig. 1. Summary of DNN-based ET detectors categorized from learning
detection performance using only a limited amount of labeled paradigm.
data or by leveraging the existing plethora of unlabeled data.
Generally, pretraining and fine-tuning learning paradigm is extract multiscale features of the input long temporal
well-suited to address this issue. In this paradigm, the model sequence.
is first pretrained for a pretext task on a dataset containing 2) To accurately detect ET under the constraint of only
large number of normal samples, and then fine-tuned with limited number of labeled data available, MFFTD is
few anomalous samples for a specific downstream task, such trained in a semi-supervised manner. Specifically, a selfas ETD. Following this paradigm, several TE-based architec- supervised pretrained scheme is implemented to learn
tures have been proposed, including time-series transformer the structure parameters of MFFTD, in which the
(TST) [19] and Patch TST (PatchTST) [17]. Specifically, self-supervised pretext task is intentionally designed to
to extract the temporal relations in the time series, patching is forecast the randomly masked segments in time series.
usually used, in which the long temporal sequence is divided Then, the penultimate of the pretrained model as the
into several subsequences with a certain patch size, and the feature extractor (FE) and the added output layer as
obtained subsequences are called patches. It is shown [17] that classifier are fine-tuned with a small percentage of
patching can effectively retain local semantic information and labeled samples in a supervised way. In brief, this
quadratically reduce computation and memory usage of the hybrid approach can merge the advantages of supervised
attention maps. However, such patching with fixed size has one and unsupervised learning paradigms and improve ETD
fatal flaw: Once the input sequence is patched, the following performance and generalization.
TE can only learn the attention weights between patches of a 3) Extensive experiments on multiple electricity consumpfixed size, which fully did not exploit the relationships between tion datasets are conducted to compare our proposed
multiscale patches at all, and may lead to a poor detection MFFTD scheme with various state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance. methods. In terms of main performance metrics, the
 effectiveness of the proposed ETD scheme MFFTD is
B. Main Contributions of Our Work verified.
 To address the above issues, different from the exist- The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
ing works, this article proposes a novel multiscale feature typical DNN (including transformer)-based ETD schemes are
fusion TE-based ETD architecture MFFTD, based on semi- summarized and their disadvantages are discussed. Section III
supervised learning paradigm consisting of self-supervised presents the proposed ETD framework MFFTD and describes
feature extraction and supervised fine-tuning. This approach its main modules in detail. Section IV provides the comprehenleverages both unlabeled and labeled data, enhancing model sive performance comparison between the proposed MFFTD
performance even with limited labeled anomalous data. framework and SOTA ETD methods. Finally, we briefly con-
Especially, a novel multiscale feature fusion TE, named as clude this article and point out future work.
hierarchical patching enhanced transformer encoder (HPTE),
is designed to intentionally extract and fuse multiscale fea- II. R ELATED W ORK
tures. Since electricity consumption data typically contain DNN-based time-series anomaly detection schemes can
patterns at different time scales, HPTE can effectively capture automatically extract temporal features from historical electhese complex temporal dependencies, thereby improving the tricity consumption data and then detect anomalies. Generally,
identification of ET behaviors. from the perspective of learning paradigm, the existing
 In detail, the main contributions of this article can be schemes can be classified into three categories, as shown
summarized as follows. in Fig. 1: supervised-learning-based, unsupervised-learning-
 1) In MFFTD, the core component, the HPTE, is designed. based, and semi-supervised-learning, which are correspond-
 In detail, at each HPTE layer, the input temporal ingly discussed in Sections II-A–II-C.
 sequence is patched with variable patch size, and
 then the multihead attentions are used to infer the A. Supervised-Learning-Based Methods
 correlation between any pair of patches. Then, hierar- Supervised-learning-based methods focus on building prechically stacked HPTE layers are used to automatically dictive models from labeled data to detect ET. There are
WANG et al.: MULTISCALE FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR ET BASED ON SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3522810

two mainly used DNNs: CNN and LSTM. Wide and deep Unsupervised-learning-based methods usually aim to learn the
CNNs (WDCNNs) [12] consist of a wide component and latent distribution of unlabeled data. The objective function of
a deep component. The wide component extracts the global the data reconstruction is designed for dimension reduction or
features of 1-D electricity consumption data, and the deep data compression, rather than anomaly detection.
component captures the periodical and nonperiodical features As a result, purely unsupervised paradigm did not assume
from the transformed 2-D data matrix. Then the features the existence of anomalous temporal samples. Its main goal is
from two components are added together to predict anomaly not specially designed for anomaly detection, but for generally
probability. But the wide component (i.e., the fully connected learning the normality of time series [24], which may lead to
layer) cannot effectively learn temporal dependencies from relatively poor ETD performance.
customers’ electricity consumption data [6], and the simple
adding operation cannot effectively fuse two types of features. C. Semi-Supervised-Learning-Based Methods
Hybrid-order representation learning network (HORLN) [20] To integrate the benefits of supervised and unsupervised
learns the hybrid-order representations of the transformed 2-D paradigms under the constraint of insufficient labeled data,
data matrix. The first-order representations contain inter-and- semi-supervised-learning-based methods are proposed, which
intra week information, and the second-order representations fully exploit both labeled and unlabeled data to build the
are composed of global temporal dependencies learned from predictive models. Multitask feature extracting fraud detector
self-correlation matrices. Through integrating both sequen- (MFEFD) [25] simply uses the stacked fully connected layers
tial and nonsequential data, hybrid DNNs for detection of as DNN structure and is trained in a semi-supervised manner,
nontechnical losses (HNN-NTLs) [21] combines an LSTM which combines supervised and unsupervised learning through
network and a multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to detect ET, multitask learning. Recently, some unified TE-based semiin which LSTM analyzes the raw daily energy consumption supervised learning frameworks are proposed [17], [19], which
history, MLP processes nonsequential data, and then the hybrid can be naturally used in ETD task. Specifically, TST [19]
features are used to predict the anomaly probability. To capture presents an unsupervised pretraining framework for multivariboth the global and local temporal dependencies of input time ate time series, in which segments of different sizes are masked
series, convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) is applied into ETD, and the model is trained to predict the masked contents with
in which convolutional operations are used into both the input- mean square error loss, and offers substantial performance
to-state and state-to-state transitions in LSTM [13]. benefits over fully supervised learning on downstream tasks.
 Recently, since TE can automatically learn the relation- However, the original TE architecture used in TST can
ships between elements in a long sequence through multihead only learn temporal dependencies between each data point
attention mechanism, transformer has witnessed great appli- at different timestamps, which neglects the local semantic
cation for processing sequential data, including ETD task. information. Besides, the efficiency of the method is limited
Conv-attentional transformer neural network (CA-TNN) [14] by the length of the time series (L) with computational
is a hybrid model of conv-attentional module and transformer complexity overhead as O(L 2 ). To solve the above issue,
model to extract local features and global features successively, before feeding the temporal sequence to TE, the latest work
and the final hybrid features are used for ETD. Specifically, PatchTST [17] segments the long time series into subseriesthe whole load sequence is divided into multiple segments, level patches as input tokens to transformer. The so-called
and the global features of consumption data are extracted patching design can both retain the local semantic information
by calculating the self-attention between segments. Moreover, in embedding and quadratically reduce computation and memconv-attentional module is used to embed the input data and ory usage. However, the total number of patches is prefixed,
capture the local features in each segment. The weakness of which can only capture the relationships between patches in
CA-TNN lies in that it can only capture dependencies of a fixed granularity way. Different from PatchTST, our work
segments of a fixed size. In summary, although supervised designs an HPTE with variable patch sizes in each HPTE
paradigm is intentionally designed for anomaly detection using layer, which can effectively extract multiscale latent temporal
training dataset with explicit normal/anomalous labels, it may dependencies in time series and greatly improve the ETD
accurately conduct ETD. However, its significant weakpoint performance. Furthermore, the impact of variable patch size
is that a large amount of labeled data are needed to train the in each HPTE layer is investigated.
detection model. Otherwise, the limited number of labeled data
constrains the detection performance (overfitting to the small III. MFFTD: P ROPOSED M ETHOD FOR ETD
dataset). However, the availability of sufficient labeled tempo- A. Overall Architecture
ral samples is extremely limited. Therefore, it is imperative to
 Fig. 2 presents the overview framework of the proposed
leverage the existing plethora of unlabeled data.
 MFFTD scheme, which consists of training phase and operating phase: the purpose of training phase is to train the
B. Unsupervised-Learning-Based Methods MFFTD framework, and then the operating phase uses the
 For the category of unsupervised-learning-based ETD, trained MFFTD to conduct ETD. The training phase is explicstacked sparse denoising autoencoder (SSDAE) [22] uses itly composed of two modules: self-supervised pretraining
a stacked sparse denoising autoencoder to learn feature of and supervised two-stage fine-tuning. In module 1, a selfnormality through minimizing reconstruction error and takes supervised pretraining regression task is used to learn the
the testing samples with the error higher than the thresh- structural parameters of HPTE used as the FE. In module 2,
old as anomalies. Similarly, [23] incorporates LSTM into the pretrained FE in module 1 and classifier are fine-tuned
autoencoders and is also based on reconstruction method. in a supervised-based two-stage way: in the first stage, the
3522810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 in Fig. 3, that is, FiHPE = P ′ W + b, where W and b are
 learnable parameters.
 Note that it is shown that transformer with positional
 encoding can hardly preserve temporal information [26], and
 moreover, we empirically found out that adding both learnable
 and fixed positional encoding each layer actually reduces,
 instead of improving, detection performance. Our empirical
 results comply with the conclusion obtained by [26] that the
 vanilla transformer is not sufficiently effective for modeling
 time series, which acts as the rationale that our work patches
 time series with multiple variable patch sizes, to effectively
 capture the multiple-scale temporal relationships in time series.
 2) Transformer Encoder: In TE module, the existing
 TE [27] is used to characterize the relationships between
 different patches, which, as shown in Fig. 3, consists of a multihead attention (MHA) layer and an MLP layer. Specifically,
 each head in the MHA transforms the feature map FiHPE into
 query matrices Q h , key matrices K h , and value matrices Vh .
 The scaled dot-product attention [Attention(.)] is conducted for
 each head and outputs the concatenated matrices [MHA(.)] as
 follows:
 Attention(Q h , K h , Vh )
 Q h K hT
  
 = Softmax √ Vh (1)
 dk
Fig. 2. Overall framework of the proposed MFFTD with training and
 MHA FiHPE
 
operating phases.
 = Concat(head1 , . . . , head H )W O + b O , where
parameters of pretrained FE are frozen, and only the classifier headh
  
is trained; and in the second stage, both are trained, which can = Attention FiHPE WhQ , FiHPE WhK , FiHPE WhV (2)
protect the pretrained parameters of FE and stabilize the whole
training processes. In the operating phase, the trained FE and where Softmax is the softmax activation function, Concat is
classifier, i.e., our scheme MFFTD takes load profile as input the concatenation operation, dk is the embedding dimension
and outputs its anomaly probability. Electricity customers with of K h , and H is the number of the heads. W O , WhQ , WhK , WhV ,
anomaly probability larger than 0.5 are judged as illegal. and b O are learnable parameters.
 Note that the designed HPTE is the core component in our Besides, the residual connecting is used to avoid gradient
framework shown as Fig. 2, which is specifically described explosion as follows:
in Fig. 3.
 V ′ = Layernorm FiHPE + MHA FiHPE
 
 (3)
B. Hierarchical Patching Enhanced Transformer Encoder Fi = Layernorm(V + MLP(V ))
 ′ ′
 (4)
 In Fig. 2, HPTE is used as the FE, which is composed of
 where Layernorm refers to layer normalization, a technique
multiple stacked HPTE layers. The ith HPTE layer is shown
 used to normalize the inputs to a layer in a neural network.
in Fig. 3, which consists of two modules: hierarchical patch
 Fi is the output of ith HPTE layer, and V ′ is an intermediate
embedding (HPE) and TE. In the ith HPTE layer, the length
 variable.
of input sequence is denoted as L i−1 , the length of output
sequence as L i , the embedding dimension as d, and the patch
size as pi . The first (i.e., gray) rectangle represents the input C. Training of MFFTD: Self-Supervised Pretraining and
feature matrix Fi−1 of the ith layer, the second (i.e., blue) Supervised Fine-Tuning
rectangle represents the feature matrix FiHPE output by HPE, Specifically, we consider the load profile as an univariate
and the third (i.e., red) rectangle represents the final output sequence of T data points X = {x1 , . . . , x T }. When detecting
feature matrix Fi of the ith layer. Note that L i = (L i−1 / pi ). whether xt is an anomaly, i.e., yt ∈ {0, 1} (1 denotes an
The detailed operations of HPE and TE modules are as anomalous data point), we take into account the dependencies
follows. within a local contextual window of length L, i.e., wt =
 1) Hierarchical Patch Embedding: Given the input feature {xt−L+1 , . . . , xt } to help the model learn to detect anomalies.
of the ith HPTE layer, Fi−1 ∈ R L i−1 ×d , HPE module, using Here we simply drop the window wt when t < L [28].
patch size pi , first divides the input feature into multiple, 1) Self-Supervised Pretraining as Regression Task: To
i.e., (L i−1 / pi ) patches, each patch P ∈ R pi ×d . Then all the strengthen the FE’s ability to capture underlying features of
patches are put together and reshaped into a matrix P ′ ∈ unlabeled data, the regressive task of recovering the masked
R(L i−1 / pi )×( pi ×d) , which are further projected into a feature map input is used: the mathematical essence is using the rela-
FiHPE with length (L i−1 / pi ) formulated in HPE module shown tionships between patches to recover the missing contents.
WANG et al.: MULTISCALE FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR ET BASED ON SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3522810

Fig. 3. Illustration of the structure of the ith HPTE layer and its processing.

Given the detection window wt ∈ R L×1 , the masked input ŵt Algorithm 1 Two-Stage-Based Supervised Fine-Tuning
for FE can be obtained as follows: Input: (W, Y) the labeled time windows, M E 1 the maximal
 epochs of training Classifier only, M E 2 the maximal
 ŵt = M ⊙ wt (5)
 epochs of training both FE and Classifier, θ F E the prewhere ⊙ is the Hadamard product, and M ∈ R L×1 is a binary trained parameters of FE
mask which consists of alternating segments of 0 s and 1 s. Output: θ = (θ F E , θc ) parameters of the whole MFFTD
The length of segments of 0 s follows geometric distribution 1: Initialize FE and classifier with parameters θ F E , θc ,
of mean l0 : when the segment of 0 s stops, it is succeeded by respectively
a segment of 1 s, whose length follows geometric distribution 2: Initialize count variables c1 ← 0, c2 ← 0
of mean l1 . Let r denote the proportion of the mask to be 0, 3: Stage 1: Train the Classifier (Freezing the FE)
thus l1 = ((1 − r )/r )l0 . 4: for c1 = 1 to M E 1 do
 The masked detection window ŵt is then fed to the 5: for each batch (wt , yt ) in (W, Y) do
FE. Afterward, the extracted feature F is fed to an FC 6: The values of
layer and flattened to output its forecasting of the partially 7: p 1 , L 1cla are presented in (8) and (9)
masked input window ŵt , denoted as w̃ t given as (6). The 8: θc ← Make a gradient step to minimize L 1cla
predictive error on the masked values (with indices in the 9: end for
set M0 ≡ {i : M(i) = 0}) is regarded as regression loss 10: end for
(i.e., mean square error loss), shown as (7) 11: Stage 2: Fine-Tune the Entire Model (FE+Classifier)
 w̃ t = Flatten(F W + b) (6) 12: for c2 = 1 to M E 2 do
 X 2 13: for each batch (wt , yt ) in (W, Y) do
 L reg = w̃t (i) − wt (i) (7) 14: The values of
 i∈M0 15: p 2 , L 2cla are presented in (8) and (9)
where Flatten is the flatten operation, and W and b are 16: θ F E , θc ← Make a gradient step to minimize L 2cla
learnable parameters. 17: end for
 Note that the objective of the self-supervised pretraining 18: end for
is to bootstrap the structural parameters of FE for the suc- 19: return θ = (θ F E , θc )
cessive supervised fine-tuning. That is, the FC layer used for
outputting the masked temporal points will be abandoned in
the following supervised fine-tuning. by pretraining and only train the classifier; in the second
 2) Two-Stage-Based Supervised Fine-Tuning: The self- stage (lines 11–19 in Algorithm 1), we train the whole
supervised training learns the structure parameters of the MFFTD, including the parameters of FE and classifier). The
FE but leaves the classifier untrained after being initialized. two-stage training shares the same model architecture (FE as
To better fit the ETD task, the whole MFFTD framework shown in Fig. 3) and loss function as (9). Given the input
is fine-tuned using the small percentage of the labeled window wt and its label yt , FE outputs the extracted feadata. However, the different task goal, i.e., regressive task tures F, and classifier takes as input the flattened features,
in pretraining and anomaly detection (classification) down- and outputs the anomaly probability p (when p is more
stream task, makes the whole model hard to converge. Thus, than 0.5, the input window wt is judged as an anomaly) as
we apply a two-stage training procedure to train the classifier follows:
(implemented as a linear layer and a sigmoid activation
function) and the FE after self-supervised pretraining as p = σ (Flatten(F)W + b) (8)
shown in Algorithm 1. The two-stage training can avoid where σ is the sigmoid activation function, Flatten is the flatten
the condition that large gradient updates triggered by the operation, and W and b are learnable parameters. Considering
randomly initialized classifier will wreck the learned param- the data imbalance between normal and anomalous temporal
eters in FE [25]. Specifically, in the first stage (lines 3–10 data, the weighted binary cross-entropy is adopted to evaluate
in Algorithm 1), we freeze the parameters of FE obtained the difference between the predicted probability and true label
3522810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

as follows: TABLE I
 n S IX T YPES OF FDI ATTACKS
 1 X
 wi yi log pi + (1 − yi ) log(1 − pi )
  
 L cla = − (9)
 n i=1

where n is the batch size, and wi ∈ {0.1, 0.9} is the weight
with 0.9 for an anomaly. yi is the true label, and pi is the
predicted probability.

 IV. E VALUATION E XPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
 In our work, a Python-based software platform is developed
to simulate multiple and typical ET behaviors in real-world
electricity consumption data, based on which our proposed
MFFTD scheme and the SOTA ETD baselines are implemented and comprehensively evaluated. In detail, this section
first describes the publicly used datasets, including the IRISH
dataset (given in Section IV-A) and the State Grid Corporation
of China (SGCC) dataset (given in Section IV-E). Then, six
false data injection (FDI) attacks that simulate multiple typical
ET behaviors are clearly provided in Section IV-A2. The
commonly used evaluation metrics are given in Section IV-A3.
Finally, the implementation details are listed in Section IV-A4,
including hardware and software configurations and hyperparameters’ settings.
 1) Smart Meter Datasets: The smart meter dataset adopted
for our performance evaluation is publicly available from Fig. 4. Example of daily electricity consumption and its tampered data
 corresponding to six types of FDI attacks.
the Irish CER smart metering project [29] which is widely
used in the research of ETD. The dataset contains more
than 500 days of smart meter data collected from over
5000 residential users and small- and medium-sized business in [14] and [25] which are defined in Table I. In Table I,
users during 2009 and 2010. The dataset is considered as not x̃ t and xt are tampered and real electricity consumption at
tampered and can be used as ground truth because all the users timestamp t, respectively. X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x48 } is the daily
completed the pretrial or posttrial surveys. The sampling rate electricity consumption of 48 data points collected by the
of the smart meter is one temporal data point every half an smart meter. max(X ), min(X ), and mean(X ) are the maxihour such that a daily load profile consists of 48 data points. mum value, minimum value, and average value of the daily
In the experiments, we use the collected data of 365 days, electricity consumption X , respectively.
drop the data of any user with nan (nan represents a null Basically, there are two types of consumption attacks,
value), recover the incorrect data, and normalize the data with called reduced consumption attacks and load profile shifting
min–max normalization [30]. The detection window is set to attacks [6]. Reduced consumption attacks (types 1–4) directly
seven days, i.e., L = 336 instead of one day to improve reduce the electricity consumption data, while load profile
the performance of the detection. We divide 5000 users into shifting attacks (types 5 and 6) shift the consumption data
4000, 500, and 500 users for the pretraining set, validation set, at a high electricity price to the consumption data at a
and test set. In each set, the whole electricity consumption low electricity price. As shown in Table I, type 1 attack
data are viewed as a long time series. In the pretraining multiples the electricity consumption at the timestamp t with a
set, we randomly pick 1% daily electricity consumption data changing-with-t parameter αt ranging from 0.2 to 0.8. Type 2
tampered with certain attacks, and pick 9% as honest daily attack reduces the daily electricity consumption by a randomly
electricity consumption data. In summary, the proportion of chosen value γ smaller than the maximum value of the daily
unlabeled, fraudulent, and honest samples are 90%, 1%, consumption and keeps the positive values. Type 3 attack
and 9%, respectively. The pretraining set is used to learn retains the value no bigger than γ . Type 4 attack picks a time
the structure parameters of FE, and labeled samples in the period and sets the data over the time period to zero. Type 5
fine-tuning set are used to fine-tune the pretrained model. attack replaces the raw data with the average value of the
In the validation set and test set, we randomly pick 10% daily daily consumption multiplied with a parameter α ∈ (0.2, 0.8).
electricity consumption data tampered with certain attacks. Type 6 attack inverts the whole daily consumption. An exam-
The left ones are normal data. The validation set is used to ple of the daily electricity consumption and its tampered data
judge whether overfitting happens and choose the best learned corresponding to six types of FDI attacks are shown in Fig. 4.
parameters. The test set is used to evaluate performance. 3) Evaluation Metrics: We adopt the F1 score, the area
 2) Attack Model: The tampering behaviors of ET on load under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC),
profiles can be simulated by various types of FDI attacks. recall, and false positive rate (FPR) as evaluation metrics. The
In this study, we consider six types of FDI attacks widely used detection results can be divided into four categories, including
WANG et al.: MULTISCALE FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR ET BASED ON SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3522810

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS

true positive (TP), false positive (FP), false negative (FN), and 1) Time-Series Transformer: TST [19] uses the TE and
true negative (TN). Here, we take predicting illegal users as computes the relationship between data points at different
positive, so that the meanings of TP, FP, FN, and TN are as timestamps. TST is trained in the semi-supervised way. In the
follows: unsupervised pretraining, TST completes the autoregressive
 1) TP: Number of illegal users correctly predicted as illegal task of forecasting the masked temporal data points and is
 users. implemented with lm = 8, r = 0.3. In supervised fine-tuning,
 2) FP: Number of benign users wrongly predicted as illegal TST is trained to predict the probability of input being an
 users. anomaly.
 3) FN: Number of illegal users wrongly predicted as benign 2) Patch TST: PatchTST [17] takes time-series segments
 users. ( p = 8) as input and is similarly trained in a semi-supervised
 4) TN: Number of benign users correctly predicted as way. In the unsupervised pretraining, the model learns to
 benign users. predict the randomly removed patches. In the supervised fine-
 Based on the above concept, precision, recall, and FPR are tuning, the operation is the same as TST.
defined to reflect the model’s ability to make the true detection 3) Conv-Attentional Transformer Neural Network: CAof the ET behavior, where Precision = (TP/(TP + FP)), TNN [14] divides the time series into several segments
Recall = (TP/(TP + FN)), and FPR = (FP/(FP + TN)). ( p = 8), uses conv-attentional module to embed the segments,
A high precision can significantly reduce the additional costs and uses transformer to extract global features by calculating
incurred due to error detection and subsequent manual inspec- the self-attention between each segment. It is trained in a
tions; a high recall means that most of the anomalies are supervised way to predict the anomaly probability of input.
detected; and a good model should have a high recall and 4) Wide and Deep CNN (WDCNN): WDCNN [12] consists
a low FPR. Then the F1 score, which is a comprehensive con- of a wide component (a fully connected layer) and a deep CNN
sideration of both precision and recall, is defined as follows: component (stacked convolutional layers). We implement the
 model with the length of fully connected layer in the wide and
 2 × precision × recall
 F1 score = . (10) deep CNN components as 90 and 90, respectively, the number
 precision + recall of filters in the convolutional layer as 60, and the number of
 AUC represents the area under the ROC curve, which plots convolutional layers as 5.
the TP rate against the FPR at various threshold settings. Table II provide the performance comparison results of
A higher AUC indicates better discrimination ability of the different methods. The following results can be observed.
model, with an AUC of 1 representing a perfect classifier. 1) On average, MFFTD achieves the best results (0.848 in
 4) Implementation Details: We implement all the methods F1 score, 0.972 in AUC, 0.862 in recall, and 0.019 in
with Python-3.8.17, PyTorch-2.0.1, and PyTorch-Ignite-0.3.0. FPR), with improvement of 3.8% in F1 score, 1.3%
We use the Adam optimizer to train all the models with a in AUC, 2.6% in recall, and 17.3% in FPR over
learning rate of 0.001. We implement all the methods three the second-best method CA-TNN (0.809 in F1 score,
times on an Intel i3-12100F CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce 0.963 in AUC, 0.812 in recall, and 0.023 in FPR).
RTX 2060 12G GPU and report the results as the mean of 2) CA-TNN uses a conv-attentional module to autosix FDI attacks. We use the hyperparameters of the baseline matically extract and implicitly fuse different types
models as presented in their respective papers. We choose the of features in electricity consumption data ahead of
following hyperparameters for our method. TE [14], which shares a similar idea with MFFTD
 1) Dimension of the embedding d = 128. (adopting HPTE to fuse multiscale features). The advan-
 2) Number of the heads H = 8. tage of our proposed MFFTD is to explicitly extract and
 3) Number of the layers N = 3. fuse multiple-scale features with variable patch size, and
 Note that the rationale of selecting these hyperparameters therefore, MFFTD averagely outperforms CA-TNN.
is given in Section IV-C. 3) Compared with TST, PatchTST roughly extracts the
 temporal relationships in an ordered time-series through
B. Performance Comparison one-shot and fix-sized patching, thus PatchTST performs
 In this part, we compare the proposed MFFTD with four better than TST.
SOTA ET methods, of which two are supervised learning The number of parameters, average training time, and
methods and two are semi-supervised methods. We implement average testing time for all the methods are also empirically
all these methods on the preprocessed data for fair comparison. given in Table II for comparison. The number of trainable
3522810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF P ER -L AYER C OMPLEXITY
 FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS

parameters is derived from the neural network architectures,
encompassing both the FE and classifier components. Training
time reflects the duration required for the complete training Fig. 5. Ablation analysis of MFFTD.
process across all the samples over 100 epochs on a GPU,
while testing time represents the time needed for a single
prediction for all the samples.
 The theoretical analysis of per-layer complexity for different
methods is given in Table III. In our study, the sequence
length l is much bigger than embedding dimension d, thus
theoretically speaking, the training time of WDCNN should
be smaller than TST, which is consistent with our experimental results. CA-TNN is a hybrid model consisting of
CNN and TE with fixed patching size, such that its training
time is larger than WDCNN while being less than TST.
 P N MFFTD,
For our proposed the computational complexity
changes to O( i=1 li2 × d), where li is the sequence length
for the ith layer and different patching modes can greatly
influence the computational complexity, which is discussed
in Section IV-D.

C. Analysis of the Selection of Main Hyperparameters
 We conduct extensive experiments on the impact of three
important hyperparameters in MFFTD to empirically seek the
best settings. The results are presented in Table IV. As shown
in Table IV, the range of values for dimension of the embedding d and number of heads H are the same as TST [19] and
the best results are almost consistent, i.e., d = 128, H = 8.
The number of the HPTE layers decides the scales of fused
features. Empirically, moderate scales are suitable for anomaly
detection. The reason may lie in that our scheme uses the
variable patch size in each HPTE layer, and therefore, the
larger number of layers may lead to shorter size of each patch,
which results in TE focusing on local feature correlations, vice
versa for the smaller number of layers. In brief, empirically,
the dimension of the embedding, number of the heads, layers,
and patch size for each layer are chosen as 128, 8, 3, and
p1 , p2 , p3 = 2, 3, 8, respectively, in our experiments.

D. Ablation Analysis Fig. 6. Specific contribution to model performance in different settings of
 multiscale patching. (a) Comparison between two patching modes: increasing
 An ablation study is conducted to demonstrate the impact mode and decreasing mode. (b) Comparison within increasing mode.
of the main components in the proposed MFFTD framework
on the ETD performance. Specifically, two variants of our
MFFTD are implemented as shown in Table V.
 1) Variant MFFTD-H:MFFTD Without HPE: MFFTD-H 2) Variant MFFTD-S:MFFTD Without Self-Supervised Predirectly uses TE instead of HPTE and is trained with our training: MFFTD-S keeps the neural network architecture, but
proposed semi-supervised way. is directly trained in a supervised way.
WANG et al.: MULTISCALE FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR ET BASED ON SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3522810

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF T HREE P RIMARY H YPERPARAMETERS

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 S TRUCTURE OF MFFTD VARIANTS P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE SGCC DATASET

 Fig. 5 illustrates the average F1 score, AUC, recall, and FPR
of six ET attacks and the following results can be obtained. design of the well-known architecture of ResNet [31],
 1) MFFTD-H performs much worse, compared with in which the receptive field is also in an increasing way.
 MFFTD, with nearly 14.7% drop in terms of F1 The rationale of beginning with small patch size lies in
 score, 2.7% drop in terms of AUC, 13.5% drop in that in early layers, the local features should be extracted
 terms of recall, and 110.5% growth in terms of FPR. through small patch size, and as the network deepens,
 It demonstrates that the designed HPTE can effectively more extract feature should be emphasized through large
 fuse multiscale feature thus improving the detection patch size.
 performance.
 2) MFFTD achieves better performance than MFFTD-S,
 which implies that semi-supervised learning effectively E. Performance Evaluation on the SGCC Dataset
 leverages the underlying distribution and general pat- We further evaluated the performance of MFFTD alongterns of both labeled and unlabeled data to enhance side the same baseline methods on another dataset: the
 predictive performance over a broader dataset. The SGCC [12]. This dataset contains the electricity consumption
 ablation results show that our proposed semi-supervised data of 42 372 electricity customers within 1035 days (from
 training strategy can improve the ETD performance. January 1, 2014 to October 31, 2016) released by SGCC
 We also provide the results of two patching modes as (http://www.sgcc.com.cn/). We use the same data preproshown in Fig. 6 to analyze each specific contribution to model cessing methods for the Irish dataset, and for details refer
performance. In detail, the temporal sequence of length 48 to Section IV-A.
(i.e., the number of temporal data points gathered in a whole Performance results are shown in Table VI. Similarly, our
day) is hierarchically divided into three layers, i.e., p1 × p2 × proposed MFFTD achieves the best performance among all
p3 = 48, and two kind of patching strategies are designed: the schemes, which is consistent with the results obtained on
decreasing mode p1 ≥ p2 ≥ p3 and increasing mode p1 ≤ the Irish dataset.
p2 ≤ p3 .
 The following results can be empirically obtained. V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 1) Increasing mode is better than decreasing mode in This article proposes a novel semi-supervised-learningterms of performance metrics: Fig. 6(a) shows that based multiscale feature fusion TE for effectively and
 the setting p1 × p2 × p3 = 2 × 4 × 6 achieves 1.9% efficiently detecting ET, MFFTD. Specifically, the designed
 higher recall than the opposite P setting. However the hierarchical patching with variable patch size can fuse the
 N
 computational complexity is O( i=1 li2 × d). In the multiscale feature of the time series, and thus greatly facilincreasing mode, the sequence length li for the ith layer itate the effective ETD. Furthermore, MFFTD is trained in
 is normally bigger than that in decreasing mode. So it a semi-supervised manner, i.e., self-supervised pretraining
 takes more time to train the whole model. and supervised fine-tuning, which can efficiently leverage
 2) For the detailed choice in increasing mode, we empir- both abundant unlabeled temporal data and a small percentically find from Fig. 6(b) that the model performs age of labeled data available. Specifically, unlabeled data
 best under the setting where the front patching size is are used in the pretraining process to extract general feaslightly smaller, and the rear patching size increases ture to assist the downstream ETD task. Experiments are
 significantly. The observations are analogous to the conducted on a real-world electricity consumption dataset,
3522810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

and the results show that our proposed ETD framework [12] Z. Zheng, Y. Yang, X. Niu, H. Dai, and Y. Zhou, “Wide and deep
MFFTD can effectively detect the anomalous electricity behav- convolutional neural networks for electricity-theft detection to secure
 smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1606–1615,
iors and outperforms SOTA other transformer-based ETD Apr. 2018.
methods. [13] X. Xia et al., “ETD-ConvLSTM: A deep learning approach for electricity
 The future work includes the following aspects. First, our theft detection in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
work uses the historical load profile to train the ETD model, vol. 18, pp. 2553–2568, 2023.
 [14] J. Shi, Y. Gao, D. Gu, Y. Li, and K. Chen, “A novel approach to
which is essentially univariate time-series anomaly detection. detect electricity theft based on conv-attentional transformer neural
If other features would be available, e.g., customers’ traits network,” Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., vol. 145, Feb. 2023,
and weather information, multivariate and their relationships Art. no. 108642. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
can be explored for more accurate ETD. Second, our work com/science/article/pii/S014206152200638X
 [15] J. Kim, H. Kang, and P. Kang, “Time-series anomaly detection
follows the semi-supervised learning paradigm: Pretraining with stacked transformer representations and 1D convolutional
with pretext task, and fine-tune using small percentage of network,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 120, Apr. 2023,
labeled anomalous samples from downstream task, it can be Art. no. 105964. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
effective for known anomaly types, but may be vulnerable to com/science/article/pii/S0952197623001483
 [16] Q. Wen et al., “Transformers in time series: A survey,” in Proc.
the emerging unknown anomaly types. One potential solution 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 6778–6786, doi:
is to learn data representations assisted by a few labeled 10.24963/ijcai.2023/759.
anomalous samples: The representations are optimized such [17] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time
that these normal instances are located in dense neighborhoods series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,”
 in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Rep., Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available:
around the designated origin in latent space, while the anoma- https://openreview.net/forum?id=Jbdc0vTOcol
lous samples are distributed far from origin. Then, the distance [18] W. Zhang and Y. Dai, “A multiscale electricity theft detection model
of the representation of sample to the origin is viewed as its based on feature engineering,” Big Data Res., vol. 36, May 2024,
anomaly score for ETD. Art. no. 100457. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S2214579624000339
 R EFERENCES [19] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff,
 “A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series represen-
 [1] M. Ahmed et al., “Energy theft detection in smart grids: Taxon- tation learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 omy, comparative analysis, challenges, and future research direc- Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, Aug. 2021, pp. 2114–2124, doi:
 tions,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 578–600, 10.1145/3447548.3467401.
 Apr. 2022. [20] Y. Zhu et al., “Hybrid-order representation learning for electricity theft
 [2] T. Ahmad, H. Chen, J. Wang, and Y. Guo, “Review of various detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1248–1259,
 modeling techniques for the detection of electricity theft in Feb. 2023.
 smart grid environment,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 82, [21] M. Buzau, J. Tejedor-Aguilera, P. Cruz-Romero, and
 pp. 2916–2933, Feb. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www. A. Gómez-Expósito, “Hybrid deep neural networks for detection
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032117314090 of non-technical losses in electricity smart meters,” IEEE Trans. Power
 [3] G. M. Messinis and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Review of non- Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1254–1263, Mar. 2020.
 technical loss detection methods,” Electr. Power Syst. Res., vol. 158, [22] Y. Huang and Q. Xu, “Electricity theft detection based on
 pp. 250–266, May 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. stacked sparse denoising autoencoder,” Int. J. Electr. Power Energy
 com/science/article/pii/S0378779618300051 Syst., vol. 125, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 106448. [Online]. Available:
 [4] Y. Liu, T. Liu, H. Sun, K. Zhang, and P. Liu, “Hidden elec- https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014206151933666X
 tricity theft by exploiting multiple-pricing scheme in smart grids,” [23] A. Takiddin, M. Ismail, U. Zafar, and E. Serpedin, “Deep autoencoder-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 2453–2468, based anomaly detection of electricity theft cyberattacks in smart grids,”
 2020. IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 4106–4117, Sep. 2022.
 [5] Z. Yan and H. Wen, “Performance analysis of electricity theft detection [24] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 for the smart grid: An overview,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2,
 pp. 1–28, 2022. pp. 1–38, Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3439950.
 [6] X. Xia, Y. Xiao, W. Liang, and J. Cui, “Detection methods in smart [25] T. Hu, Q. Guo, X. Shen, H. Sun, R. Wu, and H. Xi, “Utilizing unlabeled
 meters for electricity thefts: A survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 110, no. 2, data to detect electricity fraud in AMI: A semisupervised deep learning
 pp. 273–319, Feb. 2022. approach,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 11,
 [7] E. Stracqualursi, A. Rosato, G. Di Lorenzo, M. Panella, and R. Araneo, pp. 3287–3299, Nov. 2019.
 “Systematic review of energy theft practices and autonomous detec- [26] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective for
 tion through artificial intelligence methods,” Renew. Sustain. Energy time series forecasting?” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023,
 Rev., vol. 184, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 113544. [Online]. Available: vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 11121–11128.
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136403212300401X [27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 [8] R. Xia, Y. Gao, Y. Zhu, D. Gu, and J. Wang, “An attention- Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, I. Guyon et al., Ed. Red Hook, NY, USA:
 based wide and deep CNN with dilated convolutions for detecting Curran Associates, Jun. 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [Online]. Available:
 electricity theft considering imbalanced data,” Electric Power Syst. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547
 Res., vol. 214, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 108886. [Online]. Available: dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378779622009105 [28] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 [9] E. U. Haq, C. Pei, R. Zhang, H. Jianjun, and F. Ahmad, networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,”
 “Electricity-theft detection for smart grid security using smart Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022, doi:
 meter data: A deep-CNN based approach,” Energy Rep., vol. 9, 10.14778/3514061.3514067.
 pp. 634–643, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. [29] Cer Smart Metering Project-Electricity Customer Behaviour Trial,
 com/science/article/pii/S2352484722024581 2009–2010, Commission Energy Regulation (CER), Dublin, Ireland,
[10] H.-X. Gao, S. Kuenzel, and X.-Y. Zhang, “A hybrid ConvLSTM-based 2012.
 anomaly detection approach for combating energy theft,” IEEE Trans. [30] R. Qi, J. Zheng, Z. Luo, and Q. Li, “A novel unsupervised data-driven
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022. method for electricity theft detection in AMI using observer meters,”
[11] A. Takiddin, M. Ismail, M. Nabil, M. M. E. A. Mahmoud, and IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
 E. Serpedin, “Detecting electricity theft cyber-attacks in AMI net- [31] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 works using deep vector embeddings,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 15, no. 3, image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 pp. 4189–4198, Sep. 2021. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.