IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2535014

 MGCL: Multiorder Graph Neural Network With
 Cross-Learning for Multivariate Time-Series
 Anomaly Detection
 Zhe Cui , Di Zang , Junqi Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Keshuang Tang

 Abstract—Multivariate time-series (MTS) anomaly detection anomaly detection has become indispensable for fault diagnois critical for industrial systems. However, for inter-variable sis and emergency response [1], [2].
dimensional modeling, existing work mainly focuses on low-order Early MTS anomaly detection methods primarily rely on
dependencies between variable pairs, overlooking high-order
interactions among multiple variables. Additionally, for temporal machine learning techniques [3]. However, these approaches
dimension modeling, time series are influenced by various system often encounter the “curse of dimensionality” when dealing
factors, posing challenges in simultaneously capturing long-term with high-dimensional MTS. Specifically, as the dimensionand short-term dependencies. To address these challenges, we ality of time series increases, model performance tends to
propose a multiorder graph neural network with cross-learning degrade. In contrast, deep learning methods have gained signif-
(MGCL). First, we design a multiscale temporal module that
captures long-term seasonal dependencies and short-term trend icant attention for automatically capturing nonlinear features in
dependencies by employing a temporal global attention network high-dimensional data, including supervised, semi-supervised,
(TGAN) and a gated temporal convolution network (GTCN), and unsupervised methods. Supervised methods rely on prederespectively. Second, we construct an adaptive hypergraph gen- fined labels and perform well when detecting known anomaly
erator to explicitly represent the dynamic high-order interactions patterns. However, due to the diversity of anomaly classes,
among multiple variables. Finally, we develop a multiorder graph
cross-learning module, which integrates a dynamic memory high-quality labels often require extensive manual annotation.
graph convolution network (DMGCN), a tri-directional diffusion Furthermore, the extreme imbalance between positive and
hypergraph convolution network (3D-HGCN), and a cross- negative samples in anomaly data limits the model’s generlearner to comprehensively capture multiorder inter-variable alization ability. Although semi-supervised methods improve
dependencies. Extensive experiments on eight real-world datasets generalization by learning from limited labeled data, they
demonstrate that MGCL outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.
 still struggle to recognize diverse anomaly patterns due to
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, cross-learning, graph neural the limited label categories. Unsupervised methods bypass
network (GNN), hypergraph, multivariate time series (MTS). the need for labels, effectively addressing challenges related
 to label scarcity and diverse anomaly patterns. Early unsu-
 I. I NTRODUCTION pervised approaches, such as RNNs [4], GRUs [5], and
 LSTMs [6], excel at capturing temporal dependencies but
M ULTIVARIATE time series (MTS) are prevalent in the
 Internet of Things (IoT), industry, transportation, and
power grids. Anomaly detection in MTS aims to identify
 overlook the strong correlations between different time series,
 limiting their ability to model inter-variable dependencies.
behaviors that deviate from expected patterns. However, due Subsequently, unsupervised methods based on graph neural
to the high complexity and susceptibility of MTS, manual networks (GNNs) [7] and Transformer [8] are introduced into
monitoring is no longer feasible. Therefore, automated MTS MTS anomaly detection, demonstrating significant potential in
 modeling inter-variable relationships. Nevertheless, they still
 Received 8 January 2025; revised 9 May 2025; accepted 23 May 2025.
Date of publication 9 June 2025; date of current version 18 June 2025.
 face the following limitations.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foun- First, in terms of temporal dimension modeling, time series
dation of China under Grant 62476200 and Grant 62472313, in part by often exhibit complex multiscale characteristics. Fig. 1(a)
the 2024 Shanghai “Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan” Inter- shows two days of traffic flow data recorded by different
national Scientific and Technological Cooperation Program under Grant
24510714400, and in part by the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal sensors. Specifically, the traffic system displays dissimilar
Education Commission under Grant 202101070007E00098. The Associate patterns during peak and off-peak periods (Window 1 and
Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Mahnoosh Tajmirriahi. (Corresponding authors: Di Zang; Junqi Zhang.)
 Window 2). Additionally, peak periods on different days often
 Zhe Cui, Di Zang, and Junqi Zhang are with the College of Computer exhibit similar patterns (Window 1 and Window 3). This
Science and Technology and the Key Laboratory of Embedded System indicates strong long-term seasonal dependencies inherent in
and Service Computing, Ministry of Education, Tongji University, Shanghai the time series. Although models like RNNs have advantages
200092, China (e-mail: cuizhe117@tongji.edu.cn; zangdi@tongji.edu.cn;
zhangjunqi@tongji.edu.cn). in capturing long-term dependencies, they are often limited by
 Keshuang Tang is with the Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering, the size of the time window and typically suffer from gradient
Ministry of Education, and the College of Transportation Engineering, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200092, China.
 explosion when processing long sequences. Moreover, the time
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3577826 series also contains more complex short-term patterns. For
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 and Transformer, primarily model inter-variable dependencies
 based on non-Euclidean graph structures, neglecting dynamic
 evolution and high-order interactions among variables.
 To address the first limitation, we propose a multiscale
 temporal module. It utilizes fast Fourier transform (FFT)
 to decompose raw time series into seasonal and trend
 components. Then, the temporal global attention network
 (TGAN) and gated temporal convolution network (GTCN) are
 employed to capture long-term seasonal and short-term trend
 dependencies, respectively. This enhances the model’s ability
 to perceive multiscale temporal features.
 To overcome the second limitation, we propose an adaptive
 hypergraph generator. It constructs dynamic hypergraphs based
 on the spatial-temporal characteristics of input MTS, explicitly
 representing complex high-order interactions and their evolution among variables. Furthermore, we design a multiorder
 graph cross-learning module, which captures low-order dependencies via the dynamic memory graph convolutional network
 (DMGCN) and high-order dependencies via the tri-directional
 diffusion hypergraph convolution network (3D-HGCN). Additionally, a cross-learner further facilitates complementary
Fig. 1. Intricacy of temporal and inter-variable dependencies modeling in a learning and deep fusion of multiorder dependencies.
system. (a) In temporal dimension modeling, similar and dissimilar patterns In the end, the model proposed for the above limitations is
represent consistent or divergent data variation trends, respectively. These named multiorder GNN with cross-learning, namely MGCL.
patterns across time windows reveal the multiscale temporal characteristics
of traffic flow, encompassing short-term and long-term trends, and reflect To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to apply
the hierarchical complexity of time series at various temporal granularities. dynamic multiorder graphs for MTS anomaly detection. The
(b) In inter-variable dimension modeling, similar patterns indicate consistent main contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
trends between sensors or regions composed of multiple sensors, highlighting
strong correlations or synergistic effects. Conversely, dissimilar patterns reflect 1) We propose an MGCL framework for MTS anomaly
local disparities or independent characteristics. Thus, dynamic low-order detection, which effectively captures multiscale tempointeractions between sensors manifest as pairwise dependencies between
topological nodes, whereas dynamic high-order interactions across regions ral dependencies and models multiorder inter-variable
reveal complex associations among multiple topological nodes. dependencies.
 2) We design a multiscale temporal module that captures
 long-term seasonal and short-term trend dependeninstance, there are both similar and dissimilar patterns in Win- cies, thereby thoroughly perceiving multiscale temporal
dow 3, reflecting the complexity and diversity of short-term dependencies.
trend dependencies. Therefore, to comprehensively understand 3) We construct an adaptive hypergraph generator that
the complex characteristics of time series, it is essential to automatically builds hypergraphs based on the spatialcapture both long-term and short-term dependencies. temporal characteristics of MTS, explicitly representing
 Second, in terms of inter-variable dimensional modeling, high-order interactions and their evolution among varithe relationships among variables often exhibit dynamics and ables. Meanwhile, we design a multiorder graph crossmultiorder characteristics. Fig. 1(b) illustrates an example of learning module aimed at capturing both low-order and
traffic conditions during peak hours on a workday. During peak high-order inter-variable dependencies, promoting their
hours, traffic flow usually travels between residential and busi- complementary learning and deep fusion.
ness areas, with variable relationships evolving continuously 4) We conduct extensive experiments on eight real-world
over time. This highlights the dynamic correlations among datasets. The results demonstrate that MGCL achieves
variables. However, most existing MTS anomaly detection state-of-the-art performance and validates its effectivemethods rely on static graph structures, lacking the ability to ness in anomaly localization and diagnosis.
dynamically model inter-variable dependencies. Furthermore, The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
both low-order and high-order interactions coexist among Section II summarizes the related work. Section III presents
variables, reflecting their multiorder characteristics. For exam- preliminary. Section IV introduces our method. Section V
ple, as shown in Fig. 1(b), low-order interactions may occur shows experiment results. Finally, Section VI concludes this
between topological node pairs within a business area, while article.
high-order interactions arise from regional disparities. Traffic
patterns between business areas often display similarities, II. R ELATED W ORK
while those between leisure and residential areas may be vastly
dissimilar. These regional disparities underscore the complex- A. Traditional Methods for Anomaly Detection
ity and significance of high-order interactions among multiple Early anomaly detection studies primarily rely on statistical
topological nodes. However, existing methods, such as GNNs theories, such as ARIMA [9] and PCA [10]. These methods
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

assume that time series follows a linear structure, which prevents them from capturing nonlinear features. Subsequently,
machine learning methods, such as One-Class SVM [11] and
STS-AD [12], improve detection performance by capturing
nonlinear features. However, these methods rely on manually
designed features and suffer significant performance degradation when dealing with high-dimensional data.
 Fig. 2. Traditional graph and hypergraph structure.

B. GNNs for Anomaly Detection
 Deep unsupervised methods are widely adopted for handling modeling temporal dependencies, these methods fail to fully
high-dimensional, hard-to-label anomalous data. RNN-based consider the multiscale temporal characteristics. Moreover, in
approaches [13] excel at capturing temporal dependencies modeling inter-variable dependencies, they overlook higherwithin individual time series but face gradient explosion order interactions among multiple variables.
issues with long sequences and cannot model inter-variable In summary, compared to prior work, our proposed MGCL
dependencies. Although CNN-based methods [14] can capture offers the following advantages.
inter-variable dependencies, they assume MTS follow grid- 1) MGCL employs FFT for multiscale decomposition of
like, Euclidean structures. However, in real-world IoT, power, raw time series and constructs TGAN and GTCN to
and transportation systems, sensor distributions exhibit unique effectively capture long-term seasonal and short-term
non-Euclidean structures, motivating the use of GNN [7]. trend dependencies.
 Early GNN methods primarily rely on static graphs to 2) MGCL adaptively constructs hypergraphs based on
model inter-variable dependencies. GDN [15] represents inter- the spatial-temporal characteristics of MTS, explicitly
variable relationships as non-Euclidean graph structures and representing high-order interactions and their dynamic
detects anomalies based on prediction errors. MSCRED evolution among variables. This overcomes the limita-
[16] employs a graph feature matrix to encode inter- tions of traditional Euclidean graph structures, making
variable relationships and integrates LSTM to capture temporal it more suitable for real-world data.
dependencies, detecting anomalies via reconstruction errors. 3) MGCL leverages DMGCN and 3D-HGCN to model
MTAD-GAT [17] utilizes a graph attention network to jointly low-order and high-order inter-variable dependencies,
learn temporal and inter-variable dependencies. However, respectively, and employs a cross-learner to promote
these methods assume static graph structures, neglecting the their complementary learning and deep fusion.
dynamic evolution of variable relationships.
 To overcome the limitations of static graphs, recent methods III. P RELIMINARY
have explored dynamic graphs. MAGNN [18] proposes a mul-
 A. Definitions
tiscale adaptive GNN that dynamically models inter-variable
dependencies through multiscale temporal decomposition and 1) Traditional Graph Structure: It is G = (V; E; A). It conadaptive graph learning. However, its multiscale modeling fails sists of a node (variable) set V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN } (|V| = N), and
to explicitly distinguish between global and local temporal an edge set E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , e M } (|E| = M) that connects paired
dependencies and overlooks the multiorder characteristics of nodes. Edges in E represent low-order pairwise relationships
variables. Additionally, AddGraph [19] combines dynamic between variables, as shown in Fig. 2. An adjacency matrix
graphs with GRU to capture anomalous patterns. GReLeN A defines these relationships: when variable vi is correlated
[20] models inter-variable dependencies using dynamic graphs with v j , A(vi , v j ) = 1. Otherwise, A(vi , v j ) = 0. Notably, A
and a random graph relation learning strategy. MEGA [1] may not always be available in all systems. In such cases, we
integrates discrete wavelet transforms with graph autoencoders adopt an adaptive embedding matrix Z as a substitute.
(AEs) to enhance anomaly detection. CrossFuN [2] further 2) Hypergraph Structure: It is defined as G = (V; E; H),
improves detection by combining dynamic graphs with time- an extension of a traditional graph. It includes a hyperedge
frequency domain information. set E = {e01 , e02 , . . . , e0M } (|E| = M) that connects multiple
 nodes, as shown in Fig. 2. Hyperedges represent high-order
 inter-variable interactions. An incidence matrix H encodes
C. Transformer for Anomaly Detection
 the relationships between nodes and hyperedges: if a node
 Benefiting from advancements in self-attention mecha- v belongs to a hyperedge e0 , then H(v, e0 ) = 1. Otherwise,
nism, Transformer has demonstrated exceptional performance. H(v, e0 ) = 0.
TranAD [21] utilizes a self-attention-based sequence encoder
to capture temporal dependencies and infer anomaly patterns.
Anomaly Transformer [22] improves the conventional self- B. Problem Formalization
attention mechanism by introducing an anomaly attention A system is represented as G. MTS is X ∈ RN×T , where
mechanism, achieving effective detection by maximizing the N represents the number of variables and T is the length of
distinction between normal and abnormal patterns. DTAAD the time series. At time step t, MTS is simplified as Xt . The
[23] integrates TCN with Transformer, enabling it to capture objective of anomaly detection is to learn a function S from
both temporal and inter-variable dependencies. However, in historical h time steps of data without requiring known labels,
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Architecture of the proposed MGCL consists of four main modules: a multiscale temporal module, an adaptive hypergraph generator, a multiorder
graph cross-learning module, and a predictor. The multiscale temporal module leverages TGAN and GTCN to capture long-term seasonal and short-term trend
dependencies within the time series. The adaptive hypergraph generator dynamically constructs hypergraphs based on the spatial-temporal characteristics of
input MTS, explicitly representing high-order inter-variable interactions and their dynamic evolution. The multiorder graph cross-learning module integrates
DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner, which captures low-order dependencies in traditional graphs and high-order dependencies in hypergraphs, while
promoting their complementary learning and deep fusion. The predictor refines feature dimensions and produces the final prediction results.

to detect the anomaly state D ∈ {0, 1} (1 represents anomaly) f1 , . . . , fk = argTopK(Amp(XFFT )) (3)
within a future time window W
 FFT = {X FFT [ f1 ], . . . , X FFT [ fk ]}
 Xmain (4)
 S
 [X(t−h):t , G] −→ D t:(t+W) . (1) where X represents MTS data, XFFT is a frequency domain
 signal after FFT processing, Amp(·) denotes an amplitude
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY function, argTopK(·) selects the top K frequency components
A. Framework Overview based on their amplitudes, and Xmain FFT represents a set of
 multifrequency signals composed of the top K amplitude
 The structure of MGCL is shown in Fig. 3. First, the
 components.
MTS is processed in parallel by the multiscale tempo-
 Subsequently, a seasonal time series XSeason , which repreral module and the adaptive hypergraph generator, which,
 sents long-term variations in time series, is extracted using
respectively, capture multiscale temporal dependencies and
 inverse FFT (IFFT) based on XmainFFT . Then, a trend time series
construct dynamic hypergraphs. Second, the multiorder graph
 XTrend , representing short-term variations in time series, is
cross-learning module comprehensively models multiorder
 obtained through a series reduction process. This process is
inter-variable dependencies. Finally, the predictor refines the
 expressed as follows:
channel dimensions of multiorder dependencies and generates
 XSeason = IFFT Xmain
 
prediction results. Detailed descriptions of each module are FFT (5)
provided below. XTrend = X − XSeason . (6)

B. Multiscale Temporal Module 2) Global Temporal Attention Convolution: Seasonal series
 typically exhibit smooth variations, requiring the capture of
 In real-world systems, time series exhibit complex charac- dependencies on a global scale. Therefore, we construct the
teristics, with both long-term seasonal and short-term trend TGAN
dependencies. However, models are often constrained by the  T 
size of a time window. When a window is large, the model exp W Q XSeason,t W K XSeason,i
tends to overlook short-term detailed features. Conversely, ati = P  T  (7)
 t
when a window is small, the model struggles to capture long- m=1 exp W Q XSeason,t W K XSeason,m
term dependencies and is prone to gradient explosion. To t
 X
 HT L = TGAN(XSeason ) = ati W V XSeason,i
 
address these challenges, we propose a multiscale temporal (8)
module, comprising three components. i=1
 1) Temporal Scale Decomposition: This process first
applies FFT to convert the original MTS into multiple fre- where exp(·) denotes exponential function. W Q , W K , and
quency signals W V are trainable parameters. ati represents the correlation
 between time step t and time step i. HT indicates long-term
 XFFT = FFT(X) (2) seasonal dependencies captured by GTAN.
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

 3) Gated Temporal Convolution: Trend series often exhibit directional, such as traffic flows in transportation systems or
complex local fluctuations. To effectively capture their short- communication links in IoT systems. Based on the predefined
term trend dependencies, we construct the GTCN adjacency matrix A, we construct a forward propagation
 matrix DF and a backward propagation matrix DB
 TCN(XTrend ) = Convdil
 s (X Trend ) (9)
 HTS = GTCN(XTrend ) = Tanh(TCN(XTrend )) DF = A/rowsum(A), DB = AT /rowsum(AT ). (14)
 Sigmoid(TCN(XTrend )) (10) Furthermore, we design the AGCN with a dual-propagation
 mechanism, formulated as
where Convdils (·) represents a temporal convolution operation K
with s kernel size and dil dilation rate. Tanh(·) and Sigmoid(·) X
 H A = AGCN(H0 ) = DkF H0 W 1 + DkB H0 W 2
 
are Tanh and Sigmoid activation functions, respectively.
 k=0
indicates Hadamard product. HTS is short-term trend depen- 0
 + Aa H W 3 (15)
dencies captured by GTCN.
 Finally, the short-term trend dependencies HTS are com- where W 1 , W 2 , and W 3 are trainable parameters. k indicates
bined with the long-term seasonal dependencies HT L to a diffusion step length. H A is inter-variable relationships
comprehensively capture multiscale temporal dependencies captured by AGCN.
 3) Hypergraph Construction: Based on H A , we cluster
 HT = HTS + HTL . (11)
 highly similar variables into a hyperedge and construct the
 hypergraph incidence matrix H to represent high-order inter-
C. Adaptive HyperGraph Generator variable relationships
 In real-world systems, sensors of the same type exhibit H = Max(Soft(H A )W 4 ) (16)
homogeneity, whereas sensors of different types display heterogeneity. While low-order inter-variable interactions are where W 4 is a trainable parameter. Max(·) selects the maxiimportant, high-order interactions among multiple variables mum value of each row in the matrix, indicating the variable
cannot be overlooked. Although prior studies have utilized with the highest similar score. Based on the incidence matrix
traditional hypergraphs [24] to represent such higher-order H, we construct the hypergraph G = (V; E; H) to support
inter-variable interactions, several limitations remain. 1) Tra- the subsequent modeling of high-order inter-variable dependitional hypergraphs are constructed using K-means clustering dencies.
to define hyperedges, requiring manual tuning of the K value. 4) Convergence of Hypergraph: The adaptive hypergraph
However, real-world systems are diverse, making it challeng- generator dynamically constructs a hypergraph G from MTS
ing to determine an appropriate K value, which may also vary data X, explicitly representing high-order interactions and
with system changes. 2) Traditional hypergraph construction their dynamic evolution among variables. To address conis applied directly to the complete training set, resulting in vergence challenges arising from dynamic adjustments, we
a static and unchangeable structure. Thus, it lacks flexibility ensure stability through mathematical constraints and optiand the ability to adjust in real time. To address these issues, mized strategies.
we design an adaptive hypergraph generator. The generator Specifically, a global optimization constraint L, as defined
not only dynamically constructs hypergraphs but also adjusts in (38), is imposed during training. This constraint ensures
their structure in real time, explicitly modeling the impact of convergence toward the global optimum, mitigating random
anomalies on a system. For example, it can describe fault drift of the hypergraph. Concurrently, the Adam optimizer
propagation in a power grid or congestion diffusion in a traffic updates the model parameters as follows:
system. P n+1 = P n − µ∇P L (17)
 1) Feature Dimension Expansion: The adaptive hypergraph generator first employs a standard multilayer perceptron where P n represents the model parameters at iteration n, µ
(MLP) to adjust the channels of the original MTS to facilitate is the learning rate, and ∇P L denotes the gradient of the
subsequent feature exploration. The process is expressed as loss L. Since H is driven by X and the prediction results
 depend on H, optimizing L indirectly constrains the hyper-
 H0 = MLP(X) (12) graph adjustment process. The Adam optimizer adaptively
where X represents the original MTS data, and H0 denotes the adjusts the learning rate by computing the first- and secondhidden features processed by the MLP. order moment estimates of the gradients, thereby preventing
 2) Adaptive Graph Convolution: To cluster similar vari- divergence.
ables into a hyperedge, we construct an adaptive graph Additionally, to mitigate significant fluctuations of the
convolutional network (AGCN) to capture inter-variable rela- hypergraph, we introduce a smoothness regularization term
tionships in H0 . The adaptive adjacency matrix is T
 X 2
 Lsmooth = η H(t) − H(t−1) F (18)
 Aa = Soft ReLU Z 1 Z T2
 
 (13) t=2

where Z1 and Z2 are adaptive embedding matrices. Soft(·) where η is the regularization coefficient, and |·|F denotes the
and ReLU(·) are Softmax and ReLU functions, respectively. Frobenius norm. This smoothness constraint ensures numeri-
In real-world systems, inter-variable interactions are often cal stability by penalizing abrupt changes in the hypergraph
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

between consecutive time steps. Moreover, from a theoretical 2) Tri-Directional Diffusion Hypergraph Convolution: To
perspective, we analyze the convergence of the hypergraph and effectively capture high-order dependencies of dynamic hyperuse (18) to derive its structural variation bounds graphs, we need to construct a Hypergraph Convolutional
 Network (HGCN). Previous HGCNs [26] and their advanced
 H(t) − H(t−1) F ≤ Lsmooth /η(T − 1).
 p
 (19) variants [27] rely solely on variable features, aggregating
The bound ensures that the hypergraph’s variation is tightly variable features into hyperedges and subsequently updating
constrained by regularization, preventing divergence. In variable features based on hyperedge features. However, these
summary, these mathematical constraints and optimization methods focus only on local features of hypergraphs while
strategies promote the stable convergence of the hypergraph neglecting their global features. Therefore, we propose the
generator during training. 3D-HGCN, which comprehensively captures high-order intervariable dependencies from both global and local perspectives.
 First, through a dimensional transformation layer, variables
D. Multiorder Graph Cross-Learning Module and hyperedges in a dynamic hypergraph H are trans-
 To capture multiorder inter-variable dependencies, we formed into feature representations to facilitate subsequent
design the multiorder graph cross-learning module comprising tri-directional feature diffusion
three submodules: DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner.
 1) Dynamic Memory Graph Convolution: Although prior X̃i = W 6 Xi + b1 (24)
methods using GCNs [25] have proven effective in capturing Ẽ j = W 7 E j + b2 (25)
inter-variable dependencies, limitations still remain. 1) Intervariable relationships in a graph structure may change over where Xi is the time series of variable vi . X̃i represents
time. However, traditional graph structures are static, meaning the feature representation of variable vi after the dimensional
their adjacency matrix A is time-invariant and cannot rep- transformation. Similarly, E j is the embedding of hyperedge
resent the dynamic inter-variable associations. 2) Due to the e0j . Ẽ j denotes the feature representation of hyperedge e0j after
sparsity of anomalous data, MTS anomaly detection methods the dimensional transformation. W 6 , W 7 , b1 , and b2 are
need to learn normal patterns. The periodic characteristics of trainable parameters.
historical data are important for learning these patterns. For Next, based on the feature representations of variables and
instance, traffic flow often exhibits similar patterns on the hyperedges, the interaction similarity between variables and
same weekdays (days of week), and electricity consumption hyperedges is computed using a self-attention mechanism
often follows similar behavior during the same times of the 
 T
 
day (times of day). However, current methods overlook these exp X̃i Ẽ j
historical periodic patterns. Therefore, we construct a dynamic ai j = P 
 T
  (26)
 er ∈vi exp X̃ i Ẽr
adjacency matrix Ad to represent the time-varying relationships among variables. Additionally, to enhance the model’s T
memory of periodic patterns, we introduce a historical pattern where Ẽ j is the transpose of hyperedge feature representations
bank for each variable and construct a pattern adjacency matrix Ẽ j . ai j represents the similarity score between node vi and
A p. They are expressed as hyperedge e0j , which can dynamically change over time.
 Then, 3D-HGCN performs a tri-directional diffusion proexp HT T (. . . , i) HT (. . . , j)
 
 cess. Specifically, hyperedge features propagate to variables,
 Ad = P N (20)
 i=1 exp HT (. . . , i) HT (. . . , j)
 T variable features propagate to hyperedges, and hyperedge
 
 features aggregate to variables. These processes are expressed
 exp HT T (. . . , i) B (. . . , j)
 
 A p = PN (21) as follows:
 i=1 exp HT (. . . , i) B (. . . , j)
 T
 
 P
 e j ∈ev ai j Ẽ j
where HT T represents the transpose of the multiscale temporal gi = P (27)
 e j ∈ev ai j
features HT . N is the number of variables. B indicates the P
pattern bank, which stores historical periodic features (times of vi ∈e j ai j X̃ i
 oj = P (28)
day and days of week) for each variable to assist in modeling v ∈e ai j
normal patterns. P i j
 e j ∈ev ai j o j
 Furthermore, we fuse the two adjacency matrices to con- qi = P . (29)
struct DMGCN e j ∈ev ai j

 Q = FC(Ad k A p ) (22) Finally, a feature aggregation operation is performed to
 H L = DMGCN(Q, HT W 5 ) (23) obtain high-order representations after tri-directional diffusion
 N N
 !
where k denotes a feature concatenation operation. FC(·) X X
 H H = Sigmoid gi + qi (30)
represents a fully connected layer. Q is the fused dynamic
 i=1 i=1
memory adjacency matrix. W 5 indicates a trainable weight
matrix. H L represents low-order inter-variable dependencies where N indicates the number of variables, and H H represents
captured by DMGCN. high-order inter-variable dependencies captured by 3D-HGCN.
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

 3) Cross-Learner: Low-order inter-variable dependencies where Y t represents a predicted value by MGCL, Ŷ t is a
H L and high-order inter-variable dependencies H H inevitably ground truth, and ψ is a hyperparameter. The segmented
have overlapping and complementary features. To eliminate loss function improves the overall performance of anomaly
redundant features and promote complementary advantages, detection by enhancing MGCL’s sensitivity to anomalies while
we design a cross-learner maintaining a stable fitting effect during normal periods.
 exp H H T (. . . , i) H L (. . . , j)
 
 ALH = PN (31) Algorithm 1 Training of MGCL
 i=1 exp H H (. . . , i) H L (. . . , j)
 T
 

 exp H L T (. . . , i) H H (. . . , j)
 
 AHL = PN (32)
 i=1 exp H L (. . . , i) H H (. . . , j)
 T
 

where ALH and AHL represent the correlation scores between
low→high and high→low dependencies, respectively.
 Then, based on the correlation scores, cross-learning is
performed as follows:
 H0 L = ω HL + $ ( ALH H H ) (33)
 HH=ξ
 0
 HH + γ ( AHL H L ) (34)
where ω, $, ξ, and γ are trainable parameters. H0 L (H L )
and H0 H (H H ) denote the updated low-order and high-order
dependencies at l (l − 1) layer, respectively.
 Finally, H0 L and H0 H are fused to achieve multiorder intervariable dependencies modeling:
 H M = H0 L + H0 H . (35)
 G. Anomaly Detection
E. Predictor The MGCL is trained using the segmented loss function
 L to achieve optimal performance, as shown in Algorithm 1.
 The multiorder inter-variable dependencies H M are fed into
 Additionally, during the threshold selection phase, traditional
the predictor to generate predictions Y, as shown in Fig. 3.
 MTS anomaly detection methods often adopt the Peak Over
This process is expressed as
 Threshold (POT) [25]. However, POT suffers from several
 Y = MLP(H M ) (36) drawbacks, including strong dependence on data distribution
 assumptions, high subjectivity in threshold selection, poor
where the MLP consists of two fully connected layers and scalability to high dimensions, and sensitivity to noise. To
functions as a non-autoregressive method to generate predic- address these limitations, we propose a novel dynamic threshtions, effectively avoiding the issue of error accumulation. old search strategy, as illustrated in Algorithm 2. It enables
 more adaptive and robust selection of threshold scores. Finally,
F. Loss Function during the detection phase, anomaly states of test samples
 are determined based on the dynamically selected thresholds,
 In MTS anomaly detection, the choice of the loss function
 achieving more accurate anomaly detection, as demonstrated
has a significant impact on model performance [28]. To
 in Algorithm 3.
effectively handle anomaly detection in different time periods,
we propose a segmented loss function that combines mean
absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE). V. E XPERIMENT
For time periods with abrupt changes (e.g., sensor anomalies), RMSE is employed to amplify the differences between In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on eight
predictions and actual values, ensuring MGCL accurately real-world datasets to answer the six research questions.
detects anomalies with large fluctuations. For stable periods 1) RQ1: How does MGCL perform compared to baselines
with minor changes under normal conditions, MAE is used in terms of benchmark MTS anomaly detection?
to avoid over-penalizing small errors, thereby maintaining 2) RQ2: How does MGCL perform in traffic anomaly
accuracy during stable periods. The segmented loss function detection with a larger number of variables?
is formulated as 3) RQ3: How do different components of MGCL influence
 (ˇ
 ˇŶ t −Y t ˇ , Y t−Y t−1 < ψ
 ˇ its performance?
 f (Ŷ t , Y t ) = Yt
 (37) 4) RQ4: How do hyperparameter settings affect MGCL?
 (Ŷ t −Y t )2 , otherwise 5) RQ5: How is the robustness of MGCL?
 T
 X 6) RQ6: How does the running time and complexity effi-
 L Ŷ (t+1):(t+T ) , Y (t+1):(t+T ) = f (Ŷ t , Y t )
 
 (38) ciency of MGCL compare to the baselines?
 t=1 7) RQ7: How does MGCL perform in real scenarios?
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Algorithm 2 Threshold Selection for Anomaly Score TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

 Among them, PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-ACC8
 are traffic accident datasets. They are built using traffic data
 recorded by the California Performance Measurement System
 (PEMS) [31] in combination with the Countrywide Traffic Accident Datasets (CTADS) [32]. CTADS contains 1.5
 million accident reports collected since March 2016, providing detailed information such as accident types, locations,
 and durations. PEMS-Rainy [33], derived from our previous
 research, includes traffic condition data associated with heavy
 rainfall events. The details of all datasets are summarized in
 Table I.

 B. Experiment Settings and Evaluation Metrics
Algorithm 3 Anomaly Detection of MGCL
 The experiments are conducted on a computer equipped
 with Python 3.6, PyTorch 1.12, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
 4090 GPU, and an i9-12900K CPU. These datasets are preprocessed using Z-score normalization. During the training phase,
 an Adam optimizer is utilized, with the initial learning rate,
 batch size, and epochs set to 0.001, 64, and 200, respectively.
 To prevent model overfitting, an early stopping strategy is
 employed. During the testing phase, model performance is
 evaluated using Precision (P), Recall (R), F1-score (F1), and
 area under the ROC curve (AUC) [23]. Consistent with prior
 works, following the point adjustment strategy proposed in
 [13], [35], if any point is detected as abnormal within a time
 window, the window is marked as abnormal.

 C. Baselines
 We compare MGCL with 20 baselines. On benchmark
A. Datasets datasets, we select classic MTS anomaly detection models.
 The experiments involved eight MTS datasets covering a 1) LSTM-NDT [29]: Is one of the earliest models to use
variety of application scenarios. The Soil Moisture Active LSTM for MTS anomaly detection.
Passive (SMAP) and Mars Science Laboratory Rover (MSL) 2) DAGMM [35]: Combines AE and Gaussian mixture
datasets [29], published by NASA, provide data on soil model for anomaly detection.
moisture and the Martian environment, respectively. The server 3) OmniAnomaly [13]: Uses RNN to capture temporal
machine dataset (SMD) [13], collected by an internet company, dependencies and planar normalization flow to model
includes data on server operating states. The MSDS dataset inter-variable dependencies.
[30] contains records from distributed systems. However, as 4) MSCRED [16]: Models temporal dependencies from a
system complexity increases, more systems are required to multiscale perspective.
record an expanding number of variables. 5) USAD [36]: Improves anomaly detection performance
 To meet the requirements of MTS anomaly detection in real- using AE with adversarial training.
world complex scenarios, we construct four traffic datasets 6) GDN [15]: Is one of the first models to use GNNs,
specifically designed for large-scale MTS anomaly detection. leveraging attention scores for anomaly detection.
These datasets include PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, PEMS- 7) TranAD [21]: Builds on a Transformer framework,
ACC8, and PEMS-Rainy. proficient in capturing inter-variable dependencies.
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS I NCLUDES SMAP, MSL, SMD, AND MSDS. B OLD : B EST, U NDERLINE : S ECOND B EST

 8) CAE-M [37]: Combines LSTM and AE to capture eling temporal dependencies while neglecting inter-variable
 temporal and inter-variable dependencies, suitable for dependencies, resulting in poor performance. AE, as an effeccomplex MTS data. tive mechanism for capturing inter-variable dependencies, is
 9) CrossFuN [2]: Considers both time domain and fre- widely adopted due to its ability to efficiently encode MTS.
 quency domain information of time series. Based on the AE architecture, models like OmniAnomaly,
 10) DTAAD [23]: Based on Transformer framework, inte- MSCRED, USAD, and CAE-M successfully capture intergrates Autoregressive (AR) modeling and AE to achieve variable dependencies. Leveraging the advantages of GNN in
 strong anomaly detection performance. modeling non-Euclidean structures, GDN and CrossFuN effec-
 11) MTGFlow Cluster [38]: Combines a clustering strategy tively model inter-variable dependencies. Moreover, thanks to
 with an entity-aware normalizing flow. advancements in attention mechanisms, TranAD, DTAAD, and
 On traffic datasets, we select models specifically designed MTGFlow cluster achieve remarkable detection performance.
for traffic tasks. Although the above methods achieve notable performance,
 1) ASTGCN [39]: Utilizes attention mechanisms to capture they remain inferior to the proposed MGCL. Its advantages
 spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic states. are mainly reflected in two aspects.
 2) AGCRN [40]: Combines GCN and GRU to capture 1) MGCL incorporates the multiscale temporal module that
 spatial-temporal dependencies. comprehensively captures short-term trend dependen-
 3) MTGNN [41]: Enhances spatial-temporal dependencies cies and long-term seasonal dependencies. This design
 modeling through Mix-Hop propagation and dilated con- enables better adaptation to the multilevel characteristics
 volutions. of time series.
 4) STG-NCDE [42]: Models traffic patterns using neural 2) MGCL introduces the DMGCN module, integrating a
 controlled differential equations. historical pattern bank and dynamic graphs. It dynam-
 5) DDGCRN [43]: Introduces a dynamic graph convolu- ically captures normal inter-variable patterns, thereby
 tional recurrent module for effective spatial-temporal enhancing anomaly detection performance.
 dependencies modeling. However, MGCL shows suboptimal F1 performance on the
 6) MegaCRN [44]: Proposes a meta-graph learner to cap- MSDS dataset. This may be attributed to the relatively small
 ture spatial-temporal dependencies. number of variables in MSDS, which constrains high-order
 7) ST-Wave [45]: Leverages a wavelet decomposition to inter-variable interactions. Consequently, the effectiveness of
 disentangle and fuse spatial-temporal dependencies. the adaptive hypergraph generator and 3D-HGCN is limited
 8) iTransformer [46]: Enhances performance by utilizing in such scenarios.
 attention mechanisms on inverted time-series dimensions.
 E. Performance Comparison and Analysis on Traffic
 9) DeepSTUQ [47]: Considers spatial-temporal uncertain-
 Datasets (RQ2)
 ties and effectively captures traffic dependencies.
 As system complexity increases, the number of variables
 grows correspondingly. To meet the requirements of real-
D. Experimental Comparison and Analysis on Benchmark world detection, we conduct experiments on traffic datasets
MTS Datasets (RQ1) with a larger number of variables, as shown in Table III.
 To verify the general applicability of MGCL in MTS ASTGCN, based on a spatial-temporal GNN framework and
anomaly detection tasks, we conduct comparative experiments incorporating an attention mechanism, effectively captures
and analyses on four benchmark datasets, including SMAP, spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic patterns. AGCRN and
MSL, SMD, and MSDS, as shown in Table II. Early models, MTGNN focus more on the dynamic characteristics of traffic
such as LSTM-NDT and DAGMM, primarily focus on mod- patterns, enhancing their ability to model spatial-temporal
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE ON T RAFFIC DATASETS I NCLUDES PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, PEMS-ACC8, AND PEMS-R AINY.
 B OLD : B EST, U NDERLINE : S ECOND B EST

dependencies. STG-NCDE introduces differential equations hypergraph generator’s ability to dynamically construct reainto deep neural networks, modeling continuous spatial- sonable hypergraphs, while 3D-HGCN excels in modeling
temporal dependencies. DDGCRN, MegaCRN, and ST-Wave multiorder inter-variable dependencies. The results of w/o
demonstrate strong performance by incorporating dynamic DMGCN highlight the essential role of DMGCN, as it not only
graph mechanisms. iTransformer and DeepSTUQ, as the latest captures normal patterns through the historical pattern bank of
methods, exhibit excellent detection performance. variables but also effectively models low-order inter-variable
 However, none of them outperforms MGCL. This is dependencies. The performance of w/o Cross indicates that the
mainly due to: 1) the proposed adaptive hypergraph generator absence of the cross-learner module results in insufficient comdynamically constructs hypergraphs, accurately representing plementary learning and deep fusion between low-order and
high-order inter-variable interactions and 2) the 3D-HGCN high-order dependencies. Furthermore, the w/o Trend-T and
module effectively extracts hypergraph features, capturing w/o Season-A results underscore the critical roles of GTCN
complex high-order inter-variable dependencies. It is worth and TGAN, respectively. Compared to conventional temporal
noting that, as shown in Table III, compared with other state- feature extraction modules, they enhance the modeling of longof-the-art baselines, MGCL achieves significant performance and short-term dependencies in time series. Additionally, the
improvements on PEMS-ACC4 (307 variables), PEMS-ACC7 results of w/o Trend and w/o Season, respectively, reveal the
(228 variables), and PEMS-Rainy (308 variables). This can importance of capturing both trend and seasonal series, both
be attributed to the hypergraph mechanism, which simplifies of which contribute to model performance enhancement. All
graph structures by grouping multiple similar variables into in all, each key component of MGCL plays a positive role,
a hyperedge, thereby capturing complex inter-variable depen- aligning with the design objectives.
dencies. However, its improvement on PEMS-ACC8 (170 variables) is relatively limited. The smaller number of variables in
PEMS-ACC8 reduces the effectiveness of hypergraph simpli- G. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis (RQ4)
fication, constraining MGCL’s performance on PEMS-ACC8.
 To further explore the impact of different hyperparameters
 on MGCL, we analyze three key hyperparameters: time win-
F. Ablation Study (RQ3)
 dow size, threshold search interval [δ, ∂] of anomaly score,
 To evaluate the contribution of key components in MGCL, and diffusion steps of AGCN. The results on six datasets are
we design the following ablation variants. shown in Fig. 5. Time window size, as a critical parameter,
 1) w/o Trend: Removes the trend series. significantly affects the model’s performance. A large window
 2) w/o Season: Excludes the seasonal series. size may capture excessive redundant information, increasing
 3) w/o Trend-T: Preserves the trend series, replacing GTCN the risk of overfitting. Conversely, an overly small window size
 with a conventional TCN. may fail to capture sufficient temporal dependencies, resulting
 4) w/o Season-A: Retains the seasonal series and replaces in the loss of critical information. As observed, when the
 TGAN with a conventional attention mechanism. window size surpasses a certain threshold, the performance
 5) w/o Cross: Substitutes the cross-learner module with a generally declines.
 conventional fusion mechanism. Threshold search interval [δ, ∂] anomaly score directly
 6) w/o DMGCN: Replaces DMGCN with a standard GCN. affects anomaly detection performance. A smaller search inter-
 7) w/o 3D-HGCN: Applies a traditional hypergraph gener- val enables fine-grained threshold adjustment but may fail to
 ation approach and replaces 3D-HGCN with a standard encompass a global optimal threshold, preventing the model
 hypergraph convolution. from achieving peak performance. Conversely, a larger search
 We conduct an ablation study on six datasets, as shown interval broadens the search scope but may introduce excessive
in Fig. 4. The w/o 3D-HGCN significantly affects the invalid thresholds, increasing computational costs and potenperformance of MGCL. This is attributed to the adaptive tially introducing noise, leading to performance fluctuations.
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

Fig. 4. Ablation study results on SMAP, MSL, SMD, PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-Rainy datasets.

 Fig. 6. Robustness testing results on PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-
 ACC8 datasets.

Fig. 5. Hyperparameter study results on SMAP, MSL, SMD, PEMS-ACC4, MegaCRN, and ST-Wave are shown in Fig. 6. As data loss
PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-Rainy datasets. rates or noise levels increase, MGCL demonstrates superior
 robustness with a relatively slower performance degradation
 Previous studies indicate that increasing the diffusion step trend compared to these baselines. This robustness stems
of GCN can expand the spatial perception range of the model, from the combined effects of the multiscale temporal modenhancing its ability to capture inter-variable dependencies. ule and the multiorder graph cross-learning module. In the
However, as shown in Fig. 5, performance deteriorates when inter-variable dimension, the multiorder graph cross-learning
the diffusion step exceeds a certain threshold. We attribute module effectively captures both low-order and high-order
this to the fact that 3D-HGCN already possesses robust inter-variable dependencies. Additionally, it facilitates complespatial perception capabilities. Excessive diffusion steps may mentary learning between these dependencies, mitigating the
introduce redundant information and noise, leading to inaccu- impact of data missing and errors. In the temporal dimension,
racies in hypergraph generation and ultimately degrading the the multiscale temporal module captures comprehensive temperformance. poral dependencies by modeling trends and seasonal series,
 ensuring a more robust representation of temporal patterns.
H. Robustness Testing (RQ5)
 In real-world scenarios, sudden events such as traffic I. Complexity Analysis (RQ6)
accidents or communication interruptions can cause sensor Model complexity is a key indicator for evaluating effifailures, leading to data loss or errors. Therefore, we conduct ciency in practical applications. We perform a comprehensive
two robustness tests to facilitate the application of MGCL complexity analysis on the PEMS-Rainy dataset, as shown
in practical scenarios. Specifically, on PEMS-ACC4, PEMS- in Fig. 7. AGCRN, a lightweight architecture based on
ACC7, and PEMS-ACC8 datasets, we randomly erase 5% to adaptive graphs and RNN, significantly reduces computa-
20% of the data to simulate data missing. In addition, we tional overhead. However, its low F1-score reveals limitations
add 10% to 50% Gaussian noise (mean 10, standard deviation in detection performance. MegaCRN enhances detection
60) to simulate data errors. Comparison results with AGCRN, performance by incorporating a meta-graph learner, while ST-
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 7. Running time and parameter count of models on PEMS-Rainy dataset.
The running time per epoch encompasses training, validation, and testing time,
while the number of parameters reflects the model’s complexity.

 Fig. 9. Visualization of the hypergraph during the accident near node No.137.
 Nodes in different colors indicate that they belong to different hyperedges.
 From the occurrence to the propagation to the dissipation of the accident, the
 dynamic changes in hyperedge types and the spatial-temporal evolution of the
 circled regions intuitively reveal the propagation and recovery mechanisms of
 the traffic network under the impact of the accident. (a) At 14:00. (b) At
 14:15. (c) At 14:30. (d) At 14:45. (e) At 15:00. (f) At 15:15.

Fig. 8. Traffic speed variation curve at node No.137 near the accident site
in California on January 10, 2019 shows significant fluctuations during the
accident period (red shaded area).

Wave employs a decoupling fusion framework with graph
wavelet position encoding to model inter-variable dependencies. Although ST-Wave improves detection accuracy, it incurs
higher runtime costs. In contrast, MGCL effectively balances
accuracy and complexity, making it well-suited for real-world
applications.
 Fig. 10. Visualization of spatial-temporal anomaly scores during the heavy
 rainfall in California on February 14, 2019. Darker colors indicate higher
 anomaly scores at the corresponding locations. (a) At 11:00. (b) At 12:30.
J. Case Study (RQ7) (c) At 14:00. (d) At 15:30. (e) At 17:00. (f) At 18:30.
 1) Visualization of Adaptive Hypergraphs: To evaluate the
effectiveness of the adaptive hypergraph generator, we conduct anomalous events, providing valuable insights for resource
experiments on the PEMS-Rainy dataset. Specifically, on Jan- allocation and management.
uary 10, 2019, at 14:15, a level-3 traffic accident occurred in 2) Anomaly Localization and Diagnosis: Accurate anomaly
downtown California, lasting approximately 2 h. We visualize localization and diagnosis are key for MTS anomaly detection,
traffic speed changes at node No.137 near the accident site, enabling rapid identification and resolution of anomalies. To
as shown in Fig. 8. This curve reveals a significant impact evaluate MGCL’s capability in anomaly localization and diagof the accident on traffic patterns. Furthermore, we visualize nosis, we conduct experiments on PEMS-Rainy. Specifically,
hypergraphs during the accident period. Fig. 9(a) shows the on February 14, 2019, a heavy rainfall event occurred in
hypergraph before the accident. As shown in Fig. 9(b), the California. The spatial-temporal anomaly score map of the
accident triggered notable structural changes, with a newly affected area, as shown in Fig. 10, reveals distinct patterns
formed hyperedge (marked in red) emerging in the affected of anomaly distribution. Overall, during the rainfall period,
downtown area. Fig. 9(c) and (d) shows that as the impact of the intensity and extent of the rainfall typically increase inithe accident spreads, the number of nodes associated with the tially and then decrease. Correspondingly, the number of high
red hyperedge grows as congestion propagates. Conversely, as anomaly score points follows a similar trend, first increasing
emergency measures such as traffic control are implemented, and then diminishing. However, at 17:00, despite a reduction
the accident’s impact gradually diminishes. Fig. 9(e) and (f) in rainfall intensity, certain regions still exhibit relatively high
demonstrates a reduction in the number of nodes covered by anomaly scores. These areas are primarily concentrated in Silithe red hyperedge. The above results show that compared con Valley, downtown, and key public transportation hubs. We
with traditional static hypergraphs, the adaptive hypergraph hypothesize that this phenomenon is related to the evening rush
generator can not only generate dynamic hypergraphs but also hour at that time. The rainfall exacerbates traffic congestion
explicitly represent the diffusion and dissipation process of in these already busy regions, significantly increasing traffic
CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2535014

 techniques to enhance computational efficiency and
 practicality.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
 graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
 [2] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multiview
 joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–9, 2023.
 [3] C. Li, L. Guo, H. Gao, and Y. Li, “Similarity-measured isolation forest:
 Anomaly detection method for machine monitoring data,” IEEE Trans.
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
 [4] M. Canizo, I. Triguero, A. Conde, and E. Onieva, “Multi-head CNN-
 RNN for multi-time series anomaly detection: An industrial case study,”
Fig. 11. Visualization of predictions and anomaly scores for nodes No.39 and Neurocomputing, vol. 363, pp. 246–260, Oct. 2019.
No.271. (a) Prediction curve for node No.39. (b) Anomaly score curve for [5] A. J. T. Sukanda and D. Adytia, “Wave forecast using bidirectional GRU
node No.39. (c) Prediction curve for node No.271. (d) Anomaly score curve and GRU method case study in Pangandaran, Indonesia,” in Proc. Int.
for node No.271. Conf. Data Sci. Appl. (ICoDSA), 2022, pp. 278–282.
 [6] H. Abbasimehr, M. Shabani, and M. Yousefi, “An optimized model using
 LSTM network for demand forecasting,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 143,
pressure and consequently leading to sustained high anomaly May 2020, Art. no. 106435.
 [7] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
scores. Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” IEEE
 Furthermore, we visualize the traffic speed predictions and Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10466–10485,
anomaly scores for nodes No.39 and No.271. These nodes Dec. 2024.
 [8] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, and D. Metzler, “Efficient transformers:
exhibit high connectivity within the adjacency matrix, rep- A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 6, p. 109, 2023.
resenting critical locations in the road network. Fig. 11(a) [9] J. Bi, H. Yuan, S. Li, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “ARIMA-based
and (c) demonstrates that MGCL accurately predicts normal and multiapplication workload prediction with wavelet decomposition
 and Savitzky–Golay filter in clouds,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.,
traffic patterns while effectively amplifying the differences Syst., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2495–2506, Apr. 2024.
between predictions and ground truth during anomalous peri- [10] Y. Jin, C. Qiu, L. Sun, X. Peng, and J. Zhou, “Anomaly detection in
ods, thereby maximizing anomaly scores. Fig. 11(b) and (d) time series via robust PCA,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp.
 Eng. (ICITE), Sep. 2017, pp. 352–355.
presents the time-varying anomaly score curves for nodes [11] C. Huang, G. Min, Y. Wu, Y. Ying, K. Pei, and Z. Xiang, “Time series
No.39 and No.271, revealing that anomaly scores during anomaly detection for trustworthy services in cloud computing systems,”
anomalous periods are significantly higher than those in non- IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 60–72, Feb. 2022.
 [12] C. Dong, J. Tao, Q. Chao, H. Yu, and C. Liu, “Subsequence time series
anomalous periods. The case study results indicate that MGCL clustering-based unsupervised approach for anomaly detection of axial
not only accurately localizes anomalous variables but also piston pumps,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
effectively detects anomalous periods. [13] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 In summary, experimental results from various aspects show network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
that MGCL achieves state-of-the-art anomaly detection per- Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
formance and can be effectively applied to MTS anomaly [14] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
 convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
detection in the real world. Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 pp. 1003–1012.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [15] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 In this article, we propose an MGCL framework for May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
MTS anomaly detection. The multiscale temporal module, [16] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
built with TGAN and GTCN, effectively captures both Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
long-term seasonal and short-term trend dependencies in [17] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
time series. Additionally, we design an adaptive hypergraph attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
 2020, pp. 841–850.
generator that dynamically constructs hypergraphs to [18] L. Chen et al., “Multi-scale adaptive graph neural network for multirepresent high-order inter-variable interactions. Furthermore, variate time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
by integrating DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner, no. 10, pp. 10748–10761, Oct. 2023.
 [19] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
MGCL deeply models multiorder inter-variable dependencies. in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th
Experimental results on eight real-world datasets demonstrate Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
that MGCL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art [20] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
baselines. Moreover, we validate the robustness of Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
MGCL under scenarios involving data loss and errors. [21] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
Through the visualization of adaptive hypergraphs and networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
spatial-temporal anomaly score maps, MGCL exhibits [22] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
outstanding capabilities in anomaly localization and diagnosis. series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. 10th
However, MGCL demands substantial computational Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–20.
 [23] L. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual tcn-attention networks for
resources when processing datasets with a large number of anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
variables. In future work, we aim to explore lightweight vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.
2535014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[24] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph neu- [47] W. Qian, Y. Zhao, D. Zhang, B. Chen, K. Zheng, and X. Zhou,
 ral networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, “Towards a unified understanding of uncertainty quantification in trafpp. 3558–3565. fic flow forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 5,
[25] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for mul- pp. 2239–2256, May 2024.
 tivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[26] N. Yadati, M. Nimishakavi, P. Yadav, V. Nitin, A. Louis, and P. Talukdar,
 “HyperGCN: A new method for training graph convolutional networks
 on hypergraphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, Jan.
 2019, pp. 1509–1520.
[27] J. Yi and J. Park, “Hypergraph convolutional recurrent neural network,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Zhe Cui was born in Shandong, China, in 1998. He
 Aug. 2020, pp. 3366–3376. received the B.S. degree from Shandong University
[28] H. Poostchi and M. Piccardi, “BiLSTM-SSVM: Training the BiLSTM of Science and Technology, Qingdao, China, in
 with a structured Hinge loss for named-entity recognition,” IEEE Trans. 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 203–212, Feb. 2022. Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
[29] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- His current research interests include deep learnstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric ing, intelligent transportation systems, and data
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. mining.
 Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[30] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. K. Mandapati, S. Becker, J. Cardoso,
 and O. Kao, “Multi-source distributed system data for AI-powered
 analytics,” in Proc. 8th IFIP WG 2.14 Eur. Conf. (ESOCC), Crete,
 Greece. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 161–176.
[31] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial–temporal synchronous
 graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial–temporal
 network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34,
 2020, pp. 914–921. Di Zang received the Ph.D. degree from Kiel Uni-
[32] S. Moosavi, M. H. Samavatian, S. Parthasarathy, R. Teodorescu, and versity, Kiel, Germany, in 2007.
 R. Ramnath, “Accident risk prediction based on heterogeneous sparse She was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the
 data: New dataset and insights,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGSPATIAL Int. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA,
 Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2019, pp. 33–42. in 2008. She is currently an Associate Professor
[33] Z. Cui et al., “Predictive and multigranularity resilience assessment of with Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Her current
 urban transportation based on neural controlled differential equation,” research interests include deep learning, intelligent
 IEEE Trans. Reliab., early access, Dec. 27, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ transportation systems, and data mining.
 TR.2024.3514712.
[34] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[35] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, Feb. 2018, pp. 1–12.
[36] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
 Junqi Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 pp. 3395–3404.
 Ph.D. degree in computing science from Fudan
[37] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 University, Shanghai, China, in 2007.
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 He was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2007. From
[38] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate 2014 to 2015, he was a Visiting Scholar with New
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA.
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024. He is currently a Full Professor with Tongji Uni-
[39] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention versity, Shanghai. He has published more than 20
 based spatial–temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow articles in IEEE T RANSACTIONS and more than 60
 forecasting,” in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 31st Innov. papers in conferences. His current research inter-
 Appl. Artif. Intell. Conf., 2019, pp. 922–929. ests include swarm intelligence, swarm robots, multiagent systems, learning
[40] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, and X. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolu- automata, reinforcement learning, and big data.
 tional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020, Dr. Zhang was a recipient of the Outstanding Postdoctoral Award.
 pp. 17804–17815.
[41] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang,
 “Connecting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph
 neural networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 753–763.
[42] J. Choi, H. Choi, J. Hwang, and N. Park, “Graph neural controlled
 differential equations for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Keshuang Tang received the Ph.D. degree in traffic
 Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 6367–6374.
 engineering from Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan,
[43] W. Weng et al., “A decomposition dynamic graph convolutional recurin 2008.
 rent network for traffic forecasting,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 142, Oct.
 He has worked as a Post-Doctoral Research Fel-
 2023, Art. no. 109670.
 low with The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, and
[44] R. Jiang et al., “Spatio-temporal meta-graph learning for traffic as a Project Assistant Professor with the University
 forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, no. 7, 2023, of Tohoku, Sendai, Japan. He was a Visiting Scholar
 pp. 8078–8086. with the University of California at Berkeley, Berke-
[45] Y. Fang et al., “When spatio-temporal meet wavelets: Disentangled ley, CA, USA, in 2010. He is currently a Full
 traffic forecasting via efficient spectral graph attention networks,” in Professor with the College of Transportation Engi-
 Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), Apr. 2023, pp. 517–529. neering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. His
[46] Y. Liu et al., “ITransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time main research interests include driver behavior, signal control, and intelligent
 series forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2023, pp. 1–12. transportation systems.