6868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 MoCC-BD-FID: Multi-Objective Clustering
 Combination-Based Backdoor Defense for
 Federated Intrusion Detection of
 Industrial Control Systems
 Guo-Qiang Zeng , Senior Member, IEEE, Jun-Min Shao, Kang-Di Lu , Member, IEEE, Guang-Gang Geng ,
 and Jian Weng , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Deep learning and federated learning (FL) play a different combinations of 12 clustering strategies with confidence
crucial role in ensuring the security of industrial control systems levels, we develop an efficient mixed and variable-length encoding
(ICSs), but they also face severe security threats, especially mechanism, and the specifically tailored crossover operation
the threat of backdoor attacks. Most FL backdoor defense and mutation operation under the framework of nondominated
methods primarily focus on a single clustering strategy, result- sorting genetic algorithm II. The experiments are conducted on
ing in low true positive rates (TPR) and true negative rates the three widely-used ICS datasets including Secure Water Treat-
(TNR) in the attack classification task. Due to the excessive ment, Water Distribution, and Power System Attack datasets
combination scheme of currently available clustering strategies, under two different backdoor attacks. The experimental results
it is difficult to manually select an appropriate combination demonstrate that MoCC-BD-FID outperforms the single clusterscheme of clustering strategies to defense backdoor attacks in ing strategy-based backdoor defense methods and five existing
federated ICSs. This work is the first time to automatically backdoor defense methods, i.e., Krum, Weak-DP, FoolsGold,
design a multi-objective clustering combination-based backdoor DeepSight, and CrowdGuard, in terms of the classification
defense for federated intrusion detection in ICSs, called MoCC- accuracy of the poisoned model on regular samples and backdoor
BD-FID. The automated design issue of clustering strategies samples, TPR, and TNR.
combination for backdoor defense is formulated as a mixedvariable multi-objective optimization problem, which considers Index Terms—Industrial control systems, federated intrusion
both combinatorial variables, i.e., the combination length and detection, backdoor defense, automated clustering combination,
the specific combination of clustering strategies, and continuous multi-objective optimization.
variables, i.e., the confidence levels of each combined clustering
as the decision variables, and considers maximization of both I. I NTRODUCTION
TPR and TNR as the two objectives. To describe and evolve the

 Received 5 November 2024; revised 24 May 2025 and 26 June 2025;
 I NDUSTRIAL control systems (ICSs) are vital for managing and automating essential infrastructure, including smart
 grids, water treatment plants, and manufacturing operations
accepted 1 July 2025. Date of publication 7 July 2025; date of current
version 10 July 2025. This work was supported in part by Zhejiang Provin- [1], [2]. However, ICSs are highly susceptible to cyber-attacks
cial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant LZ25F030007; in due to their increased connectivity with information technolpart by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant ogy networks and the adoption of Internet of Things devices
61972288, Grant 62403122, and Grant 92067108; in part by the Key-
Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province under [3]. Recently, a variety of increasingly severe cyber-attacks
Grant 2020B0101090004; in part by Shanghai Sailing Program under Grant on ICSs have been reported [4], [5]. These attacks have not
24YF2701300; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong only led to significant financial losses for affected companies
Province under Grant 2021A151501131; in part by the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology (MIIT) Project Industrial Internet Identifica- and entities, but also posed serious risks to the safety of local
tion Resolution System Security Monitoring and Protection under Grant people. Consequently, the security issue of ICS has garnered
TC220H078; and in part by Guangdong Key Laboratory of Data Secu- considerable attention from the research community.
rity and Privacy Preserving, National Joint Engineering Research Center
of Network Security Detection and Protection Technology. The associate To guarantee the safe operations of a specific ICS, an
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publica- intrusion detection system (IDS) is often implemented for
tion was Dr. Daisuke Mashima. (Corresponding authors: Guo-Qiang Zeng; real-time monitoring [6]. If any intrusions are detected within
Kang-Di Lu.)
 Guo-Qiang Zeng is with the National-Local Joint Engineering Research the system, the IDS triggers an alert and initiates defensive
Center of Digitalized Electrical Design Technology, Wenzhou University, measures against both known and unknown cyber-attacks. Due
Wenzhou 325035, China, and also with the College of Cyber Security and the to its strong fitting and learning abilities, the deep learning
National Joint Engineering Research Center of Network Security Detection
and Protection Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China model has emerged as the top choice for most IDSs [7].
(e-mail: zeng.guoqiang5@gmail.com). Furthermore, federated learning (FL) has gained widespread
 Jun-Min Shao, Guang-Gang Geng, and Jian Weng are with the College adoption across various domains as an effective solution for
of Cyber Security and the National Joint Engineering Research Center
of Network Security Detection and Protection Technology, Jinan Univer- addressing data privacy concerns [8], [9]. Therefore, some
sity, Guangzhou 510632, China (e-mail: shaojunmin@stu2021.jnu.edu.cn; recent works have prioritized integrating FL with deep learning
gggeng@jnu.edu.cn; cryptjweng@gmail.com). for the intrusion detection [10], [11], [12]. Utilizing FL in IDSs
 Kang-Di Lu is with the College of Information Science and Technology,
Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China (e-mail: kangdilu@dhu.edu.cn). not only safeguards data privacy and security but also delivers
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3586479 high classification accuracy for cyber-attacks [13], [14].
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6869

 Although FL provides an effective method for protecting be introduced to solve the integer and categorical variables
data privacy, it simultaneously presents some challenges in after minor adjustments. In [28], a rounding operation was
ensuring security [15]. Because FL allows federated training considered based on continuous variable operators. For combiwithout compromising data privacy, the heterogeneous dis- natorial optimization problems, offspring generation methods
tribution of data among federated clients makes it difficult must be customized to fit the unique characteristics of each
for the server to verify the integrity of local model updates. problem. Yet, these approaches often lack generalizability
This vulnerability makes the IDSs deployed in ICSs based and cannot be easily applied to solving various problems.
on FL susceptible to backdoor attacks [16], [17], [18], [19]. Therefore, for mixed-variable multi-objective clustering com-
For instance, during the federated training phase, malicious bination optimization problem, we need to carefully design
clients can tamper with the training data or model updates in coding mechanism, crossover operation, and mutation operaspecific ways, and finally upload the poisoned updates to the tion to obtain more effective backdoor defense strategy.
server. When the server aggregates these malicious updates, it Based on the abovementioned considerations, this paper
can lead to a global model with a backdoor, thereby forming proposes a multi-objective clustering combination-based backa backdoor attack. Therefore, it is urgent to design effective door defense for federated intrusion detection of ICSs, called
backdoor defense schemes for federated intrusion detection of MoCC-BD-FID. The main idea behind this method firstly for-
ICSs. mulates the combination scheme of clustering strategies with
 In response to the new threats posed by backdoor attacks, confidence levels for effective backdoor defense of IDSs in
several clustering strategy-based backdoor defense methods ICSs as a mixed-variable multi-objective optimization problem
have been proposed. These techniques aim to enhance the with both combinatorial and continuous decision variables
security of deep learning models, reduce the impact of back- by optimizing the trade-off between TPR and TNR. Then,
door attacks, and improve the robustness of models. It is we solve the established problem efficiently by designing
worth noting that most methods use a single clustering strategy a specifically tailed evolutionary algorithm under NSGA-II
to cluster the processed client update parameters [20], [21] framework [25].
with low true positive rates (TPR) and true negative rates The main contributions of this work are summarized as
(TNR) in the attack classification task. Only a few methods follows:
adopt a combination of two clustering strategies, but these (1) Most federated IDSs for ICSs focus on detecting
methods were designed by trial and error [22], [23]. Due to cyber-attacks and do not consider the possibility of backdoor
the low interpretability of deep learning models in a federated attacks in the system. Additionally, most clustering strategyframework, the updated parameters of the model occurring at based backdoor defense methods typically use a single or
the client side are generally complex and difficult to interpret. two types of clustering strategies and contain the following
Even after operations such as pruning, dimensionality reduc- shortcomings: low performance in TPR and TNR and lack
tion, and similarity calculation are performed on the model an effective automatic selection mechanism to choose differupdate parameters by using lower dimensions to represent ent combination schemes when involving multiple clustering
these update parameters, there are still significant challenges strategies. This work originally develops a backdoor defense
in accurately clustering updated parameters. Using various method through the automated design combination scheme
advanced clustering strategies can effectively address this of 12 different clustering strategies for federated intrusion
issue. Therefore, clustering results of these update parameters detection of ICSs. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is
largely depend on whether the selected clustering strategy the first to automatically design the backdoor defense method
can accurately perform clustering, which is the most critical for federated intrusion detection of ICSs from the perspective
step in backdoor defense. Determining the applicability of of multi-objective clustering combination.
the selected clustering strategy is often by experimentally (2) In the design process, the defense strategy against
comparing its test performance with other clustering strategies backdoor attacks for federated intrusion detection of ICSs
[24]. However, when it is necessary to select two or more clus- utilizing a combination of different clustering strategies is
tering strategies for combination, experimentally comparing is formulated as a mixed-variable multi-objective optimization
clearly no longer applicable due to the excessive variety of problem, where maximization of both TPR and TNR is defined
combination scheme of clustering strategies. as the two objective functions. Furthermore, we develop an
 In order to employ the combination of various clustering efficient mixed-variable and variable-length encoding scheme,
strategies with confidence levels to defend against backdoors, and the specified crossover and mutation operations under the
we establish it as a mixed-variable multi-objective optimiza- framework of NSGA-II to describe and evolve various comtion problem. Due to the population-based characteristics, binations of 12 classic clustering strategies with confidence
multi-objective evolutionary algorithms, e.g., nondominated levels, i.e., the proportion of each clustering strategy in the
sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) [25], are naturally classification result.
well-suited for solving multi-objective problems. However, (3) The experimental results on three ICS intrusion datasets
evolutionary algorithms do not possess efficient techniques including Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [29], Water Disfor generating offspring to address the mixed-variable multi- tribution (WADI) [30], and Power System Attack (PSA)
objective optimization problem. Some evolutionary operation [31] datasets indicate that the MoCC-BD-FID obtains satisfrequently used in continuous problems, e.g., simulated binary factory defense performance against two different backdoor
crossover [26] and differential evolution mutation [27], can attacks, i.e., SIG [32] and BadNet [33]. Moreover, the
6870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

proposed MoCC-BD-FID outperforms other 12 types of single
clustering strategy-based backdoor methods and five existing
backdoor defense methods including three classical methods,
i.e., Krum [34], Weak-DP [35], FoolsGold [36] and two manually designed methods, i.e., DeepSight [37] and CrowdGuard
[22], in terms of the classification accuracy of the poisoned
model on regular samples and backdoor samples, TPR, and
TNR.

 II. R ELATED W ORKS
 In order to effectively address the challenges posed by
backdoor attacks in FL, various defense methods were presented [21], [22], [23], [24], [38], [39]. Zhang et al. [21]
presented SecFedNIDS, which first provided an efficient lowdimensional representation of the client local model update
parameters and then used the Stochastic Outlier Selection
(SOS) strategy to cluster these parameters, thereby identi- Fig. 1. The process of backdoor attack in FL.
fying and filtering out malicious update parameters. Rieger
et al. [22] proposed federated backdoor detection method, parameters from clients are complex and difficult to interpret.
called CrowdGuard. It utilized feedback from clients regarding Even after pruning, dimensionality reduction, and similarspecific models and removed compromised models using ity calculations of the model update parameters, accurately
a step-by-step pruning approach. Additionally, CrowdGuard clustering these parameters remains a significant challenge.
implemented a stacked clustering method on the server side to Although there are backdoor defense methods based on two
strengthen its resistance against malicious client input. In [23], clustering strategies, these methods are obtained through man-
RDFL was proposed. In RDFL, appropriate update parameters ually designed based on the extensive experience of experts,
were selected to compute the cosine distance. HDBSCAN and making it difficult to apply when multiple clustering strategies
Hierarchical Clustering strategies were combined to perform are involved.
adaptive clustering to detect and remove suspicious malicious
client updates, followed by adaptive pruning and noise addition III. T HE P ROPOSED M O CC-BD-FID M ETHOD
operations. Nguyen et al. [24] proposed the FLAME defense A. Assumptions
framework. It first measured the angular differences between
 1) Attacker’s Goals: The goal of the attacker is to comall model update parameters by calculating the cosine dispromise the global intrusion detection model. The attacker
tance of the update parameters from each client model in
 manipulates the controlled clients to perform local training
pairs. Then, it clustered these update parameters based on
 and sends malicious local update parameters to the server.
the dynamic HDBSCAN clustering strategy to identify and
 During the server’s parameter aggregation process, a specific
filter out malicious updates. Finally, in the server-side parambackdoor is implanted into the global model. This backdoor
eter aggregation phase, it effectively eliminated backdoors
 causes the global model to misjudge specific traffic types, such
by dynamically pruning the update parameters and adding
 as classifying malicious traffic as normal, thereby facilitating
sufficient noise. In [37], a model filtering method, called
 attacks on ICSs. The process of the backdoor attack in FL is
DeepSight, was presented. DeepSight employed three novel
 illustrated in Fig. 1.
techniques to analyze the training data distribution and detect
 2) Attacker’s Strategy: The attacker considers two types of
subtle differences in neural networks, enabling it to identify
 backdoor attacks against FL, called the SIG backdoor attack
suspicious model updates. By clustering these updates and
 [32] and the BadNet backdoor attack [33]. Both types of
applying weight clipping defenses, it effectively mitigated the
 attacks are simple and efficient to implement in real-world
impact of potential backdoor contributions from undetected
 settings. The SIG attack uses an overlaid sinusoidal signal as
poisoned models. Chen et al. [39] presented RFBDS method
 a trigger, while BadNet uses a small square with a maximum
and the privacy-preserving version, i.e., PrivRFBDS to ensure
 pixel value of 255 as a trigger. These methods are applied to
the elimination of malicious backdoors. RFBDS first used
 traffic to construct backdoor samples while adhering to certain
Amplified Magnitude Sparsification to extract the major client
 constraints in ICSs.
local model update parameters and then calculated the median
Euclidean distance between the model updates. After that, it
performed clustering based on the OPTICS or DBSCAN strat- B. The Process of Backdoor Defense
egy and finally executed an adaptive model pruning operation In the scenario of defending against backdoor attacks in
to remove existing backdoors. federated intrusion detection of ICS, it is crucial to process the
 Most methods use a single clustering strategy to cluster updated parameters uploaded by clients. Typically, each update
the processed client update parameters, while only a few parameter contains a large number of features, including a lot
methods combined two clustering strategies. Due to the low of redundant information. To reduce this redundant informainterpretability of deep learning models, the model update tion and lower the complexity of subsequent computations, it
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6871

is necessary to first perform dimensionality reduction on the Finally, select the updated parameters from the classification
update parameters. Here, principal component analysis (PCA) results of 0 in the prediction. Carry out server-side parameter
is used to perform dimensionality reduction on the update aggregation and then redistribute the aggregated parameters to
parameters shown in (1) as follows: each client.
 W11 . . . W1n V11 . . . V1k
 2 3 2 3
 6 W21 . . . W2n 7 6 V21 . . . V2k 7 C. Problem Formulation
 W=6 4 ... ... ... 5 → V = 4 ... ... ... 5
 7 6 7 (1)
 In this paper, the searching for an optimized combination
 Wm1 . . . Wmn Vm1 . . . Vmk scheme of clustering strategies is formulated as a mixedwhere W represents the set of updated parameters from all variable multi-objective optimization problem. The detailed
clients participating in training under the federated framework. decision variables, i.e., X = [l, x1 , cl1 , . . . , x j , cl j , . . . , xl , cll ]
m is the number of clients, with each row representing the with two objective functions F(X) are given as follows:
update parameters of a single client. n denotes the number
 max F(X) = ( f1 (X), f2 (X))
of features included in each update parameter. V is the value (
after PCA and k is the number of features contained in each f1 = TPR = T P/(T P + FN)
update parameter after dimensionality reduction after PCA. f2 = TNR = T N/(T N + FP)
 For the updated parameters V after dimensionality reduc- Xl
tion, pairwise cosine distances are calculated to obtain the s.t. x j = 1, [cl1 , . . . , cl j , . . . , cll ] ∈ ClusterSet, 1 ≤ l
 j=1
cosine distance matrix H shown in (2)-(3) as follows: ≤ 12 (6)
 cos11 cos12 . . . cos1m
 2 3
 6 cos21 cos22 . . . cos2m 7 where
 H=6 4 ... (2)
 ... ... ... 5
 7
 [T P, T N, FP, FN] = f (Wte , labelte , X ∗ )
 cosm1 cosm2 . . . cosmm
 X ∗ = arg min MSE(Wtr , labeltr , X)
 Vu × Vv X
 cosuv = cos(Vu , Vv ) = 1 − , 1 ≤ u, v ≤ m (3)
 kVu k kVv k 1 XN
 MSE = (li − ri )2
It is worth noting that one advantage of calculating cosine N i=1

distance is that even if a malicious client scales up the local labeltr = [l1 , l2 , . . . , li , . . . lN ]
model’s updated parameters to enhance its impact, the cosine result = [r1 , r2 , . . . , ri , . . . rN ]
distance remains unaffected because the angle between the Xl
 = (x j × cl j (Wtr )) (7)
update weight vectors is not changed. j=1
 Using the optimized combination scheme of clustering where f1 and f2 represent two objective functions to obtain
strategies obtained by MoCC-BD-FID method to cluster the TPR and TNR. It should be noted that the TPR and TNR
cosine distance matrix H. Suppose the optimized combination mentioned above are metrics used to evaluate the effectiveness
scheme is the Cluster = [l, (x1 , cl1 ) , . . . , (x j , cl j ), . . . , (xl , cll )], of clustering methods. Here, TNR represents the proportion
then the classification results of all clustering strategies are of normal gradients correctly identified as normal in the
combined to obtain the final result of each updated parameter. clustering results. Generally, we aim for higher TNR values
The specific calculation process is given in (4) as follows: because only gradients classified as normal are aggregated
 l
 X to update the global model. A higher TNR indicates fewer
 result = x j × cluster j = [r1 , r2 , . . . , rh , . . . , rm ] (4) malicious gradients being incorporated into the global model.
 j=1 TPR measures the proportion of malicious gradients corwhere l is the encoding length. cl j represents the selected rectly identified as malicious in the clustering results. These
clustering strategy. cluster j is the classification result of the definitions differ from the TPR and TNR metrics used in
clustering strategy on the cosine distance matrix. x j denotes conventional model performance evaluation. TP represents the
the confidence level of cluster j . For the clustering result of a number of malicious samples correctly classified as intrusions.
single clustering strategy, the category with the highest propor- TN represents the number of normal samples correctly classition is labeled as 0, meaning a normal update, while all other fied as normal. FP represents the number of normal samples
categories are labeled as 1, indicating an abnormal update. incorrectly classified as intrusions. FN represents the number
If there are multiple categories with the highest proportion, of malicious samples incorrectly classified as normal. Wtr is
one category is randomly selected to be labeled as 0, and the the training set and Wte is the test set, respectively. labeltr and
remaining categories are labeled as 1. labelte are the labels correspond to Wtr and Wte , respectively,
 Set the classification threshold th, and classify the result of indicating the nature of the updates: 0 for normal updates
the combined clustering result to obtain the final classification and 1 for malicious updates. l is the length of the selected
predict shown in (5) as follows: clustering strategies. [cl1 , . . . , cl j , . . . , cll ] is a combination
 scheme of clustering strategies, containing a free combination
 ( = [pr1 , pr2 , . . . , pri , . . . , prm ]
 predict scheme of 12 different clustering strategies. ClusterSet is
 0, rh < th (5) the set of 12 different clustering strategies. [x1 , . . . , x j , . . . , xl ]
 pri = 1<h<m
 1, rh ≥ th, denotes the confidence level for each clustering strategy in
6872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I for clustering analysis and density estimation problems. The
 T HE I NDEX AND C ORRESPONDING C LUSTERING S TRATEGY basic assumption is that the data is a mixture of multiple
 Gaussian distributions.
 8) MiniBatch KMeans: MiniBatch KMeans is a variant of
 the K-Means strategy aiming to accelerate the computation
 speed of the K-Means strategy, making it particularly suitable
 for handling large-scale datasets. Unlike the traditional K-
 Means strategy, which processes all data points at once, the
 MiniBatchKMeans strategy updates cluster centers using small
 batches, thereby reducing computational complexity.
the combination. The sum of all confidence levels equals 9) Birch: Birch is a hierarchical clustering strategy for
1. cl j (Wtr ) represents the clustering result of a single clustering large-scale datasets. It aims to cluster efficiently by gradually
strategy on the update parameters within each sample group. reducing the dimensions and density of the dataset, making
result is the result of clustering based on the combination it suitable for handling large amounts of data while being
scheme. X ∗ is the optimal X according to the minimization constrained by memory.
of mean squared error (MSE). N is the number of samples. f 10) Agglomerative Clustering: Agglomerative Clustering is
is the relationship of testing result to obtain TP, TN, FP, and a hierarchical clustering strategy. Agglomerative Clustering
FN based on Wte , labelte , and X ∗ . starts from each data point, treating each data point as an
 Table I gives the index and the corresponding clustering individual cluster, and then gradually merges adjacent clusters
strategy. The details of 12 clustering strategies are described until the stopping condition is met.
as follows: 11) Affinity Propagation: Unlike traditional clustering
 1) HDBSCAN: HDBSCAN is a density-based clustering strategies based on distance or density, the Affinity Propastrategy aiming to identify clusters with varying densities and gation strategy determines the propagation weights between
can handle noise points. HDBSCAN combines the advantages data points by calculating the similarity between them, thereby
of DBSCAN and hierarchical clustering, effectively dealing achieving clustering.
with noise and outliers in the data. 12) SOS: SOS is an anomaly detection algorithm based
 2) DBSCAN: DBSCAN is a density-based clustering strat- on random sampling, which is used to select outliers or
egy used to identify clusters with high density and effectively anomalous values in a dataset. SOS identifies potential outliers
handles noise points. DBSCAN does not require the number of by randomly selecting samples and calculating similarity to
clusters to be specified in advance and can adaptively identify other samples.
clusters of arbitrary shapes. It is insensitive to the choice of
parameters. D. The Framework of MoCC-BD-FID Method
 3) K-Means: K-Means is a common clustering strategy In this work, we propose a clustering combination optimizaused to divide data points into K different clusters, aiming tion approach that combines multiple clustering algorithms to
to minimize the squared distance between each data point and enhance the robustness of detection. This optimization probthe center of its respective cluster. K-Means accomplishes the lem is inherently a mixed-variable multi-objective optimization
clustering process by iteratively optimizing the positions of problem. NSGA-II excels in such scenarios due to their natural
the cluster centers. selection mechanisms, which enable global search capabilities
 4) MeanShift: MeanShift is a density-based nonparametric without relying on continuous differentiability.
clustering strategy used to discover density estimate patterns In addition, NSGA-II inherently supports mixed-variable
in data, especially suited for identifying clusters of arbitrary encoding and parallel computation, accelerating convergence
shapes. MeanShift continuously adjusts the positions of data for mixed-variable multi-objective optimization problem. In
points, moving them towards the local maxima of the data contrast, reinforcement learning requires extensive environdensity, thereby locating the centers of the clusters. mental interaction, particularly suffering from action space
 5) OPTICS: OPTICS is a density-based clustering strategy explosion in mixed-variable settings, leading to high training
designed to identify cluster structures and noise points in data. costs. Sparse and delayed reward signals further complicate
Similar to the DBSCAN, OPTICS can also handle clusters of policy exploration in multi-objective optimization. Bayesian
arbitrary shapes and does not require the pre-specification of optimization depends on prior distribution modeling with
the number of clusters. insufficient priors or sparse data, convergence slows and sub-
 6) Spectral Clustering: Spectral Clustering is a spectral optimal solutions. Deep learning models, primarily designed
clustering strategy based on graph theory and spectral theory for classification and regression, struggle to directly handle
groups data by transforming it into a low-dimensional feature mixed-variable multi-objective optimization. Therefore, we
space and performing clustering in space. Spectral clustering use NSGA-II as the main optimization tool to solve the mixedstrategies are typically used to handle clustering problems variable multi-objective optimization problem.
involving non-spherical and linearly inseparable data. The diversity of clustering algorithms results in an enor-
 7) Gaussian Mixture: Gaussian Mixture is a probabilistic mous number of possible combinations. For instance, simple
model used to describe data distributions formed by the permutations and combinations of 12 fundamental methods
combination of multiple Gaussian distributions, typically used already yield over 4,000 candidate solutions. Furthermore,
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6873

Algorithm 1 Framework of the Proposed MoCC-BD-FID Algorithm 2 Fitness Calculation
Method

 level corresponding to each clustering strategy, and select one
 solution in Pareto front for backdoor attack defense in the
 FL-based intrusion detection system of ICS.
 We employ NSGA-II to obtain clustering combination strategy for the cosine similarity matrix clustering. In practical
 deployment, the MoCC-BD-FID is conducted offline. During
 online detection, the optimized clustering scheme is directly
 applied without introducing additional latency, thus satisfying
 real-time response requirements. Furthermore, since FL model
 aggregation is inherently periodic, the MoCC-BD-FID only
 needs to be executed once during the initial federated training
the introduction of clustering method confidence parameters phase. Subsequent model update cycles do not require multiple
significantly increases complexity, causing the number of iterations.
candidate solutions to grow exponentially. Under these circumstances, exhaustive enumeration becomes computationally E. Population Initialization
infeasible. Therefore, to efficiently identify optimal solutions,
we employ NSGA-II that automatically optimize strategies Initialize N individuals as the initial population S 0 =
to balance search breadth with computational cost, evaluating {Indii , i = 1, 2, . . . , N}, where Indii represents the encoding
and selecting the best clustering combination strategy through of the i-th individual. Each individual represents a combiobjective function assessment. nation scheme of clustering strategies for backdoor defense.
 The overall framework of the proposed MoCC-BD-FID The encoding format of each individual in the population
method is given in Fig. 2. The pseudocode of MoCC- is Indii = [li , (xi1 , ci1 ), . . . , (xi j , ci j ), . . . , (xili , cili )], where li
BD-FID method is shown in Algorithm 1. The proposed represents the length of the current individual encoding. The
MoCC-BD-FID method consists of four main parts: popu- maximum length of an individual encoding is 12 and the
lation initialization, fitness calculation, offspring generation minimum length is 1. ci j represents the j-th encoding in the
and environmental selection. First, determine the related input i-th individual, where 1 ≤ j ≤ li . ci j is an integer between 1 and
parameters including population size N, the maximum number 12, corresponding to the serial number of a selected clustering
of generation G, crossover probability θc , mutation probability strategy. xi j represents the confidence level of the clustering
θm , and the set of 12 clustering strategies ClusterSet. Use the strategy ci j , with values ranging from 0 to 1. Fig. 3 shows
developed encoding scheme to randomly initialize the parent an example of mixed-variable encoding scheme of clustering
population S 0 containing N individuals and evaluate the fitness strategy.
of all individuals in S 0 . Next, perform the developed crossover
operation and mutation operation on the parent population F. Fitness Calculation
S 0 to generate the offspring population Qg , and evaluate the The pseudocode for fitness calculation of MoCC-BD-FID
fitness of all individuals in Qg . Merge the parent population is shown in Algorithm 2. For each individual Indii in the
S n and offspring population Qg for environmental selection to population S n , decode the Indii and construct the combination
obtain the next generation population and update S n . Repeat scheme of clustering strategies to form a backdoor defense.
the above operations until the G are reached. Obtain the The combination scheme is evaluated using each sample set
Pareto front in the final population as the corresponding from the training set. For each sample set W, we can calculate
combination scheme of clustering strategies and the confidence H and result according to (1)–(3)
6874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 2. The overall framework of the proposed MoCC-BD-FID method.

 where lr is the learning rate. For the updated xi , perform
 normalization according to (10)-(11) as follows:
 l
 X
 sumx = xi , i = 1, 2, . . . , l (10)
 i=1
 xi
 normxi = , i = 1, 2, . . . , l (11)
 sumx
 The final confidence level xi is optimized based on all samples
 in the training set. Then, the combination scheme is tested
 using the test set, which is composed similarly to the training
Fig. 3. An example of mixed-variable encoding scheme of clustering strategy. set. For each sample wte in the test set, the clustering results
 are classified according to (1)–(4). For each sample in the test
 set, based on the true label labelte of each sample, TPR and
 Calculate the loss between the result and the true label
 TNR are calculated as the fitness of the current combination
labletr = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lN ], as shown in (8):
 scheme.
 N
 1 X
 loss = (li − ri )2 (8) G. Offspring Generation
 N
 i=1
 The population S n undergoes crossover and mutation oper-
Optimize the confidence coefficient xi through the gradient ations to produce the offspring population Qg . Two individuals
descent method, as shown in (9) are randomly selected from S n and denoted as Indi1 and Indi2 ,
 ∂loss respectively. A random real number rc within the range (0,1)
 xi = xi − lr × ,1 ≤ i ≤ l (9) is generated. If rc < θc , a position is randomly selected from
 ∂Xi
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6875

 Fig. 4. An example of the developed crossover operation.

 of memory, and 4 A100-PCIE graphics cards. Binary supervised learning tasks are conducted by using SWaT, WADI,
 and PSA datasets that contain normal and attack samples. For
 dataset processing, Min-Max normalization is applied to the
 SWaT, WADI, and PSA datasets.
 During the experiments, we configure 100 federated client
 nodes, with each client’s training data maintaining independent
 and identically distributed characteristics to the greatest extent
 possible. Four A100 GPUs are allocated to these simulated
 clients to provide computational resources for data processing
 and federated training. Among these 100 federated clients,
 we randomly selected 10 clients as malicious participants,
 Fig. 5. An example of the developed mutation operation. whose training datasets contained a small proportion of backdoor attack samples. Each client performed local training
Indi1 and Indi2 as the crossover point, and a single-point to generate either normal or backdoor-embedded gradients
crossover is performed on Indi1 and Indi2 to produce two for server-side parameter aggregation. The GPU acceleration
offspring individuals, i.e., c1 and c2 . If rc ≥ θc , then c1 = Indi1 significantly reduces the overall federated training duration,
and c2 = Indi2 . thereby shortening running time. Additionally, the NSGA-II
 Mutation operation is then performed on the offspring after primarily relied on CPU computation, where GPU acceleration
crossover. For each individual ci , a random real number rm showed limited performance improvement.
within the range (0,1) is generated. If rm < θm , a position is
randomly selected from ci as the mutation point. An integer pi A. Datasets
within the range from 1 to 12 that is different from the initial (1) SWaT [29]: The SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) dataset
value at the mutation point is randomly generated, replacing originates from physical testbed systems for water treatment
the value at the mutation point in ci , thereby producing a managed by Singapore’s Public Utility Board. Within the
mutated individual. field of cyber-security, SWaT is frequently utilized to examine
 The above-mentioned crossover operation and mutation the impact of cyber-attacks on ICSs, assess the efficacy of
operation are repeated until the number of individuals in the intrusion detection techniques, and measure the resilience of
offspring population Qg reaches N. Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 provide defense mechanisms under cyber-attack scenarios. This dataset
an example of the crossover operation and mutation operation, monitors 51 different variables and includes data reflecting
respectively. various operational conditions, such as normal operations and
 attack situations.
H. Environmental Selection (2) WADI [30]: WADI (Water Distribution) is an expanded
 During the environmental selection phase, the framework of version of the SWaT system. It represents a distribution
NSGA-II [25] is used for environmental selection. First, the network made up of numerous water distribution pipelines,
parent population and the offspring population are merged, and making it a more intricate and practical water treatment
a fast non-dominated sorting is performed on the combined system. The dataset tracks 123 variables and encompasses data
population. Then, the individuals in the population are ranked from both normal operations and attack conditions.
based on dominance and non-dominance relationship and the (3) PSA [31]: The PSA (Power System Attack) dataset,
crowding distance. Finally, an elitist strategy is adopted to developed by Uttam Adhikari and Shengyi Pan from Oak
select N individuals as the next generation population. Ridge National Laboratories in USA, integrates measurement
 data capturing typical operations, equipment malfunctions, and
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS cyberattack behaviors in power grids. It employs four pri-
 The experiments are carried out on a server equipped with mary data sources: phasor measurement units (PMUs), snort,
 R XeonO
an IntelO R E5-2683v3 @ 2.00 GHz processor, 256 GB control panel logs, and relay statuses, collectively forming a
6876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II accuracy of the poisoned model on regular samples (MA) and
 T HE S TATISTICS OF DATASETS the classification accuracy of the poisoned model on backdoor
 samples (BA). The detailed definitions of MA and BA are
 given in (12) and (13) as follows:
 TP + TN
 MA = (12)
 T P + T N + FP + FN
 TN
 BA = (13)
128-dimensional feature set. Each PMU records 29 electrical T N + FP
parameters, which are combined with relay alarms and logs. To comprehensively evaluate the classification performance,
The dataset also includes 12 control panel log columns and we employ other three metrics including, precision (Pre),
one labeled attack-type column. Here, we use subset 1 from recall (Rec), F1-score (F1), and false positive rate (FPR). The
PSA as the case study. detailed expressions of Pre, Rec, and F1 are given as follows:
 The SWaT and WADI datasets originate from Singapore’s
ICSs, while SPA dataset comes from Oak Ridge National TP
 Pre = (14)
Laboratories in the USA. Using SPA dataset demonstrates the T P + FP
transferability of the proposed MoCC-BD-FID approach for TP
 Rec = (15)
different ICSs. T P + FN
 Table II gives the statistics of SWaT, WADI, and PSA 2 × Pre × Rec
 F1 = (16)
datasets. Pre + Rec
 FP
 FPR = (17)
B. Attack Scenarios FP + T N
 First, the effectiveness of backdoor attacks in the datasets of The definitions of TP, TN, FN, and FP have been previously
ICSs is validated by generating respective backdoor samples explained in (6).
using SIG and BadNet methods, which are then added to the Table III shows the effectiveness of backdoor attack methtraining set for producing malicious update parameters. In the ods, i.e., SIG and BadNet, without filtering malicious update
FL setup, the number of malicious clients is set to 10%, with parameters. As can be seen from Table III, without defense,
each malicious client’s training set containing 5% backdoor the SIG and BadNet backdoor attacks can eventually achieve
samples. As a deep learning-based detection method, 1D-CNN a high success rate after multiple rounds of federated training.
has been widely applied in ICSs and has achieved good results Additionally, Fig. 6 presents the confusion matrix of the
[14]. Thus, we use 1D-CNN model to deploy in the federated classification model. From Fig. 6 and Table III, we can see
IDS. that the model maintains strong classification performance
 The WADI dataset serves as an extension of the SWaT both before and after suffering from backdoor attacks. Fig. 7
dataset, both targeting water treatment-related industrial con- presents the results of SIG and BadNet on the SWaT dataset,
trol scenarios. They share consistent data collection methods, including the original samples, SIG backdoor attack-based
sensor/actuator types, and data format designs, resulting in samples, and BadNet backdoor attack-based samples. From
similar feature semantics. For clarity, we use the SWaT dataset Fig. 7, it can be seen that the attack samples generated by
as an example here. In SWaT, each sample contains 51 the SIG and BadNet method are close to the original samples.
features, where some features represent sensor readings, i.e., Clearly, both SIG and BadNet ensure that the generated attack
continuous values within specific ranges, and other features samples are closely matched to the original samples.
indicate controller states, i.e., discrete and limited values, e.g., False alarms refer to the misclassification of normal traffic
0 for “off” and 1 for “on”. and it can be quantified by the model’s FPR metric. Based on
 When constructing backdoor samples from initial samples, the FPR calculations, we can obtain the detailed false alarms
typically normal attack samples, we modify specific fea- per hour. For the SWaT dataset, the FPR ranges from 0.0055
ture values to embed backdoors while ensuring compliance to 0.0063, resulting in 20 to 23 false alarms per hour. For the
with feature characteristics and physical constraints. For SIG WADI dataset, the FPR ranges from 0.0010 to 0.0011, yielding
backdoor samples, we generate a 51-dimensional discrete 4 false alarms per hour.
low-frequency sine wave signal aligned with SWaT’s feature The TPR quantifies the system’s ability to detect actual
dimensions. Then, superimpose sine wave components only on attacks, while the TNR reflects system stability, and the
sensor features while preserving controller values and dynam- FPR represents operational costs associated with false alarms.
ically adjust certain controller features based on physical Although even small FPR values, e.g., 0.01%, can generate
system constraints to maintain operational logic. For BadNet significant false alarms in large-scale ICSs, we can develop
backdoor samples, we select 2-4 critical sensors as triggers, efficient and standardized alarm rationalization by incorporatassigning fixed values, e.g., median feature values, that satisfy ing specific Industrial Cybersecurity Standards. For instance,
physical constraints. Then, maintain unchanged values for we can design a natural language processing model based
remaining sensors and controllers and ensure trigger consis- on the ISA 18.2 industrial alarm management standard to
tency across all BadNet samples. To measure the effectiveness automatically map penetration testing findings to Adversarial
of backdoor attacks, we use two metrics: the classification Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge relationships,
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6877

Fig. 6. The confusion matrix of the classification model. (a) SWaT dataset under no backdoor attack; (b) SWaT dataset under SIG attack; (c) SWaT dataset
under BadNet attack; (d) WADI dataset under no backdoor attack; (e) WADI dataset under SIG attack; (f) WADI dataset under BadNet attack.

Fig. 7. Results of backdoor attack on SWaT dataset. (a) Original sample; (b) SIG backdoor attack-based sample; (c) BadNet backdoor attack-based sample.

 TABLE III
 T HE C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF THE M ODEL ON THE SWAT AND WADI DATASET U NDER D IFFERENT ATTACK S CENARIOS

thereby achieving rationalized alarm management [40]. Fur- continuously throughout the evolutionary process. Specifically,
thermore, as suggested in [41], applying MoCC-BD-FID to the results at the 20th generation are significantly better than
more realistic training datasets enhances the identification of those generated randomly at the 1st generation. For the WADI
genuine attacks. Additionally, we proactively address noisy dataset, the quality of the Pareto fronts also improves steadily.
labels that may arise from attack attempts or benign triggers, Although some solutions are similar in the 5th and 10th
further improving alarm rationalization. For systems that can- generations, the diversity of solutions improves by the 20th
not tolerate any false positives, we can integrate ε-classifiers, generation, which is an important metric for Pareto fronts. The
adopting zero false positives as the primary decision-making diversity of solutions provides more options for users, which is
metric [42]. crucial in practical applications. Hence, using TPR and TNR
 as two objective functions, the designed NSGA-II method
 can obtain satisfactory Pareto fronts. This indicates that our
C. Evolutionary Process of MoCC-BD-FID Method designed encoding method, crossover operation, and mutation
 Fig. 8 presents the Pareto fronts of MoCC-BD-FID on the operation can effectively handle the established mixed-variable
SWaT and WADI datasets under SIG and BadNet backdoor multi-objective optimization problem.
attacks. We provide the Pareto fronts at generations 1, 5, The combination scheme of clustering strategies obtained
10, and 20. As shown in Fig. 8, for the SWaT dataset, both for SWaT and WADI in the backdoor attack scenarios of SIG
the convergence and diversity of the Pareto fronts improve and BadNet are as follows: For SWaT: [(1, 0.3), (10, 0.3),
6878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 8. The Pareto front of the proposed MoCC-BD-FID method. (a) SWaT dataset under SIG attack; (b) SWaT dataset under BadNet attack; (c) WADI
dataset under SIG attack; (d) WADI dataset under BadNet attack. Gen-i, i = 1, 5, 10, 20 represents the ith generation.

(12, 0.4)] and [(11, 0.4), (12, 0.6)]. For WADI: [(3, 0.1), TABLE IV
(6, 0.5), (12, 0.4)] and [(1, 0.2), (11, 0.3), (12, 0.5)]. Fig. 8 C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS
shows the corresponding combination scheme of clustering AGAINST SIG BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SWAT DATASET
strategies. For example, in the SIG attack scenario of the
SWaT dataset, the combination scheme of clustering strategies
is [(1, 0.3), (10, 0.3), (12, 0.4)], which indicates the use
of three combination strategies: HDBSCAN, Agglomerative
Clustering, and Affinity Propagation and the corresponding
confidence levels are 0.3, 0.3, and 0.4.

D. Comparison With Single Clustering-Based Defense
 First, collect sample parameters of normal and malicious
updates generated during the SIG and BadNet backdoor
attacks to serve as a training set for offline optimization in
the defense phase. To enhance the robustness of the backdoor
defense, the training set includes samples that each contain
10% of malicious update parameters produced by SIG and TABLE V
BadNet. The optimized combination scheme of clustering C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS
strategies is then applied to two different scenarios, i.e., SIG AGAINST BAD N ET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SWAT DATASET
and BadNet.
 1) Backdoor Defense for SWaT Dataset: Table IV and
Table V present the backdoor defense experimental results
on the SWaT dataset. It should be noted that the minor
differences in MA metrics in Table VI are related to our
designed backdoor attack approach. A successful backdoor
attack should maintain model performance on normal samples
while effectively triggering specific backdoor samples. This
means metrics like accuracy and F1-score on normal test sets
should show no significant difference from clean models, while
accurately identifying backdoor samples.
 The BA primarily depends on the clustering methods
employed. The experiments reveal that single clustering methods can initially identify normal gradients, i.e., high TNR,
precisely in early federated training rounds due to their
dominant proportion. However, if any round exhibits poor global model incorporates more backdoor parameters, subseclustering performance on normal gradients, the aggregated quently increasing difficulty in identifying normal gradients in
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6879

 TABLE VI strategies with different confidence levels. Compared with a
C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS single clustering strategy, MoCC-BD-FID achieves the lowest
 AGAINST SIG BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE WADI DATASET BA value, as it can better defend against backdoor attacks.
 Moreover, these three clustering strategies are automatically
 selected without requiring manual trial and error, which is one
 of the advantages of MoCC-BD-FID.
 By analyzing the results of single cluster strategy, it can be
 seen that no single cluster strategy method can achieve the
 best result. This also indicates the necessity of selecting an
 appropriate combination scheme of clustering strategies.
 In the case of the BadNet backdoor attack, we can also
 obtain similar results. The MoCC-BD-FID method achieves
 the best results. Although its TPR value is not as good as
 HDBSCAN and SOS, this performance index of MoCC-BD-
 FID are very close to those of HDBSCAN and SOS. Further
 comparison between MoCC-BD-FID and SOS shows that the
 BA value of MoCC-BD-FID is 0.2185, much smaller than the
 BA value of SOS. Additionally, the TNR value of MoCClater rounds. This leads to gradually deteriorating clustering BD-FID is 0.9586, which is much higher than the 0.9173 of
performance, demonstrating the limitation of single clustering SOS.
methods, i.e., their lack of robustness. A single round of Comparing the defense performances in the SIG and BadNet
poor clustering can significantly compromise overall defense scenarios, we can see that the BA values in the SIG scenario
effectiveness, causing BA to increase and stabilize at higher are all larger than those in the BadNet scenario, indicating that
values while TNR approaches undefended states. This explains the SIG attack has a more severe impact. However, MoCC-BDwhy most single clustering methods show similar BA and TNR FID can still maintain the BA value below 0.3, demonstrating
metrics. In contrast, the proposed combined multiple clustering the effectiveness of MoCC-BD-FID in defending against backapproach enhances robustness, where poor performance of door attacks.
any single method in a particular round doesn’t affect overall Regarding the issue of low TPR and TNR accuracy in single
clustering effectiveness, thereby improving TNR and reducing cluster strategy-based backdoor defense method, the proposed
BA. MoCC-BD-FID improves performance and surpasses all single
 Regarding TPR metrics, the generally low values in the cluster strategy-based methods, except that under SIG attacks,
tables result from our experimental setup where malicious the TPR is lower than DBSCAN and Spectral Clustering.
clients constituted only 10% of SWaT dataset participants, Here, we need to emphasize that although we consider various
with backdoor samples accounting for merely 0.5% of each clustering strategies, the combination scheme is automatically
malicious client’s training data. This configuration makes selected and does not require trial-and-error method.
backdoor attacks stealthier, causing most clustering methods 2) Backdoor Defense for WADI Dataset: Tables VI shows
to perform poorly in identifying malicious gradients, hence the the defense results on the WADI dataset under SIG backsimilarly low TPR values across different methods. door attack. From Table VI, we can see that MoCC-BD-FID
 From Tables IV–V, it can be observed that: achieves the best overall performance. Although the TPR
 MoCC-BD-FID achieves the best overall performance. value is 0.1483, ranking third, it is only slightly worse
Although the TPR value of Agglomerative Clustering is than MeanShift and MiniBatchKMeans but better than other
0.1203, slightly higher than the 0.12 of MoCC-BD-FID, all strategies. Analyzing the BA value, we observe that MoCCother single cluster-based defense methods performed worse BD-FID’s value of 0.03 is significantly better than other
than MoCC-BD-FID. Specifically, when comparing MoCC- methods, especially compared to OPTICS, which has a BA
BD-FID with Spectral Clustering, it can be observed that all value as high as 0.72. Furthermore, the results reveal that
other performance indices of MoCC-BD-FID are much better MeanShift performs best in TPR. SOS achieves the best BA
than those of Spectral Clustering. Similarly, when comparing result among single clustering strategies, but its TPR and TNR
MoCC-BD-FID with Agglomerative Clustering, the other per- are not the best. This shows that single clustering strategies
formance indices of MoCC-BD-FID are significantly better. may perform well in certain aspects but struggle to achieve
This shows that the proposed MoCC-BD-FID has a strong the best overall performance. MoCC-BD-FID, targeting the
defense effect against SIG backdoor attacks in the SWAT SIG backdoor attack on the WDIA dataset, automatically
dataset. selects the combination scheme of clustering strategies with
 Comparing the defense methods based on single cluster corresponding confidence levels, achieving better overall perstrategy with the no-defense scenario, the BA value under formance than single clustering strategies while overcoming
the no-defense condition is the worst. Intuitively, since no- the design process relied on experts.
defense does not account for defending against backdoor Regarding the scenario of BadNet backdoor attacks on the
attacks, its BA value is the highest. The results obtained by WADI dataset, Table VII presents the comparison results of
MoCC-BD-FID are based on a combination of three clustering MoCC-BD-FID and other single clustering strategies. From
6880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 9. The final clustering combination strategy obtained from Pareto front of the proposed MoCC-BD-FID method. (a) SWaT dataset under SIG attack; (b)
SWaT dataset under BadNet attack; (c) WADI dataset under SIG attack; (d) WADI dataset under BadNet attack.

Fig. 10. The rank of four performance indices of MoCC-BD-FID and other compared methods: (a) SIG backdoor attack on SWaT dataset; (b) BadNet
backdoor attack on SWaT dataset; (c) SIG backdoor attack on WADI dataset; (d) BadNet backdoor attack on WADI dataset.

 TABLE VII TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST SIG
 AGAINST BAD N ET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE WADI DATASET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SWAT DATASET

 MoCC-BD-FID method rank first or second, especially the
 BA, TPR, and TNR metrics. Since MoCC-BD-FID is essentially a backdoor defense method, the BA metric is very
 important and always ranks first. The TPR and TNR metrics,
 which are the objective functions during evolutionary process,
 can dominate most methods. This indicates the effectiveness
 of MoCC-BD-FID.
Table VII, it can be seen that MoCC-BD-FID has the best
overall performance. Especially, in the BA value, it achieves
as low as 0.1682, which is significantly better than the highest E. Comparison With Existing Backdoor Defense
value of 0.7925. The TPR metric ranks second, just behind To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
SOS’s 0.29. Additionally, MoCC-BD-FID achieves the best backdoor defense method, we select five existing backdoor
TNR, indicating that MoCC-BD-FID is effective in handling defense methods including three classic backdoor defense
BadNet attacks. methods, i.e., Krum [34], Weak-DP [35], FoolsGold [36] and
 Fig. 10 gives the rank of four performance indices of two manually designed methods, i.e., DeepSight [37] and
MoCC-BD-FID and other compared method. From Fig. CrowdGuard [22], as comparison methods on the SWaT and
10, it can be seen that most performance indices of the WADI datasets.
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6881

 TABLE IX TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST BAD - C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS
 N ET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SWAT DATASET AGAINST SIG BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SPA DATASET

 TABLE X
C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST SIG
 BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE WADI DATASET

 TABLE XIII
 C OMPARISON OF BACKDOOR D EFENSE BY D IFFERENT M ETHODS
 AGAINST BAD N ET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SPA DATASET

 TABLE XI
C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST BAD -
 N ET BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE WADI DATASET

 Table VIII and Table IX show the comparison of six
defense methods under SIG backdoor attack and BadNet
 F. Transferability
backdoor attack on the SWaT dataset, respectively. From
Table VIII, MoCC-BD-FID outperforms the existing five This subsection demonstrates the transferability of MoCCmethods. Although the MA value of MoCC-BD-FID is 0.9883, BD-FID. While previous experimental results focused on
slightly lower than DeepSight’s 0.9893 and CrowdGuard’s Singapore’s ICSs, we here employ the PSA dataset from
0.9884, the other metrics are all the best. It should be noted Oak Ridge National Laboratories in the USA. Tables XII
that the BA metric of MoCC-BD-FID is significantly higher and XIII present the backdoor defense results against BadNet
than that of manually designed CrowdGuard and DeepSight. backdoor attack and SIG backdoor attack on the PSA dataset.
This shows that the method of automatically selecting a The results show that MoCC-BD-FID achieves similar MA
combination scheme of clustering strategies can effectively values while obtaining the best BA values compared to nodefend against SIG backdoor attacks. Similarly, from Table IX, defense and other single clustering methods. For TPR and
we can see that MoCC-BD-FID is only slightly lower than TNR metrics, MoCC-BD-FID delivers the best performance
Krum’s 0.9885 in the MA metric, while it performs best in against SIG backdoor attack. Against BadNet backdoor attack,
all other aspects, especially with a significant improvement in MoCC-BD-FID achieves 0.2164 in TPR, slightly lower than
the BA value. the top-performing Birch single clustering method, but signif-
 Table X and Table XI present the defense comparison icantly outperforms other single clustering approaches.
results of MoCC-BD-FID and five other methods under SIG To further demonstrate the effectiveness of MoCC-BD-FID
and BadNet attacks on the WADI dataset, respectively. From on the PSA dataset, we compared it with Krum [34], Weak-DP
Table X, it can be observed that all the metrics of MoCC- [35], FoolsGold [36], DeepSight [37], and CrowdGuard [22].
BD-FID are the best, with significant improvements in both Table XIV presents the comparison results between MoCCthe BA and TNR metrics. From Table XI, although the MA BD-FID and these five methods against SIG backdoor attacks
value of MoCC-BD-FID is slightly inferior to other methods, on the SPA dataset, while Table XV shows the defense perforits BA, TPR, and TNR values are much better than those of mance comparison of all six methods against BadNet backdoor
the other methods. attacks on SPA dataset. The results in Tables XIV and XV
6882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XIV then leverage the distributional similarity between backdoor
C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST SIG samples and OOD samples to obtain the required backdoor
 BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SPA DATASET samples for MoCC-BD-FID. This enables MoCC-BD-FID to
 detect OOD backdoors to some extent. Also, MoCC-BD-FID
 can be extended to solve OOD backdoors by designing a
 method to mount clean-label backdoor attacks or predicting
 label transitions based on counterfactual explanation [44], [45].

 V. C ONCLUSION
 TABLE XV In this paper, we have proposed a multi-objective clustering
C OMPARISON OF F IVE E XISTING BACKDOOR D EFENSES AGAINST SIG combination-based backdoor defense for federated intrusion
 BACKDOOR ATTACK ON THE SPA DATASET detection of ICSs, called MoCC-BD-FID. In MoCC-BD-FID,
 we establish the automated design issue of clustering strategies
 combination for defense method as the mixed-variable multiobjective optimization problem by maximizing both TPR
 and TNR. Besides, we have developed an efficient encoding
 strategy, crossover operation and mutation operation under the
 framework of NSGA-II to describe and evolve the different
 combination schemes of 12 classic clustering strategies with
 different confidence levels. The effectiveness of the backdoor
demonstrate that MoCC-BD-FID achieves best performance, defense strategy is illustrated by subjecting 1D-CNN to two
particularly in terms of the BA metric, obtaining values of different attack scenarios including SIG and BadNet on three
0.2062 and 0.1908 for SIG backdoor attack and BadNet widely-used ICS intrusion datasets i.e., SWaT, WADI, and
backdoor attack scenarios, respectively. These comprehensive PSA. The experimental results have shown that MoCC-BDresults confirm that MoCC-BD-FID can be successfully trans- FID achieves better performance in MA, BA, TPR and TNR
ferred to other ICS environments while maintaining excellent than other 12 single cluster strategy-based methods, three
performance. classic backdoor defense methods, i.e., Krum [34], Weak-DP
 [35], FoolsGold [36] and two manually designed methods,
G. Discussion i.e., DeepSight [37] and CrowdGuard [22]. In addition, the
 In real ICSs, online testing of new IDSs is typically not combination scheme of clustering strategies is automatically
permitted. Performance evaluation of novel IDSs is generally designed by the developed NSGA-II, which overcomes the
first conducted on public datasets or experimental testbeds. difficulty in determining combination scheme involving more
Considering data privacy and security concerns when actual than two clustering strategies.
systems are under attack, complete datasets are rarely pub- This work focuses on the automatic selection of an approlicly available. In academic research, experimental approaches priate combination of clustering strategies for defending
can simulate attacks on practical systems to generate highly against backdoor attacks, so the illustrated deep learning
representative data including the characteristics of large-scale model employed in this study is a simple 1D-CNN, whose
and operational environments [43]. In this paper, we employ detection performance especially the FPR can be further
the SWaT, WADI, and SPA datasets, which largely reflect the improved. In practical deployments, more advanced models
characteristics of real systems, and are widely used in existing such as automated federated IDS (Fed-GA-CNN-IDS) [14]
literature to validate the effectiveness of model. Therefore, if and multi-objective discrete extremal optimization-based CNN
MoCC-BD-FID performs well on these datasets, it should also (MODEO-CNN) [47] will be adopted to further reduce the
achieve good performance when applied to practical systems. FPR. For federated IDSs, FPR is directly correlated with
In practical deployment, the MoCC-BD-FID is conducted model performance after federated training. However, FL
offline. During online detection, the optimized clustering encounters increasing convergence challenges with more parscheme is directly applied without introducing additional ticipating clients, making it difficult to obtain optimal models.
latency, thus satisfying real-time response requirements. Fur- For future work, we plan to implement multi-dimensional
thermore, since FL model aggregation is inherently periodic, collaborative optimization through personalized FL, efficient
the MoCC-BD-FID only needs to be executed once during aggregation strategies, and automated deep learning techniques
the initial federated training phase. Subsequent model update to systematically reduce FPR while improving convergence
cycles do not require multiple iterations. Therefore, when efficiency. Also, it will be interesting to develop more robust
deployed in practical systems, MoCC-BD-FID can achieve defense methods against OOD backdoor attacks.
real-time detection.
 Detecting out of distribution (OOD) backdoors remains a R EFERENCES
challenging task, and MoCC-BD-FID can be extended for [1] H. Zhu, M. Liu, C. Fang, R. Deng, and P. Cheng, “Detection-
OOD backdoor detection. Following [44], we first inject performance tradeoff for watermarking in industrial control systems,”
indicator tasks into the global model by using OOD data, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2780–2793, 2023.
ZENG et al.: MoCC-BD-FID OF INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 6883

[2] V. Tay et al., “Taxonomy of fingerprinting techniques for evaluation of [23] Y. Wang, D.-H. Zhai, Y. He, and Y. Xia, “An adaptive robust defending
 smart grid honeypot realism,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Con- algorithm against backdoor attacks in federated learning,” Future Gener.
 trol, Comput. Technol. Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), Kalba, United Comput. Syst., vol. 143, pp. 118–131, Jun. 2023.
 Kingdom, Oct. 2023, pp. 1–7. [24] T. D. Nguyen et al., “FLAME: Taming backdoors in federated learning,”
[3] Y. Shan, Y. Yao, T. Zhao, and W. Yang, “NeuPot: A neural network- in Proc. 31st USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2022,
 based honeypot for detecting cyber threats in industrial control systems,” pp. 1415–1432.
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 10512–10522, Oct. [25] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
 2023. multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Com-
[4] M. Asiri, N. Saxena, R. Gjomemo, and P. Burnap, “Understanding put., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, Apr. 2002.
 indicators of compromise against cyber-attacks in industrial control [26] K. Deb, K. Sindhya, and T. Okabe, “Self-adaptive simulated binary
 systems: A security perspective,” ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 7, crossover for real-parameter optimization,” in Proc. 9th Annu. Conf.
 no. 2, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2023. Genet. Evol. Comput., 2007, pp. 1187–1194.
[5] R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Secur. [27] H. Li and Q. Zhang, “Multiobjective optimization problems with compli-
 Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, May 2011. cated Pareto sets, MOEA/D and NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
[6] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense against vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 284–302, Apr. 2009.
 gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intrusion detection [28] J. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Xin, and L. Wang, “A biobjective perspective for
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4561–4576, mixed-integer programming,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst.,
 2023. vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2374–2385, Apr. 2022.
 [29] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
[7] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in indusresearch in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
 trial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,” IEEE
 Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Secur., 2017, pp. 88–99.
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197, Jul.
 [30] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
 2022.
 distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
[8] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 systems,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CySWater, 2017, pp. 25–28.
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized [31] S. Pan, T. Morris, and U. Adhikari, “Classification of disturbances and
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. cyber-attacks in power systems using heterogeneous time-synchronized
[9] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 650–662, Jun.
 fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. 2015.
 Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023. [32] M. Barni, K. Kallas, and B. Tondi, “A new backdoor attack in CNNs
[10] A. Albaseer, N. Abdi, M. Abdallah, M. Qaraqe, and S. Al-Kuwari, by training set corruption without label poisoning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 “FedPot: A quality-aware collaborative and incentivized honeypot-based Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019, pp. 101–105.
 detector for smart grid networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., [33] T. Gu, K. Liu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “BadNets: Evaluating
 vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4844–4860, Aug. 2024. backdooring attacks on deep neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
[11] X. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Lai, B. Mao, and H. Lyu, “EEFED: Personalized pp. 47230–47244, 2019.
 federated learning of execution & evaluation dual network for CPS intru- [34] P. Blanchard, E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
 sion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 41–56, learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in Proc.
 2023. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, Dec. 2017, pp. 118–128.
[12] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning [35] Z. Sun, P. Kairouz, A. Theertha Suresh, and H. Brendan McMahan, “Can
 for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet of you really backdoor federated learning?,” 2019, arXiv:1911.07963.
 Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249, Jun. [36] C. Fung, C. J. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “The limitations of federated
 2022. learning in Sybil settings,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Symp. Res. Attacks,
[13] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and Intrusions Defenses, 2020, pp. 301–316.
 O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack [37] P. Rieger, T. Duc Nguyen, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DeepSight:
 detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5, Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated learning through deep model
 pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022. inspection,” 2022, arXiv:2201.00763.
[14] J.-M. Shao, G.-Q. Zeng, K.-D. Lu, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng, [38] X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Provably secure federated learning
 “Automated federated learning for intrusion detection of industrial con- against malicious clients,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 trol systems based on evolutionary neural architecture search,” Comput. vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 6885–6893.
 Secur., vol. 143, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103910. [39] Z. Chen, S. Yu, M. Fan, X. Liu, and R. H. Deng, “Privacy-enhancing
[15] X. Hao, C. Lin, W. Dong, X. Huang, and H. Xiong, “Robust and secure and robust backdoor defense for federated learning on heterogeneous
 federated learning against hybrid attacks: A generic architecture,” IEEE data,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 693–707, 2024.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 1576–1588, 2024. [40] S. Alabdulhadi and A. Al-Matouq, “Efficient and standardized alarm
[16] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How rationalization for cybersecurity monitoring,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
 to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., pp. 166936–166944, 2024.
 2020, pp. 2938–2948. [41] L. Yang et al., “True attacks, attack attempts, or benign triggers?
[17] X. Gong, Y. Chen, Q. Wang, and W. Kong, “Backdoor attacks and An empirical measurement of network alerts in a security operations
 defenses in federated learning: State-of-the-art, taxonomy, and future center,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur. 24), 2024,
 directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 114–121, Apr. pp. 1525–1542.
 2023. [42] M. Sayad Haghighi, F. Farivar, and A. Jolfaei, “A machine learningbased approach to build zero false-positive IPSs for industrial IoT and
[18] Y. Wan, Y. Qu, W. Ni, Y. Xiang, L. Gao, and E. Hossain, “Data and
 CPS with a case study on power grids security,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl.,
 model poisoning backdoor attacks on wireless federated learning, and the
 vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 920–928, Jan. 2024.
 defense mechanisms: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 [43] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1861–1897, 3rd Quart., 2024.
 learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
[19] T. D. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, P. L. Nguyen, H. H. Pham, K. D. Doan,
 Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
 and K.-S. Wong, “Backdoor attacks and defenses in federated learning: [44] S. Li and Y. Dai, “BackdoorIndicator: Leveraging OOD data for proac-
 Survey, challenges and future research directions,” Eng. Appl. Artif. tive backdoor detection in federated learning,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX
 Intell., vol. 127, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 107166. Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 4193–4210.
[20] H. Jeong, H. Son, S. Lee, J. Hyun, and T.-M. Chung, “FedCC: [45] Y. Zeng, M. Pan, H. Just, L. Lyu, M. Qiu, and R. Jia, “Narcissus: A
 Robust federated learning against model poisoning attacks,” 2022, practical clean-label Backdoor attack with limited information,” in Proc.
 arXiv:2212.01976. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 771–785.
[21] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, L. Yao, and Z. Li, “SecFedNIDS: Robust [46] H. Sui et al., “DMGNN: Detecting and mitigating backdoor attacks in
 defense for poisoning attack against federated learning-based network graph neural networks,” 2024, arXiv:2410.14105.
 intrusion detection system,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 134, [47] K.-D. Lu, J.-C. Huang, G.-Q. Zeng, M.-R. Chen, G.-G. Geng, and
 pp. 154–169, Sep. 2022. J. Weng, “Multi-objective discrete extremal optimization of variable-
[22] P. Rieger, T. Krauß, M. Miettinen, A. Dmitrienko, and A.-R. Sadeghi, length blocks-based CNN by joint NAS and HPO for intrusion detection
 “CrowdGuard: Federated backdoor detection in federated learning,” in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb.
 2022, arXiv:2210.07714. 24, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3545363.