IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 4012212

 Multimodal VAD: Visual Anomaly Detection in
 Intelligent Monitoring System via
 Audio-Vision-Language
 Dicong Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qilong Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Qinghua Hu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Kaijun Wu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The deep learning-based anomaly detection methods detection/monitoring systems” by integrating digital techusing visual sensors generally rely on a single modality or variants nologies, such as machine learning (ML), the Internet of
as raw signal inputs, which severely limits expressiveness and Things (IoT), and cyber-physical systems into visual anomaly
adaptability. The evolution of multimodal and visual-language
pretrained models is shaping new possibilities in video anomaly detection. Following this, Industry 5.0 further advanced the
detection (VAD). So, how to efficiently leverage them to achieve application of digital technologies and intelligent devices,
reliable multimodal VAD presents a significant challenge worth enabling comprehensive monitoring and refined management
investigating. In this work, we propose a novel dual-stream of production processes. This effectively enhanced production
multimodal VAD network, which integrates coarse-grained and efficiency and reduced costs for enterprises, further propelling
fine-grained streams combining video, audio, and text modalities.
First, in the coarse-grained stream, we perform cross-modal the development of intelligent detection and monitoring sysfusion of audio features with temporally modeled visual fea- tems. Surveillance cameras are increasingly used in industrial
tures, utilizing contrastive optimization to achieve more accurate fault detection [1], [2], intelligent security monitoring [3], [4],
coarse-grained results. In the fine-grained stream, we constructed [5], and production line defect detection [6], [7], [8]. Neverabnormal-aware context prompts (ACPs) by integrating visual theless, the present automated anomaly detection technologies
information and prior knowledge related to anomalous events
into the text modality. Through the “coarse-support-fine” strat- lag behind, resulting in suboptimal utilization of surveillance
egy, we further enhanced the model’s ability to discriminate equipment and limiting their potential. Drawing inspiration
fine-grained anomalies. Our method achieved optimal perfor- from the natural way humans watch videos, video anomaly
mance in experiments on two large-scale anomaly datasets, detection (VAD) relies not only on visual information but also
demonstrating its effectiveness and superiority. It supports the on audio and others (such as captions or text), which are
development of highly robust intelligent monitoring systems and
promotes the potential applications of multimodal VAD across indispensable for creating a complete perceptual experience. In
industrial monitoring, public safety, smart cities, and so on. smart cities, the precision and comprehensiveness required by
 video surveillance systems make multimodal learning espe-
 Index Terms—Abnormal-aware context prompts (ACPs), multimodal, video anomaly detection (VAD), weakly supervision. cially necessary. In intelligent security systems, the ability
 to identify and respond to various anomalous behaviors and
 I. I NTRODUCTION emergencies is critical, especially in areas, such as public
 safety, traffic management, and emergency response. Introduc-
T HE arrival of Industry 4.0 marks the transformation of
 manufacturing, driving the development of “intelligent ing multimodal information can significantly reduce reliance
 on unimodal data, effectively overcoming issues, such as
 Received 18 November 2024; revised 25 March 2025; accepted 28 May information loss and incomplete representation that may arise
2025. Date of publication 16 June 2025; date of current version 20 June
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science from using a single modality, thereby enabling the model to
Foundation of China under Grant 62276186 and Grant U23B2049; in part by analyze anomalies from multiple perspectives [9]. Therefore,
the Natural Science Foundation Key Project of Gansu Province under Grant constructing a multimodal VAD network is not only essential
23JRRA860; in part by the Inner Mongolia Key Research and Development
and Achievement Transformation Project under Grant 2023YFDZ0043, Grant for enhancing the intelligence of security systems but also
2023YFDZ0054, and Grant 2023YFSH0043; in part by the Key Research and plays a vital role in advancing the development of smart
Development Project of Lanzhou Jiaotong University under Grant ZDYF2304; cities. It assists urban managers in real-time, comprehensive
and in part by the Key Talent Project of Gansu Province. The Associate Editor
coordinating the review process was Dr. Jianbo Yu. (Corresponding authors: monitoring and management of urban conditions, improving
Qilong Wang; Kaijun Wu.) city safety and quality of life.
 Dicong Wang is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China, and also with the School of Electronics
 According to the industry definition of anomalous events,
and Information Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070, VAD methods can be roughly categorized into unsuper-
China (e-mail: wangdc 2021@tju.edu.cn). vised VAD and weakly supervised VAD. In the unsupervised
 Qilong Wang and Qinghua Hu are with the College of Intelli- paradigm, VAD models are trained solely on normal data,
gence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail:
qlwang@tju.edu.cn; huqinghua@tju.edu.cn). treating any data that deviates from the normal distribution as
 Kaijun Wu is with the School of Electronics and Information Engi- anomalous. Numerous excellent studies have emerged under
neering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070, China (e-mail:
wkj@mail.lzjtu.cn).
 the unsupervised paradigm [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15],
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3578702 [16], [17], including those based on reconstruction [10], [15],
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 our work, we organically integrate video, audio, and textual
 information [as shown in Fig. 1(c)], fully leveraging the
 synergistic and complementary effects of multimodal data to
 more comprehensively capture and describe the characteristics
 of anomalous events.
 Based on the above analysis, we propose a multimodal
 two-stream VAD network capable of processing visual, audio,
 and textual modalities. Specifically, we first perform temporal
Fig. 1. Distribution of modalities in existing methods. (a) Focused on modeling on visual information to capture dynamic changes
using unimodal images or variants for VAD. (b) Some multimodal methods and spatial features in the video. Subsequently, we conduct
combine images with audio or text. (c) Ours integrates image, audio, and cross-modal fusion of the visual features and the encoded
text modalities, capturing subtle features of anomalies and improving model
adaptability and reliability. audio signals to enhance the perception and understanding
 of anomalous events. The fused features are then utilized
 for coarse-grained frame-level classification to preliminarily
prediction [12], [13], and so on. However, the main limitation distinguish between anomalous and normal events. At the
of the aforementioned methods is the singularity of modalities same time, we introduce a contrastive constraint to strengthen
and the lack of anomalous diversity. Despite the existence the model’s discriminative capacity and resilience, which
of various modalities, such as optical flow, depth maps, and further enhances subsequent fine-grained anomaly detection.
semantic maps, these are still variants or derivatives based on For the fine-grained stream, we design abnormal-aware con-
RGB images, which, broadly speaking, can be considered as text prompts (ACPs), encoding them into a text encoder to
the same modality [as shown in Fig. 1(a)]. Weakly supervised generate corresponding text embeddings. By calculating the
VAD (WSVAD) has garnered increasing attention in recent similarity matrix between the text embeddings and the visual
years due to its broad application prospects. Compared to embeddings, we further improve the model’s performance in
unsupervised methods, weakly supervised methods have sev- fine-grained anomaly detection.
eral notable advantages: 1) due to the simultaneous presence In summary, the main contributions of this article are as
of both anomalous and normal data, the model can learn follows.
richer discriminative representations; 2) WSVAD leverages 1) Effective Fusion of Multimodal Data: By effectively
coarse-grained video-level labels to achieve a good tradeoff integrating heterogeneous source information—visual,
between performance and efficiency at a lower cost; and audio, and textual—we achieve mutual supplementation
3) the production of large-scale anomaly datasets becomes of information, capturing richer, more comprehensive,
feasible. Currently, most weakly supervised methods typically and diverse feature representations.
formalize it as multiple instance learning (MIL) [18], [19], 2) Dual-Stream Network With Coarse and Fine Granular-
[20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29]. As a ity: The coarse-grained stream via audiovisual fusion,
mainstream research paradigm in WSVAD, MIL has led to contrastively optimized, yields a global perspective. The
the emergence of various innovative ideas and methods in fine-grained stream via APCs, the “coarse-support-fine”
this field. Sevetlidis et al. [19] proposed a method that inte- strategy, offers anomalous detail.
grates anomaly information through weighted training, aimed 3) Abnormal-Aware Context Prompt (ACP): Incorporating
at enhancing detection performance in weakly supervision, anomalous visual information and prior knowledge into
particularly demonstrating noteworthy results in scenarios with the textual modality improves the recognition and analsparse labeled data. Lv et al. [23] proposed a bias-free anomaly ysis of fine-grained anomalous behaviors.
detector through invariant learning of confident and ambiguous 4) Extensive Experimental Validation and SOTA Perforsegments with different contextual biases, effectively reduc- mance: We systematically evaluated its effectiveness and
ing bias issues caused by contextual changes during the adaptability on two large benchmarks, achieving optimal
detection process. Given the scarcity of anomalous data and performance across multiple metrics.
high labeling costs, continuous development and efforts have The organization of this article is as follows. In Section II,
shown that incorporating multimodal information effectively we review the research progress related to VAD. In Section III,
reduces dependence on single-modal data, mitigates potential we elaborate on the multimodal VAD method we proposed. In
information loss, and makes VAD tasks more comprehensive Section IV, we conduct a series of experiments to validate and
[2], [7]. Meanwhile, with the notable achievements of vision- analyze the proposed method. Finally, Section V concludes our
language pretraining (VLP) models across various tasks, an work and provides an outlook on future research.
increasing number of researchers are exploring how to transfer
the semantic knowledge learned by these models into VAD. II. R ELATED W ORK
The strong ability of VLP models to capture the complex multimodal relationships between vision and language offers new A. Video Anomaly Detection
possibilities for multimodal VAD [24], [25], [27]. However, Early VAD was predominantly based on unsupervised methmost current methods primarily focus on the combination of ods [11], [29], [30]; however, these approaches are limited
video with audio or text [as shown in Fig. 1(b)], failing to in capturing subtle behavioral changes and in thoroughly
fully leverage the potential advantages of multimodalities. In understanding anomalous events, thus underscoring the urgent
WANG et al.: MULTIMODAL VAD: VISUAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INTELLIGENT MONITORING SYSTEM 4012212

need to incorporate anomaly-related knowledge [26], [31]. The C. Multimodality on VAD
continuous advancements in deep learning have driven the With the rapid development in areas, such as image/video
evolution of VAD, gradually shifting research toward weakly understanding [42], pattern recognition [30], [31], text-tosupervised anomaly detection. Current weakly supervised image generation [43], and speech recognition [44], we are
methods can generally be categorized into two main types: one closer than ever to achieve the integration and unification of
adopts a two-stage self-training strategy, while the other is a multimodal learning [45]. Compared to unimodal methods,
single-stage method based on MIL. Since the introduction of multimodal VAD integrates heterogeneous source data—such
the MIL method, it has been continuously developed and opti- as visual, audio, and textual information—that exhibit sigmized, attracting widespread attention. The related research nificant differences in representation and distribution. This
focuses on leveraging spatiotemporal contextual information enhances capabilities in information fusion and representation
and motion features, emphasizing the overall temporal conti- while offering unique research mechanisms and challenges
nuity of anomalous events and accurately capturing the subtle to the VAD community due to the latent connections and
boundary changes between anomalies and normal instances interactions among modalities [20], [25], [27], [34], [46],
[18], [29], [32]. With the continuous advancement and evolu- [47]. Yu et al. [46] proposed a modality-aware contrastive
tion of VAD, multimodal approaches have gradually emerged. multi-instance learning network with self-distillation, offering
These methods are not only model based on traditional improved parameter efficiency, scalability, and effectiveness
visual information but also integrate other modalities, such while resolving inconsistencies between audio and video
as audio and text. These modalities’ complementarity effec- events. Wu et al. [20], [21] tackled the issues of limited scene
tively compensates for the limitations that may exist in single diversity and modality insufficiency in prior datasets by conmodality, enabling capturing anomalous behaviors and better structing a large-scale audiovisual multimodal dataset called
interpreting scenes through cross-modal fusion [24], [26], [33], XD-Violence. This innovative work enriches the existing VAD
[34]. Meanwhile, anomaly detection methods based on large data resources and greatly enhances the reliability and expanlanguage models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) sibility of VAD through the fusion of multimodal information.
have also begun to attract the attention and exploration of Zhang et al. [47] effectively corrected and refined the detection
researchers [35], [36]. These cutting-edge technologies and boundaries in the anomaly space by introducing multiple coninnovative ideas open novel opportunities and challenges in straints and optimized the definition of the anomaly boundaries
visual anomaly detection. to better align with the requirements of practical applications.
 In contrast, our method integrates different types of data,
 including visual, audio, and textual information, to construct a
B. LLMs and VLMs on VAD
 richer and more multidimensional feature representation. This
 In recent years, vision-language pretraining models have not enhances the understanding and analysis of complex video
only demonstrated remarkable progress in tasks, such as image content and aids in more comprehensive identification and
captioning [37], visual question answering [38], and image- interpretation of anomalous events.
text matching [39], [40], but have also played a crucial role in
industrial monitoring and measurement. By integrating visual III. M ETHODOLOGY
sensor data with textual descriptions, these models enhance A. Preliminaries
the accuracy of anomaly detection [19], fault diagnosis [1],
and intelligent decision-making systems, providing critical First, given an untrimmed audiovisual sequence X =
technological support for intelligent industrial production and (xv , xa ), where xv represents video information and xa reprequality control. Kim et al. [41] used ChatGPT to generate sents audio information, we segment the entire sequence into
textual descriptions of normal and abnormal elements, thus N segments x = {xv , xa }i=1
 N
 and assign corresponding coarseproviding the textual data required for training CLIP. However, grained video-level labels yc ∈ {0, 1}, where yc = 1 indicates
this approach has a human-in-the-loop issue, necessitating the presence of anomalous events in x. We utilize off-thea certain degree of manual intervention to optimize output shelf pretrained networks as feature extractors to separately
according to specific application contexts. Zanella et al. [35] extract visual and audio information, obtaining visual features
 v

exploited the existing VLM to generate textual descriptions F v and audio features F a . Specifically, F v = { f v }i=1
 N
 ∈ RL×d
 a

for each test frame and designed specific prompt mechanisms and F a = { f a }i=1
 N
 ∈ RL×d , where fiv and fia denote the video
to unlock the capabilities of LLM in temporal aggregation and and audio features of the i-th segment, dv and da represent
anomaly score estimation, making them effective detectors. Du the dimensions of the video and audio features, respectively,
et al. [9] employed visual language large models (VLLMs) and L denotes the length of the video sequence X . In the
to uncover and capture the key clues of anomalous behavior MIL framework, we treat a video sequence as a bag and the
and establish a logical chain of causality, thereby accurately audiovisual segments {xv , xa }ni=1 as instances.
identifying and inferring the occurrence process of anomalous
events. In this article, we will further explore how to effectively B. Two-Stream Network
transfer the semantic understanding and cross-modal matching In this article, we propose a dual-stream network for
advantages demonstrated by the large-scale VLM CLIP in multimodal VAD, enhancing precision and generalization
processing image and text information to the VAD task, through the synergy of coarse-grained and fine-grained streams
providing new insights and directions in subsequent research. (refer to Fig. 2). The coarse-grained stream fuses visual
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Overview. We have constructed a dual-stream network capable of simultaneously processing image, audio, and text modalities, utilizing a “coarsesupport-fine” strategy to establish their interconnections. Through cross-modal audio-video fusion and contrastive constraints, we perform coarse-grained
anomaly detection; concurrently, we introduce ACPs that are sensitive to anomalies to enhance the discriminative capability for fine-grained anomalous events.

and audio signals to generate multimodal representations,
facilitating effective detection of anomalies. A contrastive
learning strategy further improves sensitivity by focusing on
anomalous samples through positive-negative sample comparisons. In the fine-grained stream, we construct ACPs using
learnable parameters, category information, and weighted
coarse-grained fused features, enabling reliable identification
of anomalies. This collaboration ensures comprehensive detection at both levels, showcasing robust generalization and
sensitivity.

 Fig. 3. Diagram of contrast constraint.
C. Coarse-Grained Stream
 1) Temporal Modeling and Cross-Modal Fusion: During features
audio signal processing, we perform feature encoding to obtain
 F 0v = GCN(Att(F v ))
 a
audio features F a = { f a }i=1
 N
 ∈ RL×d . For videos, we utilize (1)
a pretrained CLIP visual encoder to encode video frames,
 v
 F =F ◦F .
 a 0v
 (2)
generating visual features F v = { f v }i=1
 N
 ∈ RL×d . Next, to more
effectively capture the temporal dependencies within video In the coarse-grained stream, the audio-visual features are
features, we construct an appropriate temporal model that fully processed through a binary classifier to obtain the coarseexploits the temporal relationships between frames, resulting grained anomaly confidence Pc
in richer and more accurate temporal features, F 0v . For tem- Pc = σ(FC(F)) (3)
poral modeling of videos, we utilize a constrained window
transformer encoder layer [48] combined with a lightweight where σ denotes the sigmoid function.
graph convolutional network (GCN) module. By effectively 2) Contrastive Constraint: To further explore the feature
joint modeling global and local features, we fully leverage the differences and interrelations between normal and abnorcomplementary advantages between global information and mal videos, we propose an optimization method based on
local details. Subsequently, we perform cross-modal fusion of contrastive constraints, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, to
both audio and video modalities. In the cross-modal fusion accurately capture the feature differences between normal and
process, we employ a transformer-based [49] to efficiently abnormal videos, we introduce a video sequence partitioning
model the complex dependencies between audio and video strategy based on anomaly confidence pc . By conducting a
WANG et al.: MULTIMODAL VAD: VISUAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INTELLIGENT MONITORING SYSTEM 4012212

comparative analysis of feature segments in different score
intervals, we reveal subtle abnormal patterns. First, we differentiate between normal and abnormal videos based on the
anomaly confidence pc of each video sequence. When pc
exceeds a threshold ε, the video sequence is classified as
abnormal, denoted as Xa ; when pc is below the threshold, it is
classified as normal, denoted as Xn . For abnormal sequences
Xa (i.e., pc > ε), we select the top k feature segments with
 top-a
the highest scores, forming an abnormal mini-bag Bmin ⊂
 a k
{D (m)}m=1 .
 These feature segments generally represent more significant
abnormal patterns, reflecting the model’s high-confidence predictions of anomalous events. Simultaneously, we also select
the k lowest scoring feature segments, forming another abnormal mini-bag Bbot-a a k
 min ⊂ {D (m)}m=1 . These segments typically
manifest as more or uncertain abnormal samples, which help
the model capture potential fine-grained anomalies.
 Fig. 4. Diagram of ACP construction.
 Similarly, for normal sequences Xn (i.e., pc < ε), we
adopt a similar partition strategy; first, we select the top-k
feature segments with the highest scores to form the normal We believe that anomaly-conditional context embeddings
 top-n
mini-bag Bmin ⊂ {Dn (m)}km=1 , which typically represent the can better adapt to the task requirements of multimodal VAD.
characteristic features of normal videos. Then, we select the To achieve this, we introduced a lightweight dynamically
bottom-k feature segments with the lowest scores to form aligned visual prompt network (composed of a simple FFN
the normal mini-bag Bbot-n n k
 min ⊂ {D (m)}m=1 to help the model and skip connection) to incorporate anomaly knowledge into
recognize common or marginal features in normal videos. each learnable prompt, enabling it with anomaly awareness.
 Based on these partitions, we use the InfoNCE loss function To be exact, we introduce vϑ (∗) = ξ, an alignment visual
as the optimization objective, constraining the model to focus prompt network parameterized by ϑ, which fuses the anomalymore on the detailed contrast between anomalous and normal weighted visual information with textual information. The
video sequences during training. This enables the model not output is then processed by vϑ (∗), and by adding this result to
only to effectively learn the latent structure within the data the existing context prompt, we obtain a context prompt with
but also to enhance its perception and understanding of subtle anomaly awareness
yet important feature differences in video sequences, thereby
improving its discriminative capability 0
 tembed = tembed ⊕ ξ. (6)
 LNCE 2) Image-Text Registration: To further explore the potential
 top-a bot-a
 e(sim(Bmin ,Bmin )/τ) of fine-grained anomaly detection, the anomaly scores gen-
 = − log . (4) erated by the coarse-grained stream are used as weighting
 e(sim(Bmin ,Bmin )/τ) + k e(sim(Bmin ,D (m) /τ)
 top-a bot-a P top-a n
 m=1
 factors, which are then combined with the fused multimodal
 audio-visual features to perform fine-grained detection. The
D. Fine-Grained Stream focus is on regions or frames in the video where anoma-
 1) Abnormal-Aware Context Prompt (ACP): ACP aims to lies may exist, thereby enhancing the model’s sensitivity to
enhance visual representation by introducing anomaly-related anomaly details and its ability to discriminate them
semantic information, enabling more effective modeling of
 T = FFN (F ⊕ pc ) + tembed
 0
 . (7)
various anomaly patterns, as shown in Fig. 4. Specifically,
discrete textual labels (such as robbery, fighting, shooting, Finally, we compute the similarity between the fused visual
etc.) are regarded as category identifiers. These labels serve features F and the category embeddings T , resulting in a
as descriptive information for the target events and need to registration map M
be encoded. We use the Tokenizer to process the textual
labels, generating a high-dimensional embedding representa- exp(cossim(F, T )/τ)
 M= P . (8)
tion tembed = Tokenizer(yt ), where yt represents the specific exp(cossim(F, T )/τ)
textual label, which contains key information related to the
event. Next, the generated textual embedding tembed is com-
 E. Objective Function
bined with M learnable parameters vi . After concatenating the
textual embedding with these learnable parameters, we obtain 1) Coarse-Grained Stream: In the coarse-grained stream, in
a new sentence embedding representation, as shown in the addition to using the contrastive loss to enhance the discrimfollowing: inative ability between different feature representations, we
 n o further introduce a video-level classification loss. We calculate
 tembed = v1 , v2 , . . . , v M2 , tembed , v M2 +1 , . . . , v M . (5) the binary cross-entropy loss function Lcbce , between the video
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

prediction scores and their corresponding ground truth (GT) abnormal and 800 normal videos are used for training. These
labels to optimize the model videos cover 13 types of real-world anomalies. XD-Violence
 mainly consists of YouTube videos from movies and outdoor
 Lcbce = −yc log (pc ) − (1 − yc ) log (1 − pc ) . (9) scenes. It contains a total of 4854 untrimmed videos with audio
 2) Fine-Grained Stream: In the fine-grained stream, we and weakly labels, amounting to 217 h, with 2405 abnormal
adopt an attention-based top-k mechanism to extend the vanilla and 2349 normal videos, of which 1905 abnormal and 2049
MIL into a generalized MIL suitable for multiclass tasks. In normal videos are used for training. These videos are captured
particular, in the image-text alignment mapping matrix M, in diverse settings, such as handheld cameras, CCTV, movies,
which represents the similarity between visual features and sports, and so on, covering six types of anomalous behaviors.
all class embeddings, we select the top-k similarity values 2) Evaluation Metrics: Following previous excellent works
for each category and average the similarities of the selected [21], [24], [27], [46], we use frame-level average precision
frames to quantify the alignment degree between the video and (AP) for XD-Violence and frame-level AUC, as well as AUC
the current category. Through this process, we obtain a vector under only anomalous videos (AUCno-n ), for UCF-Crime. In
u = {u1 , . . . , uk }, which represents the similarity between the addition, to ensure the comprehensiveness and standardizavideo and all categories. We expect the video and its paired tion of the evaluation, we adhere to the standard evaluation
text label to have the highest similarity score. The multiclass protocols in the field of video action recognition [50], using
prediction is then carried out as follows: mean AP (mAP) values under different intersection over union
 (IoU) thresholds, along with the average of overall mAP. The
 exp(ui /τ)
 pif = Pk (10) selection and application of these evaluation metrics not only
 j exp(u j /τ) render our results comparable and consistent but also provide
 a more comprehensive reflection of the model’s performance
where pif represents the predicted confidence for the i-th class
 across various complex scenarios.
and τ is the temperature scaling hyperparameter. It is important
to note that due to the dual-stream nature of the network
architecture, each network branch with different granularities B. Implementation Details
generates its own anomaly score. We take the larger of the Following previous excellent works [20], [24], [60], we
two as the anomaly score for the entire network. Finally, employed the pretrained CLIP (ViT-B/16) model to extract
we employ the fine-grained aligned binary cross-entropy loss video and text features for both modalities. For audio features,
 f
Lbce . Additionally, we introduce an embedding constraint to we adopted the same feature extraction method as in prior
ensure semantic consistency, thereby obtaining semantically works, using the VGGish audio extractor, which was prerich anomaly-aware prompts. We quantify the differences in trained on the YouTube dataset. Additionally, both the visual
the feature space by calculating the cosine similarity between and audio features were aligned at a coarse-grained level. For
the normal embeddings and the embeddings of each anomaly hyperparameter settings, the batch sizes and total epochs for
class. Based on this similarity, we further define an embedding UCF-Crime and XD-Violence were set to 64 and 128 and
constraint loss Lembed to regulate the organization of the 40 and 60, respectively. In (13), λ1 was set to 0.1 and 0.15,
embedding space, ensuring that normal embeddings are closely and λ2 to 1e-1 and 2e-4, and Adam was used for optimization.
clustered, while anomaly embeddings maintain an appropriate Our network was implemented using PyTorch [51] and trained
distance from the normal embeddings end-to-end on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.
 N C
 f 1 XX t
 Lbce =− y j log pif (11) C. Comparisons With State-of-the-arts
 N
 i=1 j=1
 X 1) Result on UCF-Crime: Our evaluation results on UCF-
 Lembed = 0a
 , tembed
 0n
 
 max 0, cossim tembed (12) Crime are presented in Tables I and II. Overall, our method
 0n 0a
 markedly outperforms unsupervised methods as well as other
where tembed represents the normal embeddings and tembed weakly supervised methods, regardless of whether these
represents the abnormal embeddings. methods are based on I3D, VideoSwinTransformer, or other
 The final multimodal VAD loss function is the sum of the extractors. Specifically, in the coarse-grained aspect, as shown
above loss functions in Table I, our method exhibits a significant advantage, surf
 Ltotal = Lcbce + Lbce + λ1 LNCE + λ2 Lembed . (13) passing multiple existing methods, including UR-DMU [52]
 and so on. Although UR-DMU introduces two additional
 memory modules, which separately store abnormal and normal
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 patterns to enrich feature representation, our method still
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics achieves superior performance. Moreover, compared to Vad-
 1) Datasets: Our experiments were conducted on two CLIP [24], our method attains comparable results, with a gap
large-scale datasets widely recognized in the VAD community: of only 0.06%. This minimal difference further underscores the
UCF-Crime [28] and XD-Violence [20]. UCF-Crime primarily effectiveness and robustness of our approach in the challenging
consists of 1900 untrimmed real-world surveillance videos task of VAD. In the fine-grained aspect, as depicted in Table II,
with a total duration of 128 h, where the number of abnor- our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art works we
mal and normal videos is roughly equal. Among these, 810 compared. It is worth noting that although our coarse-grained
WANG et al.: MULTIMODAL VAD: VISUAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INTELLIGENT MONITORING SYSTEM 4012212

 TABLE I TABLE III
C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER SOTA M ETHODS ON UCF-C RIME . B OLD C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER SOTA M ETHODS ON XD-V IOLENCE . B OLD
 I NDICATES THE P ERFORMANCE ACHIEVED BY O UR M ETHOD I NDICATES THE P ERFORMANCE ACHIEVED BY O UR M ETHOD

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF SOTA M ETHODS U NDER D IFFERENT M ODALITIES ON
 XD-V IOLENCE . B OLD I NDICATES THE P ERFORMANCE
 ACHIEVED BY O UR M ETHOD

 TABLE II
 F INE -G RAINED C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER SOTA M ETHODS ON
 UCF-C RIME . B OLD I NDICATES THE P ERFORMANCE
 ACHIEVED BY O UR M ETHOD

performance does not reach the best level as VadCLIP, our
fine-grained performance is superior. This indicates that our
method achieves a more precise alignment with the anomalous
time intervals than VadCLIP, which is mainly attributed to
the incorporation of more anomaly-related information and
knowledge into the model, allowing it to more accurately
capture and identify subtle changes in abnormal events. effectively assisting the model’s ability to capture anomalies.
 2) Result on XD-Violence: Table III presents a comparison Although PEL4VAD also utilizes textual information and
of the AP values between our method and the current state-of- achieves results close to ours, its primary strength lies in the
the-art methods. It is evident from Table III that our method fine processing of visual features, which still shows some
performs exceptionally well in both unsupervised and weakly gaps compared to our method. In Table IV, we present a
supervised methods and reaches optimal performance. Specif- detailed comparative analysis of the state-of-the-art methods
ically, our method outperforms TPWNG [27], VadCLIP [24], under different modality inputs. The results show that methods
and PEL4VAD [25] by 2.64%, 1.81%, and 0.73%, respectively. relying solely on the visual modality exhibit relatively average
The key to VadCLIP’s performance enhancement lies in its performance. In contrast, bimodal methods that incorporate
use of finer-grained class labels and the full utilization of audio signals (such as environmental sounds and event-related
the semantic representation capabilities of textual informa- audio cues) or higher level semantic text information substantion. However, our method goes further by introducing an tially improve performance. This indicates that by integrating
efficient anomaly-aware contextual prompt to deeply model additional modality information, the model is able to more
anomalous scenes. Moreover, we integrate audio information, comprehensively understand and analyze video content, thus
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 F INE -G RAINED C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER SOTA M ETHODS ON A NALYSIS OF THE C ONTRIBUTION OF E ACH C OMPONENT TO THE M ODEL
 XD-V IOLENCE . B OLD I NDICATES THE P ERFORMANCE
 ACHIEVED BY O UR M ETHOD

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON B EFORE AND A FTER THE C ONSTRUCTION
 TABLE VI OF ACP S
 I MPACT OF D IFFERENT I NPUT M ODALITIES ON THE M ODEL

enhancing the accuracy of anomaly detection. Our method
integrates information from three different modalities—visual,
 enhancing the model’s ability to understand and reason semanaudio, and text—by constructing more expressive multimodal
 tically. While audio contains some directional information, it
representations that fully exploit the intrinsic semantics of the
 is more susceptible to environmental noise, which affects its
data, enabling the model to outperform methods relying solely
 effectiveness. Furthermore, when all three modalities (video,
on single-visual and other forms of bimodal methods across
 audio, and text, V + A + T ) are combined, the model exhibits
various metrics. In Table V, we provide a detailed comparison
 the best result. The underlying reason is that audio effectively
of the fine-grained performance on the XD-Violence dataset.
 enhances the model’s ability to better capture significant
Compared to coarse-grained analysis in Table III, fine-grained
 anomalous features in the video, while text further provides
analysis can more accurately reflect the anomaly categories
 clear and accurate semantic direction, improving the model’s
as well as the continuity and completeness of anomalous
 perception and discrimination capabilities.
events, thus posing greater challenges and offering stronger
representativeness. Specifically, compared to the state-of-the- 2) Analysis of the Contribution of Each Component to the
art methods AVVD [20] and VadCLIP [24], our method Model: In Table VII, we conducted ablation experiments to
improves the average performance by 7.23% and 4.46%, evaluate the contributions of each component. The results
respectively. This substantial improvement confirms both the reveal that multiple core components of the model have a
efficacy and strength of our method while emphasizing that positive impact. First, the temporal unit effectively models
fine-grained analysis captures subtle details and the full scope the temporal information of videos. Compared to raw visual
of anomalous events. In complex VAD tasks, such analysis representations, the temporal unit captures the relationships
offers more precise feedback and broader opportunities for between frames, allowing the model to learn dynamic changes
optimizing anomaly detection models. over time, as anomalies often involve gradual or abrupt
 changes over time. Second, the ACP integrates textual information while concurrently augmenting the model’s capacity
D. Ablation Study to perceive visual anomalies. After the cross-modal fusion,
 1) Analysis of the Contribution of Different Modalities to the model can combine anomaly-related visual information
the Model: We conduct an in-depth exploration of the impact with textual prompts, thereby improving the discrimination of
of different input modalities and their combinations on the anomalies. Additionally, the contrastive constraint effectively
model, as detailed in Table VI. The video, audio, and text strengthens the model’s ability to differentiate between the
modalities are represented as V, A, and T , respectively. two, particularly optimizing the performance on hard samples
The results show that multimodal combinations significantly (i.e., ambiguous samples). Overall, as each component is
outperform single-modal inputs in terms of performance, a progressively introduced, the model’s performance exhibits
finding that is also validated in Table IV. For instance, the certain fluctuations. Although increasing the number of comjoint of video and audio (video + audio, V + A) as well as ponents leads to a moderate decline in execution efficiency,
the joint of text and video (text + video, T + V) improved this reduction remains within a reasonable and controllable
performance by 1.08% and 4.10%, respectively, compared range, posing no substantial threat to the whole system’s
to using merely the video modality. The improvement can real-time performance and stability. Ultimately, when all
be attributed to the text modality, which provides more components work in unison, the model’s status reaches its
direct and structured information than the audio modality, optimum.
WANG et al.: MULTIMODAL VAD: VISUAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INTELLIGENT MONITORING SYSTEM 4012212

 TABLE IX
 VALIDATION OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT L OSS
 F UNCTIONS D URING THE O PTIMIZATION P ROCESS

 TABLE X
 E FFECT OF D IFFERENT λi ON THE O PTIMIZATION F UNCTION

Fig. 5. Analysis of the number of learnable parameters.

 TABLE XI
 I MPACT OF V ISUAL S EGMENTS AND L EARNING R ATE ON THE M ODEL

Fig. 6. Visualization of the differences before and after ACP construction.

 3) Analysis of Learnable Parameter Count and ACPs:
In the abnormal-aware module, we performed an in-depth coarse-grained optimization supplemented by fine-grained tunanalysis of the quantity of learnable parameters and system- ing can consistently enhance performance, and the introduction
atically compared the changes before and after introducing of contrastive loss further reinforces this improvement, thereby
anomaly knowledge. Specifically, as illustrated in Figs. 5 and validating the complementarity between loss components at
6, and Table VIII. In Fig. 5, considering the symmetry of different levels. To verify the rationality of the weight configlearnable parameters, we chose to represent half the quantity uration for each loss term in the objective function, we adopted
to simplify the analysis of total parameters. We found that the parameter settings of previous excellent methods and
the sensitivity of performance to the number of learnable designed controlled variable experiments (detailed in Table X).
parameters varies across different datasets. It highlights the The results show that, with the coarse-grained contrast weight
necessity of appropriately tuning the quantity of learnable fixed (i.e., λ1 = 0.15), appropriately adjusting the fine-grained
parameters to improve network performance on particular weight gradually improves performance, reaching the highest
datasets. Table VIII illustrates the variations before and after effect under the optimal configuration; similarly, when the finethe implementation of anomaly knowledge. By integrating grained contrast weight is fixed, tuning the coarse-grained
anomaly knowledge, all performance metrics of the model contrast weight also enhances performance. These findings
have been markedly improved. In the visualization difference demonstrate that the complementary interactions among the
map of Fig. 6, it is also clear that the boundaries of anoma- various loss terms in the multiloss joint optimization strategy
lous events are delineated more precisely, and the distinction positively contribute to the overall performance.
between anomalous and normal states is enhanced. This phe- 5) Effective Partitioning of Visual Segments and Selection
nomenon can be attributed to the introduction of anomaly of Batch Size: Given that videos exhibit notable temporal
knowledge, providing the model with richer representations continuity, segmenting the video for input is indispensable to
and effectively enhancing the sensitivity and recognition ability capture its dynamic information. At the same time, properly
for anomalous events. configuring key hyperparameters—such as batch size—is crit-
 4) Effectiveness of Different Losses and the Selection of ical for ensuring that the model achieves optimal convergence
Loss Weights During Optimization: We conducted a system- and efficient performance during training. In Table XI, we
atic evaluation of the effectiveness of different loss functions gradually increased the number of input visual segments
and their weight selection in the overall optimization pro- from 64 to 512. The results indicate that as the amount of
cess, with the relevant results summarized in Tables IX and visual information per input increases, the model performance
X. The results in Table IX indicate that a foundation of improves significantly. However, once the input information
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE XII enable preliminary identification of anomalies, and support
 I MPACT OF D IFFERENT BATCH S IZES ON P ERFORMANCE subsequent fine-grained anomaly detection. The fine-grained
 stream integrates textual information by constructing ACPs,
 fully leveraging the semantic information carried by the text,
 and combining the cross-modal fusion features and corresponding anomaly scores from the coarse-grained stream. By
 employing a “coarse-support-fine” strategy, the model is able
 to effectively identify anomalies at different levels. Finally,
 we conducted systematic experiments, detailed visual analysis,
 and ablation studies on two large-scale datasets, the proposed
 method achieves optimal performance across multiple metrics.
 This can efficiently identify anomalous behaviors in industry
 monitoring, driving the development of intelligent surveillance
 systems, and supporting the realization of big data analysis and
 intelligent decision-making in the industry.
 In future research, although we have explored relevant
 aspects about VLMs, there remains extensive and profound
 research potential in utilizing LLMs or VLMs for anomaly
 behavior or event reasoning and analysis. Therefore, future
 studies will focus on how to more effectively tap into and
 utilize the emergent capabilities to advance deep reasoning
 and precise descriptive analysis of abnormalities. Meanwhile,
 the emergent capabilities of general-purpose large models have
Fig. 7. Qualitative results analysis on XD-violence and UCF-crime.
 already yielded preliminary success in VAD, and they still
 face significant limitations when analyzing highly specialized
 and complex anomalous vision. Thus, designing and training
exceeds a certain threshold, the negative effects of information LLMs specifically for VAD in vertical domains will be an
redundancy lead to a decline in performance. Furthermore, important direction.
Table XII reveals that the optimal batch size varies considerably across different application scenarios. Therefore,
 R EFERENCES
batch size and related hyperparameters should be dynamically
adjusted according to specific environments to achieve optimal [1] Y. Liu and H. Liang, “Review on the application of the nonlinear
performance. output frequency response functions to mechanical fault diagnosis,”
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
 [2] P. P. Liang, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, “Foundations & trends in mul-
E. Qualitative Comparison timodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open questions,”
 ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1–42, Oct. 2024.
 Fig. 7 presents the analysis of both abnormal and normal [3] F. Harrou, M. M. Hittawe, Y. Sun, and O. Beya, “Malicious attacks
videos. For the anomalous videos, when abnormal events detection in crowded areas using deep learning-based approach,” IEEE
 Instrum. Meas. Mag., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 57–62, Aug. 2020.
occur, the anomaly score curve experiences a substantial [4] T. Li and H. Yu, “Visual–inertial fusion-based human pose estimation:
increase and maintains a high level for the duration of A review,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–16, 2023.
these events. This reflects the model’s ability to capture the [5] L. Wang, X. Wang, F. Liu, M. Li, X. Hao, and N. Zhao, “Attentionguided MIL weakly supervised visual anomaly detection,” Measurement,
occurrence of abnormal events in real time and effectively vol. 209, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 112500.
monitor their duration. The anomaly score curve steadily drops [6] M. A. Abou-Khousa, M. S. U. Rahman, K. M. Donnell, and
to lower values as the anomalous events come to an end, M. T. A. Qaseer, “Detection of surface cracks in metals using microwave
 and millimeter-wave nondestructive testing techniques—A review,”
with minor oscillations within this range. Conversely, the IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–18, 2023.
anomaly score curve for normal videos remains consistently [7] H. Qi, X. Kong, Z. Shen, Z. Liu, and J. Gu, “Progressively learning
low, with occasional minor fluctuations that, while resembling dynamic level set for weakly supervised industrial defect segmentation,”
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023.
abnormalities, do not reach the threshold required to trigger [8] Y. Li, X. Wu, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “Ferrite beads surface defect detection
an anomaly warning. Here, it further validates its ability to based on spatial attention under weakly supervised learning,” IEEE
maintain high sensitivity to abnormal events while effectively Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
avoiding false positives for normal behaviors. [9] H. Du et al., “Uncovering what, why and how: A comprehensive
 benchmark for causation understanding of video anomaly,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 V. C ONCLUSION pp. 18793–18803.
 [10] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
 In this article, we propose a multimodal dual-stream VAD for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
network that can utilize video, audio, and textual information. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
 [11] M. Liu, Y. Jiao, J. Lu, and H. Chen, “Anomaly detection for med-
In the coarse-grained stream, we first perform cross-modal ical images using teacher–student model with skip connections and
fusion of temporally modeled visual and audio features, intro- multi-scale anomaly consistency,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
duce contrastive learning to enhance the discriminative ability, pp. 1–15, 2024.
WANG et al.: MULTIMODAL VAD: VISUAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INTELLIGENT MONITORING SYSTEM 4012212

[12] D. Wang, Q. Hu, and K. Wu, “Dual-branch network with memory for [36] H. Zhang et al., “Holmes-VAD: Towards unbiased and explainable video
 video anomaly detection,” Multimedia Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 247–259, anomaly detection via multi-modal LLM,” 2024, arXiv:2406.12235.
 Feb. 2023. [37] X. Hu et al., “Scaling up vision-language pretraining for image
[13] R. Liu, W. Liu, H. Li, H. Wang, Q. Geng, and Y. Dai, “Metro captioning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 anomaly detection based on light strip inductive key frame extraction (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 17959–17968.
 and MAGAN network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–14, [38] Z. Jiang, J. Araki, H. Ding, and G. Neubig, “How can we know
 2022. when language models know? On the calibration of language models
[14] J. Jiang, S. Wei, X. Xu, Y. Cui, and X. Liu, “Unsupervised anomaly for question answering,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 9,
 detection and localization based on two-hierarchy normalizing flow,” pp. 962–977, Sep. 2021.
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024. [39] K. Zhou, J. Yang, C. C. Loy, and Z. Liu, “Learning to prompt for vision-
[15] Y. Yan, D. Wang, G. Zhou, and Q. Chen, “Unsupervised anomaly language models,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 9, pp. 2337–2348,
 segmentation via multilevel image reconstruction and adaptive attention- Sep. 2022.
 level transition,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021. [40] K. Zhou, J. Yang, C. C. Loy, and Z. Liu, “Conditional prompt learning
[16] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Video anomaly for vision-language models,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 detection via visual cloze tests,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 16795–16804.
 vol. 18, pp. 4955–4969, 2023. [41] J. Kim, S. Yoon, T. Choi, and S. Sull, “Unsupervised video anomaly
[17] C. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Tan, “MTHM: Self-supervised multi-task detection based on similarity with predefined text descriptions,” Sensors,
 anomaly detection with hard example mining,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. vol. 23, no. 14, p. 6256, Jul. 2023.
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023. [42] P. Jin, R. Takanobu, W. Zhang, X. Cao, and L. Yuan, “Chat-UniVi:
[18] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro, Unified visual representation empowers large language models with
 “Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal fea- image and video understanding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 ture magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 13700–13710.
 (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4955–4966. [43] Q. Wang et al., “StableIdentity: Inserting anybody into anywhere at first
[19] V. Sevetlidis, G. Pavlidis, V. Balaska, A. Psomoulis, S. G. Mouroutsos, sight,” 2024, arXiv:2401.15975.
 and A. Gasteratos, “Enhancing weakly supervised defect detection [44] J. Li, “Recent advances in end-to-end automatic speech recognition,”
 through anomaly-informed weighted training,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. APSIPA Trans. Signal Inf. Process., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2022.
 Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024. [45] P. Pu Liang, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, “Foundations and trends
[20] P. Wu, X. Liu, and J. Liu, “Weakly supervised audio-visual violence in multimodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1674–1685, 2023. questions,” 2022, arXiv:2209.03430.
[21] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal [46] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware
 violence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. contrastive instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised
 Vis., Jan. 2020, pp. 322–339. audio-visual violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multi-
[22] Y. Pu and X. Wu, “Audio-guided attention network for weakly super- Media, Oct. 2022, pp. 6278–6287.
 vised violence detection,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Consum. Electron.
 [47] Z. Zhang, B. Yang, and J. Ma, “Multiple constraints flow for weakly
 Comput. Eng. (ICCECE), Jan. 2022, pp. 219–223.
 observable defect detection based on defect-free samples,” IEEE Trans.
[23] H. Lv, Z. Yue, Q. Sun, B. Luo, Z. Cui, and H. Zhang, “Unbiased multiple
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13, 2024.
 instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in
 [48] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 2023, pp. 8022–8031.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
[24] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
 [49] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
 vol. 38, Mar. 2024, pp. 6074–6082.
[25] Y. Pu, X. Wu, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Learning prompt-enhanced [50] P. Lee, J. Wang, Y. Lu, and H. Byun, “Weakly-supervised temporal
 context features for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” IEEE action localization by uncertainty modeling,” Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 4923–4936, 2024. Intell., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1854–1862, May 2021.
[26] P. Wu, J. Liu, X. He, Y. Peng, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Toward video [51] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
 anomaly retrieval from video anomaly detection: New benchmarks and learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Jan.
 model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2213–2225, 2024. 2019, p. 32.
[27] Z. Yang, J. Liu, and P. Wu, “Text prompt with normality guidance [52] H. Zhou, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Dual memory units with uncerfor weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF tainty regulation for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,”
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), vol. 32, Jun. 2024, in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 3,
 pp. 18899–18908. pp. 3769–3777.
[28] P. Wu et al., “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proc. [53] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 pp. 18297–18307. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210.
[29] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in [54] P. Wu, J. Liu, M. Li, Y. Sun, and F. Shen, “Fast sparse coding networks
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern for anomaly detection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 107, Nov. 2020,
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488. Art. no. 107515.
[30] X. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Li, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “A CAM-based weakly [55] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. H. Khan, M. Segu, F. Yu, and S.-
 supervised method for surface defect inspection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. I. Lee, “Generative cooperative learning for unsupervised video anomaly
 Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022. detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[31] C. Cao, Y. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Context recovery and knowledge retrieval: (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 14724–14734.
 A novel two-stream framework for video anomaly detection,” IEEE [56] A. Al-Lahham, M. Z. Zaheer, N. Tastan, and K. Nandakumar,
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 1810–1825, 2024. “Collaborative learning of anomalies with privacy (CLAP) for unsu-
[32] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with pervised video anomaly detection: A new baseline,” in Proc.
 transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 1395–1403. pp. 12416–12425.
[33] D. Wei, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, J. Liu, and X. Zeng, “MSAF: Multimodal [57] M. Zhang et al., “Multi-scale video anomaly detection by multi-grained
 supervise-attention enhanced fusion for video anomaly detection,” IEEE spatio-temporal representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Com-
 Signal Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 2178–2182, 2022. put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17385–17394.
[34] C. Feng, Z. Chen, and A. Owens, “Self-supervised video forensics by [58] H. Lv, C. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Localizing anomalies
 audio-visual anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. from weakly-labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 10491–10503. pp. 4505–4515, 2021.
[35] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci, [59] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Fok, X. Qi, and Y.-C. Wu, “MGFN:
 “Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for weakly-supervised
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536. vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 387–395.
4012212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[60] H. K. Joo, K. Vo, K. Yamazaki, and N. Le, “CLIP-TSA: Clip- Qilong Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 assisted temporal self-attention for weakly-supervised video anomaly Ph.D. degree from the School of Information and
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2023, Communication Engineering, Dalian University of
 pp. 3230–3234. Technology, Dalian, China, in 2018.
[61] Y. Su, Y. Tan, S. An, and M. Xing, “Anomalies cannot materialize or He is currently a Professor with Tianjin Univervanish out of thin air: A hierarchical multiple instance learning with sity, Tianjin, China. He has authored or co-authored
 position-scale awareness for video anomaly detection,” Exp. Syst. Appl., more than 40 academic papers in top confervol. 254, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 124392. ences and referred journals, including ICCV, CVPR,
[62] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. J. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and NeurIPS, ECCV, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PAT-
 J. C. Platt, “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. TERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE ,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 12, 1999, pp. 582–588. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING ,
[63] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and L. S. Davis, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECH -
 “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. NOLOGY . His research interests include visual understanding and deep
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 733–742. learning, particularly deep models with high-order statistical modeling, and
[64] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Self- self-attention mechanism.
 supervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Prof. Wang served as the Area Chair for CVPR 2024 and 2025.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, pp. 729–745.
[65] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature
 discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021.
[66] T. Liu, C. Zhang, K.-M. Lam, and J. Kong, “Decouple and resolve:
 Transformer-based models for online anomaly detection from weakly Qinghua Hu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 15–28, B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute
 2023. of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1999, 2002, and
[67] C. Zhang et al., “Exploiting completeness and uncertainty of pseudo 2008, respectively.
 labels for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Depart-
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, ment of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
 pp. 16271–16280. University, Hong Kong, from 2009 to 2011. He
[68] S. Paul, S. Roy, and K. R.-C. Amit, “W-TALC: Weakly-supervised is currently the Chair Professor with the College
 temporal activity localization and classification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
 Comput. Vis., Jan. 2018, pp. 563–579. Tianjin, China, and the Director of the SIG Granular
[69] S. Narayan, H. Cholakkal, F. S. Khan, and L. Shao, “3C-net: Category Computing and Knowledge Discovery and Chinese
 count and center loss for weakly-supervised action localization,” in Proc. Association of Artificial Intelligence. He was supported by the Key Program
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8678–8686. and the National Natural Science Foundation of China. He has authored or coauthored over 300 peer-reviewed articles. His current research interests include
 uncertainty modeling in big data, machine learning with multimodality data,
 and intelligent unmanned systems.
 Prof. Hu is an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON FUZZY
 SYSTEMS , Acta Automatica Sinica, and Acta Electronica Sinica.

 Dicong Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) Kaijun Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 is currently pursuing the joint Ph.D. degree with degree from Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou,
 the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tian- China, in 2017.
 jin University, Tianjin, China, and the School of He is currently a Professor with the School of
 Electronic and Information Engineering, Lanzhou Electronics and Information Engineering, Lanzhou
 Jiaotong University, Lanzhou, China. Jiaotong University. His research interests include
 His research interests include computer vision and intelligent algorithm optimization and image provideo anomaly detection. cessing.