IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2530715

 Multiscale Transformers With Contrastive Learning
 for UAV Anomaly Detection
 Gang Hu , Zhongliang Zhou , Zhengxin Li , Zheng Dong , Jiayong Fang ,
 Yu Zhao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Chuhan Zhou

 Abstract—With the widespread application of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) in various fields, anomaly detection in flight
data has become increasingly important. However, temporal
variations and temporal correlations in flight data challenging
to achieve accurate anomaly detection. To address these issues,
the multiscale Transformers with contrastive learning for UAV
anomaly detection (MTCL-UAV) is proposed to achieve adaptive
multiscale modeling. The model is based on the mixture-ofexperts (MoEs) architecture, and each MoE block includes a
router, expert networks (ENs), and an aggregator. The router
performs a temporal decomposition to select optimal scales for
each sample, and the aggregator fuses the outputs of the ENs
into an integrated representation. To learn the temporal correlations of flight data and improve the model’s representation,
a dual attention mechanism enhanced by contrastive learning Fig. 1. Left: Variation curves of UAV’s flight speed. Pink and green represent
(CL-DAM) is introduced, which captures not only intrapatch two samples, respectively. Right: Flight data are divided into patches of
and interpatch correlation relationships but also neighborhood varying sizes as temporal resolution. Gray and blue arrows represent local
relationships among patches. Experiments on a real flight dataset and global correlations. Green arrows represent the neighborhood relationships
demonstrate that MTCL-UAV not only achieves superior per- among patches.
formance compared to other methods but also exhibits strong
robustness. The code is available at https://github.com/SteelHu/
MTCL-UAV these flight data, the abnormal state of the UAV can be found
 in time, and timely measures can be taken to reduce the occur-
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, contrastive learning, flight rence of accidents [9]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop
data, multiscale modeling, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
 anomaly detection methods for UAV flight data. Anomaly
 detection refers to identifying data that significantly deviate
 I. I NTRODUCTION from the normal distribution [10], such as sensor failure,
 abnormal manipulation behavior, and control system failure.
W ITH advancements of sensor and communication technologies, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are widely
used in communications [1], emergency response [2], [3],
 The anomaly detection methods for UAVs are classified into
 knowledge-based, model-based, and data-driven approaches
agriculture [4], and environmental monitoring [5], [6]. As the [8]. As UAV systems become increasingly complex and the
number of UAVs increases, their safety and reliability require- volume of generated data increases, data-driven approaches
ments also increase rapidly. Compared to manned aircraft, have gained prominence in flight data analysis because they
the UAV faces more severe safety and reliability challenges, rely minimally on prior domain knowledge, allowing flexible
which also leads to its higher accident rate [7], [8]. During the pattern learning directly from historical data. There have been
flight, the flight data records various UAV parameters, such as many research results on data-driven methods. Most of the
altitude, speed, angular velocity, etc. These parameters can early approaches focused on machine learning algorithms such
effectively reflect the flight state of the UAV. By analyzing as k-nearest neighbors (KNNs) [11], [12], kernel principal
 component analysis (KPCA) [13], [14], [15], recursive least
 Received 27 March 2025; accepted 2 May 2025. Date of publication 19 May squares (RLS) [9], isolation forest (IForest) [16], and support
2025; date of current version 4 June 2025. The Associate Editor coordinating vector machine (SVM) [17]. However, due to the complex
the review process was Dr. Siliang Lu. (Corresponding author: Zhengxin Li.)
 Gang Hu, Zhongliang Zhou, Zhengxin Li, Jiayong Fang, and Yu Zhao are meteorological conditions and diverse mission requirements
with the College of Equipment Management and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in UAV operational environments, these methods may show
Engineering, Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an 710043, China (e-mail: limited flexibility and adaptability in processing complex flight
gangh24@163.com; zhengxinli@nwpu.edu.cn).
 Zheng Dong is with Beijing Bytedance Technology Company Ltd., Beijing data.
200000, China (e-mail: zhdong0@outlook.com). Existing research indicates that improving the performance
 Chuhan Zhou is with the College of Air Traffic Control and Navi- of models’ anomaly detection relies on achieving more effecgation, Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an 710043, China (e-mail:
chuhan zhou edu@163.com). tive feature extraction from flight data [18]. In recent years,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3571126 deep learning methods have attracted much attention because
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

of their powerful feature extraction capabilities. For example, multiple time scales of flight data to better reconstruct
convolutional neural network (CNN) [19], [20], long short- the input data.
term memory networks (LSTMs) [20], [21], [22], [23], and 2) A CL-DAM is proposed to extract the temporal cor-
Transformer [20], [24] have all been used for UAV anomaly relations from flight data in each EN. CL-DAM not
detection with flight data. However, these methods mainly only captures intrapatch and interpatch correlation relafocus on single-scale feature extraction of flight data and lack tionships, but also enhances the model’s representation
multiscale feature extraction, which has not been effectively of similarity relationships among patches through conexplored so far. Affected by the environment and task, UAV trastive learning, thus further improving the model’s
flight data have significant characteristics of temporal vari- feature extraction capability.
ation. In the left part of Fig. 1, two flight speed samples 3) The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
are selected from a real UAV flight dataset [25], and in the model not only outperforms existing methods but also
right part, the samples are divided at different scales, which exhibits strong robustness across varying noise levels.
show different feature patterns. Furthermore, different types Moreover, visualization further validates the necessity
of anomalies in UAV flight data also have various temporal of employing multiscale modeling in UAV flight datasets
scale variations. For example, when actuator failures occur and the effectiveness of the proposed model.
in the UAVs, the elevator failure and the aileron failure The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Secpresent different characteristics of temporal scale variations tion II reviews related work on UAV anomaly detection and
in the flight data. Therefore, multiscale modeling is required multiscale modeling. Section III introduces the MTCL-UAV
to extract features at different scales from UAV flight data. anomaly detection framework, detailing data preprocessing,
Nevertheless, as the optimal scales of each sample are dif- the MTCL model, and the detection strategy. Section IV
ferent, it is not appropriate to use fixed multiscale feature outlines the experiments and presents the results. Finally,
extraction for all samples. This not only significantly increases Section VI summarizes the study and suggests directions for
the computational cost, but may also bring performance degra- future research.
dation. Chen et al. [26] introduced the multiscale Transformers
with an adaptive pathways model for time series forecasting II. R ELATED W ORK
(Pathformer), which achieve adaptive multiscale modeling
 This section briefly reviews UAV anomaly detection methwhile keeping computational costs relatively low. It uses a
 ods and the application of multiscale modeling techniques in
dual attention mechanism to extract intrapatch and interpatch
 time series analysis.
information but ignores the neighborhood relationships among
patches. As shown in the right part of Fig. 1, the temporal
correlations include not only the intrapatch and interpatch A. UAV Anomaly Detection
correlations but also the neighborhood relationships among the UAV anomaly detection methods are classified into
patches. All of these temporal correlations are important for knowledge-based, model-based, and data-driven approaches
accurate anomaly detection [27], [28]. [8]. Early techniques primarily utilized statistical analysis to
 In summary, effective multiscale modeling of UAV flight identify abnormal data, but they struggled with complex temdata for accurate anomaly detection requires addressing two poral dependencies and high dimensionality [8]. In contrast,
key challenges: temporal scale variations and temporal corre- data-driven approaches include machine learning and deep
lations. To address these issues, the multiscale Transformers learning methods [32], which extract patterns directly from
with contrastive learning model for UAV anomaly detection historical flight data. Machine learning methods are valued for
(MTCL-UAV) is proposed. The model is built based on their simplicity and interpretability, but often require complex
the sparse mixture-of-experts (MoEs) architecture [29], [30], feature engineering [33], [34], [35].
[31], and each sparse MoE block contains three components: Recently, deep learning methods have gained prominence
1) Router; 2) Expert Networks (ENs); and 3) Aggregator. due to their powerful feature extraction and modeling capabil-
The Router adaptively selects the key scales for each input ities. Wang et al. [21] proposed an LSTM-based approach to
sample and routes them into the corresponding ENs. Each detect abnormalities in UAV systems. Dhakal et al. [22] trained
EN corresponds to a specific scale and learns the temporal an autoencoder (AE) on normal data to identify anomalies
correlation at this scale. To fully identify temporal correlations, based on reconstruction errors. Bae and Joe [23] developed
a dual attention mechanism enhanced by contrastive learning a distributed LSTM-AE model that utilized state, position,
(CL-DAM) is proposed, which captures not only intrapatch and velocity data, achieving faster detection with lower
and interpatch correlation relationships but also neighborhood computational costs. He et al. [36] proposed a conditional
relationships between patches. Finally, the Aggregator fuses generative adversarial network (CGAN)-based collaborative
the outputs of the various ENs into an integrated representa- intrusion detection with distributed federated learning powered
tion. Our contributions are given below. by blockchain to address challenges related to small sample
 1) An unsupervised anomaly detection framework, called sizes and imbalanced data. Yang et al. [19] proposed a model
 multiscale Transformers with contrastive learning for based on timestamp slicing and multisplit CNN (TS-MSCNN),
 UAV Flight Data, is introduced to perform adaptive mul- which extracts and fuses UAV temporal domain information to
 tiscale modeling according to temporal scale variations learn key features from flight data. Jiang et al. [20] proposed
 in flight data. It can extract and fuse the features of a robust spatial–temporal AE (RSTAE) model, accompanied
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

Fig. 2. Overview of proposed framework. It includes three parts: data preprocessing, model training, and anomaly detection.

by an enhanced loss function based on maximum correntropy III. M ETHODOLOGY
for improved robustness and performance. Ahmad et al. [24] A. Overview of the Proposed Framework
introduced a Transformer-based framework for predicting and
classifying UAV sensor faults, utilizing an innovative attention The problem is considered as follows: let FD := {Fi }ni=1
mechanism and deep learning techniques for early diagnosis represent a UAV flight dataset, where each flight Fi ∈ Rm×ti
and proactive prevention of sensor failures, thereby enhancing consists of m time-dependent variables measured over ti times-
UAV flight safety and reliability. tamps. The temporal dimension ti varies across flights due to
 Existing research shows that unsupervised anomaly detec- different durations. The dataset contains normal and abnormal
tion methods for UAVs have produced significant results. flights. As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed framework comprises
However, certain issues still need to be addressed, particularly three main steps: data preprocessing, model training, and
the challenge of temporal scale variations. To address this chal- anomaly detection. During preprocessing, the raw flight data
lenge, multiscale modeling techniques need to be employed, undergoes filtering, resampling, data integration, and feature
which has been neglected in UAV anomaly detection. selection to ensure high-quality model input [7], [20]. Then,
 following the standard unsupervised anomaly detection procedure, the training set includes only normal data, while the test
 set includes normal and abnormal data. Thus, normal flights
B. Multiscale Modeling for Time Series
 and parts of anomalous flights before faults can be selected as
 Multiscale modeling has emerged as an important technique the training set as follows:
in time series analysis, such as wavelet transforms [37] and
 Xtrain = concat F1 , F2 , . . . , Fntrain
 
pyramid structures [38]. It extracts features from multiple time (1)
scales of a time series to obtain a richer representation than where ntrain is the number of flights in the training set. After
a single scale. Recently, many deep learning models have concatenating, the training set can be written as Xtrain =
successfully integrated multiscale techniques. Nie et al. [39] {Xitrain }Ti=1
 train
 , where Xitrain ∈ Rm is the value of the ith timestamp
introduced PatchTST, a channel-independent patch time series and T train is the number of timestamps in the training set.
Transformer that retains local semantic information while Similarly, the test set can be represented as Xtest = {Xitest }Ti=1 test
 .
reducing computational complexity. The patching operation After performing data preprocessing, the model learns the
addresses the issue of insufficient semantic information and distribution of normal data in the training set and performs
provides the foundation for multiscale modeling. Wu et al. anomaly detection in the test set. In anomaly detection, the
[40] proposed TimesNet, a CNN-based model that man- output of our model is a set of binary labels Ypred = {yt }Tt=1 test

ages multiperiodicity in time series by decomposing complex indicating whether each tick at the test time is an anomaly or
temporal patterns into intraperiod and interperiod variations. not, that is, yt ∈ {0, 1}, where yt = 1 indicates that time t is
Zhou et al. [41] introduced the frequency-enhanced decom- anomalous.
posed Transformer (FEDformer), which combines Transformers with seasonal trend decomposition to capture both global
profiles and detailed structures. Zhang et al. [42] presented the B. Data Preprocessing
multiresolution time series Transformer (MTST), featuring a Typically, a UAV system can generate a large amount of raw
multibranch architecture that simultaneously models diverse flight data. This raw data has the characteristics of high dimentemporal patterns at different resolutions. sionality, multivariate, high noise, missing data, heterogeneous
 However, most multiscale models rely on fixed scales data, and irregular sampling, which cannot be fed directly into
and cannot adapt to different data. Chen et al. [26] intro- the model for training. Therefore, it is necessary to perform
duced Pathformer to address adaptive multiscale modeling, but data preprocessing and feature engineering to enhance the
it overlooks the neighborhood relationships among patches, quality of data and convert raw data into standard format data,
which is important for learning the temporal correlations which mainly includes as following.
[27]. Therefore, the multiscale Transformers with contrastive 1) Data Filtering: This process involves selecting data
learning model are proposed for UAV anomaly detection. The from the raw dataset that meets specific criteria. Specific
proposed model achieves adaptive multiscale modeling, and variables unique to individual UAVs were excluded to ensure
can effectively extract the temporal correlations in flight data. compatibility with a wide range of UAV systems [43].
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 C. Multiscale Transformers With Contrastive Learning
 MTCL-UAV is built based on sparse MoE blocks, as
 illustrated in Fig. 4. Each MoE block consists of three primary components: Router, ENs, and Aggregator. The Router
 begins by performing seasonal and trend decomposition on
 the input data, effectively extracting periodicity and trend
 patterns and incorporating them into the input. Based on the
Fig. 3. Resampling of flight data. (a) Distribution of samples before sampling. data characteristics, the Router selects the optimal scales and
(b) Sample distribution after average sampling.
 routes the input sample into the corresponding ENs. Within
 each EN, a dual attention mechanism is employed to capture
 2) Resampling: Resampling is utilized on the data at a both interpatch and intrapatch correlation relationships. To
frequency of 5 Hz because the sampling frequency of the enhance the model’s ability to learn important patterns in flight
selected variables is inconsistent [20]. An average aggregation data, a contrastive learning approach is introduced, effectively
method is employed to perform resampling in each sensor capturing neighborhood relationships among patches. Finally,
data table to align the timestamps. By averaging multiple data the Aggregator combines the results of ENs to generate the
points, the effect of random fluctuations and noise can be final output of the MoE block. The details of each component
reduced, making the data trend smoother and more precise. within the MoE block are described below.
The process is shown in Fig. 3. 1) Router: Recently, patching time series has emerged as a
 prominent approach for effective segmentation and enhanced
 3) Data Integration: Since the raw data is collected from
 feature extraction. The choice of patch size is critical, as it
multiple sensors, it is necessary to combine the data from
 directly impacts model efficiency and the ability to capture
different sources into a consistent dataset. Each table has a
 meaningful temporal patterns. Flight data are multivariate time
timestamp index, and the resampled timestamp is used as an
 series, and exhibit diverse variations and fluctuations across
index to combine each table. This merging is implemented in
 different temporal scales. To achieve adaptive multiscale modthe form of a union.
 eling, a Router based on frequency domain analysis techniques
 4) Feature Selection: Flight data are high-dimensional mul- is employed to dynamically select optimal patch sizes for each
tivariate time series collected from various sensors, but not sample and assign them to the corresponding experts, as shown
all features are essential for model training. Thus, feature in Fig. 4. The Router achieves automatic routing of data by
selection is crucial as it enhances model performance by optimizing patch sizes, enabling efficient multiscale modeling,
reducing overfitting, improving interpretability, and accelerat- and facilitating the analysis of information across various
ing training. In the experiments, the flight parameters adopted scales. This module performs seasonal and trend decompoin [43] and [44] are applied to two flight datasets, respectively. sition to transform the data from the temporal domain to the
 5) Dataset Split: Typically, anomaly detection models frequency domain to extract periodic patterns and improve the
based on reconstruction loss are trained using normal data. model’s ability to analyze temporal dynamics.
Therefore, the training set contains only normal data to enable First, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT), denoted DFT(·),
the model to learn normal patterns, and the test set contains is performed to decompose the sample X ∈ Rm×L into Fourier
normal and anomalous data with reconstruction loss as the basis, and the kf basis with the largest amplitudes is selected
anomaly score. In the article, the UAV flight dataset FD as follows:
is divided into a training set Xtrain and a test set Xtest ,
with the anomalous samples then removed from the training A, Φ = Amp (DFT (X)) , Phase (DFT (X)) (3)
set. Considering cross-validation requirements, a part of the where Amp(·) and Phase(·) denote the calculation of amplitude
training set is selected as the validation set. values and phase values, respectively. A ∈ Rm×L and Φ ∈ Rm×L
 6) Sliding Sampling: Sliding sampling involves moving a represent the amplitude and the phase of each frequency
sampling window over the data, allowing for the continuous for each variable, respectively. The kf basis with the largest
capture of data streams. A key advantage of sliding sampling amplitudes, { f1 , . . . , fkf }, is selected to maintain the sparsity of
is its ability to reduce computational load while still providing the frequency domain. Each fi ∈ Rkf represents the relevant
a strong representation of the underlying data. The sliding frequency of each variable. To obtain the seasonal pattern,
window is applied to the training set Xtrain and the test set Xtest . the inverse DFT (IDFT) is used to transform the Fourier
The reconstructed training set can be expressed as follows: coefficients as follows:
 Xsea = IDFT f1 , . . . , fkf , A, Φ .
 ˚ 
 (4)
 XRS = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XN } , Xi ∈ Rm×L (2) The trend patterns are extracted by the various kernel sizes
 of average pooling from the remaining data after seasonal
where m is the number of variables, L represents the window decomposition Xrem = X − Xsea . A weighted operation is used
size, and N indicates the total number of reconstructed samples to represent the trend component based on the outcomes from
gathered from all flight data. In the following, X is used to different kernel sizes
represent the ith sample Xi in order to maintain a concise Xtrend = Softmax (L (Xrem )) · Avg1 (Xrem ) , . . . , AvgC (Xrem )
 
symbolic description. (5)
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

Fig. 4. Architecture of MTCL-UAV. A sparse MoE block comprises Router, ENs, and Aggregator. The Router performs seasonal and trend decomposition
on the input data, and adds the decomposed results to the input to enhance its periodicity and trend characteristics. After that, the optimal routing weights
are obtained through the routing function. In each ENs with a specific scale, CL-DAM is used to extract temporal correlations from the data. The Aggregator
performs a weighted sum based on the routing weights and outputs of ENs to obtain the output of MoE.

where Softmax(zi ) = exp(zi )/ j exp(z j ), zi represents the ith
 P
 a contrastive learning method is introduced to enhance the
element of the input vector z, Avgi (·) is the average pooling model’s ability to detect subtle differences between patches.
function of the ith kernel, C is the number of kernels, and L(·) Specifically, the similarity relationships among patches in the
represents a linear layer. The output of the time decomposition input and output of the EN are treated as two views (View
module can then be obtained as follows [26]: 1 and View 2). By comparing and aligning the consistency
 differences between these two views, the model is guided to
 Xtrans = L (X + Xsea + Xtrend ) (6)
 capture more precise and meaningful features across patches.
where Xtrans ∈ R . L
 Let M ENs E = {EN1 , EN2 , . . . , EN M }, and let the patch size
 Finally, the softmax function is employed to generate the of ith EN be S i . The collection of patch sizes {S 1 , S 2 , . . . , S M }
routing weight of result Xtrans , which determines the ENs to can be defined based on prior knowledge. For the ith EN, the
be chosen for the current data. To enhance model generaliza- patch size S i is denoted as S to simplify the notation. Since
tion, a noise term is introduced during weight calculation to channel-independent modeling is adopted in ENs, embedding
increase randomness. The process of generating weights can is performed on the vth variable X[v, :], and it is denoted as
be formulated as follows: Xv ∈ Rd×L , where d is the dimension of features.
 Through the patch division operation with the patch size S,
 R (Xtrans ) = Softmax Xtrans Wr +  · Softplus (Xtrans Wn ) (7)
 
 the input data Xv can be divided into P (P = L/S ) patches as
where Softplus(x) = ln(1 + e x ), x is the input,  ∼ N (0, 1), follows [39]:
N (·) is the Gaussian distribution, R(·) is the routing function,
 X1v , X2v , . . . , XvP = PatchS (Xv )
 
 (8)
Wr and Wn ∈ RL×M represent learnable parameters for weight
generation, and M is the number of ENs. To introduce sparsity where Xv ∈ RP×S ×d ), each patch (Xiv ∈ RS ×d ) with S
in the routing and encourage the selection of critical scales, the timestamps.
Top-k selection is performed on the routing weight, keeping a) Intrapatch Attention: For the ith patch, denoted as
the Top-k routing weight and setting the remaining weights at Xiv , the process begins with embedding the patch along the
0. The final result of Router is denoted as R̄(Xtrans ). feature dimension d, resulting in Xiintra ∈ RS ×dm , where dm
 2) Expert Networks: The Router selects optimal k scales represents the dimensionality of the embedding. A trainable
for each sample and assigns it to the corresponding k ENs. linear transformation is then applied to Xiintra to obtain the
Within each EN, a dual attention mechanism is employed to key and value components required for the computation of
 i i
learn both intrapatch and interpatch correlations. In addition, attention, denoted as Kintra and Vintra . In addition, a query
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

matrix Qiintra ∈ R1×dm is used to aggregate the context of the d) Contrastive Learning: The dual attention mechanism
patch. The cross-attention is subsequently computed among is an encoder for patches, enabling simultaneous attention to
 i
Qiintra , Kintra i
 , and Vintra to extract the local features within global and local data correlations. However, when processing
the ith patch. This attention mechanism can be expressed highly complex or noisy data, the dual attention mechanism
mathematically as follows: may overly depend on specific patterns in the training set,
  leading to model overfitting. To address this issue, a con-
 T . p  i
 Attniintra = Softmax Qiintra Kintra i
 dm Vintra . (9) trastive learning method is proposed to improve the model’s
 generalization. The approach can be summarized as treating
 Upon completing the intrapatch attention process, each the dual attention mechanism as an encoder while maintaining
patch transforms from its initial length of S to a length of 1. the consistency of neighborhood relationships among patches
The attention outputs from all patches are then concatenated before and after encoding. The details of this process are
to form the intraattention output across the divided patches, described below.
represented as Attnintra ∈ RP×dm , which encapsulates the local Considering the collection of input patches
details from adjacent time steps within the time series (X1v , X2v , . . . , XvP ), the pairwise similarity between these
 patches is determined and used as the weights in the
 Attnintra = Concat Attn1intra , . . . , Attnintra
 P
 
 . (10) following manner:
 W pq = exp sim Xiv , Xvj /t
  
 (14)
 b) Interpatch Attention: The interpatch attention mechanism is structured to establish relationships between patches, where sim(Xvp , Xqv ) represents the similarity function such as
thereby facilitating the capture of global correlations. For the Euclidean distance (ED), cosine distance (CD), and dynamic
time series segmented into patches, defined as Xv ∈ RP×S ×d , time warping (DTW), and t is the temperature parameter.
the embedding of the feature is executed from dimension d to After encoding with the dual attention mechanism, the set
dm before the data is rearranged to combine the dimensions of output patches (X1out , X2out , . . . , Xout
 P
 ) is obtained. Thus, the
of the patch count S and feature embedding dm . This results contrastive loss of jth EN in ith block can be defined as
 0
in Xinter ∈ RP×dm , where dm0 = S · dm . This embedding and 0
 P P
 1
rearrangement process enables us to integrate time steps within Lossicj = Avg @
 X X
 sim Xout p
 , Xqout W pq A .
 
 (15)
each patch and consequently apply self-attention to Xinter to p=1 q=1,p,q
model interpatch correlations. To incorporate the sequential
order of the patches, a learnable positional encoding is added The contrastive loss of our model Lossc is the average of
to the transformed embedding. Specifically, a trainable posi- all Lossicj for each EN in layers.
 0
tional encoding matrix Wpos ∈ RP×dm is generated and added 3) Aggregator: The Router selects k ENs based on the routto Xinter as ing result R̄(Xtrans ) ∈ R M , which divides the input X according
 to its temporal characteristics. Here, R̄(Xtrans )i represents the
 Xinter = Xinter + Wpos . (11) weight of the ith dimension corresponding to a specific EN,
 and R̄(Xtrans )i > 0 indicates that the sample is assigned to the
 This embedding allows the model to effectively capture the ith EN. Subsequently, the Aggregator performs a weighted
global temporal relationship among patches. Following the aggregation of the outputs from the selected ENs using the
standard self-attention framework [45], the query, key, and routing weights. This yields the final output of the block
value matrices are derived from Xinter , denoted as Qinter , Kinter ,
 0 M
and Vinter ∈ RP×dm . Subsequently, the attention Attninter is com- X
puted, capturing interactions between patches and reflecting Xout = R̄ (Xtrans )i Xiout (16)
 i=1
the global correlations of the time series
  .p  where Xiout is the output of ith EN with the patch size S i .
 Attninter = Softmax Qinter (Kinter )T dm0 Vinter . (12) For each sample X, the final output of our model is denoted
 as O ∈ Rm×L , which is also the output of the last sparse MoE
 c) Fusion: The global and local correlations acquired block after residual connection. The reconstruction loss of the
through the dual attention mechanism are fused by first rear- model can be defined as
ranging the outputs from intrapatch attention into Attnintra ∈
 Lossr = MSE (X, O) (17)
RP×S ×dm . This step entails performing linear transformations
on the patch size dimension, transitioning from 1 to S to where MSE(·) is the mean squared error function.
amalgamate the time steps within each patch. Finally, the 4) Hybrid Loss Function: The loss function employed
output of interpatch attention Attninter ∈ RP×S ×dm is added to in MTCL-UAV consists of two fundamental components:
the transformed intrapatch attention results, yielding the final reconstruction loss and contrastive loss. Reconstruction loss
output of the dual attention mechanism, denoted as follows: quantitatively assesses the model’s ability to accurately reconstruct input data, ensuring the preservation of structural
 Xout = Attninter + Attnintra (13) integrity and critical information, which is essential for capturing intricate details. Meanwhile, contrastive loss considerably
where Xout ∈ RP×S ×dm , and ith output patch Xiout ∈ RS ×dm . enhances the model’s discriminative capacity by enabling
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

 TABLE I
 D ETAILED I NFORMATION OF ALFA DATASET

Fig. 5. Depiction of the point adjust strategy. Red for abnormal points and
green for normal points.

the learning of relationships among samples, thus promoting
the development of a robust and easily identifiable feature
representation.
 squares. In the second row, the scores from the detector
 This hybrid loss function can be represented mathematically
 are displayed below. The third row presents the results of
as follows:
 point-wise detection using a threshold value of 0.5. After
 Loss = Lossr + λ · Lossc (18) adjustments, the fourth row illustrates the modified detector
where λ is a hyperparameter that regulates the tradeoff between outcomes. Consequently, a precision of 0.6 and a recall of 0.5
reconstruction loss and contrastive loss, enabling a nuanced are calculated. In particular, from the third row, it can be seen
adjustment based on the specific requirements of the task. that the alert delay for the initial segment is 1 interval. With
 By harmonizing the goals of reconstruction and contrastive the PA strategy, the output of the test set is adjusted to obtain
learning, the hybrid loss function enhances the model’s perfor- the adjusted output Ỹpred .
mance while facilitating a balanced approach to maintaining
global structure and distinguishing local features. E. Complexity Analysis
 The MTCL-UAV model leverages an MoE architecture,
D. Anomaly Detection where ENs can be computed in parallel to reduce the over-
 Anomaly detection methods are based on a fundamental all runtime. However, the computational complexity is still
assumption: the distribution of abnormal samples differs sig- heavily influenced by the operations within each EN. Among
nificantly from that of normal samples. Consequently, the these, the interpatch attention mechanism dominates, with a
model is trained using normal data to facilitate unsupervised quadratic complexity O(P2 ) in terms of the number of patches
anomaly detection. In the trained model, the reconstruction P (where P = L/S ). This quadratic dependency becomes
loss in (17) serves as the anomaly score for each sample particularly significant when processing long sequences, makin the test set Xtest . Subsequently, the anomaly threshold is ing global self-attention a primary bottleneck. In addition, in
determined based on the distribution of anomaly scores the contrastive learning module, the computation of pairwise
 similarities between patches Xiv and Xvj , such as using ED,
 τ = Percentile (Λ, p) (19) further adds to the computational burden, also scaling with
 O(P2 ).
where Λ = {αi }Ti=1
 test
 represents the set of anomaly scores, and
Percentile(a, b) is a function that calculates the bth percentile
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
of the set a. The output of the model can be computed as
follows: In this section, a real UAV flight dataset is used to verify the
 performance of the proposed model. Some classical and state-
 Ypred = {yt }Tt=1
 test
 , yt = 0 if αt < τ else 1. (20) of-the-art models are selected as baselines for the comparison
 experiment. In addition, the ablation study and the parameter
 In practical applications, human operators generally do not
 sensitivity analysis are conducted to comprehensively evaluate
focus on point-wise metrics. An algorithm may trigger an alert
 the robustness of the proposed model. Finally, a visualization
at any point in a contiguous anomaly segment, as long as the
 is performed to validate the necessity of employing multiscale
delay is reasonable. Therefore, the point-by-point detection
 modeling and the effectiveness of the proposed model.
strategy needs to be improved to make it more realistic for
evaluating the model. Specifically, a point adjustment (PA)
strategy is adopted: If a chosen threshold can detect any point A. Data Description
within an anomaly segment in the ground truth, that segment In the experiments, two flight datasets, the AirLab Failure
is labeled as correctly detected, with all points within this and Anomaly (ALFA) dataset [25] and the Fixed-Wing UAV
segment considered identifiable by this threshold. Meanwhile, (FW-UAV) dataset [44], are used to evaluate our model and
points outside the anomaly segments are treated as usual. others. The descriptions of the two datasets are as follows.
This approach is illustrated in Fig. 5. The top row represents The ALFA dataset is presented by Keipour et al. [9],
the ground truth, which consists of ten consecutive points [25] and was collected from a fixed-wing Carbon-Z T-28
with two highlighted anomaly segments enclosed in shaded UAV at the experimental site of an airport near Pittsburgh,
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
 C OMPOSITION OF DATASETS M ODEL PARAMETERS C ONFIGURATION

 set. Thus, a modified cross-validation approach is adopted:
 a portion of abnormal flights is randomly selected as the test
 set, while the remaining abnormal flights and all normal flights
 form the training and validation sets. Abnormal samples are
Pennsylvania. It includes processed data from 47 autonomous excluded from both the training and validation sets. In this
flights with scenarios for eight different types of control way, seven datasets are obtained as shown in Table II. These
surface failure (actuator and engine), totaling 66 min of flight datasets are all complete datasets rather than subsets, differing
under normal conditions and 13 min of postfailure flight time. only in the sample distributions of their training and test sets.
Table I shows the detailed information about the ALFA dataset. This approach enables a more comprehensive evaluation of
Each flight has a record of whether the UAV is in a fault model performance on the anomaly detection task. D1 to D5
state at each timestamp as a ground truth. In addition, the first are from the AFLA dataset, and U1 and U2 are from the FWflight has no ground truth information, so there are 46 flights UAV dataset. The composition of the ALFA dataset test set
available. In the dataset, faults on different control surfaces gives the type of abnormal sample fault in the test set, while
have different effects on the state of the UAV, some faults the FW-UAV gives the flight date of the test set sample.
may be present for a shorter period of time and others for a
longer period of time. In addition, there are scale variations
in normal flight data that are affected by the environment and
mission. B. Implement Details and Evaluation Metrics
 The FW-UAV dataset is presented by Bronz et al. [44] and
was collected from a small fixed-wing UAV. It includes 11 1) Implement Details: Experiments are conducted using
flights and the faults were manually injected into the actual PyTorch 2.1.2 and Python 3.10 on an NVIDIA 3090 24-GB
task to simulate the faults occurring in a real flight. The GPU. MTCL-UAV employs the Adam optimizer [47] with a
actuator fault model proposed by Tandale and Valasek [46] learning rate of 10−4 and incorporates early stopping within
was used in the experiment ten training epochs. The details of the related parameters are
 given in Table III. The trend kernel size is a sequence that
 d ,0
     
 uaR ucR
 = R indicates the pooling kernel sizes used for detrending. In our
  
 + eR e L (21)
 uaL 0, dL ucL model, each sparse MoE block includes four ENs with patch
where the subscripts R and L represent the right and left control sizes selected from the patch pool.
surfaces, respectively, ua is the final control deviation, uc is 2) Evaluation Metrics: To comprehensively evaluate the
intended deviation of surface control, e is a noise term, and d performance of anomaly detection models, four widely recogis the control plane efficiency failure. nized evaluation metrics are employed: Accuracy, Precision,
 To evaluate model performance, the dataset is divided into Recall, and F1-score. In addition, the receiver operating
training and test sets, with a portion of the training set serving characteristic (ROC) and area under the curve (AUC) are
as the validation set. Unsupervised anomaly detection methods provided in the comparison experiment. These metrics proare typically trained on normal data and tested on a test set vide complementary perspectives on the anomaly detection
containing both normal and abnormal samples. Traditional capabilities and collectively offer a thorough assessment of
cross-validation randomly divides samples into training or the effectiveness of the model. Each metric captures different
testing sets, which may result in insufficient normal samples aspects of the detection performance, allowing for a balanced
in the training set or insufficient abnormal samples in the test and comprehensive evaluation of the methods.
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

 the best results highlighted in bold and the second best highlighted. To assess overall model performance, the F1 scores
 from the D1–D5 dataset are normalized and visualized on the
 radar chart shown in Fig. 6. Furthermore, all deep learning
 models were provided with the same input as MTCL-UAV.
 The results demonstrate that MTCL-UAV achieves superior
 performance in most datasets, recording the highest average F1
 score of 0.8125 in D1–D5 datasets, significantly outperforming
 traditional and other deep learning-based anomaly detection
 methods. This highlights the robustness of our approach in
 handling UAV flight data with diverse distribution characteristics. For a more comprehensive evaluation, ROC curves
 are plotted and the value of AUC is given in Fig. 7. In
 these figures, the horizontal and vertical axes represent the
Fig. 6. Radar chart for normalized F1 scores. false positive rate and true positive rate at various thresholds,
 respectively. AUC is a comprehensive metric, with higher
C. Baselines values indicating better performance of the model. It can be
 seen that MTCL-UAV achieves the highest AUC values in
 To verify the performance of the proposed model, some all five datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in balancing
time series anomaly detection models, including deep learn- false positive and true positive rates under varying thresholds.
ing methods and machine learning methods, are selected as Furthermore, MTCL-UAV maintains a low missed detection
baselines. Some of these have been used in UAV anomaly rate while achieving high precision, underscoring its reliability
detection, such as AE [22], XGBoost, IForest [16], and and practicality in UAV anomaly detection tasks.
OCSVM [49], [50]. The following is an overview of other In D1–D5 datasets, deep learning methods generally outmodels. perform traditional machine learning methods, mainly due
 1) DCdetector [27] uses a dual attention asymmetric design to their powerful feature extraction capabilities and the abiland pure contrastive loss to learn a permutation invariant ity to capture complex spatio-temporal dependencies. While
 representation with strong discrimination capabilities. OCSVM and ensemble learning-based methods (XGBoost
 2) Anomaly Transformer [28] introduces an anomaly atten- and IForest) perform well in some tasks, they often struggle
 tion mechanism for association discrepancy and employs with challenges such as complex feature engineering and
 a minimax strategy to enhance the distinction between limited generalization when dealing with high-dimensional
 normal and abnormal. and complex time series data. In contrast, deep learning
 3) TimesNet [40] transforms 1-D time series into 2-D methods automatically learn and extract high-order features
 tensors with TimesBlock, capturing intraperiod and through multilayer neural networks, significantly improving
 interperiod variations for efficient anomaly detection the recognition of abnormal patterns and achieving higher
 through multiscale feature extraction. accuracy and robustness in UAV anomaly detection. From
 4) PatchTST [39] is a patch-based method for multivariate Table IV, it is evident that FEDformer and Autoformer have
 time series that preserves local semantics and improves lower recall rates, indicating higher missed detection rates
 long-term dependency capture, reducing complexity and due to overfitting in normal data. CGAD combines causal
 enhancing modeling effectiveness. convolutional and graph convolutional networks to effectively
 5) FEDformer [41] integrates Transformers with seasonal- capture dynamic patterns in flight data, and has a good
 trend decomposition, allowing the decomposition performance in recall. TimesNet, which combines multiscale
 method to capture the overall time series profile while modeling with CNN to capture intraperiod and interperiod
 Transformers focus on detailed structures. variations, effectively captures multilevel temporal dependen-
 6) Autoformer [50] employs auto-correlation and decom- cies but falls short in capturing global dependencies compared
 position to model time series, capturing long-term to Transformer models. PatchTST addresses the limitations
 dependencies and seasonal patterns effectively. of single-point modeling in traditional Transformers by using
 7) CGAD [51] utilizes transfer entropy to construct graph patching to enhance the granularity of feature extraction.
 structures that unveil the underlying causal relationships However, it lacks multiscale modeling to capture the complex
 among time series data, and models both the causal patterns in flight data. The strong performance of Anomaly
 graph structures and the temporal patterns within multi- Transformer and DCdetector can be attributed to their implevariate time series data. mentation of contrastive learning, which improves feature
 discrimination.
 In the U1 and U2 datasets, MTCL-UAV also achieves a
D. Performance Comparison balance between high precision and high recall compared to
 The effectiveness of MTCL-UAV was evaluated by compar- other models and achieves the highest F1 score of 0.9568. It
ing it against several competitive baselines in seven UAV flight should be noted that machine learning methods show perfordatasets. The results are summarized in Tables IV and V, with mance comparable to that of deep learning methods in both
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 7. (a)–(e) ROC curves (horizontal-axis: false-positive rate; vertical-axis: true-positive rate) for D1–D5 datasets. A higher AUC value (area under the
ROC curve) indicates better performance. The predefined threshold percentile p is in {0.1%, 0.5%, 1.0%, 1.5%, 2.0%, 2.5%, 3.0%, 5.0%, 10.0%, 20.0%, 30.0%}.

 TABLE IV
 A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS IN THE ALFA DATASET

datasets, and their recall rates are generally higher. The reason The results of comparative experiments demonstrate that
is that the control surface effectiveness reduction type faults MTCL-UAV outperforms existing methods, highlighting its
are injected in the FW-UAV dataset, and they are injected in ability to effectively capture critical patterns in flight data and
a linear manner. This leads to noticeable changes in angular achieve accurate modeling. Unlike other multiscale modeling
velocity and acceleration, making it easy for anomaly detection approaches, MTCL-UAV adaptively selects optimal scales
methods to catch such anomalies. based on the temporal variation characteristics of the samples,
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

Fig. 8. Parameter sensitivity results. (a) Number of top-k ENs. (b) Loss weight λ. (c) Maximum patch size S max . (d) Temperature t.

 tistically significant. In practical applications, adjusting key
 hyperparameters such as the maximum patch size S max and
 the temperature t based on the characteristics of the data is
 crucial for optimal results.
 2) Robustness Analysis: UAVs often operate in complex
 and dynamic environments, where the sensors onboard are
 exposed to harsh conditions, leading to noisy flight data. To
 evaluate the robustness of the model under such conditions,
 two types of noise, Gaussian and uniform, were introduced
 into the D1 dataset. Gaussian noise was tested with standard
 deviations of 1.0%, 5.0%, and 10.0%, while uniform noise was
Fig. 9. Averaged GPU memory cost and the averaged running time of 100 applied with intervals of ±0.5, ±1.0, and ±5.0. As shown in
iterations during training with different dmodel . Table VI, while the accuracy of MTCL-UAV decreases slightly
 as the noise levels increase, it maintains strong performance.
enabling efficient multiscale modeling. Furthermore, the incor- Even at the highest level of Gaussian noise (10.0%), the
poration of contrastive learning improves the model’s ability F1 score drops by only 0.82%, demonstrating the robustness
to extract comprehensive temporal correlations. In general, of the model in UAV anomaly detection tasks under noisy
MTCL-UAV achieves superior accuracy in UAV anomaly conditions.
detection.

E. Sensitivity and Robustness Analysis
 F. Ablation Study
 1) Sensitivity Analysis: Fig. 8 presents the results of our
sensitivity analysis on four key hyperparameters in the ALFA To evaluate the contributions of various modules in
dataset: the number of Top-k ENs, the loss weight λ, the MTCL-UAV, ablation studies were conducted on the multimaximum patch size S max , and the temperature t. Our analysis scale mechanism, the Router, and the CL-DAM. The “W/O
shows that the use of two experts achieves the best overall multiscale mechanism” configuration employs single-scale
performance, with further increases in k yielding only marginal modeling, utilizing a single EN (with the largest patch size) for
improvements or slight declines. This suggests that a moderate feature extraction. The “W/O Router” setup removes adaptive
number of experts effectively capture the diversity in UAV multiscale selection, instead activating all ENs in each sparse
flight patterns. For the loss weight λ, the model remains stable MoE block for every dataset. The “W/O CL-DAM” variant
across a wide range of values, with optimal performance at excludes contrastive learning, retaining only the dual attention
λ = 1, emphasizing the importance of balancing the loss mechanism within the EN. Table VII summarizes the results,
components. Regarding the maximum patch size, S max = 32 highlighting the unique contributions of each module.
delivers an F1 score of 0.9119, striking a balance between The ablation results reveal that the multiscale mechanism
temporal segmentation and model accuracy. The temperature significantly enhances performance. However, simple multiparameter t exhibits significant sensitivity at lower values; scale modeling without the Router does not yield notable
at t = 10, the model performs consistently well in datasets, improvements, emphasizing the importance of frequency
with diminishing returns as t increases. The complexity of domain analysis in selecting appropriate scales. MTCL-UAV’s
the model was evaluated by counting the time cost and adaptive multiscale modeling ensures efficient feature extracmemory cost for different dm , as shown in Fig. 9. Based on tion by dynamically activating ENs based on flight data
these findings, an embedding dimension of dm = 16 was characteristics, even selectively engaging specific networks for
selected to optimize the tradeoff between performance and anomaly detection when necessary. Furthermore, the model’s
complexity, ensuring efficient operation with minimal memory performance declines when the dual attention mechanism operconsumption. ates without contrastive learning, confirming that CL-DAM
 In general, although performance variations across different effectively captures neighborhood relationships among patches
parameters were observed, these differences were not sta- and plays a critical role in improving model performance.
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE V
 A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS IN THE FW-UAV DATASET

Fig. 10. Visual comparison of ground truth anomalies, anomaly scores, and routing weights for different types of anomalies in the D1 dataset. (a)–(d) Original
and decomposed data. (e)–(h) Normalized anomaly scores. (i)–(l) Routing weight. The four types of anomalies are engine, elevator, rudder, and aileron. The
light red areas represent anomalous areas.

 TABLE VI addition, two abnormal samples were randomly selected from
 R ESULTS OF D1 W ITH N OISY DATA the U1 dataset to more fully show that the temporal scale variations exist in the UAV flight datasets. Figs. 9 and 11 visualize
 the original signal, the decomposed signal, the normalized
 anomaly score, and the routing weight matrix. In these figures,
 the light red region denotes the window in which the anomaly
 occurs, and the red dashed line indicates the model threshold
 for the normalized anomaly score. Each row of the matrix of
 routing weights represents one sparse MoE block, and each
 column corresponds to a distinct EN. S1 is the minimum
 scale weight and S4 is the maximum scale weight in this
 layer.
 Fig. 10 illustrates four anomaly type samples, which are
 engine failure, elevator failure, rudder failure, and aileron
G. Visualization failure. Fig. 11 shows two abnormal samples, both of which
 are brake faults. It can be seen that different samples present
 To illustrate the need for multiscale modeling, four types significant scale variations. For example, the elevator fault
of anomaly samples were selected from the D1 dataset. In
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

 TABLE VII scales to achieve more effective feature extraction. Specifically,
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS the Router isolates the seasonal and trend components of
 the original signal and then adds them back to emphasize
 periodicity and trend characteristics. It then identifies the
 optimal scale for each sample based on these decomposed
 signals, assigning the original signal to the most suitable EN.
 Within each EN, samples are divided into patches of a specific
 scale, and CL-DAM is utilized to extract temporal correlations.
 Finally, outputs from all ENs are fused according to routing
 weights to produce the final output. The normalized anomaly
 scores show that the proposed model effectively identifies
 abnormal segments in the samples after this multiscale feature
 extraction.

 V. D ISCUSSION
 Regarding the UAV anomaly detection, this study has two
 major limitations to consider.
 On the one hand, our method employs channel-independent
 modeling, which overlooks interactions between channels and
 may fail to capture spatial correlations among various features
 in flight data. In scenarios where multiple channels carry
 interrelated information, this limitation can lead to suboptimal outcomes. However, channel-independent approaches
 are effective in mitigating model overfitting, especially for
 small datasets, which is a common scenario in UAV anomaly
 detection. Although incorporating both temporal and spatial
 correlations could improve model performance, it is important
 to consider the computational costs. Models sensitive to both
 dimensions, particularly Transformer-based architectures, may
 incur significant computational cost, limiting their application
 in the real world. On the other hand, our approach introduces
 additional computational overhead due to multiscale feature
 extraction and fusion, which poses challenges for deployment
 on resource-constrained UAVs. This complexity can hinder
 real-time applications where quick decision-making is critical. Fortunately, the MoE architecture mitigates some of the
 additional time costs, as each EN can be computed in parallel.
 However, the model does have limitations in terms of space
 efficiency.
 In conclusion, UAV anomaly detection models should balance performance and computational efficiency. Future work
 could focus on optimizing the architecture to achieve this goal.
 Alternatively, techniques such as model distillation and model
 pruning can be considered to reduce model complexity without
 sacrificing performance.
Fig. 11. Visual comparison of ground truth anomalies, anomaly scores, and
routing weights for different samples in the U1 dataset. (a) and (b) Original VI. C ONCLUSION
and decomposed data. (c) and (d) Normalized anomaly scores. (e) and (f)
Routing weight. The light red areas represent anomalous areas.
 In this article, MTCL-UAV is proposed. It is built based
 on the sparse MoE architecture. Each MoE block includes a
 Router, ENs, and an aggregator. MTCL-UAV effectively solves
exhibits a shorter periodicity, while the aileron fault displays the challenges of temporal variations and temporal correlations
a more pronounced downward trend. In contrast, the engine in UAV flight data. It employs seasonal and trend decomfault has stronger periodic fluctuations, and the rudder fault position to adaptively identify optimal scales and aggregate
follows a gentler trend. In the first sample of FW-UAV outputs from ENs. To enhance representational capabilities,
datasets, MTCL-UAV employs longer scale ENs for feature a CL-DAM is proposed to extract temporal correlations in
extraction; in the second sample, it uses shorter scale ENs. a comprehensive way. Experimental results demonstrate that
These observations highlight the presence of time series scale MTCL-UAV achieves superior performance compared to existvariations in UAV flight data. MTCL-UAV adapts to multiple ing methods and exhibits robustness at varying noise levels.
2530715 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

The limitations of the proposed model and the directions of [20] G. Jiang, P. Nan, J. Zhang, Y. Li, and X. Li, “Robust spatial–temporal
future research are also discussed. autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection of unmanned aerial
 vehicle with flight data,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–14,
 In the future, multiscale information fusion in temporal and 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3428649.
spatial dimensions will be explored. The development of more [21] B. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Liu, D. Liu, and X. Peng, “Data-driven anomaly
efficient frameworks to satisfy the requirements for lightweight detection for UAV sensor data based on deep learning prediction model,”
 in Proc. IEEE Prognost. Syst. Health Manag. Conf. (PHM-Paris), May
deployment in UAVs will also be considered. 2019, pp. 286–290.
 [22] R. Dhakal, C. Bosma, P. Chaudhary, and L. N. Kandel, “UAV fault and
 R EFERENCES anomaly detection using autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE/AIAA 42nd Digit.
 Avionics Syst. Conf. (DASC), Oct. 2023, pp. 1–8.
[1] S. Li, B. Duo, M. D. Renzo, M. Tao, and X. Yuan, “Robust secure UAV [23] G. Bae and I. Joe, “UAV anomaly detection with distributed artificial
 communications with the aid of reconfigurable intelligent surfaces,” intelligence based on LSTM-AE and AE,” in Advanced Multimedia
 IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 6402–6417, Oct. and Ubiquitous Engineering. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Aug. 2019,
 2021, doi: 10.1109/TWC.2021.3073746. pp. 305–310.
[2] Y. Wan, Y. Zhong, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “An accurate UAV 3-D [24] M. W. Ahmad, M. U. Akram, M. M. Mohsan, K. Saghar, R. Ahmad,
 path planning method for disaster emergency response based on an and W. H. Butt, “Transformer-based sensor failure prediction and
 improved multiobjective swarm intelligence algorithm,” IEEE Trans. classification framework for UAVs,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 248, Aug.
 Cybern., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2658–2671, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1109/ 2024, Art. no. 123415, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2024.123415.
 TCYB.2022.3170580. [25] A. Keipour, M. Mousaei, and S. Scherer, “ALFA: A dataset for UAV
[3] R. W. L. Coutinho and A. Boukerche, “UAV-mounted cloudlet sys- fault and anomaly detection,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 40, nos. 2–3,
 tems for emergency response in industrial areas,” IEEE Trans. Ind. pp. 515–520, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1177/0278364920966642.
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 8007–8016, Nov. 2022, doi: 10.1109/ [26] P. Chen et al., “Pathformer: Multi-scale transformers with adaptive
 TII.2022.3174113. pathways for time series forecasting,” in Proc. The 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
[4] A. Menshchikov et al., “Real-time detection of hogweed: UAV platform Represent., Vienna, Austria, May 2024, pp. 1–13.
 empowered by deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 70, no. 8, [27] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
 pp. 1175–1188, Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TC.2021.3059819. attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
[5] K. Liu and J. Zheng, “UAV trajectory optimization for time-constrained detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 data collection in UAV-enabled environmental monitoring systems,” Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 23, pp. 24300–24314, Dec. 2022, [28] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer:
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3189214. Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc.
[6] M. Pan, C. Chen, X. Yin, and Z. Huang, “UAV-aided emergency environ- ICLR, Jan. 2021, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 mental monitoring in infrastructure-less areas: LoRa mesh networking forum?id=LzQQ89U1qm
 approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2918–2932, Feb. [29] Y. Zhou et al., “Mixture-of-Experts with expert choice
 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3095494. routing,” in Proc. NeurIPS, Jan. 2022, pp. 7103–7114. [Online].
[7] P. Xiong, Z. Li, Y. Li, S. Huang, C. Liu, and F. Gu, “Fault diagnosis Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/hash/
 of UAV based on adaptive Siamese network with limited data,” IEEE 2f00ecd787b432c1d36f3de9800728eb-Abstract-Conference.html
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023. [30] X. Ma, Y. Yu, H. Wu, and K. Zhou, “Efficient reflectance capture
[8] L. Yang, S. Li, C. Li, A. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “A survey of with a deep gated mixture-of-experts,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
 unmanned aerial vehicle flight data anomaly detection: Technologies, Graph., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 4246–4256, Jul. 2023, doi: 10.1109/
 applications, and future directions,” Sci. China Technol. Sci., vol. 66, TVCG.2023.3261872.
 no. 4, pp. 901–919, Apr. 2023. [31] Y. Kim, H. Lim, and D. Han, “Scaling beyond the GPU memory
[9] A. Keipour, M. Mousaei, and S. Scherer, “Automatic real-time limit for large mixture-of-experts model training,” in Proc. ICML,
 anomaly detection for autonomous aerial vehicles,” in Proc. Int. 2024, pp. 24342–24353. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2019, pp. 5679–5685, doi: 10.1109/ forum?id=uLpyWQPyF9
 ICRA.2019.8794286. [32] D. Z. Shen, C. Qin, C. Wang, Z. Dong, H. Zhu, and H. Xiong,
[10] D. Ge, Z. Dong, Y. Cheng, and Y. Wu, “An enhanced spatio-temporal “Topic modeling revisited: A document graph-based neural network
 constraints network for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” perspective,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, Dec. 2021,
 Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 283, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 111169. pp. 14681–14693.
[11] Y. Liu and W. Ding, “A KNNS based anomaly detection method applied [33] Q. Liu, Z. Dong, C. Liu, X. Xie, E. Chen, and H. Xiong, “Social
 for UAV flight data stream,” in Proc. Prognostics Syst. Health Manage. marketing meets targeted customers: A typical user selection and cov-
 Conf. (PHM), Oct. 2015, pp. 1–8. erage perspective,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2014,
[12] A. Alos and Z. Dahrouj, “Detecting contextual faults in unmanned pp. 350–359.
 aerial vehicles using dynamic linear regression and K-nearest neighbour [34] Y. Ye et al., “MANE: Organizational network embedding with multiplex
 classifier,” Gyroscopy Navigat., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 94–104, Jan. 2020. attentive neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
[13] D. Yong, Z. Yuanpeng, X. Yaqing, P. Yu, and L. Datong, “Unmanned no. 4, pp. 4047–4061, Apr. 2023.
 aerial vehicle sensor data anomaly detection using kernel principle [35] J. Hang, Z. Dong, H. Zhao, X. Song, P. Wang, and H. Zhu, “Outside
 component analysis,” in Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Meas. in: Market-aware heterogeneous graph neural network for employee
 Instrum. (ICEMI), Oct. 2017, pp. 241–246. turnover prediction,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data
[14] D. Pan, “Hybrid data-driven anomaly detection method to improve UAV Mining, Feb. 2022, pp. 353–362.
 operating reliability,” in Proc. Prognostics Syst. Health Manage. Conf. [36] X. He, Q. Chen, L. Tang, W. Wang, and T. Liu, “CGAN-based
 (PHM-Harbin), Jul. 2017, pp. 1–4. collaborative intrusion detection for UAV networks: A blockchain-
[15] L. Liu, M. Liu, Q. Guo, D. Liu, and Y. Peng, “MEMS sensor data empowered distributed federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet
 anomaly detection for the UAV flight control subsystem,” in Proc. IEEE Things J., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 120–132, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/
 SENSORS, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–4. JIOT.2022.3200121.
[16] A. B. Mohammed, L. Chaari Fourati, and A. M. Fakhrudeen, “Isolation [37] M. Cheng, Q. Li, J. Lv, W. Liu, and J. Wang, “Multi-scale LSTM
 forest algorithm against UAV’s GPS spoofing attack,” in Proc. CPSCom, model for BGP anomaly classification,” IEEE Trans. Services Com-
 2024, pp. 459–463. put., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 765–778, May 2021, doi: 10.1109/TSC.2018.
[17] E. Baskaya, M. Bronz, and D. Delahaye, “Fault detection & diagnosis 2824809.
 for small UAVs via machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE/AIAA 36th Digit. [38] S. Liu et al., “Pyraformer: Low-complexity pyramidal attention
 Avionics Syst. Conf. (DASC), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6. for long-range time series modeling and forecasting,” in Proc.
[18] L. Yang, S. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Zhu, and Z. Liao, “Deep learning-assisted ICLR, 2022, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 unmanned aerial vehicle flight data anomaly detection: A review,” IEEE forum?id=0EXmFzUn5I
 Sensors J., vol. 24, no. 20, pp. 31681–31695, Oct. 2024. [39] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
[19] T. Yang, J. Chen, H. Deng, and Y. Lu, “UAV abnormal state detection is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
 model based on timestamp slice and multi-separable CNN,” Electronics, ICLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 vol. 12, no. 6, p. 1299, Mar. 2023. forum?id=Jbdc0vTOcol
HU et al.: MULTISCALE TRANSFORMERS WITH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR UAV ANOMALY DETECTION 2530715

[40] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: Tem- Zhengxin Li received the Ph.D. degree in control
 poral 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc. science and engineering from Air Force Engineering
 ICLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ University, Xi’an, China, in 2011.
 forum?id=ju Uqw384Oq He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the
[41] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FedFormer: School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Elec-
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series tronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical Uniforecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286. versity, Xi’an. His research interests mainly include
 [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/zhou22g.html time series data mining, machine learning, and arti-
[42] Y. Zhang, L. Ma, S. Pal, Y. Zhang, and M. Coates, “Multi- ficial intelligence.
 resolution time-series transformer for long-term forecasting,” in Proc.
 AISTATS, Jan. 2023, pp. 4222–4230. [Online]. Available: https://
 proceedings.mlr.press/v238/zhang24l.html
[43] K. H. Park, E. Park, and H. K. Kim, “Unsupervised fault detection
 on unmanned aerial vehicles: Encoding and thresholding approach,”
 Sensors, vol. 21, no. 6, p. 2208, Mar. 2021, doi: 10.3390/S21062208.
[44] M. Bronz, E. Baskaya, D. Delahaye, and S. Puechmore, “Real-time
 fault detection on small fixed-wing UAVs using machine learning,” in Zheng Dong received the Bachelor of Science
 Proc. AIAA/IEEE 39th Digit. Avionics Syst. Conf. (DASC), Oct. 2020, degree in electronic science and technology from
 pp. 1–10. the University of Science and Technology of China,
[45] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Hefei, China, in 2015, and the master’s degree in
 Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, computer science from The University of British
 H. M. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 2017.
 2017, pp. 5998–6008. He is currently a Staff Software Engineer with
[46] M. D. Tandale and J. Valasek, “Fault-tolerant structured adaptive model ByteDance Inc., Beijing, China. He has published
 inversion control,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 635–642, prolifically in refereed journals and conference pro-
 May 2006. ceedings, including TKDE, ACM TOIS, VLDB,
[47] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” NeurIPS, WSDM, and ICDM.
 in Proc. ICLR, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds., Dec. 2014, pp. 1–11. Mr. Dong was a recipient of the Best-Ranked Papers of WSDM 2022. He
[48] A. Chriki, H. Touati, H. Snoussi, and F. Kamoun, “UAV-based is a reviewer for many leading academic journals and has served regularly on
 surveillance system: An anomaly detection approach,” in Proc. IEEE the program committees of numerous conferences.
 Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/
 ISCC50000.2020.9219585.
[49] A. Chriki, H. Touati, H. Snoussi, and F. Kamoun, “Deep learning and
 handcrafted features for one-class anomaly detection in UAV video,”
 Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 2599–2620, Jan. 2021, doi:
 10.1007/S11042-020-09774-w.
[50] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Jiayong Fang received the Ph.D. degree from
 Decomposition transformers with auto-correlation for long-term Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an, China, in
 series forecasting,” in Proc. NeurIPS, Jan. 2021, pp. 22419–22430. 2011.
 [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/ He is currently an Associate Professor with Air
 bcc0d400288793e8bdcd7c19a8ac0c2b-Abstract.html Force Engineering University. His research interests
[51] Y. Wan, D. Zhang, D. Liu, and F. Xiao, “CGAD: A novel contrastive include the design of evaluation, causal inference in
 learning-based framework for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” statistics, and observational studies.
 Neurocomputing, vol. 609, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 128379.

 Gang Hu received the B.S. degree in management engineering and the M.S. degree in electronic Yu Zhao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 information from Air Force Engineering University, received the Ph.D. degree from Eindhoven Univer-
 Xi’an, China, in 2020 and 2022, respectively, where sity of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in
 he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control 2022.
 science and engineering. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher at Air
 His research interests include unmanned aerial Force Engineering University, Xi’an, China.
 vehicle (UAV) anomaly detection and multivariate
 time series analysis.

 Zhongliang Zhou received the Ph.D. degree from Chuhan Zhou received the B.S. degree in man-
 Air Force Engineering University, Xi’an, China, in agement engineering from Air Force Engineering
 2007. University, Xi’an, China in 2020, where he is cur-
 He is currently a Professor with Air Force Engi- rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science
 neering University. His research interests include the and engineering.
 design of evaluation, causal inference in statistics, His research interests include unmanned aerial
 and observational studies. vehicles (UAVs) formation control, event-triggered
 control of multiagent systems, and resilient security
 control.