IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3500714

 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection Based
 on Multiple Spatiotemporal Graph Convolution
 Shiming He , Qingqing Guo , Genxin Li , Kun Xie , Member, IEEE,
 and Pradip Kumar Sharma , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Multivariate time series anomaly detection method, MSTGAD achieves an additional 0.83% improvement
(MTSAD) plays a crucial role in the Internet of Things (IoT), on average.
identifying device malfunction or system attacks. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) are widely applied in MTSAD to capture Index Terms— Anomaly detection, graph neural networks
the spatial features among sensors. However, GNN requires (GNNs), graph structure learning (GSL), Internet of Things
an explicit graph structure and cannot work when spatial (IoT), multivariate time series (MTS).
relationships are lacking or sensor dependencies are unknown.
Hence, graph structure learning (GSL) emerges as a promising N OMENCLATURE
solution, which learns graph structures with the downstream X Multivariate time series.
tasks without requiring spatial relationships. However, a general xi ith indicator values.
cascade effect occurs in the industrial scene. Moreover, an attack xt Indicator values at timestamp t.
event changes sensor data sequentially instead of simultaneously Xt Historical window of length ω at
due to the multiple serial process that occurs (i.e., delay
correlation). Existing GSL-based anomaly detection methods timestamp t.
fail to tackle delay correlation and focus on low prediction N Number of indicators.
errors. However, the low prediction error distribution is always M Number of timestamps.
dispersed, making it difficult to differentiate between normal and yt
 b Label of timestamp t.
abnormal samples based on a threshold. Therefore, we propose G Graph.
an MTSAD based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution
(MSTGAD). MSTGAD uses dynamic time warping (DTW) A Adjacency matrix.
distance as prior knowledge instead of Euclidean, guiding graph DTW(x i , x j ) DTW distance between indicators i and j.
learning to capture delay correlations effectively. MSTGAD ADTW Adjacency matrix of the DTW
designs an ensemble predictor, which uses two subpredictors prior graph.
with a shared and learnable graph to ensure high prediction ε Threshold of the DTW distance in prior
accuracy while maintaining stable anomaly scores. Furthermore,
we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the MSTGAD graph.
method’s effectiveness. Our method outperforms existing g Samples from the Gumbel distribution.
GSL-based methods in anomaly detection on four publicly πi Probabilities of ith class.
available real-world datasets, demonstrating our proposed τ Temperature parameter.
approach’s effectiveness. Compared with the best GSL-based AFPM Adjacency matrix of the fully
 parameterized graph.
 0∗T X Temporal convolutional network.
 Received 30 May 2024; revised 20 August 2024; accepted 6 September
2024. Date of publication 22 November 2024; date of current version 2∗G X Graph convolutional network.
26 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural ⊙ Hadamard product of elements.
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272062 and Grant 62025201; in 2l Spectral kernel of the GCN.
part by the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province
under Grant 2023RC3139; in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan xtSTGCN
 b Prediction from the STGCN subpredictor
Provincial Transportation Department under Grant 202143; in part by the at timestamp t.
Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Safety Control of Bridge Engineering, H(t) Hidden features at timestamp t.
Ministry of Education, Changsha University of Science and Technology,
under Grant 21KB07; and in part by the Open Research Fund of the Hunan xtDCRNN
 b Prediction from the DCRNN subpredictor
Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Investigational Technology under Grant at timestamp t.
2018WLZC003. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was xt
 b Prediction from the ensemble predictor at
Dr. Ke Feng. (Corresponding author: Kun Xie.)
 Shiming He, Qingqing Guo, and Genxin Li are with the School of timestamp t.
Computer and Communication Engineering and the Hunan Provincial Key λ1 Prediction weight parameter.
Laboratory of Intelligent Processing of Big Data on Transportation, Changsha λ2 Regularization amplitude parameter of
University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, China (e-mail:
smhe_cs@csust.edu.cn; guoqingqing@stu.csust.edu.cn). graph learning.
 Kun Xie is with the College of Computer Science and Electronics Engi- Erri (t) Prediction error at timestamp t for sensor i.
neering and the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Fusion Computing s(t) Anomaly score at timestamp t.
of Supercomputing and Artificial Intelligence, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, China (e-mail: xiekun@hnu.edu.cn).
 Pradip Kumar Sharma is with the Department of Computing Science, I. I NTRODUCTION
University of Aberdeen, AB24 3UE Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail: Pradip.sharma@
abdn.ac.uk).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3493890 I N RECENT years, more critical infrastructures have been
 deployed by various Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensors.
 1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

These sensors, such as water treatment, lithium-ion batteries Resulting in a Dispersed Distribution. This Makes Dis-
[1], and nanogenerators [2], continue to generate substantial tinguishing Between Normal and Abnormal Samples
amounts of time series data that record system statuses. The Based on a Threshold Challenging, Thereby Dimindata generated by these sensors are known as multivariate time ishing Anomaly Detection Performance: Most existing
series (MTS) data. Developing effective anomaly detection GSL-based anomaly detection methods focus on the
technologies to automate the identification of abnormal system prediction error generated by GNNs and treat timesbehavior and promptly trigger alerts is a necessary and urgent tamps with a large prediction error as anomalies. They
task. This is because abnormal MTS data changes indicate generally select prediction models with a low prediction
a system attack or equipment failure. If the anomaly is not error and high overall accuracy [19], [20]. However, the
discovered and dealt with immediately, the whole system prediction and anomaly detection tasks differ. Although
may fail, leading to economic losses [3]. Therefore, the MTS the overall prediction accuracy is high, the anomaly
anomaly detection (MTSAD) task plays an important role in detection effectiveness may not be satisfactory. In addithe IoT [4]. tion, models with high overall prediction accuracy
 In the IoT, sensors interact with and depend on each other. may exhibit inconsistent prediction errors (i.e., anomaly
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) [5] have been scores) with large variances. This means that the preincorporated into MTSAD to capture the relationships between diction error at certain timestamps is low, while being
sensors. GNNs require an explicit graph structure. Therefore, significantly high at others. Consequently, distinguishing
the existing GNN-based anomaly detection methods use a between normal and abnormal samples based on the
fixed graph structure derived from the prior domain expert prediction error values becomes challenging, leading to
knowledge. However, sensor graph structures or dependency unsatisfactory anomaly detection performance.
information is expensive and not easily accessible in most real- To address the aforementioned problems, we propose
world scenarios. MTSAD based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution
 Graph structure learning (GSL) [6] is a promising solution (MSTGAD). We leverage the dynamic time-warping (DTW)
when expert knowledge is lacking, sensor dependencies are distance to establish a DTW graph as prior knowledge, guiding
unknown, and access costs are high [7]. It learns the optimal the learning process to capture delay correlations effectively.
graph structure of the dependencies among sensors to match In addition, we adopt a fully parameterized approach to
downstream anomaly detection tasks. Graph deviation network construct the learnable graph, substantially reducing time
(GDN) [8] first introduced GSL into anomaly detection, result- overhead. Moreover, we combine the diffusion convolutional
ing in two mainstream GSL methods being used in anomaly recurrent neural network (DCRNN) and spatiotemporal graph
detection currently: node feature-based similarity [8], [9], [10], convolutional network (STGCN) with a shared and learnable
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15] and fully parameterized GSL [16], graph for ensemble prediction. This strategy ensures precise
[17], [18], [19], [20]. The former generates a graph using predictions and stabilizes the anomaly scores. This article’s
the learnable node embedding similarities, while the latter main contributions can be summarized as follows.
regards the adjacency matrix’s elements as free and learnable parameters. In addition, fully parameterized GSL offers 1) To effectively address delay correlation, we generate a
more flexibility than the node feature-based similarity method. prior graph from raw data using DTW distance instead
Although GSL can learn the relationships among sensors of Euclidean to accurately guide GSL.
[15], the existing GSL-based anomaly detection method still 2) To concentrate and stabilize the anomaly scores necencounters several challenges. essary for anomaly detection, we integrate multiple
 1) The Existing Prior Graph Similarity Methods Can- spatiotemporal predictors with a shared and learnable
 not Tackle With the Delay Correlation Within Time graph instead of focusing solely on the high overall
 Series Data: The existing GSL-based anomaly detection prediction accuracy. This strikes a balance between
 methods usually use prior graphs [21] to guide GSL. prediction accuracy and anomaly score stability.
 The prior graph in TS-GAT [11] and GSLAD [20] 3) We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the prois generally generated using sensor data similarities, posed method’s efficiency and effectiveness. On four
 and the main similarity methods include the cosine real-world and publicly available datasets, our method
 and Euclidean distance approaches, which only compare achieves state-of-the-art anomaly detection results. Comthe same timestamp values between sensors. However, pared with the best GSL-based method, MSTGAD
 a general cascade effect in the industrial field exists, achieves an additional 0.83% improvement on average.
 mainly due to the presence of certain distances in space This article’s remaining sections are organized as follows.
 between industrial sensors. Moreover, an attack even Section II presents an overview of related works. Section III
 changes sensor data sequentially instead of simulta- provides the preliminary knowledge, problem definition, and
 neously. The cosine or Euclidean distance approaches research motivation. Section IV comprehensively explains
 ignore the similarities between different timestamp val- our approach, including a general overview and an individues noise into the prior graph. ual components discussion. In Section V, we analyze the
 2) Existing Anomaly Detection Methods Focus on Low model’s performance and efficiency. Finally, we conclude
 Prediction Error. However, Models With High Predic- by summarizing our findings and discussing future work in
 tion Accuracy Have Large Prediction Error Variances, Section VI.
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

 II. R ELATED W ORK Moreover, DVGCRN [33] captures uncertain interrela-
 The existing works on MTSAD can be classified into three tionships in MTS and detects anomalies based on the
categories. The first type usually uses temporal features to reconstruction results. GReLeN [34] uses VAE and GCN to
detect anomalies, while the second focuses on MTS spatial learn relationships among MTS for reconstructing graphs and
features. The third type detects anomalies with unknown achieve anomaly detection.
spatial relationships. GNNs rely on known graph structures. These methods
 assume that the relationships between indicators are known.
A. Temporal Feature-Based Anomaly Detection However, the relationships between indicators are often
 unknown or the cost of obtaining them is high.
 Long short-term memory (LSTM) is widely used in
MTSAD due to its ability to process sequence data. For
 C. Unknown Spatial Relationship-Based Anomaly Detection
example, LSTM-NDT [22] uses LSTM to achieve a high
prediction performance while maintaining the whole system’s GSL has been used in the MTSAD field to capture spainterpretability. It uses a nonparametric, dynamic, and unsu- tial indicator features without graph structure. Two GSL
pervised threshold method to detect anomalies. In contrast, approaches are typically used for anomaly detection: the node
MSCRED [23] constructs a multiscale feature matrix and uses feature-based similarity and fully parameterized methods.
conv-LSTM neural networks to encode the correlation between First, GDN [8] learns the relationship graph between sensors
sensors and reconstruct multiscale feature matrix. The residual based on learnable node features and identifies data that
feature matrix facilitates anomaly detection and diagnosis. deviate significantly from the expected distribution. Building
MAD-GAN [24] uses LSTM as the basic model in the gener- on GDN, HGTMAD [9] leverages GCNs and the transative adversarial network framework, capturing the time series former to extract spatial and temporal features independently.
temporal correlation, extracting potential interactions, and In contrast, FuSAGNet [10] uses a fused sparse self-encoder
detecting anomalies using discrimination and reconstruction. graph to explicitly model the relationships between MTS
LSTM-DAE [25] uses a model trained on operational cycle data. It predicts and reconstructs future time series to detect
signals to select outlier candidate points in the first stage. Then, anomalies. TS-GAT [11] uses prior knowledge from raw data
it uses another model trained on sensor signals exploiting tem- to constrain graph learning. MEGA [12] and DPGLAD [13]
poral continuity to detect abnormal events among the candidate learn a unidirectional graph for anomaly detection. GSC-MAD
points in the second stage. In comparison, LSTM-VAE [26] [14] uses aggregative graph updating, smooth, and sparse
introduces multimodal observation and time dependence into constraints to learn a stable graph structure. ACGSL [15]
the potential space, reconstructs the expected distribution, and learns a graph for individual subsequences using the difference
evaluates the anomalies based on the reconstructed anomaly constraint between two consecutive subsequences, resulting in
scores. dynamic graphs.
 Other recurrent neural networks (RNNs) beside LSTM are GTA [16] introduces a fully parameterized GSL strategy
also applied in MTSAD. For example, OmniAnomaly [27] and uses a transformer for predictions. It detects and diaguses a stochastic RNN to capture the robust representations noses anomalies in the time series by evaluating the second
of normal patterns and reconstruct observations. DAGMM norm of the difference between predicted and actual values.
[28] uses a depth self-coding and Gaussian mixture model Subsequently, GLAD [17] combines GAT and a transformer
to produce low-dimensional representations and reconstruction to extract global and local features for anomaly detection.
errors to detect anomalies. MGCLAD [18] uses two directed graphs to simultaneously
 Although these temporal feature-based methods achieve learn inter- and intra-signal correlations. MEGLAD [19]
adequate anomaly detection results, they ignore time series exploits three GSL types to extract multiple correlation views.
correlations. Finally, GSLAD [20] uses diffusion graph convolution networks to detect anomalies.
B. Spatial Feature-Based Anomaly Detection Node feature-based similarity GSL only learns a simple
 KNN graph, where the node degree is less than K . In contrast,
 Graph attention networks (GATs) extract graph data features fully parameterized GSL is more flexible. However, using
and use them to capture the correlation between indicators and a transformer for temporal prediction in GTA, GLAD, and
predict the time-dependent relationships. For example, MTAD- MGCLAD increases the model’s time complexity.
TF [29] captures the temporal and spatial patterns produced by
multiscale convolution networks and GAT. MTAD-GAT [30] III. P ROBLEM D EFINITION AND P RELIMINARIES
obtains the correlation between different univariate time series
and the temporal dependence within each time series produced This article aims to explore anomaly detection in MTS.
by GAT. It integrates the prediction and reconstruction tasks In this section, we elaborate on the basic concepts of anomaly
 detection in MTS and introduce our motivation.
to detect anomalies. In contrast, Arvalus [31] treats system
components as nodes, and their dependencies and positions
as edges, thereby improving the identification and location A. Multivariate Time Series
of anomalies. MDGAT [32] uses a novel architecture based MTS data comprises a large number of regularly spaced and
on the GAT with multihead dynamic attention to learn the uninterrupted samples, which are characterized by N indicadependencies between sensors in temporal and spatial spaces. tors and M timestamps, denoted by X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , x M )T ∈
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Six-stage SWaT test bed processes are P1–P6. These processes include raw water supply and storage, chemical dosing, UF, dechlorination, RO, and
RO permeate transfer, UF backwash. Each process contains several sensors named according to their function and process. For example, AIT-203 represents
the third analyzer indicator transmitter in the P2 process. The three sensors marked in red (P-203, AIT-202, and AIT-503) are used as examples to explain
delay correlation in Fig. 2.

R M×N . The ith indicator is defined as x i = (x1i , x2i , . . . , x M
 i
 ). The adjacency matrix elements consist of 0 and 1. If Ai, j
In addition, the tth timestamp contains N indicator values, is 1, an edge appears between nodes i and j. On the contrary,
which is defined as xt = (xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN )T . The history win- when Ai, j = 0, no edge occurs between nodes i and j.
dow on timestamp t with length ω is defined as a subsequence
X t = (xt−ω , xt−ω+1 , . . . , xt−1 )T ∈ R ω×N . When the label y of D. Motivation
timestamp t is 1, an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t. Generally, GSL-based MTSAD methods outperform current
When the label y of timestamp t is 0, timestamp t is normal. approaches. However, the existing methods encounter the
 following challenges.
B. Anomaly Detection in MTS 1) Ignoring Delay Correlation in MTS: Typically, industrial
 systems are executed within multiple serial processes. For
 MTSAD calculates the anomaly score of each timestamp t example, the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) test bed includes
according to the historical subsequence X t and records it as six processes (P1–P6): raw water supply and storage, chemical
st . If the anomaly score st exceeds a predetermined threshold, dosing, ultrafiltration (UF), dechlorination, reverse osmosis
an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t. This process is (RO), and RO permeate transfer, UF backwash, as shown in
defined as follows: Fig. 1. Each process contains several sensors that are named
 according to their functions and processes. For example, AITxt = f (X t )
 b (1)
 203 represents the third analyzer indicator transmitter in the
 st = ϕ(xt , b
 xt ) (2) P2 process. A process attack or fault can trigger a cascade
 (
 1, if st > Thr effect on other processes, causing delays within the time
 yt =
 b (3) series. As shown in Fig. 2, AIT-202 experienced an attack
 0, if st ≤ Thr
 from timestamps 707 to 730, during which the P-203 sensor
where f () is the prediction function, bxt denotes the predicted responded promptly. However, the AIT-503 sensor only starts
value at timestamp t, xt represents the ground truth, ϕ indicates responding at timestamp 760. This is because AIT-202 and
the anomaly scores function, and Thr is the threshold. P-203 are deployed during P2, while AIT-503 is deployed at
 P5. This is known as delay correlation. The existing prior
 graph generation methods generally obtain the time series
C. Graph Structure Learning similarity based on cosine or Euclidean distance, which calcu-
 Given the time series X ∈ R M×N , GSL aims to obtain a lates the sensor proximity at the same timestamp and ignores
graph G = (V, E) and its topology or adjacency matrix A ∈ the similarity between different timestamps. This makes delay
R N ×N . In this instance, the graph nodes are the sensors that correlation challenging to tackle; therefore, these methods are
produce the indicators, and the edges E are the hidden sensor not suitable for asynchronous time series data, leading to
relationships. Furthermore, the adjacency matrix A stores missing edges in the prior graph.
the edge information in the graph, reflecting the underlying 2) Existing Predictors Cannot Meet the Requirements of
dependencies between indicators. High Prediction Accuracy and Concentrated Anomaly Score
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

 Fig. 3. DCRNN predictor’s anomaly score distribution. The DCRNN
 method’s anomaly scores range from 1 to 11 and exhibits a large span,
 indicating that the scores are widely spread and not concentrated.
Fig. 2. Example of delay correlation in the SWaT dataset. We consider three
sensors marked in red in Fig. 1: P-203 and AIT-202 in the P2 process, and
AIT-503 at P5. During the timestamps marked in pink, the sensor AIT-202
experienced an attack, while the sensor P-203 responded during the same
timestamps, marked in blue. On the other hand, the sensor AIT-503 responded
during the subsequent timestamps marked in gray.

Distributions Simultaneously: DCRNN and STGCN are excellent spatiotemporal predictors.
 DCRNN combines MTS with diffusion processes to capture
spatial dependencies. Furthermore, it uses gated recurrent units
to capture time dependencies. It also excels in prediction tasks
by effectively capturing temporal and spatial dependencies,
making it an ideal choice for achieving high accuracy and
minimizing overall errors. Anomaly detection tasks aim to
minimize prediction errors at normal timestamps and maximize those at abnormal timestamps. In addition, we expect the
overall prediction error variance at normal timestamps to be Fig. 4. STGCN predictors’ anomaly score distribution. The STGCN anomaly
 scores range from 11 to 16. While the distribution is concentrated, the STGCN
small, and we strive for minimal anomaly score fluctuations. scores are significantly higher than those of DCRNN.
However, DCRNN exhibits wide anomaly score variances,
ranging from 1 to 11, as shown in Fig. 3. According to
the figure, the anomaly score exhibits a sudden increase IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
around timestamp 8000. This can be attributed to the indicator
 This section introduces the proposed method, elaborating
(2B_AIT_002_PV) sharply rising from 0.05 to 267 during
 on each module.
that timestamp. This variance significantly affects the anomaly
detection task performance. The detailed sensor values in
the Water Distribution (WADI) dataset can be found in A. Overview
Appendix. To obtain stable anomaly scores, we propose the MSTGAD
 In comparison, STGCN combines graph and causal convo- method. MSTGAD uses the DTW distance to measure the
lution to extract temporal and spatial features. This network node similarities and generate the prior graph. It uses the fully
comprises convolutional structures that can be computed in parameterized graph structure learner to generate a learnable
parallel, resulting in faster speed. Therefore, STGCN is also an graph and combines DCRNN and STGCN for ensemble
excellent spatiotemporal predictor. During the prediction task, prediction to achieve more accurate predictions and stable
STGCN has a low prediction accuracy. However, during the anomaly detection. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the MSTGAD
anomaly detection task, it exhibits relatively stable anomaly framework comprises four key modules.
scores with low variance, ranging from 11 to 16, as shown 1) DTW Prior Graph Learner: To capture the delay corin Fig. 4. The anomaly scores remain stable even around relation in time series data, we use DTW distance to
timestamp 8000. measure time series similarities and obtain a similarity
 DCRNN and STGCN have several advantages and dis- adjacency matrix. The DTW distance is invariant to time
advantages during prediction and anomaly detection tasks. shifts compared with the regular Euclidean and cosine
Therefore, we combine DCRNN and STGCN to detect anoma- distances. Therefore, it can capture the delay correlations
lies. between the indicators.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 5. MSTGAD framework. MSTGAD comprises four modules: the DTW prior graph learner, fully parameterized graph structure learner, STGCN and
DRCNN-based ensemble predictor, and the anomaly score and threshold selection.

 2) Fully Parameterized Graph Structure Learner: The we treat it as an anomaly. When the score is below the
 graph structure learner exploits the full graph param- threshold, we treat it as normal.
 eterization method to learn the relationships between The symbols used in this section are displayed in Nomenindicators. In the full graph parameterization method, clature.
 each element of the adjacency matrix A is directly
 modeled by a learnable and independent parameter, B. DTW Prior Graph Learner
 which is updated through backpropagation. This method Due to delay correlation in time series, the Euclidean
 generates a customized and optimal graph for the down- distance may introduce noise to the prior graph [35]. Thus,
 stream task. the DTW distance [36] is more robust. Compared with the
 3) STGCN- and DRCNN-Based Ensemble Predictor: To Euclidean and cosine distances, DTW is invariant to time
 avoid a single predictor pursuing high overall accu- shifts and can consider the time drift between two sequences.
 racy at the expense of discriminating anomaly scores, It also searches for the optimal alignment match using dynamic
 we adopt a combined approach that uses multiple spa- programming techniques.
 tiotemporal predictors. We divide the MTS into multiple Given two time series Y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) and Z =
 subsequences using a sliding window. According to (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z m ), the sequence distance matrix is D ∈ R n×m ,
 the learned adjacency matrix in the graph structure where Di, j = |yi − z j |. Thus, the cost matrix Dc is defined as
 learner, the combined STGCN and DCRNN predictor follows:
 uses the subsequence as the input for predicting the next
 Dc (i, j) = Di, j + min(Dc (i − 1, j), Dc (i, j − 1),
 timestamp’s value.
 4) Anomaly Score and Threshold Selection: The anomaly Dc (i − 1, j − 1)). (4)
 scores are derived from the prediction error between the Therefore, the final DTW distance is determined as follows:
 prediction and the ground truth. A high anomaly score
 indicates that the subsequence may not follow normal DTW(Y, Z ) = Dc (n, m). (5)
 patterns, increasing its likelihood of being an anomaly. The optimal alignment match is the minimum function travers-
 When the anomaly score exceeds the selected threshold, ing path of Dc (n, m). In this instance, the DTW distance
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

represents the best alignment gap between Y and Z , indicating 1) STGCN Subpredictor: STGCN [37] adopts a full conthe similarity between the time series. volution network, resolving the inherent issues of recursive
 Thus, we can obtain a similarity matrix S DTW ∈ R N ×N of networks such as RNN that require iterative training and
all the indicators using the DTW distance accumulate errors during each step.
 STGCN comprises several spatiotemporal convolution
 Si,DTW
 j = DTW(x i , x j ) (6) blocks (STBlock). These blocks comprise two temporal conwhere the values of the ith row and jth column in the sim- volution networks (TCNs) and one GCN layer, forming a
ilarity matrix is the DTW distance between the ith indicator sandwich-like structure. The input X l of the lth STBlock
x i (x1i , x2i , . . . , x M
 i j j j
 ) and the jth indicator x j (x1 , x2 , . . . , x M ). obtains output X l+1 , where X 1 is X t . Therefore, the STBlock
Then, we construct the adjacency matrix ADTW of the prior is defined as follows:
graph using the DTW distance as follows:
 Y l+1 = 01l ∗T ReLU 2l ∗G 00l ∗T Y l
 
 ( (10)
 1, Si,DTW <ε 0∗T Y = P ⊙ σ (Q) (11)
 Ai,DTW
 j = j
 (7)
 0, otherwise 2∗G Y = 2(L)Y = 2(U 3U )Y = U 2(3)U Y T T
 (12)
 − 21 − 12
where ε is the DTW distance threshold that determines the L = In − D AD = U 3U T
 (13)
sparsity of the adjacency matrix ADTW .
 where 0∗T X is TCN and 2∗G X is GCN. 00l and 01l are
 the left and right temporal TCN kernels in the lth block.
C. Fully Parameterized Graph Structure Learner
 In addition, 2l denotes the spectral GCN kernel, and ReLU(·)
 The learnable graph structure’s adjacency matrix consists is the activation function.
of 0 and 1, which is nondifferentiable. As a result, the In (11), P and Q represent the output elements after
backpropagation algorithm struggles to efficiently compute the the convolutional kernel, with ⊙ representing the Hadamard
parameter gradient, thereby failing to jointly optimize the adja- product of elements. Furthermore, the sigmoid gate σ (Q)
cency matrix and downstream task parameters. To address this controls which inputs P of the current state are related.
issue, we use a reparameterization technique (i.e., Gumbel- In (12), graph Fourier basis U denotes the eigenvector
Softmax), which represents a continuous distribution that can matrix of the normalized graph Laplacian L, and D is the
approximate samples from the class distribution. It enables degree matrix. In addition, 3 and 2(3) are the diagonal
the expression of discrete parameters using the continuous matrix of the eigenvalues of L.
ones, simplifying the parameter gradient calculation. The After stacking two STBlocks, we append a fully connected
Gumbel-Softmax process is defined as follows: layer at the end as the output to map the last STBlock output
 to a predicted value bxtSTGCN .
 g = − log(− log(u)), u ∽ Uniform(0, 1) (8)
    2) DCRNN Subpredictor: DCRNN [38] can capture temi, j
 exp log π1 + g i, j /τ poral and spatial features. It uses diffusion convolution to
 i, j
 z1 = P    (9) capture spatial dependence and the encoder–decoder archii, j
 v∈{0,1} exp log πv + g i, j /τ
 tecture to obtain temporal dependence. Therefore, we use
where u represents the sample extracted from a Uniform(0, 1) DCRNN instead of GCN. Thus, DCRNN is defined as follows:
 i, j
distribution, g i, j follows a Gumbel distribution, and π1   
 Rt = sigmoid W R ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + b R (14)
denotes the values of the ith row and jth column of probability
 Ct = tanh WC ◦ xt ||(Rt ⊙ H(t−1) ) + bC
   
matrix π1 ∈ R K ×K , indicating that the probability that node i (15)
is connected to j in the graph. In this instance, τ serves as a
   
 Ut = sigmoid WU ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + bU (16)
 i, j
temperature parameter. As τ approaches 0, z 1 tends toward H(t) = Ut ⊙ H(t−1) + (1 − Ut ) ⊙ Ct (17)
0 or 1, and the Gumbel-Softmax distribution converges to the L2 
class distribution. Ultimately, the ith row and jth column in
 X Q l Q 
 −1 T l
 i, j WQ ◦ Y = wl,1 D −1
 O A + wl,2 D I A Y (18)
the adjacency matrix Ai,FPMj are assigned the value z 1 , causing l=0
 i, j
 j to be set to 1 with the probability of π1 .
Ai,FPM
 In graph structure learners, we initialize the probability where D O and D I are the out- and in-degree matrices, ∥
 Q Q
matrix π1 randomly. Then, the adjacency matrix is derived is the concatenation operation, wl,1 , wl,2 , and b Q are model
from the probability matrix using Gumbel-Softmax sampling. parameters, and the diffusion degree L 2 is a hyperparameter.
Typically, the ensemble predictor uses the adjacency matrix During each step, xt ′ and node feature H(t ′ −1) enter the
for the prediction task. Thus, the probability matrix is updated diffusion convolution layer to obtain the node feature H(t ′ )
using backpropagation to accomplish GSL. at the next timestamp t ′ .
 Then, the encoder updates the node feature H(·) from the
 timestamp t − ω to t − 1 and obtains the total node feature
D. Ensemble Predictor Based on STGCN and DCRNN H(t−1) of the subsequence. In the decoder, the total node
 We design an ensemble predictor combining DCRNN and feature H(t−1) is used as the input. Subsequently, the predicted
STGCN to overcome the issue that predictors cannot achieve value bxtDCRNN at the timestamp t is obtained, as shown in
high accuracy and a concentrated anomaly score distribution. Fig. 5.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 3) Ensemble Predictor: After obtaining the two predictions TABLE I
using the STGCN and DCRNN predictors, the results are com- DATASET D ESCRIPTION
bined. To balance the prediction result accuracy and anomaly
score stability, we adjust their weights to enhance anomaly
detection performance. The combined prediction result is
defined as follows:
 b xtSTGCN + (1 − λ1 )b
 xt = λ1b xtDCRNN (19)
where λ1 adjusts the two prediction results’ weights.
 Then, the anomaly score at timestamp t is determined using
E. Loss Function the highest value among all the sensors
 Generally, the average absolute error is used as the loss s(t) = max si (t). (25)
function loss p for the prediction task and can be defined as i

 K Grid search technology is pivotal for determining the opti-
 1 X i
 loss p = x − xti (20) mal threshold. During grid search, the upper and lower bounds
 K i=1 t
 b
 of the threshold are defined as the maximum and minimum
where b xti and xti represent the prediction and ground truth of values of s(t), respectively. All possible thresholds are exhausthe ith indicator at the timestamp t, respectively. tively searched with a step size of 0.01, and the threshold with
 Furthermore, to improve the learned graph’s quality and the highest F1 score is selected as the best one. In addition,
guarantee its robustness and generalization ability, we use the we use the point adjustment strategy to obtain the anomaly
DTW prior graph as prior knowledge. Then, we introduce scores.
graph learning loss during model training to impose constraints
on graph learning. Therefore, the graph learning loss function
 V. E XPERIMENT AND P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
lossg is expressed as the cross-entropy between prior knowledge ADTW and the learned graph structure AFPM A. Datasets
 X
 −Ai,DTW log Ai,FPM DTW
 log 1 − Ai,FPM .
  
 lossg = j j − 1− Ai, j j
 We use four public real-world datasets; their statistics are
 ij displayed in Table I.
 (21) First, the SWaT dataset is derived from the water treatment
 test bench supervised by the Singapore Public Utilities Bureau.
 Thus, the total loss function is defined as follows: The data collection process lasted for 11 days and ran conloss = loss p + λ2 lossg (22) tinuously 24 h a day, during which network traffic and values
 from all 51 sensors and actuators were recorded.
where λ2 is the regularization amplitude graph learning param- Second, the WADI dataset is obtained from a compreeter. hensive WADI system composed of numerous pipelines.
 As an extension of the SWaT test platform, WADI shows
F. Anomaly Scores and Threshold Selection the water treatment, storage, and distribution network more
 comprehensively and realistically. The dataset is collected over
 The purpose of anomaly detection is to identify abnormal
 16 consecutive days, with 14 dedicated to routine operations
situations that deviate from the norm according to the ground
 and the remaining two simulating attack scenarios. The whole
truth and prediction values. First, we calculate individual
 test bed is equipped with 127 sensors and actuators.
anomaly scores for each sensor. Then, these scores are com-
 Third, the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover is a dataset
bined to obtain the anomaly scores for each timestamp. Once
 comprising sensors and actuators from the NASA Mars rover.
the anomaly score at timestamp t exceeds the predetermined
 This dataset contains 55 indicators from 27 unique entities.
threshold, an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t.
 Finally, the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite
 The comparison between the ground truth and prediction
 dataset comprises soil samples and telemetry data collected by
values is conducted to obtain the prediction error Erri (t) of
 NASA using the Mars probe. This dataset contains 25 indicathe sensor i at timestamp t
 tors from 55 entities.
 xti .
 Erri (t) = xti − b (23) To handle substantial raw data, the SWaT and WADI
 datasets undergo a downsampling process every 10 s, capturing
 To ensure metric scale consistency among sensors with
 the median value. During this period, an anomaly is tagged
varying value ranges, a standard normalization process is
 once it occurs.
conducted on the prediction error as follows:
 Erri (t) − µi
 si (t) = (24)
 σi B. Experimental Setup
where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of Erri (t), 1) Metrics: We use precision (Prec), recall (Rec), and F1
respectively. score (F1) to evaluate the performance of our method and the
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

baselines from various perspectives. Then, it conducts time series
 TP prediction and anomaly detection based on the predicted
 Prec = (26)
 TP + FP values.
 TP 14) MGCLAD [18]: This method achieves anomaly detec-
 Rec = (27) tion by concurrently learning intra- and intersignal graph
 TP + FN
 Prec ∗ Rec structures, capturing temporal context and dependencies
 F1 = 2 ∗ (28) between signals. It performs anomaly detection by com-
 Prec + Rec
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the number of true positives, paring inputs and reconstructing outputs.
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively. 15) GSLAD [20]: This method uses a fully parameterized
 2) Baselines: We compare our method with 12 machine and GSL method and uses diffusion graph convolution netdeep learning methods, including AE, IF, DAGMM, LSTM- works to detect anomalies.
NDT, LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, OmniAnomaly, USAD, 3) Experimental Setting: Our main experimental param-
MTAD-GAT, GDN, FuSAGNet, GTA, MEGLAD, MGCLAD, eter settings are shown in Table II. The DTW distance
and GSLAD. threshold ε is set to 0.5 for the SWaT dataset and 0.6 for
 1) AE: In this method, the input data are reconstructed by the remaining three datasets according to STGODE [39].
 an autoencoder, and the resulting reconstruction error is In addition, the Gumbel-Softmax function is implemented
 used as the anomaly score. by torch.nn.functional, where the temperature parameter τ is
 2) IF: Isolation forest is a tree-based anomaly detection initialized to 1 and progressively approaches 0 during training.
 algorithm that effectively identifies anomalies or outliers All the experiments were carried out in Python 3.8, PyTorch
 in datasets that differ significantly from the majority. 1.10, and CUDA version 11.3 on a server equipped with an
 3) DAGMM [28]: This method combines deep autoen- Intel1 Xeon1 Platinum 8255c CPU, NVIDIA RTX 3090 24-GB
 coders with Gaussian mixture models to capture the GPU, 90-GB memory, and 80 GB of hard disk space.
 underlying distribution of normal data and identify 4) Baseline Method Parameter Settings: For the baseline
 anomalies based on reconstruction errors. methods, we set the sliding window size ω in GDN and
 4) LSTM-NDT [22]: This method uses LSTM to capture FuSAGNet to 5, and GTA to 60.
 contextual information and dependencies in sequential
 data for anomaly detection.
 5) LSTM-VAE [26]: This method projects multimodal C. Detection Performance
 observations and time dependencies into a latent space As shown in Table III, our method outperforms the
 and reconstructs the expected distribution using an baseline approaches significantly. Compared with the tra-
 LSTM-based VAE. ditional CNN and LSTM anomaly detection methods (i.e.,
 6) MAD-GAN [24]: This method uses LSTM as the under- IF, DAGMM, LSTM-NDT, LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, Omnilying model in a GAN framework to capture the time Anomaly, USAD), our method uses spatial and temporal
 series data temporal correlation. GNNs to effectively extract the relationship between indica-
 7) OmniAnomaly [27]: This method is a priori-driven tors. Compared with the latest GSL-based anomaly detection
 stochastic model used to detect timestamp anomalies, methods (such as GDN, FuSAGNet, GTA, MEGLAD,
 directly returning the reconstruction probability. MGCLAD, and DPGLAD), our method achieves the highest
 8) USAD: This method trains an encoder–decoder frame- average F1 score. This is because our method attains a better
 work in an adversarial manner to achieve fast and balance between prediction accuracy and anomaly scores,
 efficient training. while enhancing the learned graph’s quality using the DTW
 9) MTAD-GAT [30]: This method regards the relationships prior graph.
 between indicators as a complete graph and uses a GAT All the methods achieved low performances on the WADI
 to detect anomalies. dataset, because it has a longer length, more indicators, and
 10) GDN [8]: This method constructs a graph structure lower anomaly rate than other datasets, as shown in Table II.
 using pairwise cosine similarities between nodes and While MGCLAD demonstrates a superior performance in
 uses attention GNNs to learn dependencies between time WADI, its reliance on GNN as an encoder for learning
 series and execute prediction. latent representations restricts the model’s representational and
 11) FuSAGNet [10]: This method learns the graph structure generalization capacities. In contrast, our approach outperusing the pairwise cosine similarity between recursive forms MGCLAD across the SWaT, SMAP, and MSL datasets,
 sensor embeddings. It obtains the input data’s sparse underscoring its broader applicability.
 representation using a sparse autoencoder and inserts it Moreover, to underscore our method’s robustness, we perinto a GAT to execute sensor behavior prediction. form multiple experiments and present a box plot, illustrating
 12) GTA [16]: This method automatically learns the graph the F1 scores on all four datasets. The experimental results
 structure using a direct method and uses graph convo- are depicted in Fig. 6. Notably, the F1 scores generated by
 lution and a transformer-based architecture to capture our method consistently demonstrate a high level of coherence
 temporal dependencies. across all four datasets, underscoring its impressive stability.
 13) MEGLAD [19]: This method uses three different GSL
 methods to learn the relationships between indicators 1 Registered Trademark.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II
 E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETER S ETTING

 TABLE III
 P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE ON THE F OUR DATASETS

 TABLE IV
 P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

 similar sensors to construct the prior graph
 xi • x j
 cos x i , x j =
 
 (29)
 xi • x j
 j = 1, j ∈ topk cos x , x
 Ai,COS .
 i j
 
 (30)
 The predictor is same as ensemble predictor (i.e., the COS +
 Ensemble function).
 The experimental results are shown in Table IV. When the
 DTW prior graph is replaced by the COS one, performance
 decreases across all the datasets. This decrease in performance
 is because the DTW prior graph captures delay correlation,
 thereby avoiding the noise that may be present in the prior
 graph generated by the cosine distance. Therefore, our pro-
Fig. 6. F1 score distributions on the four datasets. posed anomaly detection method outperforms the COS prior
 graph. This further demonstrates our proposed DTW prior
 graph’s effectiveness.
 2) Predictor Ablation Experiment: To demonstrate the
D. Ablation Experiments ensemble predictor’s effectiveness, we conduct experiments
 using a single DCRNN or STGCN predictor with the DTW
 To validate the DTW prior graph and ensemble predictor’s prior graph. As shown in Table IV, the single predictor’s
efficacy, we conduct a series of ablation experiments. anomaly detection performance is lower than that of the
 1) Prior Graph Ablation Experiment: The DTW prior ensemble predictor. This is because a single predictor cannot
graph is replaced by a COS one, which compares sensor meet the requirements for high accuracy and stable anomaly
similarity using cosine distance. Then, we select the top-k most scores during anomaly detection tasks simultaneously.
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

Fig. 7. Ensemble predictor anomaly score distribution. The ensemble Fig. 8. Impact of window size.
predictor’s anomaly scores range from 1 to 6. In comparison to the single
DCRNN predictor, this predictor demonstrates more concentrated anomaly
scores. Furthermore, it exhibits lower anomaly scores when compared with
the single STGCN predictor.

Moreover, we highlight the overall anomaly score distribution
of the ensemble predictor in the WADI dataset, as shown
in Fig. 7. When comparing Figs. 7 and 3, the ensemble
predictor concentrates the anomaly scores ranging from 1 to 6,
whereas the single DCRNN one has anomaly scores ranging from 1 to 11. Similarly, in the comparison between
Figs. 7 and 4, the ensemble predictor achieves lower prediction
errors than the single STGCN one, which ranges from 11 to 16.
The ensemble predictor can effectively balance the requirements of high prediction accuracy and stable anomaly scores,
leading to improved overall performance.
 3) Graph Learning Loss Function Ablation Experiment: Fig. 9. Impact of prediction weight parameter.
To verify the graph learning loss function’s effectiveness,
we perform an ablation experiment where we exclude it from
 size of 60 can obscure anomalies within a large dataset,
the total loss calculation, referred to as “w/o GSL loss.”
 making anomaly detection more challenging.
 The experimental results are shown in Table IV. Relying
 2) Prediction Weight Parameter: We introduce prediction
solely on prediction loss backpropagation to update the graph
 weight parameter on the four datasets. During this experiment,
structure, without the support of prior graphs, results in a
 we adjust λ1 from 0.2 to 0.8. The experimental results are
notable decrease in performance. This underscores the critical
 shown in Fig. 9.
importance of incorporating graph learning loss into the overall
 For the SWaT, SMAP, and MSL datasets, the prediction
function.
 weight parameter λ1 slightly impacts the performance. For
 the WADI dataset, MSTGAD with λ1 = 0.5 exhibits the
E. Parameter Influence most effective performance. A value of λ1 = 0.5 indicates
 To assess our method’s stability across various parameters, that both the subpredictors contribute equally to the final
the impact of hyperparameters on model performance is ana- prediction result. Moreover, the DCRNN subpredictor controls
lyzed. the overall prediction accuracy, while the STGCN one ensures
 1) Window Size: In this experiment, we set the window the stability of the overall prediction results. Optimal anomaly
lengths w to 10, 12, 15, 30, and 60. The MSTGAD perfor- detection performance is typically attained when these two
mance with different window sizes is displayed in Fig. 8. aspects are in equilibrium.
 The experimental results demonstrate that the window size 3) DTW Distance Threshold in the Prior Graph: To assess
influences the anomaly detection performance. For the SMAP the influence of the DTW distance’s threshold on performance,
and MSL datasets, the window size slightly impacts anomaly we conduct an experiment to identify the optimal parameter.
detection, resulting in a relatively stable F1 score. However, The DTW distance’s threshold ranges from 0.2 to 1.0. A low
for the SWaT and WADI datasets, increasing the window threshold signifies a denser prior graph structure, whereas a
size initially boosts the F1 score before declining. With a high value indicates a sparse prior graph structure. We comwindow size of 10, the historical information is insufficient to pare the impact of various threshold values by training the
effectively support anomaly detection. Conversely, a window model on the four datasets and evaluating their performance.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE V
 P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE FOR D IFFERENT DTW D ISTANCE T HRESHOLDS

Fig. 10. Partial graph structure learned using the SWaT dataset (left). The ground truth and prediction values of the related sensors (right).

 The experimental results are shown in Table V. When the
DTW distance exceeds 1 or falls below 0.2, a notable deterioration in the model’s performance occurs. This is primarily due
to the fact that overly sparse or dense prior graphs do not effectively facilitate GSL. An excessively sparse prior adjacency
matrix decreases the essential information required for guiding
the graph structure learner to understand the relationships
between the indicators. Conversely, an overly dense adjacency
matrix contains redundant information, making it challenging
for the graph structure learner to differentiate crucial edges or
relationships among indicators. Therefore, the DTW distance
threshold is set to 0.5 for the SWaT dataset and 0.6 for the
remaining three datasets.

F. Case Study Fig. 11. Indicator values of the WADI dataset.
 We conduct a case study to evaluate the learned graph,
as shown in Fig. 10. Fig. 10 (Left) is a partial graph structure
learned using our method, and Fig. 10 (Right) is the ground VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
truth and prediction of related sensors obtained with our
method. Specifically, the sensor AIT-202 was attacked from In this article, we propose the MSTGAD method. We incorthe timestamp 43 734 to 43 771, which are marked in pink. Due porate the DTW distance metric to measure the similarity
to the interactions between sensors during the water treatment between time series pairs, effectively capturing the delay
process, AIT-202 was attacked, leading to the shutdown of correlations in MTS and obtaining a more accurate prior graph.
P-203 in the dosing pump. Due to several water treatment Simultaneously, using an ensemble predictor with multiple
steps, AIT-501, an osmotic conductivity analyzer, was finally graph convolutions, we effectively predict sensor behavior
affected at timestamp 43 850, as shown in Fig. 10 (Right). and significantly improve anomaly score stability. Compared
 Our model accurately predicts the changes in AIT-501, with the baselines on the four public datasets, our proposed
thereby demonstrating our model’s effectiveness. Moreover, method achieves the best performance. In future work, we can
Fig. 10 (Left) accurately shows the relationship between the consider more efficient GSL strategies to further enhance
three sensors in the learned graph. model performance.
HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION 3500714

 A PPENDIX [21] H. Yu et al., “Regularized graph structure learning with semantic
 knowledge for multi-variates time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint
 The WADI dataset includes 127 indicators. Fig. 11 illus- Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2362–2368.
trates the sensor values in the WADI dataset. The indicator [22] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non-
(2B_AIT_002_PV) exhibits a sharp increase from 0.05 to parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
267 at timestamp 8000. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
 [23] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
 R EFERENCES Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 [24] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 [1] Y. Liu, Q. Li, and K. Wang, “Revealing the degradation patterns Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
 of lithium-ion batteries from impedance spectroscopy using varia- adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
 tional auto-encoders,” Energy Storage Mater., vol. 69, May 2024, 2019, pp. 703–716.
 Art. no. 103394. [25] K.-J. Jeong, J.-D. Park, K. Hwang, S.-L. Kim, and W.-Y. Shin, “Two-
 [2] X. Yu, T. Ai, and K. Wang, “Application of nanogenerators in acoustics stage deep anomaly detection with heterogeneous time series data,” IEEE
 based on artificial intelligence and machine learning,” APL Mater., Access, vol. 10, pp. 13704–13714, 2022.
 vol. 12, no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 020602. [26] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 [3] S. He, Z. Li, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Intelligent detection for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 key performance indicators in industrial-based cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5799–5809, Aug. 2021. [27] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 [4] S. He et al., “Fine-grained multivariate time series anomaly detection in detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 IoT,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 5027–5047, 2023. network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 [5] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, Jun. 2020. [28] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
 [6] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 opportunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036. pp. 1–10.
 [7] D. Chai, L. Wang, and Q. Yang, “Bike flow prediction with [29] Q. He, Y. J. Zheng, C. L. Zhang, and H. Y. Wang, “MTAD-TF:
 multi-graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGSPA- Multivariate time series anomaly detection using the combination of
 TIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2018, pp. 397–400, doi: temporal pattern and feature pattern,” Complexity, vol. 2020, pp. 1–9,
 10.1145/3274895.3274896. Oct. 2020.
 [8] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection [30] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 May 2021, pp. 4027–4035. Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
 [9] R. Gao, W. He, L. Yan, D. Liu, Y. Yu, and Z. Ye, “Hybrid graph [31] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao,
 transformer networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” “Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and
 J. Supercomput., vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 642–669, Jan. 2024. localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell.,
[10] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representa- May 2021, pp. 7–12.
 tions for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th [32] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE
 pp. 2977–2986. Access, vol. 10, pp. 40967–40978, 2022.
[11] W. Zhang, P. He, C. Qin, F. Yang, and Y. Liu, “A graph attention [33] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
 network-based model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
 J. Supercomput., vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 8529–8549, Apr. 2024. series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 162,
 2022, pp. 3621–3633.
[12] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
 graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” [34] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023. anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[13] S. He, G. Li, J. Wang, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Uni-directional
 graph structure learning-based multivariate time series anomaly detec- [35] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
 tion with dynamic prior knowledge,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 2, detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
 pp. 1–17, May 2024. Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
 [36] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
[14] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
 for spoken word recognition,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal
 detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
 Process., vol. ASSP-26, no. 1, pp. 43–49, Feb. 1978.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
 [37] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
[15] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for mulnetworks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc.
 tivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
 vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
 [38] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
[16] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
 graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
 Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–24.
 detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 [39] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE
 Jun. 2021.
 networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
[17] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global–local association
 Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2021, pp. 364–373.
 discrepancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, May 2024.
[18] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive
 learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Shiming He received the B.S. degree in information
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Apr. 2023. security and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
[19] S. He, G. Li, Q. Guo, and K. Xie, “Multi-graph structure learning- and technology from Hunan University, Changsha,
 based multivariate time series anomaly detection with extended prior China, in 2006 and 2013, respectively.
 knowledge,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat. Work She is currently an Associate Professor with the
 Design (CSCWD), May 2024, pp. 109–114. School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Tech-
[20] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series nology, Changsha. Her research interests include
 anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric consumer machine learning, data analysis, and anomaly detecapplications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–15,
 tion.
 May 2024.
3500714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Qingqing Guo received the B.S. degree from Hunan Kun Xie (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 Agricultural University, Changsha, China, in 2022. in computer application from Hunan University,
 He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer Changsha, China, in 2007.
 technology with Changsha University of Science and She has published more than 100 articles in major
 Technology, Changsha. journals and conference proceedings, including jour-
 His research interests include deep learning, data nals such as IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
 analysis, and anomaly detection. N ETWORKING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE
 C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUT-
 ERS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND
 D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS , and IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON S ERVICES C OMPUTING, and conferences, including
 SIGMOD, INFOCOM, ICDCS, SECON, DSN, and IWQoS. Her research
 interests include cover network measurement, network security, big data,
 and AI.

 Pradip Kumar Sharma (Senior Member, IEEE)
 received the bachelor’s degree in information technology in 2009, the Master of Technology degree in
 computer science in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in
 secure computing in 2019.
 He is a highly Esteemed Academician and
 Researcher known for his expertise in Cybersecurity
 and Artificial Intelligence. He is currently serving
 Genxin Li received the B.S. degree from Jiangxi
 as an Associate Professor of Cybersecurity & AI at
 Science and Technology Normal University, Nanthe Department of Computing Science, University
 chang, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
 of Aberdeen, U.K. His academic journey is char-
 M.S. degree in computer science and technology
 acterised by a steadfast pursuit of excellence. His professional background
 with Changsha University of Science and Technolencompasses roles such as Research Fellow and Software Engineer, reflecting
 ogy, Changsha, China.
 a blend of academic and industry experience. Throughout his career, he has
 His research interests include deep learning, data
 shown a strong interest in advancing research in areas such as privacy-aware
 analysis, and anomaly detection.
 AI, blockchain, edge computing, the IoT security, and critical infrastructure
 security, earning recognition through various research projects and grants.
 Dr. Sharma received the awards from EPSRC and Innovate U.K.