IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3518513

 One-Class Classification Constraint
 in Reconstruction Networks for Multivariate
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Jiazhen Li , Zhenhua Yu , Qingchao Jiang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zhixing Cao

 Abstract— Detecting the anomalies in multivariate time α Attention score in the self-attention
series (MTS) data is crucial for maintaining the stability of mechanism.
industrial manufacturing processes and biochemical operations. α att Linear feedforward network. Used to
However, current methods often focus on capturing the normal calculate the attention score.
patterns of training data while overlooking the potential of σ (·) Activation function (e.g., ReLU).
latent representations. This research introduces the hypersphere
constraint network (HSC), an innovative self-supervised model f encoder (·) Encoder function.
for anomaly detection in MTS. This approach uniquely inte- H Number of heads used in multihead
grates a one-class classification framework to regulate latent attention.
distribution. First, the HSC employs a temporal convolutional R Radius of the hypersphere in latent space.
network (TCN) and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to extract
 X
 b Reconstructed input data.
latent representations of input data, imposing constraints on the
latent distribution to achieve a one-class loss. Second, a self- x̂ nt Reconstructed feature data at time step t for
attention mechanism is applied to reconstruct the input data the nth variable.
and calculate the reconstruction loss. Anomalies are identified WMLP , bMLP Learnable parameters in MLP.
by combining the one-class loss with the reconstruction loss. β Hyperparameter balancing one-class and
By integrating one-class classification with a reconstruction-based
 reconstruction loss.
method, the HSC significantly increases sensitivity to anomalous
data, enhancing the distinction between normal and abnormal
data. Evaluations on three real-world datasets and a simulated
dataset demonstrate that the HSC model outperforms existing I. I NTRODUCTION
state-of-the-art methods in anomaly detection.
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, deep learning, multivariate
time series (MTS), one-class classification, transformer.
 M ULTIVARIATE time series (MTS) data are of great significance across various domains. In modern industrial
 production, data continuously monitored by sensors reflect the
 operating conditions of manufacturing processes [1]. Similarly,
 N OMENCLATURE in aerospace missions, hundreds of sensors track the real-time
 Xinput Input multivariate time series data. performance of an aircraft [2], [3]. Such sophisticated systems
 xint Input data at time t. require efficient, reliable, and continuous operations, as even
 xtn Input data at time t for the nth variable. subtle anomalies can lead to severe system failures and sigy Output label vector representing anomalies. nificant economic loss [4]. Therefore, prompt identification
 yt Output label at time step t. and early warning of potential anomalies in MTS are critical.
 X Input matrix for the encoder. Efficient MTS anomaly detection methods can assist in timely
 xn Feature vector for the nth variable. discovery of system abnormalities, thereby prompt identific Center of the hypersphere in latent space. cation and early warning of potential anomalies in MTS are
 Z Latent representation matrix. critical. Efficient MTS anomaly detection methods averting
 z Latent representation. drastic consequences.
 Anomaly detection in MTS refers to the identification of
 Received 7 November 2024; accepted 17 December 2024. Date of publica- data that deviate from the expected distribution within a
tion 5 March 2025; date of current version 25 March 2025. This work was collection of interconnected time series [5]. The main chalsupported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under lenges in MTS anomaly detection are threefold. First, in real
Grant 62322309, in part by Shanghai Pilot Program for Basic Research under
Grant 22TQ1400100-16, and in part by Shanghai Science and Technology industrial environments, most data are in a normal state, mak-
Innovation Action Plan under Grant 23S41900500. The Associate Editor coor- ing it labor-intensive to label anomalous data, which render
dinating the review process was Dr. Zhigang Liu. (Corresponding authors: supervised methods unsuitable [6]. Second, MTS anomaly
Qingchao Jiang; Zhixing Cao.)
 The authors are with the Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy detection involves capturing both complex relationships among
Chemical Process, Ministry of Education, East China University of Science variables and temporal dependencies. Therefore, an effective
and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China (e-mail: y30220958@mail.ecust. MTS anomaly detection method must capture both spatial and
edu.cn; y10210100@mail.ecust.edu.cn; qchjiang@ecust.edu.cn; zcao@ecust.
edu.cn). temporal relationships [7]. Lastly, the model must exhibit high
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3548251 sensitivity to the distribution of anomalous data and give a
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

clear distinction between outputs for normal and anomalous normal system states, using deep embeddings to optimize
data [8], [9]. filter parameters and detect anomalies based on reconstruction
 To address the MTS anomaly detection problem, several errors from the filtered signal. USAD [5] employs a dual
feature-based methods from classical unsupervised machine reconstruction strategy with variational autoencoders (VAEs)
learning have been developed. OC-SVM [10], [11] reframes to learn the normal data distribution and detect anomalies
the anomaly detection task as a one-class classification chal- by identifying deviations from these learned distributions.
lenge, while SVDD [12] projects latent representations of data In MAD-GAN [31], LSTM functions as both generator
into a hypersphere, classifying normal and anomalous data and discriminator in a GAN [32], combining the discrimbased on their positions within this hypersphere. Clustering inator’s judgment with the generator’s reconstruction loss
strategies such as K -means [13] and DBSCAN [14] desig- to score anomalies. The TranAD [33] method employs an
nate samples as anomalies when their distance from cluster encoder–decoder structure with adversarial training to amplify
centroids exceed a predefined threshold. Principal compo- reconstruction errors and improve detection performance.
nent analysis (PCA) can be employed to extract statistical CAE-AD [34] utilizes a contrastive autoencoder framework
models of normal data, with anomalies identified based on with data augmentation in both time and frequency domains
deviations from principal component scores [15]. TTAD [16] to achieve robust representations. MANomaly [35] employs a
uses K -means [17] or SMOTE [18] algorithms to augment mutual adversarial network for data reconstruction and implethe test data, thereby boosting the efficiency and robustness ments a high anomaly suppression mechanism to enhance its
of anomaly detection. These methods use an unsupervised effectiveness. D3R [36] uses noise diffusion and a designed
approach to achieve anomaly detection. However, they only attention structure to address the challenges of MTS anomaly
capture relationships among variables and neglect temporal detection in unstable environments. AT-DCAEP [37] combines
relationships. convolutional autoencoders and attention mechanisms to better
 Recently, deep learning has gained widespread atten- capture temporal relationships. In addition to the methods
tion for its exceptional ability to capture both intervari- mentioned above, recent approaches have integrated graph
able relationships and temporal dependencies simultaneously. neural networks to capture relationships among non-Euclidean
Current mainstream MTS anomaly detection methods can data variables [38], [39]. For example, in the GReLeN [40],
be divided into three categories: prediction-based meth- the VAE [41] serves as an overall framework, and graph
ods, reconstruction-based methods, and distribution-based neural networks are integrated to learn dependencies across
methods [19], [20]. different features. MTAD-GAT [42] leverages graph attention networks (GATs) to capture both temporal dependencies
A. Prediction-Based Methods and intervariable relationships for effective MTS anomaly
 detection.
 Detect anomalies by analyzing prediction errors. LSTM-
NDT [21] employs LSTM [22] networks and combines
them with unsupervised dynamic thresholding techniques for C. Distribution-Based Methods
anomaly detection. GDN [23] utilizes graph neural networks to
 Introduce normalizing flows, which use a series of invertassess the interconnections across sensors and performs time
 ible transformations to map complex distributions to simpler
series prediction based on attention mechanisms. Deviations
 ones, thereby estimating data probability [43], [44]. A lower
between predicted and actual results are then used to detect
 probability density indicates a higher likelihood of anomalies.
anomalies. The GTA [24] method leverages a Transformer-
 GANF [45] integrates Bayesian networks with normalizing
based architecture to automatically learn graph structures,
 flows to model conditional dependencies among time series,
apply graph convolution, and model temporal dependencies for
 enabling effective density estimation and anomaly detection
effective MTS anomaly detection. DTAAD [25] model comin MTS. MTGFlow [46] employs dynamic graph structure
bines temporal convolutional network (TCN) and Transformer
 learning and entity-aware normalizing flows for unsupervised
models [26] and improves prediction accuracy through global
 anomaly detection, enhancing anomaly detection. Compared to
and local temporal convolutions via Dual TCN. Additionally,
 classical methods, deep learning approaches can better capture
it leverages meta-learning to enhance anomaly detection perthe temporal features of data.
formance in scenarios with small sample data.
 However, these methods primarily focus on capturing the
 characteristics of normal data, without emphasizing the dis-
B. Reconstruction-Based Methods tinctions between normal and anomalous data and may not
 Identify anomalies by analyzing reconstruction errors [27]. fully utilize latent data representations.
DAGMM [28] combines a deep autoencoder and a Gaus- To address these existing issues, this article proposes the
sian mixture model to identify anomalies in MTS by hypersphere constraint network (HSC) model for anomaly
modeling data distributions and detecting deviations using detection. First, to better understand the temporal dependenenergy-based representations. MEGA [29] leverages multi- cies, the HSC model uses a TCN encoder to identify temporal
scale discrete wavelet transform and graph convolutional dependencies. Second, to fully leverage the data in the hidnetwork modules to enhance autoencoder architecture, effec- den space, the model applies constraints within the latent
tively capturing subtle anomalies. KalmanAE [30] leverages representation, differentiating normal from abnormal data to
an autoencoder-optimized Kalman filter to adaptively estimate amplify the reconstruction loss. Finally, to better extract the
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

features in the latent space, the decoder uses a self-attention
mechanism that combines the GAT [47] and transformer
model [26] to effectively extract features and reconstruct the
input data. Finally, anomaly detection is achieved by merging
the reconstruction and one-class classification losses.
 The contributions of this research are as follows.
 1) This study introduces a novel network model
 named HSC. By integrating one-class classification with
 a reconstruction-based neural network, the HSC model
 effectively separates normal and anomalous data in the
 latent space. This separation amplifies reconstruction
 Fig. 1. Overall structure of the TCN model.
 errors and enhances the model’s anomaly detection
 capability.
 2) To enable effective reconstruction of the input data and Dilated convolution [50] enables TCN to capture long-range
 capture the relationships between multivariate data, HSC dependencies in sequence data. The formula is expressed as
 utilizes a self-attention mechanism that combines the follows:
 GAT and Transformer models to extract features in the K
 X −1
 latent representation. yt = wk · xt−d·k (2)
 3) In evaluations conducted across three publicly avail- k=0
 able real-world datasets and six penicillin fermentation where d is the dilation factor, i is the current layer in the
 test datasets, the HSC model outperformed other hidden state, and d = 2i . The greater the number of hidden
 state-of-the-art methods. These results underscore the layers, the longer the temporal dependencies that can be
 effectiveness of the HSC model in anomaly detection captured.
 tasks. Residual connections [51] are widely used in deep learn-
 The remainder of this article is organized as fol- ing to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. To capture
lows: Section II presents the preliminary knowledge longer sequences, TCN require stacking of multiple layers.
of HSC. Section III elaborates on the details of the proposed To maintain training stability, TCN also incorporate residual
method. Section IV evaluates the effectiveness of the HSC connections. The formula is expressed as follows:
model on three public datasets and six penicillin fermentation
test datasets, assessing its ability to amplify the distinction y = σ (x + F(x)) (3)
between anomalous and normal data. Section V discusses the where x is the input, F(x) represents the transformation
scalability and robustness of the HSC model and explores applied to x, and σ is the activation function. The addition
potential future research directions. Finally, Section VI pro- (x + F(x)) provides a direct gradient path, improving the
vides a summary of this study. training stability of deep networks.
 The overall architecture of the TCN is illustrated in Fig. 1.
 II. P RELIMINARY W ORK The orange circles represent the nodes observed at the
 output yt . Through multiple layers of dilated convolutions, the
 In this study, two key methods are employed: TCN [40]
 model effectively captures long-range sequence features.
and an attention mechanism. Both approaches have proven
effective in time series analysis.
 B. Attention Mechanism
 The design of the attention mechanism is inspired by the
A. TCN Model cognitive abilities of humans, where information processing
 The TCN model, introduced by Bai et al. [48], is an is not uniform across all data. Humans identify key informaeffective method for capturing temporal data features using tion and allocate additional cognitive resources to processing
convolutional networks. The TCN consists of three key com- and understanding crucial aspects. Similarly, the attention
ponents: causal convolutions [49], dilated convolutions [50], mechanism extracts significant features and allocates resources
and residual connections [51]. efficiently [52].
 Causal convolution [49] prevents the leakage of future The canonical attention mechanism proposed by
information by introducing an appropriate offset during the Vaswani et al. [26] is used to overcome the limitations
convolution operation. This ensures that the output yt depends of traditional RNN methods and capture information from
only on the current and past data. The corresponding formula all positions in long sequence. The principle of obtaining an
is given as follows: attention score is given by
 QK T
  
 K −1
 X Attention(Q, K , V ) = softmax √ V (4)
 yt = wk · xt−k (1) dk
 k=0
 where dk is a scaling factor. Q, K , and V represent the query,
where xt−k represents the data at time t − k, K denotes the key, and value, respectively, derived from the input data to
kernel size, and wk is the convolution kernel weight. calculate attention scores.
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 B. Model Overview
 The HSC model utilizes an encoder–decoder architecture,
 as illustrated in Fig. 3, and is a reconstruction-based neural
 network designed for anomaly detection in MTS.
 Encoder: The encoder processes the input data through a
 sliding window method and employs a TCN model to capture
 temporal dependencies in MTS. After applying the TCN,
 the data are transformed into a latent space through linear
 mapping. The distribution in latent space is controlled by a
 modified one-class classification loss function to better handle
 latent representations.
 Decoder: The primary function of the decoder is to reconstruct the input data from the latent representation and compute
 the reconstruction loss. The core of the decoder network is
 a self-attention mechanism, which differs from the canonical
Fig. 2. Overall structure of the multihead attention mechanism.
 version by incorporating the GAT [47] model. This incorporation enhances the flexibility of attention score calculation.
 To enhance model expressivity, the multihead attention
 The final loss score, which combines the reconstruction loss
mechanism is often used. This mechanism is a fundamental
 and the one-class classification loss, effectively evaluates data
and pivotal module within the Transformer model. It runs
 abnormalities.
the attention mechanism in parallel multiple times, applying
different linear transformations to the original Q, K , and V .
This approach captures various aspects of the input data, C. Encoder and One-Class Classification Loss
enriching the representation of the input. The concept can be In the encoder module, two primary tasks are performed.
formulated as follows: The first task is to set the center of the data in the latent
 space. In this study, the method from the COUTA [53] model
 MultiHead(Q, K , V ) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O
   is adopted, where the initial encoder output point is set as the
 headi = Attention QWiQ , K WiK , V WiV data center.
 The second task involves finding a latent space representa-
 (5)
 tion for the decoder input, similar to standard encoder–decoder
where WiQ , WiK , WiV are the projection matrices for the Q, K , models. To better capture temporal features, the encoder of
and V , respectively, for each attention head i.The operation of the HSC model employs both TCN and multilayer percepmultihead attention is illustrated in Fig. 2. tron (MLP). As represented by (6), these two modules are
 used to derive the latent space representation
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
 (K ) (K −1) (1)
 h i
A. Problem Statement f encoder = f TCN ◦ f TCN ◦ · · · ◦ f TCN (X) WMLP1 + bMLP1
 In the MTS anomaly detection problem, the input data are (6)
denoted by Xinput = (xin1 , xin2 , xin3 , . . . , xinT ) ∈ RT ×N , where
T represents the number of timestamps in the input time where K represents the number of TCN layers used in the
series and N equals the number of features. The data at each encoder, WMLP1 and bMLP1 are the parameters of the MLP.
timestamp t are represented as xint = (xt1 , xt2 , xt3 , . . . , xtN ) ∈ To fully utilize the latent representation, HSC adopts a
R N , where N = 1 for univariate time series and N ≥ 1 for method similar to SVDD [12], projecting normal data into
MTS. The primary aim of MTS anomaly detection is to the hypersphere’s interior. The loss function for this task is
identify unusual deviations within the data. given by
 Following the data processing method described in previous Lossorig = Ex∼X [∥ f (x) − c ∥2 ] (7)
works [23], [31], [40], [42], continuous data segments X =
(x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , x L ) ∈ R L×W ×N are used as inputs for HSC. where f (·) the denotes the feature extraction process, and c
These segments are obtained by applying a sliding window represents the center of the hypersphere. Optimizing this loss
method, characterized by a window size W , a stride S, and function ensures normal data maps inside the hypersphere,
the number of segments L = (floor(T − W )/S) + 1, where while anomalies are mapped outside.
floor(·) denotes rounding down. However, using (7) as the loss function can central-
 The output is y = (y1 , y2 , y3 , . . . , yT ) ∈ RT , yt ∈ {0, 1}. ize normal data near the hypersphere’s center, reducing its
This vector represents the anomaly detection results at each radius and causing similar representations. This diminishes
timestamp. Specifically, an output value of 1 indicates an unique features and compromises the effectiveness of TCN.
anomaly at time t, while a value of 0 signifies that no anomaly Consequently, the downstream decoder struggles to extract
is detected. reliable features for reconstruction. An optimized loss func-
 The variables used in our proposed method are summarized tion, as shown in (8), addresses this by projecting data onto the
in Nomenclature. hypersphere’s surface, preserving more features and alleviating
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

Fig. 3. Overall structure of HSC.

 original input is to the reconstructed output. The architecture
 of the decoder consists of two fundamental components: a
 self-attention mechanism and linear mapping.
 To some extent, self-attention can be viewed as a self-loop
 in the GAT model. The key difference between these two
 mechanisms lies in how they compute the attention score.
 As illustrated in (4), the canonical attention uses the dot
 product to compute the attention score. In GAT, the attention
 score is computed using a feedforward neural network. This
 method of computing the attention score is known as the
 “additive attention mechanism” also referred to as “Bahdanau
 attention” [54]. Compared with the canonical attention mechanism, this method provides greater flexibility and the ability
 to learn complex patterns.
 In the HSC model, the attention score is calculated as
 follows:
 α = σ (α att
 T
 (wz)) (9)
Fig. 4. Comparison of the effects of original one-class classification loss
function and optimized loss function in HSC. (a) Effect of the original loss where w ∈ R V ×W
 represents a transformation matrix. The actifunction. (b) Effect of the optimized loss function in HSC.
 vation function σ (·) computes α, the attention score α att ∈ RV
 represents the parameters of the feedforward network used to
the issue of feature disappearance calculate the attention score. These parameters are updated
 iteratively during network training.
 Z = f encoder (X), Z = (z1 , z2 , . . . , z N )
 After obtaining the attention score, the output is calculated
 Lossone-class = Ez∼Z (||z − c|| − R)2 (8) using a layer of linear transformation, with parameters deterwhere R is the hypersphere radius, zi ∈ R W ×1
 represents the mined by wout ∈ R N ×V . The output denoted as z′ ∈ R N is
latent representation after the encoder module. calculated according to the following equation:
 The effects of the original one-class loss function and the z′ = σ [wout (α · wz)]. (10)
optimized loss function are illustrated in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a)
shows the effect of applying the original loss function to the HSC also incorporates a multihead attention mechanism.
latent representation, where normal data tend to centralize The multihead attention score is computed as follows:
around the hypersphere’s center during training. In contrast, exp σ α att
   T
 (wh z)
 
Fig. 4(b) demonstrates the effect of the optimized loss function αh = P H h
 (11)
 k=1 exp σ α attk (w z)
   T 
 k
as defined by (8), where the data are projected onto the surface
of the hypersphere. This approach significantly preserves more where H represents the number of heads. The SoftMax operfeatures of the data by ensuring that the unique characteristics ation is applied after calculating the attention score for each
of data point are maintained on the hypersphere’s surface. head. In the GAT model, SoftMax operation is applied across
 adjacent nodes. However, self-attention inherently applies a
D. Decoder and Reconstruction Loss self-loop graph, where adjacent nodes essentially refer to
 In decoder, the primary task is to reconstruct data by themselves. This can result in all output attention scores
using the previously obtained latent representation. The extent converging to 1. For this situation to be avoided, the SoftMax
of reconstruction is determined by comparing how similar the operation is applied across each head rather than each node.
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 The final output of the self-attention module is computed TABLE I
based on the calculated scores, following the same approach as D ETAILS OF THE DATASETS
canonical attention. The output of each head is concatenated
and linearly transformed using Wout ∈ R N ×(V ·H ) . After passing
through an activation function σ (·) and an MLP transformation
which is defined by WMLP2 and bMLP2 , the final output is
    
 H
 x̂ = WMLP2 σ Wout || αh · wz + bMLP2 . (12)
 h=1

 The reconstructed data bX = (b x2 ,b
 x1 ,b xT ) ∈ RT ×N
 x3 , . . . ,b
are obtained. By comparing the reconstructed output with the
input data using MSE, the reconstruction loss can be computed
as follows: dataset [3], Server Machine dataset (SMD) [1], and the Peni-
 T N
 1 XX n 2 cillin Simulation dataset [57].
 Lossrecon = x̂ t − xtn . (13) The first three datasets are real-world datasets commonly
 T × N t=1 n=1
 utilized in the field of anomaly detection for MTS. These
 datasets were chosen as standard test cases in this research
E. Anomaly Detection because they cover a wide range of characteristic scenarios,
 In HSC, the final error score is calculated by combining the ensuring the generalizability of HSC.
reconstruction loss and the one-class classification loss. A ratio The penicillin simulation dataset, generated based on the
hyperparameter, denoted as β ∈ [0, 1], is used to calculate the simulation platform described in [57], includes 100 batches of
final loss score, as shown in the following equation: normal data used as training data and six batches of test data.
 The test data were designed cover different fault causes, fault
 x − x|| + β × (|| f encoder (x) − c|| − R)2 .
 Score = ||b (14)
 variables, and fault time zones to achieve a comprehensive
 Anomalies are determined based on the final loss score. validation of the proposed method. The characteristics of the
If the score exceeds a predetermined threshold, the associated four datasets are presented in Table I.
timestamp is classified as an anomaly. Most anomaly detection 2) Evaluation Metrics: In the experiments, the precimethods adopt a point adjustment (PA) strategy to refine sion (P), recall (R), F1, and AUC score were adopted as
their outputs and determine a suitable threshold. However, metrics to evaluate the performance of the proposed model.
the details of the PA strategy and threshold-setting method The formulas for these metrics are given by the following
vary depending on the application scenario. For instance, the equations:
method in [55] uses the PA%K method to adjust results for TP
different anomaly types. In [1] and [42], the threshold is Precision = (15)
 TP + FP
dynamically adjusted according to the anomaly scores. TP
 This work primarily emphasizes the network framework Recall = (16)
 TP + FN
design for efficient MTSs anomaly detection. Hence, HSC Precision × Recall
follows prior works [21], [34], [40], [53], adjusting its results F1 = 2 × (17)
 Precision + Recall
and performs a grid search over potential thresholds, selecting Z 1  
 TP FP
the one yielding the best F1 scores. AUC = d . (18)
 0 TP + FN FP + TN
 IV. E XPERIMENTS In the task of anomaly detection, TP refers to correctly
 The effectiveness of the proposed method was validated flagged anomalies. FP denotes normal data that are incorrectly
through several experiments. First, three public datasets for classified as anomalies, and FN represents actual anomalies
MTS anomaly detection were used as standard test cases that are mistakenly identified as normal data. In MTS anomaly
to demonstrate the method’s capabilities and compare the detection, precision indicates the proportion of correctly idenresults with other methods. Second, ablation studies assessed tified anomalies among all flagged anomalies, while recall
the impact of applying one-class constraints in the latent represents the proportion of detected anomalies among all
space and evaluated the modified attention mechanism in the actual anomalies. The F1 score combines precision and recall,
decoder. Third, parameter sensitivity analysis was conducted providing a balanced measurement. AUC, which measures the
to thoroughly explore the characteristics of HSC. Finally, area under the ROC curve, provides an aggregate performance
a simulated penicillin dataset was used as an application test measure across all classification thresholds.
case to perform a comprehensive analysis of performance
under various anomaly scenarios. B. Standard Test Cases
 1) Benchmark Comparison:
A. Datasets and Metrics a) Baseline models: The efficacy of the proposed method
 1) Datasets: Four datasets were employed to evaluate the was compared with several state-of-the-art methods. The
effectiveness of the proposed method: Secure Water Treatment proposed method incorporates techniques from one-class clas-
(SWaT) [56], the Mars Science Laboratory Rover (MSL) sification, self-attention, autoencoder, and the GAT model.
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF HSC W ITH OTHER BASELINE M ETHODS ON T HREE P UBLIC DATASETS

Therefore, eight methods were selected as benchmarks:
COUTA [53], TranAD [33], GReLeN [40], GDN [23], MTAD-
GAT [42], CAE-AD [34], DeepSVDD [58], and anomaly
transformer [9]. Among these methods, Deep SVDD [58]
and COUTA [53] utilize one-class classification for anomaly
detection. TranAD [33] and anomaly transformer [9] employ
transformer architectures to extract features for anomaly
detection. CAE-AD [34] uses an autoencoder framework
for reconstruction-based anomaly detection. Finally, GRe-
LeN [40], GDN [23], and MTAD-GAT [42] leverage graph
neural networks to achieve high-efficiency anomaly detection. Fig. 5. Log ratio of anomaly-to-normal scores for models.
 b) Results and analysis: The results presented in Table II
are derived from ten independent repeated experiments to
ensure the robustness and reliability of the findings. For space distribution as effectively as HSC. Methods such as
each method, we report the average values along with the GDN, GReLeN, and MTAD-GAT use graph neural networks
corresponding standard deviations. to capture inter-variable relationships. However, their focus
 The HSC model demonstrates outstanding performance on modeling normal data makes it harder to detect subacross all four metrics. Specifically, it achieves the highest tle anomalies. TranAD and Anomaly Transformer, based on
F1 score on all datasets, with improvements of 1.1%, 6.3%, transformer architectures, are more complex and prone to overand 1.4% on the SMD, SWaT, and MSL datasets, respectively, fitting, especially when training data are limited, as seen in the
compared to the second-best method, highlighting its superior SMD and MSL datasets, resulting in suboptimal performance.
anomaly detection capability. In addition to F1 scores, the The proposed HSC model is capable of capturing both tem-
HSC model also achieves the highest AUC scores on all poral dependencies and intervariable relationships. By applythree datasets, with increases of 1.7%, 1.6%, and 2%. The ing a HSC in the latent space, HSC effectively differentiates
model also shows strong competitiveness in terms of precision between normal and anomalous data, enhancing its ability
and recall. Moreover, across ten repeated experiments, the to detect subtle anomalies that may be overlooked by other
standard deviation is consistently below 0.04, demonstrating models. Additionally, compared to purely reconstruction-based
the robustness and stability of the HSC model. Although recall or prediction-based models, HSC benefits from the integration
and precision did not achieve the highest scores across all of one-class classification loss and reconstruction loss, which
datasets, they are still highly competitive. contributes to its robustness.
 Among the compared methods, DeepSVDD underper- c) Anomaly distinction: To validate the effectiveness
formed, primarily because it is not designed for MTS anomaly of HSC in enhancing the distinction between normal and
detection and lacks the ability to capture temporal depen- anomalous data, we first calculate the average score of normal
dencies, focusing only on inter-variable relationships. This data Sn and anomalous data Sa ; then compute the ratio of
limitation impacts its effectiveness in MTS anomaly detection. these two scores. The formula for this calculation is given
COUTA, being a purely one-class classification-based method, by log(Sa /Sn ), The results, as shown in Fig. 5, demonstrate
lacks a sufficient understanding of data distribution com- that HSC achieves the highest distinction between normal and
pared to reconstruction-based models, resulting in relatively anomalous data across all three datasets.
weaker performance. CAE-AD, while using an autoencoder d) Case study: To further demonstrate the effectiveness
and contrastive learning, does not fully utilize the latent of latent space constraints in the HSC model, the machine-1-1
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 7. Comparison of F1 scores between having and not having latent space
 restrictions across the three public datasets.

 Fig. 8. Comparison of F1-score between the using GAT, Transformer as the
 decoder of HSC, and original HSC decoder.

 constraint and assessing its effects on three datasets. The
 results, using F1 as an evaluation metric, are shown in Fig. 7.
 After removing the constraint in the latent space, the overall
 average F1 score decreased by 6.23%. The smallest decrease
 was observed on the SMD dataset, with a 3.9% reduction in
 F1 score. The most significant decrease, 9.5%, was observed
 on the SWaT dataset. These results indicate that applying constraints within the latent space significantly enhances anomaly
 detection capability.
Fig. 6. Case study. (a) Visualization of four dimensions from the machine-1-1 In the HSC model’s decoder, self-attention was employed
dataset, where the black line represents the ground truth, the red line represents for feature extraction. The attention mechanisms of both GAT
the model’s predictions, and the five red-shaded areas indicate the time points
when anomalies occurred. (b) Anomaly scores with latent space constraints
 and the transformer were then integrated into the framework.
applied. (c) Anomaly scores without latent space constraints. The effectiveness of combining these two mechanisms was
 assessed in this study. The self-attention mechanism in the
 decoder was replaced by the attention mechanisms from the
dataset from the SMD benchmark is selected as a case transformer model and GAT. As shown in Fig. 8, the HSC
study. Specific dimensions of the reconstruction results are model achieved the best performance across the three datasets.
visualized, and anomaly scores with and without latent space When the decoder’s self-attention module was substituted with
constraints are compared, as illustrated in Fig. 6. The model GAT, the average F1 score decreased by approximately 3%.
in Fig. 6(a) exhibits robust reconstruction capability for normal When the transformer model was used, the F1 score decreased
data. The results in Fig. 6(b) and (c) indicate that the inclusion by 5.6%. The most significant improvement achieved using
of latent space constraints significantly improves the model’s the HSC model was on the SMD dataset. When GAT and the
ability to distinguish between normal and anomalous data. transformer model were used, the F1 scores were only 88.2%
Notably, in the absence of the HSC, as shown in Fig. 6(c), and 88.6%, respectively; by contrast, the F1 score of the HSC
increased background noise in the anomaly scores is observed, model was 95.1%. These results demonstrate that combining
and high anomaly scores occur after the anomaly ends. These GAT and transformer architectures can effectively improve the
findings highlight the importance of latent space constraints model’s capabilities.
in mitigating noise interference and enhancing the accuracy 3) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: This section anaof anomaly detection. lyzes the sensitivity of the proposed method to two crucial
 2) Ablation Test: The impact of constraining the distribu- hyperparameters: the hypersphere radius R and the ratio
tion of representations in the latent space needs to be assessed. hyperparameter β. The analysis is performed on the SWaT,
Comparative experiments were conducted by removing this MSL (D-14), and SMD (machine-1-1) datasets.
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

 TABLE III
 I NFORMATION ON S IX A BNORMAL S ETTINGS
 IN P ENICILLIN S IMULATION P ROCESS

Fig. 9. Reconstruction loss on different datasets (SWaT, MSL, and SMD)
with varying R values.

 of balancing the one-class loss and reconstruction loss for the
Fig. 10. AUC score on different datasets (SWaT, MSL, and SMD) with model. Setting β between 0.5 and 1 is a reasonable range.
varying β values.
 C. Application Test Case

 a) Hypersphere radius R: Our experiments reveal that The capabilities of the HSC model were also evaluated
the hypersphere radius impacts feature retention and data in this study. In particular, the complex process of penicillin
reconstruction. By varying R from 0 to 3 in increments of 0.1, fermentation was introduced to assess the performance of the
we assessed the reconstruction loss on each dataset, as shown HSC model under various anomalous conditions. This process
in Fig. 9. represents a typical dynamic and multistage batch production
 process with long operational cycles and relatively complex
 1) SWaT: Small radius values cause significant fluctuations
 reactions. The penicillin fermentation simulation platform
 in reconstruction loss. As R increases, the loss stabi-
 “Pensim,” developed by Professor Cinar’s research group [57].
 lizes, indicating that a larger radius ensures consistent
 Pensim simulates growth variations across variables under
 reconstruction performance.
 diverse production conditions, offering a standardized platform
 2) MSL: The reconstruction loss consistently decreases
 for detecting anomalies in multivariate time-series data.
 with an increasing radius, suggesting that a larger R
 In this simulation platform, the duration of the entire ferenhances the model’s reconstruction ability.
 mentation reaction was set to 400 h, with data sampled every
 3) SMD: Although some fluctuations are observed, the
 hour, incorporating 16 variables. The training dataset included
 reconstruction loss generally decreases as the radius
 100 instances of normal fermentation operations. Pensim
 increases, confirming that a larger R reduces reconstrucallows for the introduction of faults in three variables: aeration
 tion errors
 rate, agitation power, and substrate feed rate. These faults are
 In summary, a larger hypersphere radius R helps maintain categorized into step and ramp types, and their magnitude and
consistent and improved reconstruction performance across timing can be artificially set. During simulation, six different
different datasets. sets of anomalous variable data, with specific conditions for
 b) Ratio hyperparameter β: To verify the impact of β on anomaly timing and types, were generated to validate the
the results, β was varied from 0 to 2 in increments of 0.1. The effectiveness of the HSC model, as shown in Table III.
AUC score under different β conditions are shown in Fig. 10. Comparisons were also performed with COUTA [53],
 1) SWaT: The AUC score increases as β approaches 1, TranAD [33], GReLeN [40], GDN [23], MTAD-GAT [42], and
 after which it starts to decline. This indicates that CAE-AD [34], DeepSVDD [58], and anomaly transformer [9].
 a balanced emphasis on both losses leads to optimal The F1 score, precision, recall, and AUC score were used
 anomaly detection performance. as metrics. Each experiment was repeated ten times with
 2) MSL: The AUC score reaches its maximum at β val- different random seeds. The comparative results are displayed
 ues around 0.5. Beyond this point, the performance in Table IV.
 decreases. When β is greater than 1, the AUC score Experimental results indicate that for the first two types of
 remains relatively stable. anomaly patterns, all models were capable of effectively locat-
 3) SMD: The AUC score peaks at β values around 0.6, ing the occurrence of faults. However, the TranAD, GReLeN,
 following this, the AUC score decreases similar to MSL, GDN, DeepSVDD, anomaly transformer, and MTAD-GAT
 though the decline is more gradual. models experienced false positives in the first four rela-
 In summary, excessively large or small β values nega- tively straightforward test datasets, failing to achieve 100%
tively impact the results. This demonstrates the importance precision. By contrast, the COUTA, CAE-AD, and HSC
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF HSC W ITH OTHER BASELINE M ETHODS ON S IX P ENISM DATASETS

models performed flawlessly on the first four datasets, captured
anomalies with precision, and achieved an F1 score of 100%.
 In the last two datasets, where anomalies were subtler and
posed greater detection challenges. The HSC model demonstrated its superior anomaly detection capability. Specifically,
HSC achieved the highest F1 scores on both the Penism5
and Penism6 datasets, with scores of 98.9% and 98.5%,
respectively. The AUC scores for HSC were also the highest: 87.1% on Penism5 and 85.3% on Penism6, representing
improvements of 5.2% and 8.7% over the next best methods,
respectively. Fig. 11. Log ratio of anomaly to normal data scores across models on six
 Penism test datasets.
 a) Anomaly distinction: In Penism dataset, to demonstrate the distinction between normal and anomalous data
for the HSC model, the same calculation was performed for indicate an inability to effectively discriminate between normal
different models on various datasets. The anomaly distinction and anomalous data.
score, log(Sa /Sn ), is presented in Fig. 11. On all six test
datasets, the HSC model consistently achieved the highest V. D ISCUSSION
scores. On the first four datasets, all models could effectively In this section, the discussion focuses on the potential chaldistinguish between normal and anomalous patterns. However, lenges the HSC model may encounter in real-world industrial
the models’ capabilities diverged on the Penism5 and Penism6 environments, particularly regarding its scalability and robustdatasets. In particular, GDN, CAE-AD, GReLeN, DeepSVDD, ness to noise. In addition, the section provides an analysis of
and anomaly transformer, exhibited negative scores which potential future research directions for the HSC model.
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

 degrades in environments characterized by high levels of noise
 interference.

 C. Future Research Directions
 The HSC model has demonstrated strong capabilities in
 detecting MTS anomalies. However, to enhance its effectiveness in real-world production settings and to reduce losses,
 there remains room for improvement.
 First, although the HSC model exhibits strong performance
 in various experiments, its reconstruction effectiveness is
 sensitive to the radius of the hypersphere. Different datasets
 require distinct hypersphere radii, and currently, there is
 no effective method to determine the optimal radius. This
Fig. 12. AUC variation of the SWaT dataset and MSL D-14 dataset under necessitates manual tuning for each dataset based on specific
different noise levels.
 application scenarios. We infer that this sensitivity may stem
 because imposing constraints in the latent space inevitably
A. Scalability leads to the loss of certain important features. Therefore, future
 research could focus on exploring ways to limit the distribution
 The primary computational bottleneck in the HSC model
 of data in the latent space while minimizing feature loss,
stems from two factors: the 1-D convolution operation in the
 in order to reduce the model’s sensitivity to hyperparameters.
TCN and the self-loop attention mechanism.
 Second, current MTS anomaly detection primarily focuses
 The time complexity of the TCN’s 1-D convolution is
 on identifying the moment when an anomaly occurs, providing
O(W · k · N ), where W represents the sliding window length,
 early warnings. However, to more effectively reduce losses,
k is the kernel size, and N is the feature dimension. Given
 early warnings alone are insufficient; root cause analysis is
its linear complexity, the model exhibits good scalability for
 also required. Through root cause analysis, the specific cause
handling long sequence data.
 and location of the anomaly can be quickly identified, enabling
 For the self-loop attention mechanism, the time complexity
 timely intervention and minimizing potential losses. Therefore,
of embedding transformation is O(W · N 2 ). The complexity
 future research could further explore how to integrate anomaly
of computing attention scores is O(W · N ), while applying
 detection with root cause analysis, enhancing the practical
attention weights has a complexity of O(W · N 2 ). Given that
 utility and efficiency of handling anomalies.
the window size can be adjusted, the complexity is primarily
constrained by the number of variables N . VI. C ONCLUSION
 Overall, the computational bottleneck in the HSC model is
 This article proposes a new network architecture, termed
largely determined by the number of variables in the data.
 HSC, designed to address the challenge of anomaly detection
Nevertheless, it is particularly well suited for capturing global
 in MTS. First, HSC combines the one-class classification
relationships within the data, which are critical for MTS
 with reconstruction-based deep learning method to accentuate
anomaly detection tasks.
 the distinctions between normal and anomalous data. Second,
 HSC leverages a self-attention mechanism, integrating the
B. Robustness to Noise Transformer and GAT, to enhance input data reconstruction.
 To assess the robustness of the HSC model in industrial In the end, by combining the one-class classification loss and
scenarios, robustness experiments were performed on the reconstruction loss, HSC computes the final loss score, which
SWaT and MSL D-14 datasets. Gaussian noise with varying serves as a basis for anomaly detection.
intensities was introduced to both datasets, where the noise Extensive experiments conducted on multiple datasets
intensity was controlled by the standard deviation (std) of the demonstrate that the HSC model offers significant advantages
Gaussian distribution. The std ranged from 0 to 1, increasing in over baseline models, particularly in its ability to enhance
steps of 0.1. Each experiment was repeated five times, and the the distinction between normal and anomalous data, thus
average AUC scores were calculated for analysis. The results improving anomaly detection performance. The effectiveare shown in Fig. 12. ness of the model’s components has been validated through
 As depicted in Fig. 12, when the noise level is low ablation studies, which underscore the contributions of each
(std ≤ 0.1), the model’s performance remains stable, with module to the overall performance. Furthermore, noise exper-
AUC scores showing minimal variation, demonstrating strong iments demonstrate the model’s robustness, indicating its
robustness. In moderate noise scenarios (0.1 < std ≤ 0.4), capability to perform reliably even in complex and noisy
slight fluctuations are observed; however, the overall per- environments.
formance remains satisfactory. However, under high noise Future research may focus on developing more efficient
conditions (std > 0.4), the AUC scores drop significantly, approaches for constraining data distribution within the latent
indicating that the model is sensitive to high levels of noise. space, with an emphasis on minimizing feature loss and reduc-
 In conclusion, the HSC model demonstrates a certain ing the model’s sensitivity to hyperparameters. Additionally,
level of robustness to noise; however, its performance incorporating root cause analysis into the framework could
3518513 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

enable the rapid identification of anomaly causes and locations, [20] Y. Zheng et al., “Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time
further enhancing the model’s ability to provide early warnings series anomaly detection with missing values,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 106,
 Jun. 2024, Art. no. 102255, doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102255.
and support timely intervention. [21] C. Yin, S. Zhang, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Anomaly detection based
 on convolutional recurrent autoencoder for IoT time series,” IEEE Trans.
 R EFERENCES Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2022, doi:
 [1] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly 10.1109/TSMC.2020.2968516.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Neural Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997, doi:
 Mining, Anchorage, AK, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837. 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
 [2] J. Yu, Y. Song, D. Tang, D. Han, and J. Dai, “Telemetry data-based [23] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 spacecraft anomaly detection with spatial–temporal generative adversar- in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 ial networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–9, 2021, doi: pp. 4027–4035.
 10.1109/TIM.2021.3073442. [24] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 [3] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
 T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non- detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3100509.
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395. [25] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention
 [4] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly detec- networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,”
 tion and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849, doi:
 graph-based encoder–decoder GAN,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., 10.1016/j.knosys.2024.111849.
 vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3139696. [26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
 [5] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, Long Beach, CA, USA, Jun. 2017,
 “USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” pp. 5998–6008.
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, [27] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multi-
 Virtual Event, CA, USA, Aug. 2020, pp. 3395–3404. view joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,”
 [6] Y. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Long-distance pipeline safety early IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, 2024, Art. no. 10254685, doi:
 warning: A distributed optical fiber sensing semi-supervised learning 10.1109/TIM.2024.10254685.
 method,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 17, pp. 19453–19461, Sep. 2021, [28] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsudoi: 10.1109/JSEN.2021.3087537. pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 [7] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural net-work for unsupervised Vancouver, BC, Canada, May 2018, pp. 1–19.
 anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” [29] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale
 in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Honolulu, HI, USA, 2019, wavelet graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detecpp. 1409–1416. tion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi:
 [8] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual 10.1109/TIM.2022.3223142.
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly [30] X. Huang, F. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Lin, H. Liu, and H. Fan, “KalmanAE:
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Deep embedding optimized Kalman filter for time series anomaly
 Mining, Long Beach, CA, USA, Aug. 2023, pp. 3033–3045. detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi:
 [9] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time 10.1109/TIM.2023.3329098.
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. [31] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 Conf. Learn. Represent., Vienna, Austria, 2022, pp. 1–20. Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
[10] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt, adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Munich,
 “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Germany, Jan. 2019, pp. 703–716.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 12, Denver, CO, USA, Nov. 1999, [32] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. ACM,
 pp. 582–588. vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1145/3422622.
[11] J. Ma and S. Perkins, “Time-series novelty detection using one-class [33] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 support vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2003, networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 pp. 1741–1745. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022, doi:
[12] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data descrip- 10.14778/3514061.3514067.
 tion,” Mach. Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004, doi: [34] H. Zhou, K. Yu, X. Zhang, G. Wu, and A. Yazidi, “Contrastive
 10.1023/B:MACH.0000008084.60811.49. autoencoder for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Inf. Sci.,
[13] J. MacQueen, “Some methods for classification and analysis of multi- vol. 610, pp. 266–280, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2022.07.179.
 variate observations,” in Proc. 5th Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Probab., [35] L. Zhang, X. Xie, K. Xiao, W. Bai, K. Liu, and P. Dong, “MANomaly:
 1967, pp. 281–297. Mutual adversarial networks for semi-supervised anomaly detection,”
[14] M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm Inf. Sci., vol. 611, pp. 65–80, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2022.08.033.
 for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. [36] C. Wang et al., “Drift doesn’t matter: Dynamic decomposition with
 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., Port-land, OR, USA, Jan. 1996, diffusion reconstruction for unstable multivariate time series anomaly
 pp. 226–231. detection,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., New
[15] M. Shyu, S. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. Chang, “A novel Orleans, LA, USA, 2024, p. 473.
 anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” [37] W. Liu et al., “Unsupervised deep anomaly detection for industrial
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Min, Melbourne, FL, USA, Jan. 2003, multivariate time series data,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 2, p. 774, Jan. 2024,
 pp. 172–179. doi: 10.3390/app14020774.
[16] S. Cohen, N. Goldshlager, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, “Boost- [38] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods
 ing anomaly detection using unsupervised diverse test-time aug- and applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, Jan. 2020, doi:
 mentation,” Inf. Sci., vol. 626, pp. 821–836, May 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001.
 10.1016/j.ins.2023.01.081. [39] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Vandergheynst,
[17] S. Lloyd, “Least squares quantization in PCM,” IEEE Trans. “Geometric deep learning: Going beyond Euclidean data,” IEEE
 Inf. Theory, vol. IT-28, no. 2, pp. 129–137, Mar. 1982, doi: Signal Process. Mag., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 18–42, Jul. 2017, doi:
 10.1109/TIT.1982.1056489. 10.1109/MSP.2017.2693418.
[18] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer, [40] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell. anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,”
 Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002, doi: 10.1613/jair.953. in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Vienna, Austria, Jul. 2022,
[19] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpreta- pp. 2390–2397.
 tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. [41] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Banff, AB, Canada, Apr. 2014,
 pp. 3220–3230. pp. 1–14.
LI et al.: ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION CONSTRAINT IN RECONSTRUCTION NETWORKS 3518513

[42] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph Zhenhua Yu received the B.S. degree in mechanical
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), engineering and automation and the M.S. degree
 Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850. in mechanical engineering from Wuhan University
[43] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, “Normalizing flows: of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2018 and 2021,
 An introduction and review of current methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3964–3979, Nov. 2021, doi: degree in control science and engineering with
 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.2992934. East China University of Science and Technology,
[44] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked auto-regressive Shanghai, China.
 flow for density estimation,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. His current research interests include fault diagno-
 Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 2335–2344. sis, process modeling, and explainable deep learning.
[45] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 2022, pp. 1–16.
[46] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3349613.
[47] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn.
 Represent., 2017. Qingchao Jiang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[48] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, of Automation, East China University of Science
 arXiv:1803.01271. and Technology, Shanghai, China, in 2010 and 2015,
[49] A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. J. Lang, respectively.
 “Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE Trans. From March to September 2015, he had been
 Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 328–339, Mar. 1989, a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Department
 doi: 10.1109/29.21701. of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Univer-
[50] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated sity of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. From
 convolutions,” presented at the Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Apr. 2016. September 2015 to September 2016, he had been
[51] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for a Humboldt Research Fellow with the Institute for
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Automatic Control and Complex Systems (AKS), University of Duisburg-
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. Essen, Duisburg, Germany. From October 2016 to May 2017, he had been a
[52] Z. Niu, G. Zhong, and H. Yu, “A review on the attention mechanism of Visiting Research Fellow with the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
 deep learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 452, pp. 48–62, Sep. 2021, doi: Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST),
 10.1016/j.neucom.2021.03.091. Hong Kong, China. He is currently an Associate Professor with East China
[53] H. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Jian, Q. Liao, Y. Wang, and G. Pang, “Calibrated University of Science and Technology. His research interests include data
 one-class classification for unsupervised time series anomaly detec- mining and analysis, data-driven soft sensing, multivariate statistical process
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5723–5736, monitoring and deep learning-based process modeling.
 Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3393996. Prof. Jiang was a recipient of the 2021 World Artificial Intelligence
[54] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation Conference Youth Outstanding Paper Nomination Award. He is the Early
 by jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Career Advisory Board Member of the IFAC Journal Control Engineering
 Represent., 2015, pp. 1–15. Practice and an Associate Editor of IEEE ACCESS.
[55] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
 evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Intell., Jan. 2021, pp. 7194–7201.
[56] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Crit.
 Inf. Infrastruct. Secur., 2017, pp. 88–99.
[57] G. Birol, C. Ündey, and A. Çinar, “A modular simulation package for fed-batch fermentation: Penicillin production,” Comput. Chem. Zhixing (Edward) Cao received the B.Eng. degree
 Eng., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1553–1565, Nov. 2002, doi: 10.1016/s0098- in automation from the Department of Con-
 1354(02)00127-8. trol Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University,
[58] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Hangzhou, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree
 Mach. Learn., vol. 80, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 4393–4402. in chemical and biomolecular engineering from
 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 (HKUST), Hong Kong, China, in 2016.
 He used to work with the Harvard John A. Paul-
 Jiazhen Li received the B.S. degree in mechanson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
 ical design, manufacturing, and automation from
 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, and the
 Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China,
 School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinin 2022. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
 burgh, Edinburgh, U.K., as Post-Doctoral Fellow. He is currently a Full
 in control science and engineering with East China
 Professor with the School of Information Science and Engineering, East China
 University of Science and Technology, Shanghai.
 University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. His research interests
 Her current research interests include multivariate
 include deep learning, stochastic processes, and systems biology.
 time series anomaly detection and fault root cause
 Dr. Cao serves as an Editorial Board Member for several prestigious
 analysis.
 journals. In 2021, he was awarded the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Technology Review Innovators Under 35 Asia Pacific.