IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 2544912

 Perceiver IO Model for Efficient Vibration Signal
 Compression and Anomaly Detection
 Guillaume Lebonvallet , Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja , Faicel Hnaien , Hichem Snoussi , and Brice Nélain

 Abstract—This research presents a deep learning model for industries, including marine engineering [2], petroleum [3],
vibration signal compression and anomaly detection, using Per- railways [4], and aerospace [5].
ceiver IO—an attention-based architecture—within a railway With the increasing complexity of machinery and the surge
industry case study. The model is lightweight and optimized for
deployment on energy- and memory-constrained sensors, making in sensor-generated data, efficient processing and represenit ideal for embedded applications. Unlike traditional methods, it tation of vibrational signals have become key challenges.
performs signal compression and anomaly detection simultane- Traditional vibration analysis methods struggle with noisy
ously, offering an efficient and unified solution applicable across high-dimensional data, requiring models that can effectively
industries. To avoid the need for separate classification models capture essential features while reducing redundancy [6].
or heavy architectures, contrastive learning is used to improve
feature extraction. This allows the learned representations to be Compression techniques not only mitigate storage and transeasily separable via a simple linear function, enabling effective mission constraints, but also enhance downstream tasks,
anomaly detection while preserving signal reconstruction quality. such as fault classification and anomaly detection [7]. These
The model is trained on a large vibration signal dataset using advances are particularly valuable for real-time industrial
a weighted loss function combining mean squared error (mse), applications, where data efficiency is crucial.
cosine similarity, and contrastive loss. Contrastive learning plays
a key role in clustering normal and abnormal signals, achieving To address these challenges, advanced machine learning
near-perfect classification accuracy. Compression performance is techniques have become powerful tools for vibration analysis,
evaluated with metrics such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), extracting meaningful patterns from large sensor data for
cosine similarity, and compression ratio. The model achieves a efficient compression and fault detection. Compact yet infor-
PSNR of 21.87 while maintaining a much smaller architecture. mative signal representation reduces data bottlenecks while
The approach shows strong potential for real-time industrial
deployment, ensuring high accuracy and efficiency in resource- preserving diagnostic information. In addition, adaptive learnconstrained environments. ing helps distinguish normal variations from true anomalies,
 enhancing fault detection in complex industrial settings.
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attention mechanisms,
contrastive learning, embedded computing, neural network com- Machine learning and deep learning techniques provide
pression, signal processing. several advantages in vibration analysis: the ability to process
 I. I NTRODUCTION large volumes of data efficiently, identify complex patterns,
 and adapt to evolving conditions [8], [9]. Over the years,
V IBRATION analysis is a critical field in engineering,
 widely used to monitor the health of mechanical systems
and detect anomalies that could indicate potential failures.
 numerous models have been proposed for fault detection and
 diagnosis [10], [11]. Approaches such as K-means clustering
 [12], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13], and long
By identifying early signs of defects, predictive maintenance
 short-term memory networks [14] have demonstrated high
strategies can be implemented to enhance reliability, minimize
 accuracy in detecting faults. More recently, deep autoencoders
downtime, and prevent costly repairs. The effectiveness of
 combined with ensemble learning [15] have shown robustness
monitoring vibration patterns for predictive maintenance has
 under noisy conditions.
been well-documented [1]. The nonintrusive nature of vibra-
 Vibration signal compression plays a vital role in condition analysis makes it an attractive solution across various
 tion monitoring; however, it presents significant challenges
 Received 29 April 2025; revised 29 July 2025; accepted 5 August 2025. due to the requirement to efficiently store and transmit data
Date of publication 1 September 2025; date of current version 8 Septem- while preserving critical diagnostic information. Key chalber 2025. This work was supported by French Government through the
Future Investment Program (Programme d’investissement d’avenir). The Asso- lenges include balancing compression efficiency with signal
ciate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Juan Xu. (Guillaume integrity and managing computational complexity in real-time
Lebonvallet and Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja contributed equally to this work.)
(Corresponding author: Guillaume Lebonvallet.)
 applications. Addressing these challenges, various advanced
 Guillaume Lebonvallet, Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja, Faicel Hnaien, and methods have been proposed. For instance, Oltean et al. [16]
Hichem Snoussi are with the LIST3N (Computer Science and Digital explored tailored compression techniques suited for aircraft
Society), Université de Technologie de Troyes, Troyes 10004, France, and engine monitoring, ensuring high fidelity in signal reconstrucalso with EUt+ Data Science Institute, European Union, Troyes 10004,
France (e-mail: guillaume.lebonvallet@utt.fr; luis.salazar zendeja@utt.fr; tion. Meanwhile, Guo and Tse [17] introduced an approach
faicel.hnaien@utt.fr; hichem.snoussi@utt.fr). leveraging optimal ensemble empirical mode decomposition
 Brice Nélain is with the Innovation Team, VOSSLOH, 69100 Villeurbanne,
France (e-mail: brice.nelain@vossloh.com).
 to enhance compression performance while preserving key
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3604141 signal characteristics. Furthermore, Yin et al. [18] integrated
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

encryption into the compression process, providing a dual II. R ELATED W ORK
advantage of data security and lightweight storage, which Deep learning techniques have demonstrated considerable
is critical for remote monitoring systems. Collectively, these promise in vibration signal analysis, particularly for fault
studies highlight the ongoing advancements in vibration sig- detection in mechanical systems. In recent years, several
nal compression, addressing challenges related to efficiency, studies have explored the use of deep learning models to
accuracy, and security in industrial applications. predict system health from vibration signals. For example, Lin
 Many real-world applications require these models to be et al. [22] evaluated various deep learning neural networks for
embedded on sensors, which impose strict memory and energy surface roughness prediction, using vibration signal analysis.
constraints. Traditional deep learning models can be compu- Their findings showed that deep learning models, particularly
tationally expensive, making them impractical for edge-based CNNs, can successfully extract features from vibration signals
condition monitoring. To ensure feasible deployment in indus- and provide accurate predictions. Similarly, Chen and Lee
trial settings, lightweight models that balance accuracy with [23] investigated how CNNs can enhance vibration signal
efficiency are essential. Embedded fault detection systems, analysis for applications like fault diagnosis and surface
such as those presented in [19], demonstrate the effectiveness roughness estimation. They utilize both 1-D and 2-D CNN
of compact machine learning architectures tailored for edge models to process raw vibration data and time–frequency
devices. In addition, compressive sensing techniques designed representations, improving predictive accuracy. Their approach
for wireless sensor networks [20] offer promising solutions for integrates optimization techniques to refine CNN performance,
reducing data transmission overhead while maintaining signal demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting faults and assessintegrity. A broader overview of AI models in the Industrial ing machining conditions.
IoT applications [21] further emphasizes the necessity of For bearing fault diagnosis, Wang et al. [24] fused vibroaoptimized algorithms that can operate within the constraints coustic data with a 1-D CNN network, showing significant
of embedded environments. improvements in diagnostic accuracy compared to traditional
 To the best of our knowledge, existing literature addresses methods. Another study [25] proposed a distributed approach
compression and anomaly detection as distinct tasks, which for bearing fault diagnosis based on vibration signals. This
can result in redundant computations and increased resource method leveraged multiple sensors to collect vibration data,
consumption, particularly problematic in real-time industrial improving the fault diagnosis process by reducing the impact
applications. Moreover, the constraints of embedded envi- of sensor placement and environmental noise.
ronments, including limited memory and power availability, More recently, the use of explainable artificial intelligence
make it challenging to deploy separate models efficiently. To (XAI) has gained traction in vibration signal analysis for
address these challenges, we propose a unified Perceiver IO- fault diagnosis. Chen and Lee [26] explored the use of XAI
based architecture that integrates vibration signal compression for bearing fault diagnosis, where they employed machine
and anomaly detection within a single framework. Our key learning models with interpretability features. This approach
contributions are threefold. allows for a deeper understanding of the decision-making
 1) We develop a latent space embedding that extracts com- process, which is particularly beneficial in critical applications,
 pact yet informative representations of vibration data, like industrial maintenance.
 achieving high compression efficiency without compro- Signal compression has been a significant focus in vibration
 mising critical diagnostic features. analysis, as it helps reduce storage and transmission require-
 2) We design an adaptive anomaly detection mechanism ments while preserving diagnostic information. Biagetti et al.
 that selectively focuses on relevant patterns, filtering [27] analyzed lossless compression algorithms for wireless
 out noise and enhancing fault diagnosis reliability in sensor networks, such as EMG sensors, highlighting tradeindustrial environments. offs between compression ratio and signal fidelity—crucial for
 3) We propose a unified, lightweight framework that effi- real-time vibration monitoring. Xin and Fan [28] introduced
 ciently combines compression and anomaly detection, a lossless method for medical image compression using big
 making it ideal for resource-constrained embedded data mining to achieve high efficiency while preserving data
 systems. This integration ensures our approach is integrity. Though focused on medical data, their approach is
 well-suited for large-scale industrial applications where also applicable to vibration signals due to similar requirements
 real-time processing and accuracy are paramount. for data preservation.
 This article is organized as follows. Section II reviews The review of existing methods demonstrates that, while
related work on vibration analysis, fault detection, and sig- significant advancements have been made in vibration signal
nal compression; Section III presents the architecture of compression and fault diagnosis, many challenges remain. Trathe Perceiver IO model, the data preprocessing steps, the ditional approaches often address compression and anomaly
attention mechanisms for compression and anomaly detection, detection separately, leading to inefficiencies and increased
and the implementation of contrastive learning to improve computational demands, particularly in real-time industrial
feature separability; Section IV describes the research con- applications. Furthermore, many existing techniques struggle
text, the dataset, and the specific training of our model; the to balance compression efficiency with the preservation of
results are discussed in Section V; and the article concludes critical fault detection features, especially when dealing with
with Section VI, which covers the conclusions and future noisy or high-dimensional data. These challenges are further
prospects. exacerbated in embedded environments, where strict memory
LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION 2544912

 time–frequency representation that captures transient events
 and frequency variations, which are crucial for accurate fault
 detection in machinery. This method enhances the detection
 of localized anomalies in vibration data, thereby improving
 diagnostic precision [30].
 The STFT process involves segmenting the vibration signal
 into overlapping windows and performing a Fourier Transform
 on each segment. This approach maintains both time and
 frequency information, allowing a detailed analysis of how
Fig. 1. (a) Time domain signal. (b) STFT representation.
 signal components evolve over time. By selecting appropriate
 window sizes, a balance between time and frequency resand energy constraints limit the feasibility of complex models. olution can be achieved, making STFT a versatile tool for
To address these limitations, this work proposes a unified analyzing complex vibrational signals in various engineering
Perceiver IO-based model that integrates both efficient com- applications. Fig. 1(a) shows an example of a time-domain
pression and anomaly detection while remaining lightweight signal and Fig. 1(b) shows a time–frequency signal.
and computationally efficient for resource-constrained edge
devices. B. Architecture of the Proposed Perceiver IO
 The overall framework, as shown in Fig. 2, consists of three
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY main components: vibration signal compression, attentiondriven anomaly detection, and vibration signal reconstruction.
 Monitoring vibration signals is essential for identifying
 Initially, the input vibration signals undergo preprocessing
faults in mechanical systems, yet the high dimensionality and
 using STFT, as described in Section III-A. The STFT repreinherent noise in raw data often present significant challenges.
 sentations are initially transformed into a latent space through
Traditional models frequently struggle to process such signals
 two fundamental steps: 1) a cross-attention block that interacts
efficiently without compromising critical fault-related inforbetween the input signals and the latent space, and 2) a
mation. To address these limitations, we introduce a model
 series of self-attention processes within the latent space itself.
based on Perceiver IO [29], known for its capability to manage
 This interaction not only captures the complex relationships
diverse, high-dimensional data with remarkable efficiency.
 within the data but also significantly reduces dimensionality
 Building on the strengths of Perceiver IO, our proposed
 while preserving the essential features needed for accurate
model leverages a latent-space representation to significantly
 representation. This module functions as the encoder in the
reduce computational requirements and memory footprint,
 Perceiver IO model.
while preserving essential signal structures. The domain-
 Once the compressed representation is obtained, it is
agnostic attention mechanism enables flexible handling of
 directed toward two distinct modules for further processing.
arbitrary input and output formats, ensuring adaptability to
 The first module is dedicated to anomaly detection, employing
various vibration-based fault detection scenarios. This design
 a straightforward linear function based on principal component
is particularly effective in isolating meaningful features from
 analysis (PCA). This approach assists in identifying deviations
noise, enhancing the clarity and reliability of fault detection.
 from normal operational patterns by analyzing the principal
 A key enhancement of this model is its ability to seamcomponents of the latent representation. The reconstruction
lessly integrate compression and anomaly detection using
 module (decoder) takes center stage, leveraging a positional
a single unified framework. By employing attention-driven
 encoding mechanism to reconstruct the STFT representation
mechanisms, the model dynamically identifies fault-indicative
 of the signal from the compressed representation with a crosspatterns and suppresses background interference. Moreover,
 attention block.
we incorporate contrastive learning to refine the anomaly
 For each attention module, there is a multilayer perceptron
detection process, eliminating the need for an additional
 (MLP) and normalization layers. The MLP consists of two
decision-making model. These innovations streamline the
 fully connected layers with a GELU activation in between,
architecture, improving both efficiency and sensitivity to faults.
 expanding the output to a higher dimension H and then
 Sections III-A–III-D detail the application of this enhanced
 returning it back to its original shape. The normalization
model to vibration signal compression and contrastive
 layers center and reduce the data with a learned mean and
learning-driven anomaly detection, following initial preprostandard deviation for each input value. The MLP introduces
cessing of time-domain signals. This unified approach achieves
 nonlinearity and enhances the expressiveness of the model,
acceptable performance in terms of both computational effiwhereas the normalization layers stabilize and accelerate the
ciency and fault detection accuracy, positioning it as an
 training process.
advanced solution for industrial condition monitoring.
 The final output includes both the reconstructed signal and
 an anomaly score, enabling real-time fault detection. This
A. Preprocessing: Short-Time Fourier Transform architecture ensures an optimal balance between efficient data
 In this study, we apply the short-time Fourier transform compression and accurate fault identification.
(STFT) to our vibration signal analysis. STFT is advanta- The modular design (encoder, decoder, and anomaly detecgeous for examining nonstationary signals, as it provides a tor) is particularly well-suited for embedded environments. In
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Perceiver IO architecture for compression and anomaly detection.

practice, only the encoder and anomaly detector are deployed N input STFT time elements. Since A depends on M (size
on the edge device, allowing for efficient, on-device processing of the latent representation) and N (input length), it adapts
with minimal computational overhead. The decoder, which is dynamically to variable-sized inputs.
more resource-intensive, is applied downstream after trans- The attention scores are normalized using the Softmax
mission of the compressed representation, enabling optional function along the input length dimension (N). This step
signal reconstruction for verification, analysis, or archival pur- ensures that the attention weights across all N input elements
poses. This separation of responsibilities ensures low-latency for each query sum to 1, regardless of the input size. The
anomaly detection while maintaining the ability to reconstruct normalized attention weights are used to compute a weighted
signals when needed. sum of the value matrix (V, other projection of the input STFT)
 and linearly projected on the latent space. This step produces
C. Attention Internal: Variable-Sized Inputs the output of the attention module
 The attention module in Perceiver IO operates in a series of O = Softmax(A)VWO , O ∈ R M×C and WO ∈ RF×C . (6)
steps, with a design that ensures the length of the key-value
 The key insight is that the shape of O is the same as the
input does not affect the fixed size of the output.
 given latent representation. The length L of the input affects
 The attention mechanism of the encoder begins by prothe intermediate attention computation but does not propagate
jecting the latent representation and the signal data into
 to the output. This ensures that the final output size remains
three matrices: queries (Q), keys (K), and values (V). These
 consistent, irrespective of the input length.
projections are linear transformations to a common feature
 At no point in this pipeline do the learned weight matrices
dimension F using learned weight matrices
 (WQ , WK , WV , and WO ) depend on the input length N (and
 Z ∈ R M×C , X ∈ RN×D (1) the latent representation length M). This independence allows
 Q = ZWQ , WQ ∈ R C×F
 and Q ∈ R M×F
 (2) the Perceiver IO model to handle inputs of arbitrary size while
 maintaining a consistent, scalable output. This design is ideal
 K = XWK , WK ∈ R D×F
 and K ∈ R N×F
 (3) for tasks involving variable-length data, such as the case study
 V = XWV , WV ∈ R D×F
 and V ∈ R N×F
 . (4) presented in Section IV.
 In the decoder section of the model, the roles of the inputs
 Z is the latent representation and X is the input STFT of
 are reversed: the latent representations are used as the key
arbitrary length N. Notice that the learned weight matrices
 and value, whereas the variable-sized output encoding serves
(WQ , WK , and WV ) do not depend on N, the length of the
 as the query. Since the attention mechanism in the decoder
input (and neither M, the length of the latent representation).
 mirrors that of the encoder, the resulting output is a matrix of
This ensures the mechanism is agnostic to the input size.
 variable length, aligning with the dimensions of the original
 The attention scores are calculated as the dot product
 input STFT.
between the query (Q, projection of the latent) and the
transposed key (K > , projection of the input STFT), scaled by
(F)1/2 to stabilize gradients. Mathematically D. Contrastive Learning
 Contrastive learning is a machine learning technique that
 QK >
 A = √ , A ∈ R M×N . (5) emphasizes learning representations by comparing data sam-
 F ples to differentiate between similar and dissimilar pairs. The
 The resulting attention score matrix A has a shape of (M, N), core principle involves pulling together the representations of
indicating that each of the M latent queries attends to all similar or related data points, known as positive pairs, while
LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION 2544912

pushing apart the representations of dissimilar or unrelated algorithms. Rather than transmitting raw data, these sendata points, referred to as negative pairs. Triplet loss, also sors perform local processing to extract metadata and detect
known as large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) [31], is a anomalies at the source. This strategy significantly reduces
crucial loss function in this context. It aims to organize data bandwidth usage and enables immediate responses to potential
points within an embedding space by ensuring that similar data issues.
points are closer together and dissimilar ones are farther apart, The processed information is then transmitted to modular
maintaining a specified margin between different classes or Virtual Observation Gateway units, which act as data conclusters. This method normally operates on triplets of samples: centrators. These units aggregate input from multiple sensors
an anchor, a positive example from the same class as the and conduct intermediate analysis before forwarding critical
anchor, and a negative example from a different class. The loss insights to centralized servers. At the highest level of the
function encourages the model to learn embeddings where the architecture, advanced AI algorithms perform global analysis
distance between the anchor and positive is minimized, and across the network to predict maintenance needs and coordithe distance between the anchor and negative is maximized nate proactive interventions.
beyond a certain margin. This margin ensures a meaningful This distributed processing approach is essential, as it
separation between clusters. reduces communication overhead in remote railway envi-
 In our approach, the contrastive loss assesses the similarity ronments, supports real-time local decision-making for
between the two latent matrices, utilizing only a selected safety-critical events, minimizes data storage requirements,
portion (i.e., a specified number of columns) of each matrix for and enhances system resilience by distributing intelligence
the computation. This approach is based on the understanding throughout the network.
that the characteristics crucial for anomaly detection are often While the broader railway monitoring system incorporates
distinct from those essential for reconstructing the STFT. By a full hierarchical data flow, our work specifically focuses on
segregating these characteristics, the model minimizes the the development of lightweight AI models for signal compresadverse impact of the contrastive loss on the reconstruction sion and anomaly detection capable of operating directly on
process. This ensures that the vital features for reconstruc- embedded sensor nodes.
tion remain unaffected by the contrastive component, thereby
enhancing the overall performance and accuracy of the model. B. Dataset Description
When pairs of vectors originate from the same cluster, the
contrastive loss aims to minimize the distance between them, To develop and validate the model, a dataset of vibration
promoting similarity within clusters. Conversely, for pairs signals was collected under various operating conditions in
from different clusters, the contrastive loss enforces a margin the railway network. Due to data protection policies, some
constraint, ensuring these vectors remain sufficiently separated details of the data collection process are omitted. The signals
in the latent space. This separation is vital to ensure accurate were acquired using accelerometers mounted on multiple
anomaly detection without the dedicated classifier. Our imple- railway switches and crossing systems. The dataset consists of
mentation introduces a notable modification to the traditional 13 907 time-series recordings, with sampling frequencies rang-
LMNN or triplet loss framework [31]. Unlike the original ing from 3100 to 3350 Hz. Of these, 5000 are anomalous, and
formulation, where the margin is dynamically calculated, we each recording lasts between 3 and 26 s.
fix the margin to a constant value. This adjustment prevents The signals were recorded under different conditions,
excessive influence on the reconstruction process, maintaining including variations in train types, number of wagons, speeds,
a balance that allows the model to learn meaningful cluster and ambient temperature. To preprocess the data, we applied
distinctions without compromising its ability to accurately a simple trimming procedure to remove noise from the beginreconstruct the input data. The implementation of contrastive ning and end of each signal. Furthermore, STFT, as detailed
learning within this framework is detailed in Section IV-C. in Section III-A, was used for further feature extraction.
This tailored approach enhances the robustness and overall
effectiveness of the model in anomaly detection tasks. C. Training of the Model
 To ensure the separability of the anomalies over the normal
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP data, a supervised contrastive learning is introduced along the
 reconstruction training. The goal of the contrastive part is to
A. Case Study on Railway Monitoring expand the margin between the two clusters to allow a quick
 This research was developed within the context of railway discrimination of samples without needing a full decision
infrastructure monitoring, specifically addressing the chal- model. Algorithm 1 shows the training loop within each epoch.
lenges of switch and crossing system surveillance [32], [33]. Each training sample is associated with another sample to form
In our industrial context, the railway monitoring system pairs for the contrastive loss calculus. Our implementation uses
implements a hierarchical data flow architecture designed to a list of shuffled indices to ensure random and diverse pairings.
optimize railway infrastructure monitoring while addressing The signal pairs remain fixed during the whole training prothe constraints of remote deployment and real-time decision- cess. The code iterates over these shuffled indices, selecting the
making. Vibration signals are first captured by autonomous original sample and its paired counterpart from the dataset. For
IoT sensors (located at switch and crossing systems) equipped every pair of inputs (x1 , x2 ), the encoder f maps these inputs
with energy harvesting capabilities and embedded processing into their latent representations z1 and z2 (L2-3). The decoder
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Algorithm 1 Training Epoch to reduce the memory footprint of the model. In the following
 1: for each (x1 , x2 ) do experiments, models were trained using the Adam optimizer
 2: z1 ← f (x1 ) with a learning rate of 0.001 over 50 epochs and a batch size
 3: z2 ← f (x2 ) of 256 signals. The fixed margin used inside the contrastive
 4: xˆ1 ← f −1 (z1 ) loss is set to 1. To ensure robust evaluation, we employed a
 1 x1 xˆ1 > 1 X threefold cross-validation strategy for training all models. In
 5: LR ← 1 − + (x1 − xˆ1 )2
 ( N ||x 1 ||.|| xˆ1 || ND each fold, 9271 signals were used for training and 4636 for
 1
 (z¯1 − z¯2 )2 if same cluster
 P
 ND testing. Both training and testing sets were balanced to contain
 6: LC ← 1
 
 (z¯1 − z¯2 )2 , 0 else an equal number of normal and anomalous signals.
 P
 min MARGIN − ND
 7: if batch is finished or no remaining data then
 8: LG ← λ1 LR + λ2 LC A. Performance of CS and Deep Learning Models
 9: Backpropagate LG and update model weights Compressed sensing (CS) is a signal acquisition paradigm
10: end if that allows the reconstruction of sparse or compressible signals
11: end for from significantly fewer measurements than required by the
 Nyquist theorem [34]. In vibration signal processing, CS has
 been used to reduce data transmission and storage demands in
 f −1 then reconstructs x1 as xˆ1 (L4). The reconstruction loss wireless sensor networks by leveraging the inherent sparsity
LR measures the quality of the reconstruction by combining a of mechanical vibration signals in suitable transform domains
cosine similarity term and a mean squared error (mse) term [18], [20].
(L5). The cosine similarity assesses the alignment in the fea- To establish a baseline for comparison with our proposed
ture space, whereas the mse ensures the pixel-wise accuracy. Perceiver IO model, we implemented the CS method by
As we want to maximize the cosine similarity between the [20], which combines an improved K-SVD dictionary learning
original signal and the reconstruction, the cosine similarity algorithm with sparse adaptive matching pursuit (SAMP)
term is defined as one minus the actual cosine similarity value, for automatic sparsity estimation. We selected this method
allowing us to minimize the reconstruction loss toward zero. because it is specifically designed for signal compression in
 In parallel, the contrastive loss assesses the similarity wireless sensor networks, which closely aligns with our use
between selected parts of the two latent matrices. These case. Our implementation used 128 dictionary atoms, trained
submatrices, called z¯1 and z¯2 , are compared based on their over 50 iterations. SAMP was configured to run for 800
clustering (L6). For pairs from the same cluster, LC minimizes reconstruction iterations with a tolerance of 1e−4 .
the distance between the latent vectors. For pairs from differ- We selected 727 signals from our dataset corresponding to
ent clusters, it enforces the given fixed margin to maintain a single train type operating at a fixed speed, in order to
separation in the latent space. simulate an almost homogeneous dataset where the signals
 At the end of each batch, or when no data remains, the are highly similar to one another. Each signal was trimmed to
global loss LG —a linear combination of LR and LC (L8)—is contain exactly 8000 samples. The method was evaluated at
backpropagated to update the weights of the model (L9). The a compression ratio of 0.5, meaning that 4000 measurements
coefficients λ in this combination control the relative influence were acquired from 8000-sample signals. This setup allowed
of each loss term, allowing for fine-tuning of their impact on us to compare its performance against our proposed deep
training. learning-based compression approach.
 After completing the training loop for an epoch, the model To ensure both methods operated at the same compression
is evaluated on the validation data to compute the validation ratio, we increased the latent space dimension of the Perceiver
losses. The validation data is processed similar to the training IO model from eight rows and 32 columns to 32 rows and 125
data, but without updating the model parameters. The vali- columns.
dation losses are averaged and used to compute the overall This comparison focuses on signal compression. In the
validation loss. case of the Perceiver IO, Algorithm 1 computes only the
 reconstruction loss LR (and λ1 = 1), whereas the contrastive
 V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION loss LC , which is part of the full training objective, is omitted
 Our final goal is to achieve the implementation of the in this context.
model into an embedded target with constrained computation In the case of the K-SVD algorithm, the output is a
capabilities and memory capacity. Therefore, we have reduced reconstructed signal in the time domain. In contrast, our model
the architecture to accommodate our use case without losing produces the STFT representation of the signal. To enable
too much performance on the metrics. The latent matrix has a comparison between the two approaches, we applied the
a shape of eight rows (M) and 32 columns (C). The cross- real-time phase gradient heap integration (RTPGHI) phase
attention module of the encoder has a feature dimension (F) reconstruction algorithm [35] and a classic inverse STFT
of 128 channels, and its MLP has a hidden layer (H) of 256 algorithm to convert the output of our model back into the
neurons. We choose to include one process block with a feature time domain. Table I reports the mse and cosine similarity
size of 64 channels and a hidden size of 64 neurons. The between the original and reconstructed signals in both the
decoder has a feature dimension of 128 channels and a hidden time domain and the time–frequency domain for the K-SVD
layer of 512 neurons. All attention modules are single-headed algorithm and our proposed approach. Fig. 3 shows examples
LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION 2544912

 TABLE I at a given time, thus relating to the amplitude of the temporal
 S UMMARY OF T RAINING M ETRICS signal and the fidelity of the spectral content. Conversely, the
 cosine similarity evaluates the preservation of the overall shape
 of the temporal signal. Both metrics indicate better performance for our model, which aligns with the visual comparison
 of the reconstruction samples shown in Fig. 3. K-SVD can
 reconstruct with a good level of fidelity [see Fig. 3(a)], but it
 notably struggles to reconstruct signals involving time shifts
 [see Fig. 3(c) and (e)]. This limitation is common among
 CS algorithms, which typically rely on fixed dictionaries
 and assume sparsity in a certain basis. Such assumptions
 make it difficult for these methods to handle heterogeneous
 datasets with diverse signal variations, including temporal
 shifts. Furthermore, as signal length increases, the complexity
 of accurate reconstruction grows, often leading to degraded
 performance. Due to these challenges, we restricted our dataset
 to a pseudohomogeneous set of signals to ensure fair and
 meaningful comparisons between models. For the following
 trainings, we use the full dataset available, which includes
 signals from seven different train types traveling at speeds
 between 90 and 110 km/h. We observed that while the method
 performs well, handling a significantly greater diversity of
 signal patterns may require increasing the size of the latent
 space and, correspondingly, the overall model. This limitation
 reflects a common trade-off in AI models between complexity
 and generalization.
 In both models, the peaks corresponding to axle crossings are not well reconstructed. However, our model exhibits
 artifacts induced by the phase reconstruction algorithm [see
 Fig. 3(b), (d), and (f)]. These artifacts could potentially be
 mitigated by fine-tuning the parameters of the STFT, notably
 reducing the step length. This can lead to improved reconstruction fidelity and reduced phase-related distortions, but will
 raise the memory footprint.
Fig. 3. (a), (c), and (e) Signal reconstructions using the K-SVD algorithm.
(b), (d), and (f) Signal reconstructions using the Perceiver IO algorithm.
 B. Results on Contrastive Learning
 The global loss function, which is a linear combination
of the reconstructed time-domain signals. The plots on the of normalized metrics, was used to control the influence of
left correspond to the K-SVD reconstructions, while those each metric during backpropagation. The values of λ1 and λ2
on the right show the outputs from the Perceiver IO model. are initially chosen arbitrarily. These hyperparameters control
For each example, the original and reconstructed signals are the trade-off between optimizing two competing objectives:
plotted together to visually assess reconstruction quality. signal reconstruction and contrastive learning. Increasing one
 The time-domain metrics presented in Table I suggest that relative to the other prioritizes the corresponding objective
the K-SVD reconstructions are significantly better than those during training. In our experiments, we fix λ1 = 1, that is, a
produced by our model. Notably, the cosine similarity is shown 100% influence on both the mse and cosine similarity losses,
to be near zero. However, the issue lies in the fact that these and vary λ2 to identify a value that effectively separates the
metrics do not accurately represent the similarity between the classes (normal versus anomaly) while preserving the quality
reconstruction and the original signal. The use of the RTPGHI of the STFT reconstruction. For simplicity, we refer to λ2 as
algorithm for temporal reconstruction introduces phase shifts the contrastive weight.
that degrade both metrics. For example, a 90◦ phase shift Table II presents a summary of evaluation metrics computed
reduces cosine similarity to zero, while a 180◦ phase shift for a series of our proposed models trained with varying
maximizes mse. These distortions undermine the validity of contrastive weights. Each row corresponds to a distinct model
time-domain comparisons. configuration, where the contrastive weight is incremented
 To provide a more accurate assessment of the reconstruc- from 0.00 to 0.45. The columns report the mean and stantion quality of both models, time–frequency metrics are also dard deviation of the performance metrics across the folds,
calculated. In this context, the mse represents the accurate including the mse loss, cosine similarity loss, and contrastive
reconstruction of the intensity of each frequency component loss. In addition, classification performance is represented by
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II
 S UMMARY OF L OSSES AND F1 S CORES ACROSS C ONTRASTIVE W EIGHTS

 TABLE III
 C LASSIFICATION R EPORT AND T RAINING M ETRICS

the accuracy and the F1-score for the normal and anomaly signals and the mean of the first PCA component for the
classes. anomalous signals, and then taking the average of these
 Metrics presented in this table indicate that all configura- two means. Compared to heavier classifiers, such as support
tions, excluding the first two and the last one, are similar in vector machines (SVMs) and random forests, this approach
results. The first configuration with no contrastive learning offers significant computational advantages. SVMs often need
gives us the baseline reconstruction metrics (0.0178 for mse complex kernel functions and can become resource-intensive
and 81.40% of cosine similarity). The classification accu- with high-dimensional latent spaces. Random forests, while
racy and F1-scores for both normal and anomaly detection powerful, involve multiple decision trees, which increase both
improve significantly with the contrastive weight, reaching memory usage and inference time. In contrast, our method
near-perfect values around weights of 0.20 and above. Notably, reduces overhead by focusing on a single linear decision
at a weight of 0.20, the model achieves an accuracy of boundary, making it highly efficient for our real-time and
99.99%, with F1-scores exceeding 0.999 for both classes, resource-constrained use case.
while the reconstruction metrics (mse and cosine similarity) To isolate the contributions of contrastive learning and the
stabilize to approximately 0.04 for mse and 61% for cosine dual-module architecture from other architectural variations,
similarity, indicating minimal compromise in reconstruction we compare our proposed method against a basic Perceiver
quality. Beyond the 0.20 weight, while some configurations IO model that shares the same underlying structure. Table III
like 0.30 and 0.35 also show excellent performance, they presents classification and reconstruction metrics for the same
do not surpass the 0.20 configuration in terms of overall model trained with three different loss functions. The first loss
balance and consistency across all metrics. Therefore, the does not incorporate contrastive learning (λ2 = 0). The second
0.20 contrastive weight is chosen for its optimal balance and third models include contrastive learning with λ2 = 0.2,
between reconstruction quality and classification accuracy, but differ in the input used to compute the contrastive loss LC .
demonstrating the most robust and reliable performance. The second applies contrastive learning across the entire latent
 To ensure a lightweight and efficient overall model, we matrix; that is, the contrastive loss LC is computed using all
avoid incorporating additional complex models for anomaly 8 × 32 values of the latent matrix. The third, referred to as
detection and instead utilize a simple linear classifier. Each partial contrastive learning, applies contrastive learning only
signal is classified based on the first PCA component derived on the first eight columns of the latent matrix—specifically, a
from the latent space as shown in Fig. 2. This component submatrix of size 8 × 8 from the full 8 × 32 latent matrix is
is compared against a decision threshold to determine the used to compute LC .
classification. This threshold is computed by first calculat- The model without contrastive loss demonstrates poor
ing the mean of the first PCA component for the normal classification performance. The mean precision, recall, and
LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION 2544912

Fig. 4. Projection of the first two PCA components (a) without contrastive learning, (b) with contrastive learning, and (c) with partial contrastive learning.
Histogram of the first PCA component (d) without contrastive learning, (e) with contrastive learning, and (f) with partial contrastive learning.

F1-score for the anomalous class are particularly low (0.24, trastive learning model (bottom row) exhibit superior fidelity
0.38, and 0.30), indicating that many anomalies are misclassi- compared to those generated by the full contrastive learning
fied. These results suggest that the extracted features from the model (third row). Moreover, introducing contrastive learning
first PCA component are not well-separated, making anomaly adversely affects reconstruction quality when compared to
detection difficult for the simple detection function. This lack models trained without it (second row). Given that the classiof separation is clearly seen in Fig. 4. fication performance remains largely comparable between the
 Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of samples in our dataset models, with both contrastive learning models misclassifying
projected onto the first two principal components (top row), an average of 50 samples, this trade-off is deemed beneficial
alongside histograms of the projections onto the first principal for the intended application.
component (bottom row). Each visualization corresponds to Compression performance was evaluated using key metrics,
the model obtained from the average fold of the respective including the compression ratio, which reflects the size of
configuration. the compressed data relative to the original. In addition, we
 As shown in Fig. 4(a), the PCA scatter plot reveals no considered the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), an important
distinct clustering between normal and anomalous signals. metric in image, audio, and video compression. Our model
Consistently, the histogram in Fig. 4(d) demonstrates that achieved a PSNR of 20.46 with a compression ratio of 88.
the threshold (green line) does not effectively separate these In comparison, the model built in [29], with 20 million
two classes when using it as a linear anomaly detection parameters, achieved a PSNR of 26.97. Despite our model
function. not achieving the same quality of reconstruction, it is 80
 In contrast, the application of contrastive learning markedly times smaller, demonstrating the efficiency of the Perceiver IO
enhances classification performance, achieving near-perfect architecture even with smaller models and flexible, nonfixedprecision and recall values of 0.999 for anomalous signals. size signals.
This improvement is corroborated visually in Fig. 4(b) and (e), The use of contrastive learning proves crucial in enhancing
where normal and anomalous signals are clearly segregated the feature separability, which enables the model to cluster
along the principal component axis. the signals effectively, facilitating a simple yet highly accurate
 Partial contrastive learning, depicted in Fig. 4(c) and (f), anomaly detection process even in the presence of imbalyields slightly lower classification metrics compared to full anced classes with a controlled reduction of the compression
contrastive learning. Nevertheless, it delivers notable improve- quality. The strong generalization capabilities of the model
ments in reconstruction quality, with an increase from 62.1% demonstrate its effectiveness not only in the railway industo 64.7% in cosine similarity, as we can see in Table III. Fig. 5 try case study but also for potential applications in other
illustrates that reconstructions produced by the partial con- domains.
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE IV
 M ODEL S IZE W ITH R ESPECT TO I TS PARAMETERS

 can strategically balance computation and size between the
 encoder and decoder to minimize the embedded component.
 Model G demonstrates our choice of single-headed attention,
 which significantly reduces the model size. Since we prioritize
 a compact encoder over the decoder, using only one attention
 head leads to a smaller model, as the MLPs in the encoder
 are smaller than those in the decoder.
 To showcase the embedding capabilities of our model, we
 have trained a streamlined variant that incorporates parameters
 from models A, C, E, and H. The new model has a compact
 architecture, with the encoder measuring 106.01 kB and the
 decoder at 307.63 kB, resulting in a total model size of
 413.64 kB. This model achieved an mse of 0.026 and a
 cosine similarity of 72.7%. In addition, it produced a PSNR
 of 21.87. For reference, although not previously reported, the
 larger model without contrastive learning achieved a higher
 PSNR of 23.72, indicating improved reconstruction quality
 due to a larger model capacity. This optimized model is
 designed to fit within an embedded target while maintaining
 performance levels that are comparable to larger, less compact
 alternatives. By demonstrating these capabilities, we affirm
 the model’s potential for deployment in resource-constrained
 environments without sacrificing too much accuracy or
 efficacy.

 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 Our Perceiver IO-based model excels in vibration analysis
Fig. 5. STFT reconstructions from different models for two sample signals.
 and fault detection through the attention mechanism, which
 isolates critical features and filters out noise. The querybased output mechanism enhances precision in identifying
C. Embedded Environments
 anomalies, such as wear or misalignment, in extensive and
 Table IV presents several variants of the model with differ- noisy datasets. The scalability of the model and its contrastive
ent configurations compared to the baseline. Although some capabilities improve fault detection accuracy and adaptability
models (A, C, E, H, and J) reduce the model size and others across various industrial domains. In addition, integrating
expand it, finding a balance between these extremes is crucial compression and anomaly detection into a unified framefor embedded environments. In models A and B, the latent work reduces data dimensionality, accelerates computations,
matrix size determines the compression ratio, with smaller and lowers memory requirements, making it ideal for realshapes yielding higher ratios. Models C, D, and H–K adjust time monitoring and predictive maintenance applications. This
the encoder size, whereas E and F modify the decoder. In combination of features establishes our model as a robust
our use case, only part of the model runs on an embedded and efficient tool for real-world vibration analysis and fault
target. Given Perceiver IO’s asymmetrical architecture, we diagnosis.
LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION 2544912

 In the future, we plan to test our model on an embedded [5] G. Peixin, Y. Tao, Y. Zhang, W. Jiao, and Z. Jingyu, “Vibration analysis
target, specifically utilizing the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense and control technologies of hydraulic pipeline system in aircraft: A
 review,” Chin. J. Aeronaut., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 83–114, Apr. 2021.
Rev2, paired with an ADXL355 3-D axis accelerometer. This [6] J.-G. Jang, C.-M. Noh, S.-S. Kim, S.-C. Shin, S.-S. Lee, and J.-C. Lee,
development board features 1 MB of flash memory and 256 kB “Vibration data feature extraction and deep learning-based preprocessing
of RAM, which is ample for storing the model weights as method for highly accurate motor fault diagnosis,” J. Comput. Design
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 204–220, Jan. 2023.
well as the code required for signal acquisition, inference, and [7] J. H. Choi, S. K. Jang, W. H. Cho, S. Moon, and H. Kim, “Motor PHM
wireless transmission. We estimate that the model’s inference on edge computing with anomaly detection and fault severity estimation
requires approximately 2 million floating-point operations for through compressed data using PCA and autoencoder,” Mach. Learn.
 Knowl. Extraction, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1466–1483, Jun. 2024.
an input of size (100, 129), corresponding to a temporal
 [8] O. AlShorman et al., “A review of artificial intelligence methods for
signal of roughly 12 000 samples. This suggests that most condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of rolling element bearings for
microcontrollers equipped with a floating-point unit (FPU), induction motor,” Shock Vibrat., vol. 2020, pp. 1–20, Nov. 2020.
such as the nRF52840 integrated within the proposed hardware [9] R. Liu, B. Yang, E. Zio, and X. Chen, “Artificial intelligence for fault
 diagnosis of rotating machinery: A review,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process.,
platform (operating at 64 MHz), could perform inference in vol. 108, pp. 33–47, Aug. 2018.
under 1 s. This estimation is based on the number of all [10] Z. Zhu et al., “A review of the application of deep learning in intelligent
mathematical operations needed by the different layers of our fault diagnosis of rotating machinery,” Measurement, vol. 206, Jan.
 2023, Art. no. 112346.
model. However, the actual computational load may be higher [11] C. Wang, Y. Sun, and X. Wang, “Image deep learning in fault
depending on the hardware target and the implementation of diagnosis of mechanical equipment,” J. Intell. Manuf., vol. 35, no. 6,
the necessary mathematical functions, particularly the expo- pp. 2475–2515, Aug. 2024.
nential and hyperbolic tangent functions. For the same input [12] C. T. Yiakopoulos, K. C. Gryllias, and I. A. Antoniadis, “Rolling element
 bearing fault detection in industrial environments based on a K-means
size, the inference memory footprint, which is the sum of clustering approach,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 2888–2911,
the sizes of all intermediate matrices, is less than 16 kB. Mar. 2011.
We are actively working on further reducing the model’s size [13] W. Zhang, G. Peng, C. Li, Y. Chen, and Z. Zhang, “A new deep learning
 model for fault diagnosis with good anti-noise and domain adaptation
and computational cost by optimizing its weights. By merging ability on raw vibration signals,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 425, Feb.
some of the matrices, it is possible to decrease the model’s size 2017.
without affecting its output. These optimizations are inspired [14] B. Zhang, S. Zhang, and W. Li, “Bearing performance degradation
 assessment using long short-term memory recurrent network,” Comput.
by the multihead latent (MLA) attention layer [36]. We will Ind., vol. 106, pp. 14–29, Apr. 2019.
also work on the effect of quantization on the performance of [15] Y. Zhang, X. Li, L. Gao, W. Chen, and P. Li, “Ensemble deep contractive
the model, both for the model weights and the STFT intensity auto-encoders for intelligent fault diagnosis of machines under noisy
 environment,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 196, May 2020, Art. no.
values. Reducing the quantification of the STFT amplitudes 105764.
reduces the size of the input data, which is important in our use [16] M. Oltean, J. Picheral, E. Lahalle, H. Hamdan, and J. Griffaton,
case, but may also strongly affect the quality of the temporal “Compression methods for mechanical vibration signals: Application
reconstructions. In addition, our method may be unsuitable for to the plane engines,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 41, nos. 1–2,
 pp. 313–327, Dec. 2013.
use cases involving very short signals or requiring extremely [17] W. Guo and P. W. Tse, “A novel signal compression method based on
fast inference. optimal ensemble empirical mode decomposition for bearing vibration
 Our goal is to expand the applicability of our model by signals,” J. Sound Vibrat., vol. 332, no. 2, pp. 423–441, Jan. 2013.
 [18] Y. Yin, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Qin, and M. Zuo, “A data compression
incorporating additional use cases, such as degradation estima- method with an encryption feature for safe and lightweight vibration. To achieve this, we aim to further reduce the model’s size tion condition monitoring,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19,
by more accurately balancing reconstruction and contrastive pp. 30524–30535, Oct. 2024.
loss through the implementation of adaptive weights. This [19] K. H. H. Aung, C. L. Kok, Y. Y. Koh, and T. H. Teo, “An embedded
 machine learning fault detection system for electric fan drive,” Electronoptimization will allow us to ensure that the model is compact ics, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 493, Jan. 2024.
enough to be fully embedded within the target hardware. [20] Q. Huang et al., “Compressed sensing based on an improved K-
 Furthermore, the capability for online training or coopera- SVD for vibration signal compression reconstruction in wireless sensor
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
tive learning will enable us to adapt the model dynamically [21] P. Dini, L. Diana, A. Elhanashi, and S. Saponara, “Overview of AIbased on incoming data, thereby enhancing its performance models and tools in embedded IIoT applications,” Electronics, vol. 13,
and relevance in real-time applications. By refining our no. 12, p. 2322, Jun. 2024.
 [22] W.-J. Lin, S.-H. Lo, H.-T. Young, and C.-L. Hung, “Evaluation of deep
approach, we hope to leverage the embedded system’s capa- learning neural networks for surface roughness prediction using vibration
bilities fully while delivering a robust and versatile solution. signal analysis,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 7, p. 1462, Apr. 2019.
 [23] H.-Y. Chen and C.-H. Lee, “Deep learning approach for vibration signals
 R EFERENCES applications,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 11, p. 3929, Jun. 2021.
 [24] X. Wang, D. Mao, and X. Li, “Bearing fault diagnosis based on vibro-
[1] A. Brandt, Noise and Vibration Analysis: Signal Analysis and Experiacoustic data fusion and 1D-CNN network,” Measurement, vol. 173,
 mental Procedures. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2023.
 Sep. 2020, Art. no. 108518.
[2] X. Li et al., “Vibration analysis of the propulsion shaft system consider-
 [25] B. Dolenc, P. Boškoski, and D. Juričić, “Distributed bearing fault
 ing dynamic misalignment in the outer ring,” J. Sound Vibrat., vol. 589,
 diagnosis based on vibration analysis,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process.,
 Oct. 2024, Art. no. 118612.
 vols. 66–67, pp. 521–532, Jan. 2016.
[3] T. Chu, T. Nguyen, H. Yoo, and J. Wang, “A review of vibration
 analysis and its applications,” Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 5, Mar. 2024, Art. [26] H.-Y. Chen and C.-H. Lee, “Vibration signals analysis by explainable
 no. e26282. artificial intelligence (XAI) approach: Application on bearing faults
[4] Z. Wang, Y. Cheng, G. Mei, W. Zhang, G. Huang, and Z. Yin, “Torsional diagnosis,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 134246–134256, 2020.
 vibration analysis of the gear transmission system of high-speed trains [27] G. Biagetti, P. Crippa, L. Falaschetti, A. Mansour, and C. Turchetti,
 with wheel defects,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Engineers, Part F, J. Rail Rapid “Energy and performance analysis of lossless compression algorithms
 Transit, vol. 234, no. 2, pp. 123–133, Feb. 2020. for wireless EMG sensors,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 15, p. 5160, Jul. 2021.
2544912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[28] G. Xin and P. Fan, “A lossless compression method for multi-component Faicel Hnaien received the engineering degree in
 medical images based on big data mining,” Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 1, industrial engineering from the National Engineerp. 12372, Jun. 2021. ing School of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, in 2004, the
[29] A. Jaegle et al., “Perceiver IO: A general architecture for structured master’s degree in industrial engineering from the
 inputs & outputs,” 2021, arXiv:2107.14795. Polytechnic Institute of Grenoble, Grenoble, France,
[30] D. Griffin and J. Lim, “Signal estimation from modified short-time in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in industrial engi-
 Fourier transform,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., neering from the École des Mines de Saint-Étienne,
 vol. ASSP-32, no. 2, pp. 236–243, Apr. 1984. Saint-Étienne, France, in 2008.
[31] K. Q. Weinberger and L. K. Saul, “Distance metric learning for large From 2008 to 2009, he held a temporary teachmargin nearest neighbor classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 10, ing and research position at French Institute of
 no. 9, pp. 207–244, Dec. 2009. Advanced Mechanics, Aubière, France. Since 2009,
[32] E. Kassa, J. Saramota, and A. Skavhaug, “Monitoring of switches and he has been an Associate Professor at the University of Technology of Troyes
 crossings/tracks using smart sensors,” in Intelligent Quality Assessment (UTT), Troyes, France, and he was promoted to a Full Professor in 2024. His
 of Railway Switches and Crossings. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021, academic work has focused on developing optimization methods in industrial
 pp. 149–166. engineering.
[33] M. Hamadache, S. Dutta, O. Olaby, R. Ambur, E. Stewart, and R. Dixon,
 “On the fault detection and diagnosis of railway switch and crossing
 systems: An overview,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 23, p. 5129, Nov. 2019. Hichem Snoussi received the Diploma degree
[34] E. J. Candès and M. B. Wakin, “An introduction to compressive in electrical engineering from École supérieure
 sampling,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 21–30, Mar. d’électricité, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, in 2000, the
 2008. DEA and Ph.D. degrees in signal processing from
[35] Z. Pruša and P. L. Søndergaard, “Real-time spectrogram inversion using the University of Paris Sud, Orsay, France, in
 phase gradient heap integration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digital Audio Effects 2000 and 2003, respectively, and the HDR degree
 (DAFx), 2016, pp. 17–21. from the University of Technology of Compiégne,
[36] F. Meng, P. Tang, X. Tang, Z. Yao, X. Sun, and M. Zhang, “TransMLA: Compiégne, France, in 2009.
 Multi-head latent attention is all you need,” 2025, arXiv:2502.07864. From 2003 to 2004, he was a Post-Doctoral
 Researcher with the Institut de Recherche en Communications et Cybernétique de Nantes (IRCCyN),
 Nantes, France. He has spent short periods as a Visiting Scientist with the
 Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Wako, Japan, and Olin Neuropsychiatry
 Guillaume Lebonvallet received the master’s Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, USA. From 2005 to 2009,
 degree in optimization and systems safety and the he was an Associate Professor with the University of Technology of Troyes,
 engineering degree in networks and telecommunica- Troyes, France. Since 2010, he has been a Full Professor with the University
 tions, with a specialization in mobile technologies of Technology of Troyes. Since 2010, he has been the in charge of CapSec
 and connected objects from the University of Tech- Plateform (Sensors for Security). From 2016 to 2020, he has been the Manager
 nology of Troyes (UTT), Troyes, France, in 2022, of the LM2S Laboratory, Charles Delaunay Institute, Troyes. Since 2021,
 where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. he has been the Deputy Director of the LIST3N Laboratory, and the Team
 Leader of the M2S Group. He is the principal investigator of many research
 projects and industrial partnerships. His research interests include Bayesian
 techniques for source separation, information geometry, differential geometry,
 and machine learning.

 Brice Nélain received the M.Sc. degree in advanced
 Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja received the B.S. degree materials from Cranfield University, Wharley End,
 in mathematics from the Autonomous University of U.K., and the Engineering degree from the Ecole
 Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza, Mexico, Centrale de Paris, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, in 2007.
 in 2015, the M.S. degree in manufacturing sys- From 2008 to 2023, he took over the positions
 tems from the Tecnológico of Monterrey, Monterrey, of computation engineer, and an Expert Engi-
 Mexico, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in computer neer at VIBRATEC, Écully, France, specialized in
 science from Centrale Lille, Lille, France, in 2022. vibration and acoustics. In 2023, he joined the
 He currently holds a post-doctoral position at the Innovation Team, VOSSLOH, Villeurbanne, France,
 University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, France. as the Project Leader. His research was focused
 His research interests include scheduling and deep on ground-borne noise and vibration, mechanical
 learning. fatigue design, and gearbox noises.