4914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Q-P2FL: Quantum-Enhanced Federated Edge
 Intelligence for Privacy-Preserving Adversarial
 Attack Detection on Consumer Edge Devices
 Farhan Ullah , Nazeeruddin Mohammad , Member, IEEE, Leonardo Mostarda , Member, IEEE,
 Diletta Cacciagrano , and Yue Zhao

 Abstract—The rapid expansion of smart consumer environ- I. I NTRODUCTION
ments is facilitated by device-to-device communication, which
 HE EXPANSION of consumer peripheral devices has
generates considerable quantities of data and improves the
user experience. While this data provides useful insights, it
is also subject to malicious cyberattacks. Machine Learning
 T significantly influenced the evolution of contemporary
 ecosystems, resulting in more personalized services and adap-
(ML)-based threat detection technologies solve these challenges; tive solutions. These devices, which range from smart home
however crucial consumer electronics privacy concerns are often systems to wearable technology, generate and analyze vast
bypassed. The growing connectivity of consumer devices raises
 quantities of private data, providing unique perspectives on
the possibility of adversarial cyberattacks. Quantum technology
may give stronger protection against threats, while FL-based individual preferences and actions. However, the interconedge computing may help to ensure data privacy and secu- nectivity of this ecosystem has posed substantial challenges
rity. This work proposes a Quantum-based Privacy-Preserving to protecting data privacy and security. The integrity and
Federated Learning (Q-P2FL) technique for detecting adversarial dependability of these systems are at risk due to adversarattacks on consumer edge devices. First, as quantum computing
 ial attacks, including ransomware, Denial-of-Service (DoS),
advances, standard validation approaches may become obsolete.
Quantum-based registration and authentication with Additive and man-in-the-middle attacks. Consequently, robust defenses
Homomorphic Encryption (AHE) is employed to safeguard are necessary to maintain functionality and confidence [1].
privacy and secure model weights on edge devices. Second, Figure 1 demonstrates that traditional malware detection algoimage-based features are extracted from network traffic bytes to rithms and antivirus software based on signatures frequently
generate distinguished datasets. Third, adversarial examples are
 fail to address modern cyber threats. A potential alternative
generated to assess the robustness of datasets. This is achieved
by employing four distinct types of adversarial techniques that is the integration of ML into threat detection systems. These
incorporate perturbations into the input data. The pre-trained systems, however, are susceptible to privacy concerns because
Vision Transformer (ViT) extracts features to generate the local they rely on centralized infrastructures for model training.
model weights. Finally, the Q-P2FL approach detects and classi- Sensitive data transported to centralized systems is vulnerable
fies adversarial attacks, ensuring data security and privacy. The
 to breaches and unwanted access, underlining the need for
proposed method is evaluated on two standard datasets: Edge-
IIoT and CICIoMT2024, with detection accuracies of 99.38% more secure, decentralized decisions [2], [3].
and 99.41%, respectively. This approach presents a promising Federated Learning (FL) has become an important step
solution for protecting consumer edge devices from adversarial forward in addressing privacy concerns. FL ensures that
attacks and improving their privacy-preserving capabilities. data is maintained on local devices during the learning
 Index Terms—Quantum computing, consumer devices, edge process by transferring only model changes, not unprocessed
computing, federated learning, adversarial attacks, cybersecurity. data. Furthermore, this methodology promotes privacy and
 allows for collaborative learning in distributed environments.
 However, FL is still vulnerable. Attackers can utilize tech-
 Received 5 January 2025; revised 3 March 2025 and 25 April 2025; niques such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM),
accepted 10 May 2025. Date of publication 19 May 2025; date of cur- Iterative Gradient Sign Method (IGSM), Projected Gradient
rent version 14 August 2025. This work was supported by the National Descent (PGD), or a hybrid approach to compromise the
Program for Research, Development, and Innovation in Cybersecurity,
National Cybersecurity Authority, Saudi Arabia, under Grant CRPG-25-3245. security and resilience of FL systems. These methods are
(Corresponding author: Yue Zhao.) referred to as evasion assaults and involve the use of adver-
 Farhan Ullah and Nazeeruddin Mohammad are with the Cybersecurity sarial samples to deceive the model into producing inaccurate
Center, Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 31952, Saudi
Arabia (e-mail: fullah@pmu.edu.sa; nmohammad@pmu.edu.sa). predictions [4]. In our research, we assess the robustness of
 Leonardo Mostarda is with the Department of Mathematics and the classification task by employing these strategies to produce
Computer Science, University of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy adversarial images. Furthermore, the current FL implementa-
(e-mail: leonardo.mostarda@unipg.it).
 Diletta Cacciagrano is with the Division of Computer Science, University tions use Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) and Secure
of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy (e-mail: diletta.cacciagrano@unicam.it). Multi-party Computation (SMC), which have large processing
 Yue Zhao is with the Department of Computer Science, College of Science, costs, limiting their usefulness in resource-constrained edge
Mathematics and Technology, Wenzhou-Kean University, Wenzhou 325060,
China (e-mail: yuezhao@kean.edu). applications. Quantum technology improves the prevention of
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3571352 cyber threats, while edge computing enables data processing,
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ULLAH et al.: Q-P2FL: QUANTUM-ENHANCED FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE 4915

 assess and strengthen resilience to evasion attacks. This
 approach enhances model performance, data security,
 and dataset resilience to adversarial threats.
 3) We presented a novel Q-P2FL framework that combines
 quantum technology and FL to improve the security and privacy of consumer edge devices [12]. By
 employing quantum-based registration, authentication,
 and AHE, the architecture effectively protects model
 weights. This approach protects data privacy while
 also providing effective resistance against malicious
 attacks.
 4) We conducted experiments using different numbers
 of edge devices to assess the performance of the
 proposed approach. Across all test scenarios, the method
 consistently achieved superior classification results,
 demonstrating its scalability and effectiveness.
 The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows:
 Section II discusses related work, and Section III describes the
Fig. 1. Impact of adversarial attacks on traditional model training methods.
 proposed methodology. In Section IV, the experimental results
 and discussions are presented, and the study is concluded in
thereby reducing the vulnerabilities associated with centralized Section V.
infrastructures [5], [6]. Quantum-based FL employs advanced
quantum authentication to secure edge device communication II. R ELATED W ORK
while maintaining privacy. It employs quantum security tech-
 Quantum-based FL approaches are gradually replacing conniques to defend against adversarial attacks. In contrast to
 ventional ML-based methods in the detection of adversarial
conventional methods, it utilizes the Quantum Conference Key
 intrusions in consumer electronics [2], [8], [12], [13]. The
Agreement (QCKA) to establish high-security key exchange
 following section examines a variety of methods that utilize
protocols. This provides quantum states impermeable in digital
 ML and quantum-based FL to identify and categorize attacks
encryption, as any interception or duplication is immediately
 on consumer electronic devices.
detectable, even under adverse conditions. Reliable interaction
is ensured by this innovative technique, which safeguards
critical data within decentralized FL systems [7], [8]. A. ML/FL Methods
 To address these difficulties, this study presents Q-P2FL, an Qiu et al. [14] have created a novel adversarial attack
FL framework for detecting adversarial attacks on consumer that targets network intrusion detection systems based on
edge devices. The method protects against data breaches and the Internet of Things (IoT). This attack utilizes closed-box
model manipulation by utilizing quantum computing to over- access to the Deep Learning (DL) model. Model extraction
come the limitations of conventional cryptography. Q-P2FL duplicates the closed-box model with minimum training data,
incorporates Additive Homomorphic Encryption (AHE) to and saliency maps highlight the most important packet features
balance data privacy with computational efficiency, making it in detection results. These methods facilitate the efficient
beneficial for edge intelligence applications [9]. This method generation of adversarial examples by utilizing conventional
addresses consumer edge device heterogeneity and resource models. Pawlicki et al. [15] used four previously proposed
constraints by incorporating quantum-driven registration and approaches to generate adversarial attacks that could damage
authentication procedures to protect FL systems from adver- a well-optimized intrusion detection algorithm during testing
sarial threats [10], [11]. Q-P2FL enhances the security and and proposed a mechanism to detect them. The four techniques
scalability of federated edge intelligence systems, making for creating adversarial attacks and the appropriate context for
consumer edge devices more resilient and privacy-preserving. artificial neural networks are described. Yamany et al. [4] used
The main contributions are given below: FL and network traffic adversarial contexts to improve medical
 1) This study leverages image-based features to effectively device security with edge intelligence. An image-based dataset
 capture structured data categories, such as headers, pro- is generated by converting bytes of network traffic. The dataset
 cedures, and storage. The datasets used in this research is skewed due to the sporadic nature of client interactions,
 are generated by systematically processing large vol- which may impair effectiveness. Four adversarial attack techumes of network traffic packets. These customized niques are implemented to generate instances and evaluate
 datasets are then evaluated to develop a lightweight the dataset’s resilience. Ibitoye et al. [16] used the UNSW
 intrusion detection approach. Canberra Cyber BoT-IoT dataset to evaluate Self-normalizing
 2) To reduce overfitting and class imbalance, data augmen- Neural Networks (SNNs) and Feed-forward Neural Networks
 tation techniques are used to increase dataset diversity. (FNNs) in identifying breach vulnerabilities in an IoT network.
 Adversarial examples are produced utilizing FGSM, The findings show that the FNN performs better than the
 IGSM, PGD, and a hybrid IGSM-PGD method to SNN in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and Cohen’s
4916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Kappa score for intrusion detection. However, the SNN performed better against adverse samples from the IoT dataset.
Chen et al. [17] introduced the privacy score and evasion
rate for FL-based intrusion detection, which quantifies traffic
attribute similarity and adversarial attack impact. Experiments
showed that hostile communications circumvented the stateof-the-art SOTA Kitsune technique, proving that existing
protections are insufficient. They presented an optimizationbased security strategy that reduces gradient distance while
increasing input distance to improve FL-based intrusion detection and privacy.

B. Quantum-Based FL Methods
 Namakshenas et al. [2] used quantum-based FL to address
two significant challenges in consumer threat identification.
The first issue addressed is the importance of rigorous customer validation in FL. The advent of quantum computing
may render traditional validation methods useless. To address
this issue, a quantum-centric enrollment and authorization
approach is provided, which ensures thorough client evaluation inside an FL paradigm. The second challenge is to
 Fig. 2. Quantum-enhanced federated edge intelligence framework for
protect the model weights in FL. The incorporation of AHE detecting adversarial attacks on consumer edge devices.
ensures the privacy of FL users and efficient computation.
Houda et al. [8] developed a privacy-preserving and efficient
network intrusion detection paradigm based on quantum com- III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY: Q UANTUM -BASED
puting and FL. While safeguarding user privacy, decentralized P RIVACY-P RESERVING FL
FL enabled a multitude of consumer devices to train a Figure 2 illustrates the proposed Q-P2FL framework.
global model. The efficiency of model training and infer- Quantum-based registration, which uses AHE, protects edge
ence is enhanced by quantum computation. Results showed device privacy and model weights. Network traffic data is
significant improvements in processing efficiency and detec- acquired using a customized crawling method and turned
tion accuracy when compared to conventional approaches. into images to generate adversarial examples. These are then
Friha et al. [18] presented a differentially FL-based decen- classified using FL to ensure the system’s resilience.
tralized secure intrusion detection system for smart industrial
locations. Quantum computing components include a key
 A. Dataset Preparation
exchange protocol for peer-to-peer weight communication, a
differentially private gradient exchange mechanism for FL The proposed approach is assessed using two widely recprivacy, and a decentralized FL framework. The decentralized ognized datasets. The first, Edge-IIoTset1 [20], dataset is
framework reduces the possibility of aggregation server failure generated using an IoT/IIoT testbed that includes a range
or attack in traditional FL systems. The approach identified of devices, sensors, protocols, and edge configurations. It
several types of Industrial IoT cyberattacks in a real-world includes data from over ten IoT devices, including low-cost
IIoT dataset. Yamany et al. [19] presented a quantum-based humidity and temperature sensors. It addresses 14 different
FL system capable of autonomously changing FL hyperpa- forms of attacks, including malware, injection, man-in-therameters in autonomous vehicle settings during adversarial middle, and DoS/DDoS. The data, which originally had 1176
attacks. A quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization tech- attributes, has been reduced to 61 key features. This dataset
nique is employed to adjust the learning rate and local & provides a wide range of attack scenarios, making it useful
global epochs. The proposed technique is integrated into a for testing industrial and IoT intrusion detection systems. The
cyber-defense system to mitigate the impact of malicious second dataset primarily focuses on the security of healthcare
attacks. devices, CICIoMT20242 [21]. It explores attacks on 40 devices
 The proposed Q-P2FL approach improves the security and (25 physical and 15 simulated) using protocols such as
privacy of consumer devices in response to adversarial attacks. Bluetooth, MQTT, and Wi-Fi. The most prominent attacks are
It integrates quantum-based registration, authentication, and spoofing, reconnaissance, DDoS, and MQTT-based exploits.
AHE to enhance the privacy and protection of model weights. The security dataset is generated by replaying network traffic
Additionally, image-based features retrieved from network between switches and IoMT devices in real time using a
traffic are used to generate novel datasets and tested for network probe.
robustness using adversarial methods. The Q-P2FL approach 1 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohamedamineferrag/edgeiiotset-cyberefficiently identifies and classifies adversarial attacks, provid- security-dataset-of-iot-iiot/code
ing a reliable privacy-preserving solution for edge devices. 2 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iomt-dataset-2024.html
ULLAH et al.: Q-P2FL: QUANTUM-ENHANCED FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE 4917

 network traffic images, especially when identifying malicious
 behavior. By producing synthetic data, the model can gain
 knowledge from a greater variety of network patterns, improving its ability to identify anomalies [25], [26].
 To simulate different orientations of the image, a synthetic
 rotation by an angle θ can be described in equation (1):
 Isynthetic = Rθ (I) (1)
 where Rθ denotes the operation that rotates image I by
 angle θ .
 Scaling the image to new dimensions x × y is another
 important transformation in synthetic data generation shown
 in equation (2):
 Iscaled = I · S(x, y) (2)
Fig. 3. Distribution of images in the CICIoMT2024 dataset. where S(x, y) is the scaling function that resizes the image I
 to the dimensions x × y.
 Incorporating noise into the image for enhanced robustness
B. Light-Weight Feature Extraction can be modeled as shown in equation (3):
 Packet Capture (PCAP) files provide essential packet logs Inoisy = I + ,  ∼ N (μ, σ ) (3)
that enhance network performance and security. They help
detect threats, identify unusual behavior, and track network where  is noise sampled from a Gaussian distribution with
issues during incident investigations. PCAP files are also crit- mean μ and standard deviation σ .
ical for protocol analysis, aiding in the detection of errors and For simulating variations in data composition as shown
illegal activities [22], [23]. Packet data analysis can be used to in equation (4), synthetic cropping is applied to the image,
measure performance more accurately, revealing latency issues adjusting its size to x × y :
  
and barriers. In addition to facilitating the identification of Icropped = I x × y (4)
threats by exposing aberrant behaviors and potential security
risks, PCAP files serve as an audit trail, ensuring adherence where x × y indicates the target dimensions of the cropped
to laws and security policies. They help troubleshoot network image.
faults by revealing individual data flows. Addressing static Synthetic color jittering, which modifies the image’s
and dynamic classification problems is becoming increasingly brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue, is represented in
important with the growth of network traffic. We explored equation (5):
using visual signals to detect malicious communications as a  
 Ijittered = I  J δbrightness , δcontrast , δsaturation , δhue (5)
solution. This method employs image processing to convert
network traffic patterns into textural features, eliminating the where J (δbrightness , δcontrast , δsaturation , δhue ) applies random
necessity for traffic signatures or reverse engineering. PCAP changes to these properties.
file analysis uses byte sequences that show harmful changes Horizontal and vertical flipping, key for generating different
to transform 8-bit vectors into grayscale images. A structured image perspectives, can be formalized in equation (6):
 
image representation of the network traffic is formed by map- Fh (I) with probability phorizontal
 Iflipped = (6)
ping each byte in the sequence to a pixel intensity value. This Fv (I) with probability pvertical
transformation allows for the visibility of patterns associated
with harmful activity, resulting in more efficient intrusion where Fh (I) and Fv (I) represent the horizontal and vertical
detection. Subsequently, the dimensions of these images are flip operations.
reduced to 128 × 128 pixels. Image-based characteristics are Lastly, applying an affine transformation to the image for
faster and utilize fewer resources than previous approaches synthetic data generation can be written in equation (7):
due to their small size. They also uncover subtle patterns that Iaffine = A(I, M, b) (7)
conventional approaches may overlook, making them useful
for identifying malicious attacks [24]. Figure 3 shows the where A(I, M, b) applies the affine transformation using
number of extracted images using the CICIoMT2024 train matrix M and translation vector b.
dataset. The lightweight nature of these capabilities makes These strategies are used to produce synthetic data, which
it easier to detect possible vulnerabilities in real time and makes the training dataset more diverse and allows the model
respond quickly to security threats. to learn more robust and generalized features. This enables
 the model to more effectively identify malicious traffic, even
 in scenarios where the network conditions are dynamic or
C. Synthetic Data Generation the data is insufficient. Additionally, synthetic data production
 Synthetic data generation is an effective strategy for increas- ensures that the model is trained on a wide range of realing feature extraction and addressing class imbalances in world traffic patterns and anomalies. For intrusion detection
4918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Equations (9) and (10) specify the iterations, starting from the
 initial input x:
 x(0) = x, (9)
   
 (t+1)
 x = clipx,λ x(t) + δ · sign ∇x L(w, x(t) , y) , (10)

 where t is the iteration step, and clipx,λ (·) constrains the
 adversarial input to the perturbation range described by λ.
 This repeated technique improves the relevancy of adversarial
 examples.
 3) PGD: PGD improves IGSM by including a projection
Fig. 4. Examining evasion attacks based on irregularities in network traffic operation that keeps perturbations under a Lp -norm limit. It
flows.
 uses the initial input as a starting point for each iteration and
 applies perturbations to return the adversarial example to a
applications, this method enhances both generalization and suitable range. For example, the formulation is indicated in
accuracy. equations (11) (12).
 x(0) = x, (11)
D. Synthesizing Adversarial Perturbations   
 (t+1)
 x = B(x,λ) x(t) + δ · sign ∇x L(w, x(t) , y) , (12)
 Evasion attacks are a common adversarial strategy in which
attackers intentionally alter inputs to confuse ML models. The projection operator on the Lp -norm ball of radius λ
These attacks take advantage of weaknesses in the model by around the original input x is represented by B(x,λ) (·). This
making small changes to legitimate inputs, causing them to ensures that the generated adversarial examples adhere to the
be misclassified as shown in Figure 4. This study evaluates specified perturbation limitations.
four adversarial techniques: PGD, FGSM, IGSM, and a hybrid 4) Hybrid Method (PGD and IGSM): The hybrid technique
approach that combines PGD and IGSM [27]. These strategies combines the optimal features of both IGSM and PGD, combinare used to evaluate their efficacy in creating adversarial ing their iterative nature with resilient optimization. It initiates
examples that can fool the target model while also lowering the process by generating adversarial samples using IGSM,
the degree of perturbation introduced. Understanding and pro- which are subsequently refined using PGD. This two-step techtecting against evasion attacks requires the ability to synthesize nique improves attack efficiency while preserving imperceptible
suspicious perturbations. The examination of the robustness of disruptions, as illustrated in equations (13) (14) (15).
intrusion detection against evasion attacks offers information IGSM Phase:
about their ability to effectively manage sophisticated cyber
 x(0) = x, (13)
intrusions [28].   
 (t+1)
 By utilizing adversarial perturbation approaches, it is pos- x = clipx,λ x(t) + δ · sign ∇x L(w, x(t) , y) . (14)
sible to predict evasion risks and improve the adaptability
of intrusion detection. In addition to revealing potential PGD Refinement Phase:
   
vulnerabilities during model testing in these scenarios, coun- x(t+1) = B(x,λ) x(t) + δ · sign ∇x L(w, x(t) , y) . (15)
termeasures are also implemented to mitigate these attacks.
By predicting and resolving evasion strategies, it is possible This hybrid approach emphasizes the benefits of both methto detect Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs), malware, and ods, with IGSM enabling precise initialization. In contrast,
other cyberattacks that employ minor modifications to evade PGD ensures that adversarial instances adhere to perturbation
detection [14], [29]. requirements, resulting in more effective and resilient samples.
 1) FGSM: FGSM uses a gradient-based, one-step tech- These developments increase the detection and analysis of
nique for adversarial sample generation. It changes the input x sophisticated cyberattacks, including evasion attacks, allowing
in the direction of the gradient of the loss function L(w, x, y), for proactive countermeasures in the real world. The prewhere it w represents the model coefficients and y represents trained ViT, which is renowned for its exceptional performance
the true label. Equation (8) calculates the adversarial input x , in image processing and feature extraction, is utilized to
whereas λ determines the perturbation magnitude. extract features for local model training [30], [31], [32]. The
 ViT architecture efficiently captures complex patterns and
 x = x + λ · sign(∇x L(w, x, y)). (8)
 dependencies inside network traffic data by using self-attention
 This method is computationally efficient, making it appro- methods. In this work, ViT is applied on the client side to
priate for fast adversarial attacks. However, its simplicity limits process adversarial instances produced from network traffic,
its effectiveness against strong defensive strategies. therefore improving its capacity to identify abnormalities,
 2) IGSM: The FGSM concept is employed iteratively by including DDoS attacks. The feature map extracted by the
IGSM, which is an acronym for Basic Iterative Method ViT model during training is illustrated in Figure 5, which
(BIM). This technique uses smaller perturbation steps δ demonstrates its ability to learn unique representations. The
across multiple rounds to ensure that adversarial perturbations ViT model updates model weights depending on processed
accumulate gradually without exceeding a predetermined limit. adversarial examples by local training on the client device.
ULLAH et al.: Q-P2FL: QUANTUM-ENHANCED FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE 4919

 Algorithm 1: Quantum-Based Secured FL for Adversarial
 Attack Detection
 Input: Client datasets: Di for i = 1, 2, . . . , N
 Output: Global model for adversarial attack detection
 Mg
 Function QuantumSecuredFL(D1 , D2 , . . . , DN ):
 Initialize client datasets Di for i = 1, 2, . . . , N;
 Initialize QKD keys for secure communication: ki for
 each client i;
 Initialize quantum classical key agreement for
Fig. 5. Cyberattack features map utilizing pre-trained vision transformer. client-server mutual authentication:
 kshared = QCKA(ki , kj );
 for each client i do
 Train local model: wi ← Train(Di ) // Train local
 model on client data Di ;
 E(θi ) ← Encrypt(wi ) // Encrypt model weights
 for privacy preservation using AHE;

 for each client i do
 Send encrypted model update to server: Send
 E(θi ) to aggregation server for global model
 aggregation;
Fig. 6. Training times distributed across edge devices.
  
 N
 Aggregation step: E(Mg ) = AHE i=1 E(θ )
 i ;
 encrypted
Figure 6 shows the distributed training time among separate wglobal ← Aggregate(E(Mg )) // Aggregate
nodes. After local training, the model weights are sent to the encrypted model updates;
server for global aggregation, enabling collaborative learning Decryption step:
and enhancing detection performance. encrypted
 wglobal ← Decrypt(wglobal , kshared ) // Decrypt
 aggregated model;
E. Quantum-Based Secured FL
 for each input x in test dataset do
 The proposed Q-P2FL design effectively protects user ŷi ← f (Mg , x) // Use global model to predict and
privacy and detects adversarial attacks on edge devices by detect adversarial attack;
utilizing quantum-based cryptography and AHE. Compare ŷi with intrusion patterns to detect
 malicious activities;
F. Quantum-Based Cryptography for Privacy Preservation
 Final Output: Return the global model Mg for
 Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) is used extensively to
 adversarial attack detection;
ensure a secure connection between the aggregation server
and clients, as shown in Algorithm 1. During QKD, quantum channels are utilized for exchanging cryptographic keys.
An alarm would be triggered regarding potential security kshared . This shared key secures client-server communication,
vulnerabilities in the system if an attempt to eavesdrop on preventing attackers from impersonating valid clients or insertthe key exchange disrupts the quantum state [6], [19]. To ing malicious data into FL.
encrypt and authenticate communications, both the client and
the aggregation server use shared keys (ki ).
 Client-aggregation server mutual authentication is secured G. Additive Homomorphic Encryption for Privacy-Preserving
via the Quantum Classical Key Agreement (QCKA) protocol Aggregation
as shown in equation (16): AHE is used to ensure the privacy of model updates
   during the FL aggregation phase. HE allows computations
 kshared = QCKA ki , kj (16) on encrypted data to be performed without the need for
 The term kj refers to one of the keys involved in decryption. As a result, the aggregation server can generate
the Quantum Classical Key Agreement (QCKA) protocol. the global model weights Mg from encrypted updates without
Specifically, kj represents the key associated with the second accessing the sensitive data underlying.
party (typically the server or another client) in the key Let E(θi ) represent the encrypted model weights for each
exchange process. In the QCKA protocol, two parties (such client i as given in equation (17):
as a client and a server) exchange keys, ki (the client’s key) N
  
and kj (the server’s key or another client’s key). These keys E Mg = AHE E(θi ) (17)
are subsequently employed to generate a shared secret key, i=1
4920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 This guarantees that the server may aggregate model
updates from multiple clients without disclosing any sensitive
information regarding the data or local models of any of the
clients. HE encryption ensures that sensitive data remains confidential during the FL process, providing further protection
against malicious attempts and data leaks.

H. Federated Learning for Adversarial Detection
 The proposed approach uses federated averaging (FedAvg)
to aggregate the global server model. This method guarantees
the reliable and effective integration of locally trained models
by computing the weighted average of model updates from
client devices. Consequently, it ensures the privacy of data Fig. 7. Individual vs global accuracy epoch curves for 3 edge nodes.
throughout the aggregation process. Clients in this system train
local models to detect adversarial behaviors by minimizing a
local loss function Li as given in equation (18): IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
   A. Performance Indicators
 Li = L ŷi , y (18) We selected various network traffic-based images and
 x∈Di several edge nodes to evaluate the proposed method comprehensively. The proposed method is evaluated using
 Afterward, QKD is used for secure communication, and two publicly available standard datasets, Edge-IIoT, and
encrypted model updates are merged into a global model CICIoMT2024. We measured performance using precision,
Mg safely and privately. The global approach benefits from recall, FL-score, and accuracy. These metrics are calculated
the diverse and secure contributions made by several clients, from True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives
which improves the detection of malicious attacks. (TN), and False Negatives (FN) counts. The performance
 measures are provided by Equations (20)-(23).
I. Adversarial Attack Detection TP
 Precision = . (20)
 The global model Mg is used to identify adversarial attacks (TP + FP)
by comparing its predictions to existing intrusion patterns. The FP
 Recall = . (21)
detection function ŷi is determined for a given input x using (FP + TN)
the following computation in equation (19): (2 ∗ TP)
 FL − score = . (22)
 (2TP + FP + FN)
 ŷi = f (Mi , x) (19) (TP + TN)
 Accuracy = . (23)
 (TP + TN + FP + FN)
 The prediction results for the i-th input, denoted as ŷi , are
obtained by applying the model function f to the model Mi B. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
and the input data x, where ŷi stores the complete output The proposed approach is tested across a variety of edge
of this prediction. By incorporating the knowledge of all node variants to demonstrate its effectiveness. Figure 7 shows
participating clients, the global model enhances its ability to the dynamic epoch curves for each node and the global server
identify adversarial activities on edge devices and increases its with three edge nodes. Nodes 2 and 3 start at 82%, the node
resilience to a variety of attack strategies. 1 at 91%, and the global server at 86%. The curves have
 The use of quantum-based cryptography provides an extra an increasing trend and 99% accuracy up to the fifth epoch,
layer of protection, making the system resilient to eavesdrop- after which they decrease to 95% and then grow again. The
ping and adversarial attacks. The proposed method improves global curve exhibits the same continuous and normal behavior
adversarial attack detection by combining QKD, QCKA, as the epoch curves of the other nodes. Figure 8 shows
and AHE, ensuring secure communication and privacy as the dynamic loss values for three edge nodes. These values
shown in Algorithm 1. Clients use their datasets to train local are behaving oppositely, as illustrated in Figure 7, which
models and then send encrypted updates to the server after illustrates the consistent efficacy of the proposed approach.
encrypting the model weights with AHE. The server uses the Figure 9 shows the dynamic accuracy curves for five edge
common QCKA key to decrypt and aggregate the local models nodes. The model may have initially struggled to identify the
received from various clients. After comparing predictions optimal parameters when it examined various parts of the loss,
to observed intrusion patterns, the final model is used to which could explain the large decline in accuracy between
detect adversarial attacks. This approach ensures secure data epochs 10 and 20. However, as training progresses and the
transmission, privacy-preserving FL, and effective adversarial model stabilizes, it begins to generalize more well, resulting
threat detection. in the observed increase in accuracy, which eventually reaches
ULLAH et al.: Q-P2FL: QUANTUM-ENHANCED FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE 4921

 TABLE I
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACK D ETECTION
 U SING E DGE II OT DATASET

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACK D ETECTION
 U SING CICI O MT2024 DATASET

Fig. 8. Individual vs global loss epoch curves for 3 edge nodes.

 be seen that the hybrid approach is stronger and has higher
 performance metrics than individual methods such as FGSM,
 IGSM, and PGD.
 Table III demonstrates the results of comparing the PGD
 and Hybrid techniques to classify adversarial attacks on the
Fig. 9. Individual vs global accuracy epoch curves for 5 edge nodes.
 EdgeIIoT dataset. We have shown only these two techniques
 as they deliver the highest classification results. The PGD
 technique performs somewhat worse for MITM and SQL
 Injection attacks, but it achieves good precision and recall for
 DDoS UDP Flood (98.89% and 98.77%) and Vulnerability
 Scanner (99.12% and 99.34%). In comparison, the Hybrid
 approach regularly beats PGD, with an accuracy of more than
 96% for the majority of attack types. The results include a
 100% recall for DDoS UDP Flood and a strong FL-score for
 Ransomware (98.88%) and XSS (99.32%). The hybrid model
 effectively detects adversarial attacks, despite significantly
 weaker performance on MITM and Password attacks. Table IV
 compares FGSM, IGSM, PGD, and Hybrid approaches for
Fig. 10. Individual vs global loss epoch curves for 5 edge nodes. DDoS, DoS, MQTT, Recon, and Spoofing adversarial attack
 classification using the CICIoMT2024 dataset. FGSM is quite
 effective for spoofing (98.87% precision, 99.24% FL-score)
99.60%. Similarly, Figure 10 depicts the loss values for 5 edge and recon (96.09% FL-score), but less effective for DDoS
nodes that behave inversely to the values shown in Figure 9. and MQTT. IGSM maintains good performance for recon
 Table I compares the performance of adversarial attack and spoofing while improving on MQTT (94.1% FL-score),
detection using the EdgeIIoT dataset. Four adversarial however, it performs moderately for DDoS. PGD exhibits
approaches are used: FGSM, IGSM, PGD, and a hybrid exceptional performance, particularly in the areas of DoS
of IGSM and PGD. The precision, recall, FL-score, and (96.96% FL-score) and Spoofing (99.77% precision). The
accuracy performance indicators are utilized to assess the Hybrid approach outperforms all others, receiving the highest
effectiveness of the proposed approach. The FGSM has the scores across most attack types, including notable findings
lowest performance because of its straightforward properties. for Spoofing (99.52% FL-score) and MQTT (97.89% FL-
The hybrid method provides its highest performance, with score), demonstrating greater reliability in adversarial attack
precision, recall, FL-score, and accuracy of 99.82%, 99.64%, detection.
and 99.15% for the benign class, and 99.06%, 99.46%, Table V displays the classification accuracy of Edge-IIoTset
and 99.28% for the attack class, respectively. Overall, the and CICIoMT 2024 datasets with varying edge nodes. The
accuracy is 99.38%. Table II compares the performance of findings suggest that adding edge nodes consistently increases
the same indicators using the CICIoMT2024 dataset. It can accuracy. In the Edge-IIoTset, accuracy rises from 92.46%
4922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACK C LASSIFICATION U SING E DGE II OT DATASET

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACK C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY U SING VARIOUS
 C LASSIFICATION U SING CICI O MT2024 DATASET N UMBERS OF E DGE N ODES

 Table VI shows the performance comparison of
 the proposed work with the related published works.
 Ullah et al. [24] used CNN-based FL for intrusion detection
 on edge devices. Further, it addressed the issue of intermittent
 client behavior and class imbalance. The proposed approach
 is tested on two datasets and provides 99.28% classification
 accuracy. Idrissi et al. [33] introduced Fed-ANIDS, a network
 intrusion detection system that uses anomaly detection and FL
with two nodes to 99.38% with twelve nodes. Similarly, to overcome privacy problems in centralized architectures. The
CICIoMT 2024 increases from 90.81% with 2 nodes to Fed-ANIDS model achieved 94.48% classification accuracy
99.41% with 12 nodes. FL performs better with more across prominent datasets such as USTC-TFC2016, CICclients because it provides a more diverse and representa- IDS2017, and CSE-CIC-IDS2018. Thein et al. [34] introduced
tive dataset, improving generalization. It also improves the Personalized Federated Learning for Intrusion Detection
model’s robustness by reducing overfitting to individual client Systems (pFL-IDS), a resilient method that integrates a
data. Furthermore, parallel client training speeds up learning, poisoned client detector to reduce poisoning attacks while
improving the model. Figure 11 shows the confusion matrix tackling the diversity of IoT data. The proposed approach
for intrusion detection using an EdgeIIoT dataset. The attack provides 99.04% accuracy. Chen et al. [35] created VAN-IDS,
class has 99.2% detection accuracy, while benign has 99.6%. a hybrid model that uses Bi-LSTM for packet analysis and
Figure 12 shows the confusion matrix for intrusion detection LGBM for vehicle attributes to detect DoS and Sybil attacks
using the CICIoMT2024 dataset. The attack is classified as with 98.5% accuracy. FL-based VAN-FED-IDS aggregates
99.3%, while the benign is classified as 99.9%. collaborative detection models using cloud services and
ULLAH et al.: Q-P2FL: QUANTUM-ENHANCED FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE 4923

 edge devices while ensuring adequate security and privacy. Combining AHE with quantum-based registration and
 authentication protects user privacy and model weights. Four
 perturbation techniques are employed to generate adversarial instances to test the resilience of the dataset, and the
 image-based properties of network traffic bytes are utilized
 for developing unique datasets. We used a pre-trained ViT
 to extract features and generate local model weights to
 detect adversarial attacks. The proposed method achieved
 99.38% and 99.41% detection accuracies on the Edge-IIoT
 and CICIoMT2024 datasets, demonstrating its potential as
 a privacy-preserving solution for protecting consumer edge
 devices in smart environments. Despite its excellent detection
 accuracy, the proposed method may need optimization for
 large-scale, heterogeneous edge scenarios. The computational
 costs of quantum authentication and homomorphic encryption
 may affect real-time performance. Adaptive defenses and
 hybrid approaches such as blockchain-quantum technologies
 may improve its robustness and functionality in intelligent
Fig. 11. Confusion Matrix using EdgeIIoT dataset. environments. Future research can improve the scalability,
 efficacy, and feasibility of Q-P2FL in smart environments.
 Furthermore, future work may focus on novel adversarial
 strategies, testing on a wide range of datasets and real-world
 settings, and optimizing computational efficiency.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep
 forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for
 consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2,
 pp. 4976–4987, May 2024.
 [2] D. Namakshenas, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
 “Federated quantum-based privacy-preserving threat detection model for
 consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
 no. 3, pp. 5829–5838, Aug. 2024.
 [3] A. Libri, A. Bartolini, and L. Benini, “pAElla: Edge AI-based realtime malware detection in data centers,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7,
 no. 10, pp. 9589–9599, Oct. 2020.
 [4] W. Yamany, M. Keshk, N. Moustafa, and B. Turnbull, “Swarm
 optimization-based federated learning for the cyber resilience of Internet
 of Things systems against adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1359–1369, Feb. 2024.
 [5] L. Malina et al., “Post-quantum era privacy protection for intelligent
 infrastructures,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 36038–36077, 2021.
 [6] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “A privacy-aware framework for
Fig. 12. Confusion Matrix using CICIoMT2024 dataset. detecting cyber attacks on Internet of Medical Things systems using
 data fusion and quantum deep learning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 99, Nov. 2023,
 Art. no. 101889.
 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED P UBLISHED W ORKS [7] H. Kadry, A. Farouk, E. A. Zanaty, and O. Reyad, “Intrusion detection model using optimized quantum neural network and elliptical
 curve cryptography for data security,” Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 71,
 pp. 491–500, May 2023.
 [8] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and M. Adil, “A privacypreserving framework for efficient network intrusion detection in
 consumer network using quantum federated learning,” IEEE Trans.
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 7121–7128, Nov. 2024.
 [9] O. A. Alzubi, J. A. Alzubi, T. M. Alzubi, and A. Singh, “Quantum
 mayfly optimization with encoder-decoder driven LSTM networks for
 malware detection and classification model,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 28,
 no. 2, pp. 795–807, 2023.
manages local training through roadside units to improve [10] M. Al-Hawawreh, O. Shindi, Z. Baig, M. Alazab, A. Anwar, and
privacy and training speed. R. Doss, “Quantum-powered extended visibility for zero trust-based
 ransomware detection in smart grids,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
 no. 6, pp. 6721–6733, Mar. 2025.
 V. C ONCLUSION [11] C. Qiao, M. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Tian, “Transitioning from federated
 learning to quantum federated learning in Internet of Things: A com-
 This study presents a Q-P2FL technique to mitigate prehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 1, pp.
the increasing threat of adversarial attacks on consumer 509–545, Feb. 2025.
4924 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

[12] A. Khraisat, A. Alazab, S. Singh, T. Jan, and A. Jr. Gomez, “Survey on [23] S. Hore, J. Ghadermazi, A. Shah, and N. D. Bastian, “A sequential deep
 federated learning for intrusion detection system: Concept, architectures, learning framework for a robust and resilient network intrusion detection
 aggregation strategies, challenges, and future directions,” ACM Comput. system,” Comput. Security, vol. 144, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103928.
 Surveys, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–38, 2024. [24] F. Ullah, G. Srivastava, S. Ullah, and L. Mostarda, “Privacy-preserving
[13] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning for federated learning approach for distributed malware attacks with
 network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE intermittent clients and image representation,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 1st Quart., 2023. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4585–4596, Feb. 2024.
[14] H. Qiu, T. Dong, T. Zhang, J. Lu, G. Memmi, and M. Qiu, “Adversarial [25] C. Dewi, R.-C. Chen, Y.-T. Liu, and S.-K. Tai, “Synthetic data generation
 attacks against network intrusion detection in IoT systems,” IEEE using DCGAN for improved traffic sign recognition,” Neural Comput.
 Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10327–10335, Jul. 2021. Appl., vol. 34, no. 24, pp. 21465–21480, 2022.
[15] M. Pawlicki, M. Choraś, and R. Kozik, “Defending network intrusion [26] A. Srivastava, D. Sinha, and V. Kumar, “WCGAN-GP based synthetic
 detection systems against adversarial evasion attacks,” Future Gener. attack data generation with GA based feature selection for IDS,”
 Comput. Syst., vol. 110, pp. 148–154, Sep. 2020. Comput. Security, vol. 134, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 103432.
[16] O. Ibitoye, O. Shafiq, and A. Matrawy, “Analyzing adversarial attacks [27] L. Sun et al., “Adversarial attack and defense on graph data: A
 against deep learning for intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc. survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 7693–7711,
 IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6. Aug. 2023.
[17] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense against [28] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y. Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Adversarial
 gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intrusion detection machine learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4561–4576, domain,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021.
 2023. [29] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “NIDS-vis: Improving the gen-
[18] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, M. Benbouzid, T. Berghout, B. Kantarci, eralized adversarial robustness of network intrusion detection system,”
 and K.-K. R. Choo, “2DF-IDS: Decentralized and differentially private Comput. Security, vol. 145, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 104028.
 federated learning-based intrusion detection system for Industrial IoT,” [30] X. Zhai, A. Kolesnikov, N. Houlsby, and L. Beyer, “Scaling vision
 Comput. Security, vol. 127, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103097. transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
[19] W. Yamany, N. Moustafa, and B. Turnbull, “OQFL: An optimized 2022, pp. 12104–12113.
 quantum-based federated learning framework for defending against [31] J. Gu, V. Tresp, and Y. Qin, “Are vision transformers robust to patch
 adversarial attacks in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. perturbations?” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 404–421.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 893–903, Jan. 2023. [32] K. Mahmood, R. Mahmood, and M. Van Dijk, “On the robustness of
[20] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, vision transformers to adversarial examples,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 7838–7847.
 IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE [33] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-Anids: Federated learning for anomaly-based
 Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022. network intrusion detection systems,” Exp. Syst. Appl., vol. 234, Jun.
[21] S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, R. Ferreira, R. C. Molokwu, S. Sadeghi, 2023, Art. no. 121000.
 and A. Ghorbani, “CiCioMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare devices- [34] T. T. Thein, Y. Shiraishi, and M. Morii, “Personalized federated learninga multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,” Internet based intrusion detection system: Poisoning attack and defense,” Future
 Things, vol. 28, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 101351. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 153, pp. 182–192, Apr. 2024.
[22] J. Ghadermazi, A. Shah, and N. D. Bastian, “Towards real-time network [35] X. Chen, W. Qiu, L. Chen, Y. Ma, and J. Ma, “Fast and practical
 intrusion detection with image-based sequential packets representation,” intrusion detection system based on federated learning for VANET,”
 IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 157–173, Feb. 2025. Comput. Security, vol. 142, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 103881.