8968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 QoS-Enabled Wireless Split Federated Learning:
 A Reinforcement Learning and
 Optimization Approach
 Latif U. Khan , Member, IEEE, Maher Guizani , Member, IEEE, Sami Muhaidat , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Moussa Ayyash , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Federated learning (FL) has various advantages, participate in the aggregation process. At the edge or cloud,
including reduced communication overhead and improved pri- aggregation of local models from various nodes happens. Next
vacy protection for situations involving frequent data production. to aggregation, the global model obtained in the aggregation
FL involves training local models on end devices before transferring them to the cloud or network edge for global aggregation. process is shared with end-devices to further update their
End-devices can use this aggregated model to enhance their local local models. This process takes place iteratively until a
models. Until convergence is reached, this iterative procedure is convergence is attained. FL is significant in wireless systems
carried out repeatedly. FL has many benefits, but it also has sev- primarily for two reasons. These include improved privacy
eral drawbacks. Constraints in computing resources are the most protection and effective communication learning for situations
notable. In general, end-devices lack the computational capacity
to learn local models effectively. To solve this issue, the split where data generation occurs often (autonomous cars, for
FL (SFL) was developed. However, wireless resource limitations example, create 40, 000 gigaoctet of data every day). As a
and uncertainty also make SFL difficult to work. For SFL at result, sending regularly generated data to the cloud under
the network edge, we consider. a joint task-offloading, resource these situations is quite difficult. FL works well in these
allocation, and end-devices computing resources optimization kinds of situations. FL has limitations, even though it makes
problem. Moreover, we consider the quality of service (QoS)
constraint in terms of latency for SFL. Because our problem numerous advantages possible. Due to limited computational
involves both continuous and binary variables, it is a mixed- resources, training local FL models at end devices is difficult.
integer non-linear programming problem and is challenging to Furthermore, it is difficult and entails numerous limitations
solve. We provide a solution based on optimization and a double to share learning updates over a wireless channel. The FL
deep Q-network (DDQN) with dueling. We use comprehensive learning process will become less effective as a result of these
simulations to validate the proposed approach. Our proposed
scheme, namely, DDQN+dueling, outperforms traditional DDQN- deficiencies.
based schemes in terms of faster convergence and attaining QoS In order to overcome the difficulty of computing resource
for various configurations. constraints, split FL (SFL) was introduced in [4]. In [4], split
 Index Terms—Federated learning, split federated learning, FL (SFL) was introduced as a solution to the computing
double deep Q-network, resource-constrained consumer elec- resources constraint problem in FL. The performance of
tronic devices. SFL and FL over wireless networks was evaluated in the
 work in [5]. An additional study in [6] suggested a hybrid
 SFL and FL architecture. For their framework, they mod-
 I. I NTRODUCTION eled wireless communication, and they used the simulation
 N ORDER to achieve superior privacy-aware machine
I learning for a variety of applications, federated learning (FL) has recently been the subject of substantial
 findings to do important analysis. A particular federated
 split learning architecture was designed and results were
 given in the study in [7]. The use of federated learning,
research [1], [2], [3]. In FL, devices run local models itera- split learning, and transfer learning for intelligent transportatively and migrate their resultant local model to the nearby tion system applications was presented by Otoum et al.
edge or remote cloud, depending on the configuration, to in [8]. We propose a novel dueling-based double deep Qnetwork for effective task-offloading and resource allocation
 Received 31 December 2024; revised 27 April 2025; accepted 13 May 2025. in SFL over wireless networks, which differs from the works
Date of publication 8 July 2025; date of current version 7 November 2025.
(Corresponding author: Latif U. Khan.)
 in [5], [6], [7], [8]. The summary of our contributions are
 Latif U. Khan is with the Department of Computer Science and as follows:
Information Technology, Abu Dhabi University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail: • Joint task offloading and resource allocation framework:
latif.u.khan2@gmail.com; latif.khan@adu.ac.ae)).
 Maher Guizani is with the Computer Science and Engineering Department,
 We present a joint task offloading and resource allocation
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019 USA. framework for SFL over wireless networks with com-
 Sami Muhaidat is with the 6G Research Center, Khalifa University, Abu puting resource-constrained devices. This framework will
Dhabi, UAE. enable us to partially compute the SFL model at the end-
 Moussa Ayyash is with the Department of CIMST, Chicago State
University, Chicago, IL 60628 USA. devices and then, offload the rest of the learning task to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3587176 the network edge.
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH 8969

 • QoS-aware problem formulation: We design a cost func- In detail, the authors presented a framework along with a
 tion that counts for both latency and energy. Moreover, we sequence diagram for flow of the process. They defined a
 formulate a problem whose objective is to minimize the cost function that accounts for both latency and energy. They
 cost function via optimizing the local computing resource optimized many parameters to minimize the formulated cost.
 variable, task offloading and resource allocation, and edge These parameters are task offloading, resource allocation,
 computing resource allocation. We introduced a QoS end-devices computing resource management, transmit power
 constraint in our problem formulation. This constraint allocation, and relative local accuracy. They used a block
 is to ensure that latency in sharing of learning updates successive upper-bound minimization function for solution due
 between the end-devices and edge servers should not to its power nature of solving non-convex problems. Moreover,
 exceed the maximum threshold. they provided extensive convergence analysis. Another work
 • Dueling-enabled DDQN for cost optimization of SFL: in [10] used multi-agent DRL for model partitioning and
 Our problem has an NP-hard nature for many end- aggregation control. The work in [11] increased the efficiency
 devices and edge servers. Therefore, it is very challenging of SFL. The work in [12] considered resource scheduling
 for us to use directly conventional convex optimization and SFL. Different, as shown in Table I), from the works
 techniques. Due to these limitations, we propose a in [1], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], our work
 solution based on double deep Q-network and con- focuses on the wireless communication aspect (i.e., specially
 vex optimization. For optimizing end-devices and edge we jointly consider task-offloading, resource allocation, and
 servers computing resource, we use convex optimizers. computing resource optimization) of SFL. In SFL, there will
 On the other hand, for task offloading and resource alloca- be many rounds of communications between devices and the
 tion, we use DDQN. Although DDQN performs well for edge servers. We will formulate a problem to minimize the
 many scenarios, it might not be very stable and have good training cost while satisfying the QoS in terms of latency.
 performance for highly dynamic scenarios. Therefore, we The latency should not be more than the maximum allowed
 added the concept of dueling in DDQN to further improve threshold.
 its performance. Our dueling-based DDQN scheme offers On the other hand, there are many works [13], [14],
 significant performance improvement. [15], [16], [17] on the use deep reinforcement learning for
 • Results: Finally, for a proof of concept, we present resource allocation and association in wireless networks.
 extensive results to support our idea of QoS-aware SFL. Xiong et al. in [13] proposed the use of deep reinforcement learning for resource allocation in IoT edge computing
 system. Their main objective is to minimize the long-term
 II. R ELATED W ORKS weighted sum of completion time of jobs. Specifically, they
 Many works [1], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12] use deep Q-network with multiple replay memories. Another
considered SFL. An overview of recent works is given in work [14] used deep reinforcement learning for resource
Table I. The work in [5] considered both split learning and allocation in blockchain-based resource allocation. The work
federated learning. Based on their analysis, they proposed in [15] considered multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
SFL and analyzed it in detail. They validated their results for wireless networks resource management. They formulated
for MNIST, CIFAR-10, FMNIST, and HAM10000 datasets. a problem to maximize the objective function by optimizing
Another work [6] proposed a scheme, namely, hybrid SL users scheduling and power control decisions. Finally, they
and FL that uses both SL and distributed learning over wire- provided extensive numerical results. The work in [16] conless networks. They formulated an optimization problem and sidered deep reinforcement learning for resource allocation
provided extensive convergence analysis. Finally, simulation in mobile edge networks. A cost function accounting for
results were provided for various settings. The work in [7] the latency was defined. Their formulated problem aimed at
extensively studied both SFL and FL. Moreover, they provided minimizing the cost function subject to many constraints. They
extensive simulation results. The work in [8] proposed the use proposed a scheme using deep deterministic policy gradient
of SFL for intrusion detection system for intelligent transporta- (DDPG) for resource management to minimize the long term
tion system. They used Canadian Institute of Cybersecurity reward. Similar to the previous works, the work in [17]
Intrusion Detection System (CICIDS2017) dataset for their proposed a Q-value iteration based reinforcement learning for
evaluation. According their analysis, their proposed scheme resource management. Based on the works [13], [14], [15],
achieved a good accuracy and suitable for use in end-devices [16], [17], it evident that we can use reinforcement learning
with resource constraints in IoT systems. Another work [9] for resource allocation and task offloading.
proposed the framework, namely, RingSFL. RingSFL is based
on split mechanism for better addressing client heterogeneity.
In contrast to vanilla FL, where a local model is learned by III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
an end-device, in RingSFL, a ring topology is formed. In a Fig. 1 illustrates a system of consumer electronics devices
ring topology, the end-devices communicate with the server with limited resources. In our system, there are devices with
as well as with each other. Finally, the authors presented limited computational power and thus they seem difficult
extensive simulation results for validating their proposal. The to train local FL model. These devices are represented by
work in [1] proposed a hierarchical SFL that improves the the set S of S devices. There is a local dataset associated
convergence speed but at the cost of communication resources. with each device s. These local datasets are denoted by a
8970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORKS W ITH P ROPOSED W ORK

Fig. 1. Split federated learning system model.

set Bs , ∀s ∈ S. Every device s has Bs data points. These the concept that is used by SFL. Even though SFL makes
devices are aimed at participating in the learning process. a lot of advantages feasible, end devices and edge servers
However, they have limited computing resources. Therefore, must allocate wireless and computational resources effectively.
these devices will compute a portion of the local model and Furthermore, the devices involved in SFL must effectively
request the edge servers to learn their remaining models. There transfer their tasks to the edge servers. Here, first, wireless
is a set L of L edge servers for serving end-users. Note SFL model is discussed.
that both end-devices and edge servers have limitations in
terms of computing resources. End-devices cannot completely
learn local models, therefore, they learn a part of their models A. Wireless SFL Model
and share the partially learning model with the edge server. In our system, a set S of S resource-constrained con-
The edge server will further learn the partial model. This is sumer electronics devices want to take part in a global
KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH 8971

 TABLE II
 S UMMARY OF THE K EY N OTATIONS power of all devices should not be greater than ℘MAX , the
 upper limit.
 
 S
 ℘s ≤ ℘MAX . (4)
 s=1
 In addition to computing the partial local model, it is shared
 with the edge server, which performs the remaining local
 model computation. There are two methods for determining
 the partly remaining local model at the network edge. One
 way is to provide labels at the network edge and the other
 way is to share back the data to end-devices for computing
 the loss function using labels. In this work, we assume the
 output labels are available at the network edge. After the edge
 servers receive a partial local model, further computation takes
 place at the network edge. It will share the gradients with the
 devices in addition to computing at the edge. We take into
 consideration an orthogonal frequency division multiple access
 (OFDMA) for communication between end-devices and edge
 servers. Since the availability of communication resources is
 limited, it makes sense for SFL devices to reuse the resources
 that are currently in use by cellular users. We can calculate
 the transmission latency as:
 ⎛ ⎞
 ⎜ κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os ⎟
 strans (κ, υ) = ⎝    ⎠, ∀s ∈ S, (5)
 ps hs,l
 Tr log2 1 + 
 p h +N 2
 c∈C c c,b o

 where Tr and Os are the bandwidth of resource block and
 learning data overhead, respectively. As we are reusing the
model’s learning process. Due to limitations in communication resource blocks, therefore,
  there will be an interference which
resources, only the set S of S will be included in the can be given by c∈C pc hc,b . Meanwhile, the noise power is
learning process among S of S . Because of limitations in given by No2 . υ(s,r) and κ(s,l) are resource allocation and task
computing power, each device learns a partial local model. offloading variables, respectively. The value of task offloading
Let Ts (cs , bs , ts )∀s ∈ S be the learning task, where cs and bs variable κ(s,l) = 1, when the task is offloaded to the edge
represent the computational resources required for learning a server and κ(s,l) = 0, vice versa. Similar to the task offloading
specific local model for a single data point and entire local variable, the resource allocation variable υ(s,r) = 1 if the
dataset points, respectively. The local latency in computing resource block r is allocated to device s and υ(s,r) = 0,
a partial model for a specific local model architecture is vice versa. In our system, every edge server has a certain
determined by: capacity to serve end-users/end-devices. Such a limitation
 can be given by:
 cs bs
 local
 s (℘) = , ∀s ∈ S, (1) 
 S
 ℘s κs,l ≤ κsmax , ∀l ∈ L, (6)
where the computational resource allocated to device s is indi- s=1

cated by ℘s . Increasing local computing resources can lower where the maximum limit of serving by edge server can be
latency, but at the expense of high local energy consumption given by κsmax . Furthermore, the task of a single device should
(i.e., energy is proportional to the square of the device’s be offloaded to a single edge server.
running frequency) 
 L
 κs,l ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S, (7)
 local
 s (℘) = αs cs bs ℘s2 , ∀s ∈ S, (2) l=1
 On the other hand, there are limited communication
where αs represents device s’s effective capacitance coeffiresources. Therefore, a resource block should not be assigned
cient. However, the processing resources of the local device
 to more than one device.
should adhere to the limitations.
 
 R

 ℘min ≤ ℘s ≤ ℘max , ∀s ∈ S, (3) υs,r ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S. (8)
 r=1
where the minimum and maximum limits are indicated by For sending learning updates to the edge servers, wireless
℘min and ℘max , respectively. However, the total computing resource blocks are necessary. To send learning updates, the
8972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

number of resource blocks needed depends on the size of the Similarly for (13), one can rewrite (14) as:
learning data, which is determined by the complexity of the
end-device model architecture. For an end-device, we employ 
 S 
 S

a single resource block [18]. total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) = (1 + θ )strans (κ, υ) + local
 s (℘)
 s=1 s=1
 
 S
 (15)
 υs,r ≤ 1, ∀r ∈ R. (9)
 s=1 It is evident from (15) that the cost in terms of latency
 Now, write the transmission energy as: will increase with an increase in relative local accuracy. There
 ⎛ ⎞ are many ways to improve the relative local accuracy. One is
 ⎜ κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os ⎟ to increase the number of local iterations. Additionally, one
 strans (κ, υ) = ⎝    ⎠ps ,
 ps hs,l can use more complex local model. Generally, both of these
 Tr log2 1 + 
 p h +N 2
 c∈C c c,b o approaches will enhance the performance but not necessary.
 ∀s ∈ S, (10) Also, for both of the aforementioned schemes, they need
 additional computing resources. Now, we write the overall
 After computation, a small cell base station shares the local
 cost as:
model with the remote cloud. The following equation can
be used to determine the number of rounds between the end
 C(κ, υ, ℘, θ ) = βtotal + (1 − β)total , (16)
devices and the edge servers:
 log(1/ε) where β is the scaling constant, which can be used to scale
 Ig (ε, θ ) = , (11)
 1−θ the energy and delay proportion when computing the cost
where the local dataset dependent constant is . The relative of learning the SFL model. The objective of our problem
local accuracy is represented by θ . The interpretation of θ formulation is to reduce the total cost of learning the SFL
differs from that of the local accuracy. In contrast to greater model.
values, lower values of θ are preferred, and vice versa. The
global accuracy is ε. As can be seen from (11), the global P − M : minimize C(κ, υ, ℘, θ )
 κ,υ,℘,θ
rounds are dependent on θ ; that is, more global rounds will subject to:
often occur when θ is higher, and vice versa. Furthermore,
 (3), (4), (6)−(9), (12). (17)
the maximum delay should not be exceeded by the maximum
threshold.
 ⎛ ⎞ The problem as formulated is a MINLP problem. Constraint
 (3) denotes that the local computing resources should follow
 ⎜ κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os ⎟
 ⎝    ⎠ ≤ φmax , the lower and upper limits. Equation (4) ensures that the total
 ps hs,l
 Tr log2 1 +  p h +N 2 computing resources should not be more than the maximum
 c∈C c c,b o
 available computing for all end-devices. Equation (6) ensures
 ∀s ∈ ∫, r ∈ R. (12)
 the maximum possible number of end-devices served by edge
 Equation (12) is the QoS constraint that ensures that delay server. Equation (7) ensures a single device should be associated
should not be more than the maximum threshold. Therefore, with only one edge server. Equation (8) limits the allocation
there is a need for efficient task-offloading and resource of a maximum of single resource block to a single device.
allocation. Next, we present our problem formulation. Equation (12) is about the QoS in terms of latency. This limits the
 delay of all devices should not exceed the maximum threshold
B. Problem Formulation and thus ensure a sufficient QoS while learning SFL model.
 The first step in formulating a problem is to determine an The problem as posed is hard to solve directly. Furthermore,
objective function. The cost of training the SFL model serves standard optimization strategies are not applicable. As a result,
as our goal function. In our situation, we write the objective as discussed in the following section, we shall employ a
function taking into account both energy and delay. Initially, decomposition-based scheme.
we write energy consumption as follows: [1]:
 
 S 
 S IV. P ROPOSED O PTIMIZATION AND M ULTI -AGENT
total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) = (1 + θ )strans (κ, υ) + local
 s (℘), R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING S OLUTION
 s=1 s=1 The formulated problem P-M is very hard to solve
 (13) using conventional convex optimization. The reason for this
 The concept of θ is used in (13), to represent how relative complexity lies in the presence of both continuous (i.e.,
local accuracy affects energy cost. Larger θ values will result local computing resource variable) and binary variables (i.e.,
in larger costs, and vice versa. We now write the overall delay resource allocation and task offloading variables). Therefore,
as follows: we will use a decomposition scheme. This scheme will allow
 
 S 
 S us to separately solve local computing resource optimization
 total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) = strans (κ, υ) + local
 s (℘) (14) and joint resource allocation and task offloading. First, we
 s=1 s=1 solve the local computing problem.
KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH 8973

A. Devices Computing Resource Allocation Problem
 In this section, we discuss our local computing resource
allocation problem. One can write the local computing
optimization problem as follows:
 P − DR : minimize C(℘) (18a)
 ℘
 subject to:
 ℘min ≤ ℘s ≤ ℘max , ∀s ∈ S, (18b)
 S
 ℘s ≤ ℘MAX . (18c)
 s=1
 The goal of problem P-DR is to reduce the latency of
end devices when calculating partial local models. In problem
P-DR, we have one continuous variable ℘. The nature of the
formulated problem is convex. To prove the convexity, we can
check the objective function and the constraints. If we take
the twice derivative of the objective function and then check
it for its range of values for possible inputs. For all inputs, the
range of the twice derivative of the objective function will be
greater than or equal to 0. Based on this, we can say that the
 Fig. 2. Deployment of agents and CVX optimizers.
objective function is convex. Meanwhile, the constraints are
linear inequality constraints. Therefore, one can say that the
problem is a convex optimization problem and can be solved has a significant computational complexity. Therefore, we
using a convex optimizer as shown in Fig. 3. will use alternate scheme, i.e., reinforcement learning based
 scheme.
B. Joint Task-Offloading and Resource Allocation Problem To solve problem P-TR, we will use multi-agent deep
 In this section, we present a joint task offloading and reinforcement learning (MARL), whose deployment is shown
resource allocation problem as follows: in Fig. 2. Various agents are deployed at the end-devices
 involved in SFL. The goal of MARL is to maximize the long-
 P − TR : minimize C(κ, υ) (19a) term reward. In problem P-TR, we want to minimize the cost
 κ,υ
 subject to: function. On the other hand, MARL is based on maximizing
 
 S the long-term reward. Therefore, we write the reward function
 κs,l ≤ κsmax , ∀l ∈ L, (19b) as s = C1 . In MARL, the long-term reward is the summation
 s=1 of the instantaneous rewards of various devices.
 
 L
 
 T−1
 κs,l ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S, (19c) s = γ t s (t) (20)
 l=1 t=0
 R
 υs,r ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S, (19d) where γ t denotes the discount rate that shows the weight
 r=1 of future reward. For γ t = 0, it is evident that we are
 
 S only considering a current reward without future rewards. For
 υs,r ≤ 1, ∀r ∈ R, (19e) γ t ≤ 1, it evident that the future rewards less important
 s=1 compared to previous rewards in computing the long-term
 reward and vice versa. For using MARL, there is a need
 s,r ≤ φmax , ∀s ∈ ∫, r ∈ R, (19f)
 for formulation as a stochastic game. In our system, all the
 κs,l ∈ {0, 1}, υ ∈ {0, 1}, (19g)
 ⎛ ⎞ users want to maximize their long-term reward by optimizing
 task offloading and resource allocation. At a certain time t,
 ⎝ κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os ⎠.
where s,r = ps hs,l
 Convex the reward is determined by the current state of the agent
 Tr log2 1+  2 itself and other agents states. For stochastic game formulation
 c∈C pc hc,b +No
optimization strategies are unable to solve the combinatorial S, G, A, P,  [21], we can write as follows:
problem P-TR. A strategy based on relaxation and • S denotes the set of S devices.
decomposition can be used to solve P-TR [19]. Approximation • G denotes the all possible states set.
errors in the conversion of binary task-offloading and resource • As denotes the action of device s. Furthermore,
allocation variables into continuous and then back to binary the joint action vector can be given by − →
 a =
variables are an inherent limitation of this approach. Using an (a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , aS ) ∈ ×s As .
 T

exhaustive search technique is another method to get around • P denotes the state transition probability.
this limitation [20]. The exhaustive search approach, however, • s is the reward function of device s.
8974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 3. Proposed solution approach.

For our system, the end-devices have two kinds of tasks: aim of this policy πs∗ : G → As is to maximize the long-term
(a) selecting an edge server for task offloading and (b) resource rewards of agents. In MARL, device share their state space
block selection. Therefore, the action space can be written as: using message passing using back haul communication links
 or direct wireless links. Maximizing the value-state function
 arls (t) = {κs,l (t), υs,r (t)}. (21)
 Vi (g, πs , π−s ) of every UE in every state yields the optimal
where κs,l (t) ∈ {0, 1}, κs,l (t) ∈ {κs,0 (t), κs,2 (t), . . . , κs,L−1 (t)} policy πs∗ :
and υs,r (t) ∈ {0, 1}, υs,r (t) ∈ {υs,0 (t), υs,1 (t), . . . , υs,R−1 (t)}.
 T−1  
The total states can be given by the product LR.  
At a certain time t for a particular device s, the Vs (g, πs , π−s ) = E 
 γ s (g(t), πs (t), π−s (t))  g(0) = g ,
 t

actions of other devices are denoted by A−s (t) = t=0
{arl1 (t), . . . , arls−1 (t), arls+1 (t), . . . , arls (t)}. It should be noted (23)
that the immediate reward s (t) = (g, As , A−s ) of every
device s is dependent on its action As at the moment and the where the expectation over all potential trajectories produced
actions of other devices A−s . Additionally, the stability of the by the joint policies πs and π−s is E. Where π−s =
stochastic game can be determined using Nash Equilibrium. A (π1 , π2 , .., πs−1 , πs+1 , . . . , πS ) indicates the strategies of the
Nash Equilibrium is said to be achieved using the following: agents other than s. The discount factor is given by γ . The
    r r∗  value function while considering the Markov property can be
  g, ar∗ ls , a−ls ≥  g, als , a−ls , ∀als ∈ A
 r∗ r∗
 (22)
 given by:
We now model our stochastic game using a finite-state Markov
decision process (MDP). The device reward is dependent upon Vs (g, πs , π−s ) = us (g, πs , π−s )
the other device’s actions and its current state. As a result,   
the Markov property is followed by the process. Lets consider
 +γ Pgg (πs , π−s )Vs g , πs , π−s , (24)
 g ∈G
S, G, A, P,  to determine the MDP. Our solution should
be based on maximizing the reward. There are two ways to
select a reward for our work. One way is the choose the where Pgg (πs , π−s ) is the state transition probability and
throughput. Another way could be to take the reciprocal of us (gt , πs , π−s ) = E[s (g, πs , π−s )]. For πs , the following
the cost function. Similar to many works on reinforcement condition should be met if NE exists:
learning, one can use the C1 as a reward. In a typical stochastic    
environment, we aim to learn a policy πs∗ : G → As . The ∗
 Vs g, πs∗ , π−s ∗
 ≥ Vs g, πs , π−s , ∀g ∈ G. (25)
KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH 8975

For mixed-strategy equilibrium based finite games, there memory. In addition to current values, previous values are also
exist a Nash equilibrium to satisfy the following Bellman used in computation for good results and faster convergence.
optimality: As DQN uses both online and target networks for performance
   enhancement, there are still some challenges in terms of over
 ∗
Vi∗ (g, πs , π−s ) = Vi g, πs∗ , π−s
  
 optimistic estimation. To address this, one can use the concept
  ∗
   ∗
  of Double DQN. DDQN is based on a different expression for
 = max us g, as , π−s +γ Pgg as , π−s DQN
 ai ∈Ai ys .
 g ∈G
 
    
 Vs g , πs∗ , π−s . ∗
 (26) yDDQN = us (g, as ) + γ Qs g , max Qs g as ; θ ; θ − . (31)
 s
 as ∈As
 Solving the above MDP (i.e., 26) can be performed using
Q-learning which is based on finding the optimal Q-value DDQN determines the optimal value Qs (g, as ; θ ) using
function, i.e., Q∗i (g, ai ). both the target network and the online network. After that,
 DDQN
   the ys is obtained using the discount factor and current
 ∗
 Q∗s (g, as ) = us gt , as , π−s reward. Fig. 3 shows the overview of the proposed solution
      ∗ ∗ 
 ∗
 +γ Pgg as , π−s Vi g , πs , π−s , (27) approach. Although DDQN results in better performance,
 g ∈G one can use the concept of dueling to further improve the
 performance of DDQN [21]. For dueling, one can split the
 ∗ ) = max
where Vs (g , πs∗ , π−s ∗
 as ∈As Qs (g, as ). Rewrite (25) as last layer of DDQN network into two networks to yield
follows:
    advantage function and value function. These advantage and
 ∗
 Vi (g, as , π−s ) = us g, as , π−s +γ value functions are used to compute the Q-value. Now, we
 g ∈G discuss the complexity of the proposed scheme. Our proposed
  ∗
   
 Pgg as , π−s max Q∗s g , as . (28) scheme uses convex optimization and DDQN with dueling.
 as ∈As The complexity of convex optimization is reasonable, and
 Obtaining an information about the transition probability it converges within reasonable iterations [22]. On the other
(i.e., Pgg ) is very challenging. To address this difficulty, the hand, in DDQN, mainly the complexity lies in the two
Q-value function Q∗s (g, as ) is computed for Q-learning as: neural networks: (a) online network and (b) target network.
 In our case, we use fully connected neural networks whose
 Qs (g, as ) = Qs (g, as ) + δ{us (gt , as , π−s ) complexity is low. Therefore, overall, we can say that our
  
 + γ max Qs g , as − Qs (g, as )}, (29) proposed scheme has low complexity.
 as ∈As

where the learning rate, represented by δ, aids in calculating
the Q value. For fast convergence, the value of δ needs V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
to be chosen carefully. In this work,  greedy strategy is A. Simulation Settings
considered. The action with the highest reward is chosen For simulations, we consider different number of conwith a probability of 1 − , whereas the random action is sumer electronic devices generated randomly for various
chosen with a probability of . Small state and action spaces runs. Meanwhile, the locations of the edge servers are kept
are better suited for the previously mentioned Q-learning fixed. All the values in our analysis are computed using an
approach. Large action spaces are not a good fit for Q-learning. average of multiple runs (e.g., 30). The channel bandwidth
To overcome this challenge, one can apply Deep Q-network is taken as 180KHz. Transmit power ranges between 30dBm
(DQN). DQN is based on two neural networks: (a) the target and 50dBM for various runs. For path loss, we consider
network and (b) the online network. In the training process, an a free space path loss model. The noise power density is
online network is frequently updated. Such frequent updating considered −174dBm/Hz. Various learning rates (i.e., δ =
of the online network might result in instability. To cater 0.0001, 0.001, 0.00001) are used for analysis. The number of
for this, DQN uses a target network, which is updated less agents used for various runs and settings are 10, 15, and 20.
frequently to improve the stability. The following loss function Our neural network consists of an input layer, two hidden
is used to update the Q-network. layers, and an output layer. Furthermore, for DDQN+dueling,
  2  the last layer is split into two network, i.e., the value function
 Ls (θ ) = Eg,as ,us (g,as ),g ysDQN
 − Qs (g, as ; θ ) , (30) and the advantage function. These two values are then used
 to compute the Q value. The number of resource blocks
 = us (g, as ) + γ maxas ∈As Qs (g as ; θ − ).
 DQN
where ys considered in a system are equal to the number of agents
 −
θ denotes the weights of the target network. For selecting an considered in the system.
action as , online network Qs (g, as ; θ ) is utilized. The weights
of the online network are updated frequently. This frequent
update of the weights might result in unstable performance. To B. Simulation Results
address this, one can use periodic updates in the target network For a fair comparison, we consider various existing baseto bring more stability. Different transitions are stored in lines as follows:
8976 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 4. (a) Cumulative reward vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling, (b) cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling, and (c) steps needed to
reach QoS for various learning rates.

Fig. 5. (a) steps needed to reach QoS for various number of agents, (b) reward vs. episodes for various learning rates, (c) cost vs. episodes for various
learning rates.

Fig. 6. (a) Reward vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling using various existing baselines, (b) cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling using
various existing baselines, (c) cost vs. end-devices for fixed number of edge servers.

 • DDQN+Dueling: This refers to the proposed scheme that Fig. 4a shows the cumulative reward vs. episodes for DDQN
 consider dueling along with DDQN for performing joint and DDQN+dueling schemes. For Figs. 4a and 4b, we
 resource allocation and task offloading. use 20 iterations within a single episode. In the case of
 • DDQN: This refers to the proposed scheme that uses DDQN+dueling, the convergence is fast. Moreover, it is
 DDQN for joint resource allocation and task-offloading. apparent that DDQN+dueling outperforms DDQN in terms of
 • DDQN-Resource Allocation [23]: In this baseline, reward. The main reason for this performance enhancement
 resource allocation is performed using DDQN, whereas is the stable nature of the DDQN+dueling which divides
 the task-offloading is considered fixed. the last layer by two networks to compute the Q-value,
 • DDQN-Task-offloading [24]: In this baseline, task- and thus more improved performance. Fig. 4b shows the
 offloading is performed using DDQN, whereas the cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling. Similar to
 resource allocation is considered fixed. Fig. 4a, Fig. 4b illustrates that DDQN+dueling outperforms
 • DDQN-Task-offloading+Resource allocation [21]: In this DDQN. The performance in terms of cost converges fast
 baseline, both task offloading and resource allocations are for DDQN+dueling. On the other hand, Fig. 4c and Fig. 5a
 performed using DDQN. illustrate the performance of various baselines for attaining
 • Convex optimization [22]: This proposed scheme refers a QoS. From Fig. 4c, it is clear that DDQN+dueling attains
 to the use of convex optimization for local computing the QoS in terms of latency very fast compared to DDQN
 resource optimization. for various learning rates. We use a maximum of 100 steps
 • Equal allocation: This baseline refers to the use of equal in every episode. It is evident from both Fig. 4c and Fig. 5a
 computing resources for end-devices [25]. that DDQN needs more steps compared to DDQN+dueling
KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH 8977

 The cumulative reward is high for more number of agents (i.e.,
 90 agents). The reason for this high reward lies in the fact that
 more agents will result in high cumulative reward.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we have considered SFL and formulated a
 cost optimization problem. We considered a QoS constraint for
 learning in terms of latency to ensure SFL with low latency.
 Our optimization is based on minimizing the cost of SFL. A
 decomposition-based scheme is used to solve the formulated
Fig. 7. Reward vs. episodes for various agents for proposed scheme. problem. The end devices computing resource allocation
 problem is solved using a convex optimizer, whereas the joint
 task-offloading and resource allocation problems are solved
 using DDQN+dueling. We proposed the use of DDQN for
to reach QoS by all devices. For learning rate 0.001, both joint task-offloading and resource allocation. Although DDQN
DDQN and DDQN+dueling perform better. Fig. 5a shows performs well, we added the concept of dueling to further
that DDQN+dueling outperforms DDQN for different number improve the performance so as to achieve faster convergence.
of agents. For 15 agents, the number of steps is typically From this work, we concluded that our DDQN+dueling-based
higher compared to 10 agents. The reason for this lies in solution can be extended to many applications/problems.
the fact that for more agents, the steps will be generally
high. Furthermore, the reason for improved performance of R EFERENCES
DDQN+dueling compared to DDQN is the consideration of
 [1] L. U. Khan, M. Guizani, A. Al-Fuqaha, C. S. Hong, D. Niyato, and
resource allocation, task-offloading and dueling. Z. Han, “A joint communication and learning framework for hierarchical
 Now, we study the effect of variations in learning rate split federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1,
on the performance of DDQN and DDQN+dueling. Figs. 5b pp. 268–282, Jan. 2024.
 [2] L. U. Khan, A. Elhagry, M. Guizani, and A. El Saddik, “Edge intellishows reward vs. episodes for various learning rates. Note gence empowered vehicular metaverse: Key design aspects and future
here that the steps used in every episode are 20. We tested for directions,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 120–126,
learning rates, 0.001, 0.0001, and 0.00001. For the learning Jan. 2024.
 [3] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
rate 0.00001, the performance is worst. This is because of the “Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
fact that neural networks are not learning fast and might stuck detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
in local maxima. Therefore, there is a need for an effective Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
 [4] C. Thapa, P. C. M. Arachchige, S. Camtepe, and L. Sun, “Splitfed:
learning rate. For learning rate 0.001, the performance is When federated learning meets split learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
better and both DDQN and DDQN+dueling achieve faster Intell., 2022, pp. 8485–8493.
convergence. If we compare both DDQN and DDQN+dueling, [5] Y. Gao et al., “End-to-end evaluation of federated learning and split
 learning for Internet of Things,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Rel. Distrib. Syst.
DDQN+dueling achieves faster. Similar to Fig. 5b, Fig. 5c (SRDS), Shanghai, China, 2020, pp. 91–100.
shows the cost vs. episodes for various learning rates using [6] X. Liu, Y. Deng, and T. Mahmoodi, “Wireless distributed learning: A
DDQN and DDQN+dueling. This Fig. 5c shows a similar new hybrid split and federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
 Commun., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2650–2665, Apr. 2022.
trend of performance to Fig. 5b. [7] V. Turina, Z. Zhang, F. Esposito, and I. Matta, “Federated or split? A
 Now, we compare our proposed DDQN+dueling scheme performance and privacy analysis of hybrid split and federated learning
with many existing baselines for a fair comparison. Fig. 6a architectures,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. (CLOUD),
 2021, pp. 250–260.
shows the reward vs. episodes for different baselines. Among [8] S. Otoum, N. Guizani, and H. Mouftah, “On the feasibility of split
all (i.e., DDQN-resource allocation, DDQN-task-offloading, learning, transfer learning and federated learning for preserving security
DDQN-task-offloading+resource allocation, DDQN+dueling), in its systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7,
 pp. 7462–7470, Jul. 2023.
DDQN+dueling outperforms and achieves faster conver- [9] J. Shen et al., “RingSFL: An adaptive split federated learning towards
gence. Fig. 6b shows cost vs. episodes for various schemes. taming client heterogeneity,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23,
Fig. 6b shows the same performance trend as Fig. 6a. Both no. 5, pp. 5462–5478, May 2024.
 [10] W. Fan, P. Chen, X. Chun, and Y. Liu, “Madrl-based model partition-
Figs. 6a and 6b show that the proposed scheme has a better ing, aggregation control, and resource allocation for cloud-edge-device
performance compared to all schemes, and thus a promising collaborative split federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
scheme. Finally, we evaluate the performance of convex vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 5324–5341, Jun. 2025.
 [11] G. Zhu, Y. Deng, X. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Fang, and T. F. Wong,
optimization and equal computing resource allocation for a “ESFL: Efficient split federated learning over resource-constrained
various number of devices. We use 30, 36, 42, and 48 number heterogeneous wireless devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 16,
of devices for fixed 6 edge servers. For all devices (i.e., pp. 27153–27166, Aug. 2024.
 [12] S. T. Ahmed, V. V. Kumar, and J. Jeong, “Heterogeneous workload based
30, 36, 42, and 48), the proposed convex optimization scheme consumer resource recommendation model for smart cities: Ehealth
outperforms the equal allocation scheme. Finally, we study edge–cloud connectivity using federated split learning,” IEEE Trans.
the scalability (i.e., performance of proposed scheme for high Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4187–4196, Feb. 2024.
 [13] X. Xiong, K. Zheng, L. Lei, and L. Hou, “Resource allocation based
number of agents) in Fig. 7. It is evident that proposed scheme on deep reinforcement learning in IoT edge computing,” IEEE J. Sel.
has a stable performance for an increase in number of agents. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1133–1146, Jun. 2020.
8978 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

[14] Y. He, Y. Wang, C. Qiu, Q. Lin, J. Li, and Z. Ming, “Blockchain-based Maher Guizani (Member, IEEE) received the masedge computing resource allocation in IoT: A deep reinforcement learn- ter’s degree in electrical engineering from Purdue
 ing approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2226–2237, university in 2016. He is currently pursuing the
 Feb. 2021. Ph.D. degree in computer engineering with the
[15] N. Naderializadeh, J. J. Sydir, M. Simsek, and H. Nikopour, “Resource University of Texas at Arlington. He has experience
 management in wireless networks via multi-agent deep reinforce- working in the automotive industry. He worked with
 ment learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6, General Motors as a Calibration Engineer from 2016
 pp. 3507–3523, Jun. 2021. to 2018. He worked with the Embedded Engineering
[16] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Chen, and L. Zhao, “Deep Department, PACCAR from 2018 to 2019. He also
 reinforcement learning-based dynamic resource management for mobile worked with the Electrified Semi Truck Department,
 edge computing in Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Meritor from 2020 to 2022.
 Informat., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4925–4934, Jul. 2020.
[17] F. Tang, Y. Zhou, and N. Kato, “Deep reinforcement learning for
 dynamic uplink/downlink resource allocation in high mobility 5G
 HetNet,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2773–2782,
 Dec. 2020.
[18] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A joint
 learning and communications framework for federated learning over
 wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1,
 pp. 269–283, Jan. 2021.
[19] R. S. Klein, H. Luss, and U. G. Rothblum, “Relaxation-based algorithms
 for minimax optimization problems with resource allocation applications,” Math. Program., vol. 64, pp. 337–363, Mar. 1994.
[20] J. Nievergelt, “Exhaustive search, combinatorial optimization and enumeration: Exploring the potential of raw computing power,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Current Trends Theory Pract. Comput. Sci., 2000, pp. 18–35.
[21] N. Zhao, Y.-C. Liang, D. Niyato, Y. Pei, M. Wu, and Y. Jiang, “Deep Sami Muhaidat (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 reinforcement learning for user association and resource allocation the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engiin heterogeneous cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., neering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
 vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 5141–5152, Nov. 2019. ON, Canada, in 2006. From 2007 to 2008, he
[22] S. P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge, was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of
 U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004. Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
[23] A. Iqbal, M.-L. Tham, and Y. C. Chang, “Double deep Q-network-based Toronto, ON, Canada. From 2008 to 2012, he was an
 energy-efficient resource allocation in cloud radio access network,” IEEE Assistant Professor with the School of Engineering
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 20440–20449, 2021. Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
[24] H. Zhai, X. Zhou, H. Zhang, and D. Yuan, “Delay minimization in hybrid Canada. He is currently a Professor with Khalifa
 edge computing networks: A DDQN-based task offloading approach,” University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. He was also a Visiting
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15098–15108, Oct. 2024. Reader with the Faculty of Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.
[25] L. U. Khan, M. Guizani, I. Yaqoob, A. Al-Fuqaha, A. Erbad, and
 Z. Han, “Network virtualization empowered metaverse: A hierarchical
 matching approach,” Techrxiv, Preprints, 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.24049998.v1

 Latif U. Khan (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
 degree (with Distinction) in electrical engineering
 from the University of Engineering and Technology,
 Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in
 computer engineering from Kyung Hee University
 (KHU), South Korea, in 2021. He is author of
 two books: (a) Network Slicing for 5G and Beyond
 Moussa Ayyash (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 and (b) Federated Learning for Wireless Networks.
 the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and
 He has reviewed over 200 times for the top ISIcomputer engineering. He is currently a Professor
 Indexed journals and conferences. He has authored
 with the Department of Computing, Information, and
 many most popular articles in the leading jour-
 Mathematical Sciences and Technology, Chicago
nals, such as IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS and
 State University, Chicago. He is also the Director
magazines (IEEE Communication Magazine, IEEE N ETWORK, and IEEE
 of the Center of Information and Security Education
Wireless Communications Magazine). His research interests include analytical
 and Research.
techniques of optimization and game theory to edge computing, end-to-end
network slicing, wireless federated learning, and digital twins. He is the
recipient of KHU Best Thesis Award.