Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

RAGN: Detecting unknown malicious network traffic using a robust adaptive
graph neural network
Ernest Akpaku a , Jinfu Chen a,b ,∗, Mukhtar Ahmed a , Francis Kwadzo Agbenyegah c ,
William Leslie Brown-Acquaye c
a
 School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China
b Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Security Technology for Industrial Cyberspace, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China
c Department of Information Technology, Ghana Communication Technology University, Accra, Ghana

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: As network environments evolve, detecting unknown malicious network traffic becomes increasingly chal-
Network security lenging due to the dynamic and sophisticated nature of modern cyberattacks. Graph Attention Networks
Dynamic graph (GATs) have shown promise in modeling complex network interactions but remain vulnerable to adversarial
Network anomalies
 attacks that exploit weaknesses in the graph structure. In this work, we propose the Robust Adaptive Graph
Robust graphs
 Neural Network (RAGN), an enhanced GAT-based framework that introduces adaptive attention mechanisms
Intrusion defense
Edge attention
 to improve detection accuracy and robustness against adversarial manipulations in network traffic graphs.
 RAGN iteratively adjusts the graph structure and feature space to suppress adversarial perturbations by
 assigning lower attention scores to unreliable edges and refining feature representations based on the feature
 smoothness regularization principle. To assess the robustness of the proposed RAGN model and compare it
 with baseline models, we introduced an effective dynamic graph attack method known as Semantic-Preserving
 Adversarial Node Injection (SPAN). We benchmarked its performance against state-of-the-art graph attack
 methods, including DICE, DGA, and RWCS. SPAN incrementally injects small batches of malicious nodes,
 refining their edges and features to target both the structural and temporal aspects of dynamic graphs. It
 preserves semantic integrity, and generates effective yet imperceptible perturbations, providing a rigorous
 test of the resilience of graph neural networks. Experiments conducted on four datasets, demonstrate that
 RAGN demonstrates robustness against adversarial, and zero-day attacks. It also demonstrates resilience against
 targeted, malicious node injection attacks in dynamic network environments. RAGN demonstrated consistent
 robustness, with misclassification rates increasing only marginally (by less than 1.2%) even under significant
 dynamic changes.

1. Introduction modeling such complex relationships. By leveraging attention mechanisms [5] to weigh the importance of various connections between
 The detection of unknown malicious network traffic, especially network entities, GATs have achieved notable success in node clasin the face of adversarial attacks, presents significant challenges in sification and malicious traffic detection. However, GATs and similar
modern network environments [1]. As networks grow in scale and graph neural networks are inherently vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
complexity, traditional intrusion detection methods struggle to cope where an attacker can manipulate the graph structure or features by
with dynamic and sophisticated threats, including zero-day attacks and introducing deceptive edges or perturbing node characteristics [6].
adversarial manipulations designed to evade detection systems [2]. Most current methods rely on static graph structures, which fail to
Modern networks face an escalating wave of sophisticated cyberattacks account for the dynamic and time-evolving nature of real-world netthat exploit their increasing complexity and dynamic nature. Existing works. This static nature limits their adaptability to new threats and
network attack detection approaches often represent network traffic us- changing environments. Adversarial attacks, such as edge manipulaing Euclidean structures, which fail to capture the intricate correlations tion and feature perturbation, significantly degrade the performance
between different traffic flows [3]. Graph-based models, particularly of graph-based models. Existing approaches lack robust mechanisms
 to mitigate these adversarial effects, leaving networks vulnerable. For
Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [4], have demonstrated potential in

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn (J. Chen).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111184
Received 29 October 2024; Received in revised form 23 February 2025; Accepted 2 March 2025
Available online 10 March 2025
1389-1286/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Fig. 1. Original graphs can be attacked by the negative edges between nodes 1 and 7 with different labels. The update function of node 1 aggregates more negative information
from nodes 7, 9, 10 than positive information from nodes 2, 3, 4.

instance, in traditional GNNs, as shown in Fig. 1, the aggregation it less suitable for environments where network behavior and threats
function in GATs process information from various neighbors for a evolve dynamically, as is common in cybersecurity [8]. (3) Vulneragiven node. This aggregated information can be broadly classified into bility to Adversarial Attacks: While GATs are powerful in weighting
two categories: positive and negative edges. Positive edges represent the importance of different nodes, they do not inherently distinguish
connections between nodes with similar labels, which are beneficial between manipulations meant to deceive the attention mechanism and
for accurately updating the node’s feature representation. In contrast, genuine data variations [7]. This makes them potentially vulnerable to
negative edges represent connections between nodes with differing adversarial attacks targeting their attention mechanisms by mimicking
labels, which can introduce noise and hinder the feature update pro- benign characteristics or subtly altering connections.
cess [7]. Adversarial edge attacks exploit this mechanism by either To address these limitations, we propose the Robust Adaptive Graph
adding deceptive positive edges or reducing critical negative edges, Network (RAGN), an enhanced GAT-based model that introduces key
disrupting the balance of aggregated information [8]. This imbalance innovations aimed at improving both detection accuracy and robustdiminishes the model’s ability to accurately distinguish between benign ness against adversarial attacks. RAGN iteratively adjusts the graph
and malicious nodes, ultimately undermining its robustness in dynamic structure and node features, leveraging dynamic attention mechanisms
and adversarial network environments. to mitigate the impact of adversarial manipulations. The model is
 These adversarial actions significantly degrade the performance of further strengthened through the application of Laplacian regulariza-
GATs, particularly when deployed in dynamic environments [9]. Such tion, which enforces feature smoothness across the graph and enhances
actions can either increase the influence of nodes with similar labels resilience against adversarial edge and feature perturbations. Our work
(positive edges) or decrease the influence of nodes with differing labels proposes defensive strategies that increase the positive effects and
(negative edges), severely degrading the GAT’s performance [7]. In minimize the negative impacts of neighbor relationships in the network
a network traffic graph, nodes represent entities like IP addresses graph. We note that, in many real-world scenarios, not all nodes will
or devices, and edges represent traffic flows or connections between have labels indicating their nature (benign or malicious), especially
these entities. Malicious actors can simulate traffic between entities in dynamic networks where new nodes (e.g., devices, IP addresses)
that do not typically communicate, creating false connections in the frequently appear. Refining the attention mechanism in GATs to weigh
graph [10]. This can make benign nodes appear malicious or vice the importance of a node’s features based on the aggregated informaversa, potentially leading to false positives or negatives in threat de- tion from its neighbors, can help in inferring the labels implicitly. We
tection [11]. Conversely, an attacker might remove existing edges from also note that GATs, by design, weigh nodes based on their relevance
the graph. For example, severing connections that signify normal inter- to a task, but if the input data (graph structure or node features)
actions between critical network services could hide ongoing malicious is manipulated, the attention mechanism may inaccurately prioritize
activities that disrupt these usual patterns. These manipulations aim malicious nodes or connections [14].
to alter the ‘‘view’’ that the GAT has over the network, misleading it As such, we introduce smooth feature representations across the
about the true nature of the network’s activity [12]. Second, each node graph based on Laplacian regularization to reduce the model’s sensitivin a network traffic graph can have features like the number of packets, ity to small changes in the graph structure. Also, we introduce an extra
types of protocols used, or frequency of connections [13]. Adversarial dynamic score to adjust the attention effects for different edges during
attacks might involve an attacker changing these features to mask the training procedure in response to perceived anomalies or shifts
malicious traffic as normal or make normal activity appear suspicious, in network traffic patterns that could indicate adversarial activities.
such as altering the volume of traffic or the frequency of connections We aim to design an improved GAT for malicious network traffic
to simulate a denial-of-service attack or to hide such an attack among detection while defending against adversarial attacks based on graph
regular traffic spikes. These feature modifications can undermine the information. Therefore, the key to our approach is the development of
effectiveness of GATs, as the attention mechanism within the GAT could innovative methods to: Distinguish between different types of neighbor
assign incorrect importance to altered nodes, leading to flawed threat connections without extensive labeling; and design attention scores that
assessments. adaptively enhance the robustness of the network against adversarial
 Specifically, three problems exist, (1) Static Attention Mechanism: manipulations.
The original GAT applies a fixed attention mechanism that, while effec- Next, we note, that in network traffic analysis, manipulating letive in learning from graph data, does not dynamically adapt to changes gitimate entities is challenging, making malicious node injection a
in the graph’s structure or node features over time [5]. This could be more practical and stealthy attack strategy. Adversaries exploit the
less effective in environments where adversarial tactics continuously dynamic nature of network environments by adding malicious nodes
evolve. (2) Lack of Iterative Refinement: GAT processes the graph that blend into evolving graph structures, making detection difficult.
based on the data available at the time of training, without iterative The performance of Dynamic Graph Neural Networks (DGNNs) depends
adjustments post-deployment unless retrained. This static nature makes heavily on the graph structure at any given time, and adversaries can

 2
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

disrupt this by targeting optimal moments for attack using periodic several limitations remain when it comes to defending against adversardecision strategies. ial attacks and detecting unknown malicious traffic . The detection and
 To address these challenges, we also introduce the Semantic- defence against malicious network traffic, especially in the presence of
Preserving Adversarial Node Injection (SPAN) method. SPAN leverages adversarial attacks remains a major concern.
graph vulnerabilities to inject malicious nodes at critical times, select- In recent years, the adoption of graph-based models has gained
ing targets based on structural fragility, connecting malicious nodes in significant traction [16], as network traffic data naturally forms a
batches, and using smoothing functions to mimic legitimate behaviors. graph structure where entities such as IP addresses, hosts, and de-
This approach improves attack efficiency and also minimizes detection vices communicate over edges representing network flows [13]. GNNs,
risk. Evaluated on dynamic graph datasets, SPAN outperforms existing particularly Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) introduced by Kipf
attack methods, demonstrating superior efficiency in degrading DGNN and Welling (2017), revolutionized the field by efficiently propagating
performance. Thus, SPAN provides a powerful and comprehensive information across graph structures, enabling better generalization to
attack framework for evaluating the resilience of GNN-based detection traffic patterns. GCNs have been employed to detect anomalies in
models against zero-day threats, dynamic challenges, and adversarial network traffic by modeling network entities and their interactions as
manipulations. The contributions of our method are summarized as nodes and edges, respectively [17]. In [18], the E-GraphSAGE model
follows: was introduced. It leverages the inherent structure of graph-based data
 to detect and mitigate network-based cyber attacks by capturing both
 1. We introduce a dynamic attention mechanism that progressively
 edge features and topological information. The E-GraphSAGE algorithm
 increases attention scores for edges in GATs, enabling more efwas extensively evaluated on four recent NIDS benchmark datasets.
 fective detection and defence against zero-day malicious traffic.
 The results demonstrated that E-GraphSAGE outperformed state-of-the-
 This mechanism differentiates between benign and adversarial
 art methods in key classification metrics, showcasing its potential and
 edges based on the feature smoothness assumption, improving
 robustness. Unlike traditional GCNs that may focus solely on node feathe model’s ability to detect subtle adversarial manipulations.
 tures, GCN-ETA [11] also considers the relationships between different
 2. An iterative refinement process is introduced into the training
 flows, such as shared source and destination hosts. Compared to the
 phase of GATs, allowing continuous adjustment of both the
 bench-marked baselines in the work, the model improved accuracy
 graph structure and node features. This process optimizes the alrates, AUC, and F1-scores exceeding 98%, along with the capability
 location of attention scores, progressively prioritizing real edges
 to process over 1300 flows per second. In [10], the authors comover adversarial ones, resulting in enhanced model accuracy and
 bined GCN with Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) mechanism. The
 robustness against various attacks.
 model addresses several limitations of existing GCN-based methods,
 3. To further strengthen defence against adversarial edges, we
 such as incomplete feature descriptions and inadequate traffic correincorporate an extra attention-scoring component that assigns
 lation mechanisms. MHSA is integrated into the GCN to assign larger
 lower scores to potentially harmful edges, mitigating their imweights to more important features [19]. This enhanced the model’s
 pact on the overall model performance.
 ability to focus on critical aspects of the data, improving detection
 4. We extended the scope of graph adversarial attacks to dynamic
 stability and efficiency. The model showed an improvement of about
 graph neural networks (DGNNs) by introducing a novel method,
 2.4% in accuracy, recall, and F1-measure, and about 2.1% in precision
 SPAN (Semantic-Preserving Adversarial Node Injection). SPAN
 in comparison with other graph-based models.
 addresses the limitations of previous approaches that were con-
 Graph Attention Networks (GATs), proposed by Veličković et al. [4],
 fined to static graph neural networks, offering an effective and
 improved upon GCNs by incorporating an attention mechanism that
 adaptive strategy for attacking dynamic graph environments.
 allows the model to focus on the most relevant neighbors during
 5. Our experimental results on the CICIDS-2018, CTU-13, USTCmessage passing. GATs have shown strong potential in network traffic
 TFC2016, UJS-IDS2022 datasets demonstrate that RAGN
 classification tasks by giving higher importance to influential neighachieves superior performance in detecting and classifying malibors. The framework presented in [20] uses GAT and transformer to
 cious network traffic, even under various types of adversarial
 model the dependencies between different time series variables. The
 attacks, including targeted, dynamic node attacks, and ranauthors introduced a new type of graph convolution called Influence
 dom node and edge attacks. RAGN consistently outperforms
 Propagation convolution is introduced to describe the anomaly inforstate-of-the-art methods across these diverse attack scenarios,
 mation flow between network nodes. The results demonstrates that the
 showcasing its robustness and effectiveness in real-world setproposed framework outperforms baseline alternative state-of-the-art
 tings.
 methods on multiple benchmark datasets, showcasing its effectiveness
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 intro- in detecting malicious network traffic intrusions. However, despite
duces the existing research related to malicious traffic detection and their effectiveness, E-GraphSAGE, GCN-MHSA, GCN-ETA, and the many
graph neural networks. In Section 3, we describe our proposed method, other GNN-GAT-GCN-based models [21–24] are limited by their inincluding the steps establishing the graph structure, and constructing ability to handle heterogeneous and dynamic graph structures, often
the RAGN method. Section 4 presents the experimental setup details. leading to suboptimal detection of evolving malicious traffic.
Section 5 presents the results with a comparative analysis through The vulnerability of graph-based models to adversarial attacks has
experiments, evaluating our method against state-of-the-art methods. drawn significant attention in recent research. For instance, GCNs and
The paper concludes with Section 6, which summarizes our findings GATs has shown to be susceptible to adversarial perturbations when
and outlines directions for future research. challenged with attack methods such as Nettack [25], RLS2V [26], and
 metattack [27]. Meta-attack involve strategically adding or removing
2. Related studies edges in the graph to degrade model performance. Nettack introduces the unnoticeable perturbations on both structures and features.
 Graph-based learning techniques, particularly Graph Neural Net- RLS2V uses reinforcement learning to generate attacks on GNNs. The
works (GNNs), have gained significant attention in recent years for metattack parameterized the graph structure and used the gradient
network intrusion detection and traffic classification. Among these, information to attack GAT. In these attacks, malicious actors introduce
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and Graph Attention Networks perturbations to the graph structure or node features with the aim of
(GATs) have emerged as powerful tools for modeling network traffic misleading the model and causing incorrect inferences. Such attacks
and detecting malicious activities [15]. However, despite their success, can take various forms, such as the addition of adversarial nodes

 3
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

designed to disrupt the graph’s normal patterns and introduce anoma- reducing negative edges, thereby disrupting the balance of information
lies. Attackers may tamper with the edges between nodes, altering aggregation. This manipulation, as shown in Table 3, can mislead the
the graph’s connectivity either by inserting or removing edges, or by model into increasing the influence of harmful neighbors or decreasing
changing their weights [28]. This manipulation of edges can effectively the weight of beneficial ones. Similarly, adversarial feature attacks can
disrupt the flow of information across the graph, undermining the degrade the node’s feature information by tampering with nodes of
GNN’s ability to learn accurate representations of the data. the same label, making it harder for the model to distinguish between
 In addition to these direct modifications, attackers can also alter benign and malicious entities.
the features associated with individual nodes, effectively changing the The primary gap in these existing approaches is their inability to dyinput presented to the GNN and skewing its output towards incorrect namically adjust to adversarial changes in both the graph structure and
conclusions [29]. More sophisticated structural changes can be im- feature space. Most models employ static attention mechanisms that
plemented, such as the creation of clusters of malicious nodes or the cannot distinguish between benign and adversarial edges effectively,
isolation of certain nodes, which can significantly impact the graph’s nor can they adjust in real-time to adversarial manipulations [34].
properties and the GNN’s capacity to learn from the graph structure. Furthermore, they lack iterative refinement processes that allow the
These attacks highlight the vulnerability of GNNs to manipulations of model to adapt to evolving attack strategies. To address these limitatheir underlying graph structure and emphasize the need for robust tions, RAGN introduces a dynamic attention mechanism that adjusts
defence mechanisms to safeguard against such threats. edge scores based on both the structure and features of the graph,
 To address these adversarial challenges, several defence mecha- coupled with iterative refinement during training. This ensures that
nisms have been proposed. In [30], for instance, the authors argued the model can continuously prioritize real edges over adversarial ones
that future IDS should track how attacks evolve across system layers by and enhance detection accuracy, even under adversarial conditions
adopting attack graphs to overcome the limitations of current IDS that such as zero-day attacks. By incorporating these innovations, RAGN
are unable to identify unseen attacks and access particular programs offers a significant improvement in both detection accuracy and roto confirm attacks [31]. An attack graph-based intrusion detection bustness compared to the aforementioned models. In addition, RAGN
approach is proposed and a few challenges to the realization of their also adjusts the influence of both positive and negative neighbors by
proposal are identified [32]. With two use cases, they showcase how applying a dynamic attention mechanism to the edges, based on an exto apply their approach. Overall, a conceptual overview of why and tra attention score computed using a feature smoothness regularization
how attack graphs should be used for the next generation of IDS is mechanism. This dynamic attention score is generated progressively
presented. The authors evaluated their proposed approach through two and plays a critical role in improving the model’s robustness for decase studies: attacks on file retrieval, such as Time-of-Check to Time-of- tecting and defending against unknown malicious network traffic. Next,
Use (TOCTOU) attacks, and attacks propagated among processes, such RAGN refines the node features to suppress feature noise, which can be
as attacks on Shellshock vulnerabilities. The concept is implemented exploited by attackers to make malicious traffic appear benign. This
in [21] where the GNN-IDS is proposed. In GNN-IDS, an attack graph step ensures that the model remains effective in identifying hidden
and real-time measurement mechanisms that represent static and dy- patterns within dynamic and evolving network environments, even in
namic attributes of computer networks, respectively, are incorporated the presence of adversarial noise. The dynamic attention score is then
and associated to represent complex computer networks. The authors applied to the edges, adjusting the importance of connections between
demonstrate the robustness of GNN-IDS against adversarial attacks by nodes. This score is generated using the adjusted edge weights and
evaluating the model’s performance on datasets with added Gaussian helps mitigate the impact of adversarial attacks. Specifically, RAGN renoise, simulating changes in network conditions. duces the influence of adversarial edges (malicious traffic connections)
 The results show that GNN models produce fewer false positives by assigning lower attention to them, while giving higher attention to
than traditional models, indicating their effectiveness in avoiding detec- reliable, benign connections. This iterative refinement of both the edge
tion evasions. However, the method is not tested in defending against weights and the node features enhances the model’s ability to detect
targeted and non-targeted attacks, particularly in scenarios where the unknown malicious traffic while remaining robust against adversarial
graph structure is heavily perturbed. Another method is TCGNN [33] manipulations.
which transforms network packets into an undirected graph, and then
adopts a two-layer GCN with three different aggregation strategies 3. Preliminaries
(Mean, Attention, and LSTM). Adversarial attacks would need to alter
these multiple features to be effective, which is more complex than This section outlines the theoretical motivations, provides a analattacking models that rely on a single type of feature. The results show ysis, and delves into the foundational theory of Graph Attention Netthat TCGNN can identify unknown network packets with an extremely works (GAT) that underpin our study.
high accuracy rate over the existing packet-grained traffic classification
methods. EdgeTorrent [23] defends against adversarial attacks by lever- 3.1. Notations
aging real-time temporal graph representations, adversarial training,
and a streaming architecture that enables rapid adaptation and detec- Let  = (, ) be a graph representing the network traffic, with
tion of anomalies. According to the authors, EdgeTorrent is the first  being the set of vertices (network entities) and  being the set of
IDS to perfectly classify the StreamSpot dataset, which includes various edges (interactions between entities). Each graph can be represented
types of network traffic, indicating its robustness against various forms by the adjacency matrix of the graph 𝐀 ∈ R𝑁×𝑁 where 𝐴𝑖𝑗 indicates
of adversarial evasion techniques. the presence of an interaction from entity 𝑖 to entity 𝑗. Let 𝐗 ∈ R𝑁×𝐷
 Despite these advancements, none of these works focus on the be the feature matrix, where each row represents the features of an
robustness principle of GAT’s aggregation function. In typical GATs, entity and 𝐷 is the number of features. The label matrix is expressed as
the aggregation function collects information from neighboring nodes 𝐘 ∈ R𝑁×𝐾 where each row represents the labels (benign or malicious)
to update the feature representation of the central node. Generally, the of an entity and 𝐾 is the number of label categories. For Neighborhood
information aggregated by GAT can be classified into two categories: and Aggregation, we let  (𝑣𝑖 ) be the set of neighbors of entity 𝑣𝑖 ,
(1) information from neighboring nodes with the same label, which representing direct interactions. 𝐀(𝑘) as the 𝑘th power of the adjais beneficial for updating positive edges, and (2) information from cency matrix 𝐀, representing 𝑘-hop neighborhood interactions. For the
neighboring nodes with different labels, which has a negative impact attention Mechanism, 𝑒𝑖𝑗 represents the attention coefficient between
on the node’s feature update. In adversarial scenarios, attackers can entities 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 , capturing the importance of one entity’s features to
manipulate these relationships by adding additional positive edges or another. The feature matrix after 𝑙th layer of attention mechanism is

 4
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

𝐇(𝑙) ∈ R𝑁×𝑀 𝑇 where 𝑀 is the dimension of the output space. For Table 1
 ̃ is the dynamically adjusted adjacency GAT accuracy on synthetic graphs with varying positive to negative edge ratios.
dynamic Graph Adjustment, 𝐀
matrix, incorporating robustness against adversarial attacks. While 𝑠𝑖𝑗 is Graph 𝑃𝑖 𝑃𝑖𝑖 𝐸1 𝐸2 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 GAT accuracy (%)

the similarity score between entities 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 , used to update the graph 1 0.02 0.01 5,982 5,224 1.22 53.60
 2 0.04 0.01 10,894 5,770 2.05 81.25
structure. The perturbation matrix representing adversarial edge addi-
 3 0.06 0.01 15,504 7,076 2.91 96.37
tions or deletions is expressed as 𝛥𝐀 for adversarial attacks. Let 𝛥𝐗 be 4 0.08 0.01 20,354 5,634 3.99 99.88
the perturbation matrix representing adversarial feature modifications.
On optimization and Learning 𝛩 is the set of model parameters to be
learned. (𝛩) is the loss function that depends on the model parameters
𝛩. adv is the adversarial loss component, focusing on robustness. We GAT enables the model to capture the relative importance of different
consider a semi-supervised node classification problem, where only a edges dynamically, improving its performance on heterogeneous and
subset of nodes 𝑙 ⊂  are labeled with labels 𝑙 . noisy graphs. Multi-head attention further enhances robustness and
 expressiveness by leveraging multiple perspectives, making GAT highly
3.2. Graph Attention Network (GAT) effective for graph-based learning tasks.

 Graph Attention Networks (GAT) update the features of a node by 3.3. Motivation
aggregating information from its neighbors, using dynamically computed attention scores to assign varying importance to different edges. This section serves to (1) define the baseline capabilities of GAT,
This mechanism allows GAT to effectively capture task-specific depen- (2) identify its limitations in dynamic and adversarial settings, (3)
dencies in graph structures, even in heterogeneous and noisy environ- establish the need for enhancements, and (4) lay the groundwork for a
ments. In GAT, the updated feature of a node 𝑣 at layer 𝑘+1, denoted as comparative evaluation with the proposed RAGN model. As discussed
𝐱𝑣(𝑘+1) , is computed by aggregating information from its neighbors  (𝑣), in Section 2 (related studies), GATs exhibit limitations that can hin-
 (𝑘) der their effectiveness, particularly under adversarial conditions. For
weighted by learned attention scores 𝛼𝑢𝑣 . The operation is expressed as:
 ( )
 ∑ instance, in Fig. 1, the aggregation function consolidates information
𝐱𝑣(𝑘+1) = 𝜎 (𝑘) (𝑘) (𝑘)
 𝛼𝑢𝑣 𝐖 𝐱𝑢 , (1) from various neighboring nodes for node 1. This aggregated informa-
 𝑢∈ (𝑣) tion can typically be categorized into two types. The first type is the
where 𝜎 is a non-linear activation function;  (𝑣) is the set of neighbors information from neighbors that share the same label, which aids in
 (𝑘) updating the node’s feature information, and these connections are
of node 𝑣; 𝛼𝑢𝑣 is the attention coefficient for the edge connecting nodes
𝑢 and 𝑣 at layer 𝑘; 𝐖(𝑘) ∈ R𝑑𝑘+1 ×𝑑𝑘 is the learnable weight matrix referred to as positive edges. The second type consists of information
for layer 𝑘; 𝐱𝑢(𝑘) ∈ R𝑑𝑘 is the feature vector of node 𝑢 at layer 𝑘. The from neighboring nodes with differing labels, which can hinder the
 (𝑘) process of updating node features, and these are called negative edges.
attention coefficient 𝛼𝑢𝑣 determines the relative importance of node 𝑢’s
information to node 𝑣. It is computed using: Adversarial edge attacks can either introduce more positive edges or
 ( ( [ ])) reduce the negative edges, thus affecting the balance between these
 exp LeakyReLU 𝐚⊤ 𝐖(𝑘) 𝐱𝑢(𝑘) ∥ 𝐖(𝑘) 𝐱𝑣(𝑘)
 (𝑘) two types of aggregated data. Similarly, adversarial feature attacks can
𝛼𝑢𝑣 = ∑ ( ( [ ])) , (2)
 ⊤ 𝐖(𝑘) 𝐱(𝑘) ∥ 𝐖(𝑘) 𝐱(𝑘) degrade the quality of information from nodes that share the same
 𝑤∈ (𝑣) exp LeakyReLU 𝐚 𝑤 𝑣
 label.
where: 𝐚 ∈ R2𝑑𝑘 is a learnable vector that determines the attention To explore these limitations, we conducted empirical analyses using
mechanism, ∥ denotes concatenation of feature vectors, and LeakyReLU both synthetic and open datasets, investigating how the ratio of positive
introduces non-linearity for better representation of feature interac- to negative edges (𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ) influences GAT’s performance. We employed
tions. The softmax normalization ensures that the attention scores the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) [35] to generate synthetic graphs,
 (𝑘)
𝛼𝑢𝑣 are non-negative and sum to one for all neighbors of node 𝑣, allowing precise control over intra-class and inter-class connection
ensuring stability. To enhance the model’s expressiveness, GAT employs probabilities. This control was essential for manipulating the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2
multi-head attention, where multiple independent attention mecha- ratio and observing its impact on GAT’s performance. For graph connisms compute attention scores. The features computed by each atten- struction, we created 𝑁 = 1000 nodes, equally divided into two classes
tion head are then concatenated to form the final node representation. with class 1 representing benign network entities and class 2 repre-
At layer 𝑘 + 1, the updated feature of node 𝑣 is: senting malicious network entities, for the edge formation intra-class
 ( )
 ∑ connection probability (𝑃𝑖 ) is defined as the probability that two nodes
 (𝑘+1) 𝑀 (𝑘,𝑚) (𝑘,𝑚) (𝑘)
𝐱𝑣 = ∥𝑚=1 𝜎 𝛼𝑢𝑣 𝐖 𝐱𝑢 (3) within the same class are connected. Inter-class connection probability
 𝑢∈ (𝑣)
 (𝑃𝑖𝑖 ) is also defined as the probability that two nodes from different
where 𝑀 is the number of attention heads, ∥ denotes concatenation, classes are connected. By varying 𝑃𝑖 while keeping 𝑃𝑖𝑖 constant, we
 (𝑘,𝑚)
and 𝛼𝑢𝑣 and 𝐖(𝑘,𝑚) are the attention scores and weight matrices for manipulated the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio to create graphs with different proportions
the 𝑚th head, respectively. of positive and negative edges. Specifically, we set 𝑃𝑖𝑖 = 0.01 and
 Multi-head attention improves the robustness and generalization increased 𝑃𝑖 from 0.02 to 0.08. We generated four synthetic graphs
of the model by aggregating information from multiple perspectives, with varying 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratios and evaluated GAT’s performance on each.
allowing the model to capture diverse patterns in node relationships. For each graph, 10% of the nodes were used for training and another
The learnable parameters of GAT are collectively denoted by 𝛩 = 10% for testing. Table 1 presents the parameters and results for each
{𝐖(1) , … , 𝐖(𝐿) , 𝐚}. Given a classification task, the model learns a func- synthetic graph.
tion 𝑓GAT ∶ R𝑁×𝑑 → R𝑁×𝐶 , where 𝐶 is the number of classes. As observed, when the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio is close to 1 (Graph 1), GAT’s
The classification probabilities for labeled nodes are predicted using a accuracy is around 50%, similar to random guessing. This indicates that
cross-entropy loss: when the number of positive and negative edges is nearly equal, GAT
 ∑ ∑
 𝐶
 ( ) struggles to make accurate classifications. However, as 𝑃𝑖 increases and
GAT (𝛩, 𝐴, 𝑋, 𝑌 ) = − 𝑌𝑣,𝑐 log 𝑓GAT (𝐴, 𝑋)𝑣 [𝑐] , (4) the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio rises, GAT’s accuracy improves significantly. In Graph
 𝑣∈𝐿 𝑐=1
 4, where 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ≈ 4, the model achieves near-perfect accuracy.
where 𝐿 is the set of labeled nodes, 𝑌𝑣,𝑐 is a binary indicator of To validate our findings, we conducted experiments on four network
whether node 𝑣 belongs to class 𝑐, and 𝑓GAT (𝐴, 𝑋)𝑣 [𝑐] is the predicted traffic datasets: CICIDS-2018, CTU-13, USTC-TFC2016. These datasets
probability of node 𝑣 being in class 𝑐. The attention mechanism in inherently possess different 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratios due to the nature of network

 5
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Table 2 Stability of the attention mechanism. The dynamic attention mechanism
GAT accuracy on real-world datasets with different positive to negative edge ratios.
 in RAGN plays a crucial role in adapting the model’s focus based on
 Dataset 𝐸1 𝐸2 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 GAT accuracy (%)
 the evolving structure of the graph. In dynamic environments, such as
 CICIDS-2018 10,687 5,986 4.10 83.97 adversarial settings, it is essential that the model remains stable under
 CTU-13 25,402 6,934 2.79 75.26
 minor fluctuations in the graph’s topology or node features. Stability
 USTC-TFC2016 30,278 3,150 9.61 96.33
 ensures that small perturbations do not cause disproportionate changes
 in the model’s outputs, which is crucial for maintaining performance
Table 3
 consistency in the presence of noise or minor data variations.
GAT accuracy on CICIDS-2018 under different perturbation rates.
 Perturbation rate (%) 𝐸1 𝐸2 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 GAT accuracy (%)
 Proposition 1. The attention coefficients in RAGN are stable under per-
 0 10,152 1,986 4.10 83.97
 turbations to node features and graph topology, a crucial property for
 5 10,232 2,412 3.41 80.44
 10 9,864 2,840 2.92 75.61 maintaining performance in adversarial settings.
 15 10,453 3,332 2.49 69.78
 20 10,358 3,852 2.13 59.94
 (𝑘)
 25 10,862 4,240 1.95 54.78 Proof. Consider the attention score 𝛼𝑢𝑣 for a graph edge (𝑢, 𝑣) in the 𝑘th
 attention layer, computed as shown in Eq. (3). where 𝑊 is the weight
 matrix, ℎ𝑢 and ℎ𝑣 are the feature vectors for nodes 𝑢 and 𝑣, 𝑎 is a shared
interactions they represent. We constructed graphs from these datasets attention vector, and 𝑢 denotes the neighbors of node 𝑢. Now, assume
by representing network entities (e.g., IP addresses, devices) as nodes a small perturbation 𝛥ℎ𝑣 is applied to the feature vector ℎ𝑣 . The change
 (𝑘)
and interactions (e.g., communication events) as edges. Classes were in 𝛼𝑢𝑣 can be approximated using a first-order Taylor expansion:
 (𝑘)
defined based on the labeling of traffic as benign or malicious. Table 2 (𝑘) 𝜕𝛼𝑢𝑣
 𝛥𝛼𝑢𝑣 ≈ 𝛥ℎ𝑣
summarizes the results from these datasets. 𝜕ℎ𝑣
 The results mirror the trends observed in the synthetic data. Datasets (𝑘)
 𝜕𝛼𝑢𝑣
with higher 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratios, such as USTC-TFC2016, exhibit higher GAT The partial derivative 𝜕ℎ𝑣
 is bounded by the norms of 𝑎 and 𝑊 (𝑘) ,
 (𝑘)
accuracies. This consistency reinforces the conclusion that the propor- ensuring that changes in 𝛼𝑢𝑣 are proportional to and bounded by
tion of positive to negative edges is a critical factor influencing GAT’s ‖𝛥ℎ𝑣 ‖. This proves that the attention coefficients remain stable under
performance. We further assessed GAT’s robustness under adversarial small perturbations, as the changes in attention scores are linearly
conditions by simulating attacks on the CICIDS-2018 dataset. We ma- proportional to the perturbation in node features, preventing large
nipulated the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio by adding edges between nodes of different fluctuations in the model’s output.
classes (increasing 𝐸2 ) and removing edges between nodes of the same
class (decreasing 𝐸1 ). Adversarial perturbations were introduced using Convergence of the dynamic adjustment. For RAGN to be effective, the
the RWCS (Random Walk Column Sum attack) method [36]. iterative process of updating adjacency matrices and node features
 Table 3 shows the effect of increasing perturbation rates on GAT’s must converge to a stable configuration. Convergence ensures that
performance. As the perturbation rate increased, the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio de- the model reaches a state where further updates do not significantly
creased, and GAT’s accuracy declined significantly. At a 25% pertur- alter its behavior, providing reliability and consistency in predictions.
bation rate, the accuracy dropped to approximately 55%, highlighting The iterative process enables the model to gradually refine the graph
GAT’s vulnerability to adversarial manipulation of the graph structure. structure and focus on the most relevant features, which is particularly
 These experiments reveal key limitations of GAT in malicious net- important in adversarial settings.
work traffic detection. First, GAT’s performance is highly sensitive to
the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio. A lower ratio, indicative of more negative edges, Proposition 2. The iterative process for updating adjacency matrices and
leads to substantial degradation in accuracy. Second, GAT’s attention node features in RAGN converges to a stable state, enhancing the model’s
mechanism does not effectively differentiate between positive (intra- reliability.
class) and negative (inter-class) edges, resulting in the aggregation
of misleading information from malicious nodes. Third, GAT lacks
mechanisms to assess the reliability of edges, making it susceptible to Proof. Consider the iterative update rule for the adjacency matrix 𝐴
adversarial perturbations that alter the graph structure and mislead with a learning rate 𝜂:
the attention mechanism. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that
 𝐴(𝑡+1) = 𝐴(𝑡) − 𝜂∇𝐴 (𝐴, 𝑋)
GAT’s performance in malicious network traffic detection is significantly affected by the proportion of positive to negative edges in the where (𝐴, 𝑋) is the loss function that includes a regularization term,
graph. Adversarial attacks that manipulate the 𝐸1 ∕𝐸2 ratio can severely such as Laplacian regularization, that promotes smooth feature trandegrade the model’s accuracy. The subsequent sections will delve into sitions across edges. The gradient ∇𝐴 (𝐴, 𝑋) measures the impact of
the architectural details of RAGN and present empirical evaluations changes in 𝐴 on the model’s performance.
showcasing its effectiveness compared to traditional GAT models.
 To prove convergence, we assume that the gradient ∇𝐴 (𝐴, 𝑋) is
 Lipschitz continuous, i.e., there exists a constant 𝐿 such that:
3.4. Theoretical analysis
 ‖∇𝐴 (𝐴1 , 𝑋) − ∇𝐴 (𝐴2 , 𝑋)‖ ≤ 𝐿‖𝐴1 − 𝐴2 ‖
 In this section, we delve into the theoretical underpinnings of the
RAGN framework, which builds upon GAT by introducing a dynamic This assumption ensures that the sequence {𝐴(𝑡) } is bounded and conattention mechanism and a revised adjacency matrix. These mech- tractive. By the Banach Fixed-Point Theorem, since the sequence is
anisms are designed to address the challenges posed by adversarial contractive, it converges to a fixed point 𝐴∗ , where:
perturbations in graph-structured data, particularly in the context of ∇𝐴 (𝐴∗ , 𝑋) = 0
network traffic analysis. Our approach incorporates both graph theory
principles and neural network operations on graphs, focusing on the Thus, the adjacency matrix 𝐴 converges to a stable configuration 𝐴∗ ,
role of node features, graph topology, and the iterative refinement of where further updates do not significantly alter the graph structure, and
the adjacency matrix to enhance robustness. the model achieves optimal performance.

 6
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Derivation and iterative adjustment of the revised adjacency matrix. The
revised adjacency matrix 𝐴̄ plays a pivotal role in optimizing the graph
structure for adversarial robustness. To address potential adversarial
perturbations in the graph, the adjacency matrix is adjusted iteratively
to reflect the most relevant nodes and edges while minimizing the
influence of irrelevant or malicious changes.

Proposition 3. The revised adjacency matrix 𝐴̄ is adjusted iteratively to
improve robustness to adversarial perturbations.
 Derivation: The adjustment of the adjacency matrix is performed
by adding an update term 𝛥𝐴(𝑡) to the original adjacency matrix 𝐴, as
follows:
𝐴̄ (𝑡) = 𝐴 + 𝛥𝐴(𝑡)

At each iteration 𝑡, the update term 𝛥𝐴(𝑡) is computed using the gradient
of the loss function with respect to 𝐴:
𝛥𝐴(𝑡) = 𝛼 ⋅ ∇𝐴 (𝐴, 𝑋)

where 𝛼 is a learning rate. The gradient ∇𝐴 (𝐴, 𝑋) incorporates a Laplacian regularization term that ensures smooth feature transitions across
edges and prevents abrupt changes in graph structure. This iterative Fig. 2. RAGN-based malicious traffic detection roadmap.

refinement process ensures that the adjacency matrix 𝐴̄ evolves towards
a configuration that maximizes the model’s robustness to adversarial
perturbations while maintaining graph structure integrity. overall workflow of the proposed RAGN method is illustrated in Fig.
 2. RAGN introduces several key innovations. First, it incorporates an
Robustness to edge perturbations. Adversarial environments often in- additional attention mechanism that considers edge reliability, assignvolve deliberate perturbations, such as the addition or removal of ing higher weights to positive edges and diminishing the influence of
edges, to mislead the model. Ensuring that RAGN is robust to such negative ones. Second, it employs an iterative optimization process to
perturbations is essential for maintaining accuracy and reliability under refine the graph structure, reducing 𝐸2 and reinforcing 𝐸1 . It further
potential adversarial attacks. encourages connected nodes to have similar feature representations,
 aiding in distinguishing between benign and malicious entities.
Proposition 4. RAGN is robust to adversarial perturbations such as edge Initially, standard preprocessing operations such as data segmentaadditions or deletions, ensuring that such modifications have minimal impact tion, filtering, and normalization are performed on the raw network
on attention scores and subsequent node classifications. traffic data. This prepares the data for graph construction, where
 nodes represent network entities like IP addresses or devices, and
Proof. When adversarial perturbations modify the graph structure by edges represent interactions or traffic flows between these entities.
adding or deleting edges, the dynamic attention mechanism recalibrates Each node is initialized with features derived from the network data,
the attention coefficients 𝛼𝑢𝑣 by adjusting the weights assigned to each encapsulating essential behavioral characteristics. In traditional GATs,
 attention scores are computed based solely on node features and the
edge. The recalibration rule is given by:
 labels of neighboring nodes, as noted by Hu et al. [33]. The graph
 ′
𝛼𝑢𝑣 = 𝛼𝑢𝑣 × 𝜎(−𝛽 ⋅ 𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣)) structure determines the choice of neighbors but does not influence the
 adjustment of attention scores. This limitation becomes significant in
where 𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣) measures the deviation of the edge (𝑢, 𝑣) from its expected
 the presence of adversarial attacks, where attackers may add negative
weight, and 𝜎 is a sigmoid function scaled by 𝛽, a parameter that
 edges or remove positive edges to manipulate neighbor aggregation,
controls sensitivity to changes. The function 𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣) quantifies the devithus degrading the model’s performance. To overcome this challenge,
ation from normal edge patterns, and the sigmoid function ensures that
 RAGN introduces a dynamic adaptive attention mechanism that recaliedges that deviate significantly from the expected structure have their
 brates attention scores in real-time, not only based on node features but
weights reduced, minimizing their impact on the attention scores. This
 also incorporating changes in the graph structure. By revising the aggrerecalibration ensures that the attention mechanism remains stable and
 gation function and inserting an extra attention score, RAGN effectively
resilient to adversarial modifications, as unexpected or deceptive edges
 reduces the influence of adversarial edges. Intuitively, this mechanism
are down-weighted, allowing the model to focus on the most relevant
 assigns smaller attention scores to negative edges by utilizing prior
parts of the graph. In Section 3.3, we present empirical evidence that
 information and continuous analysis to discern and mitigate the impact
supports the theoretical enhancements introduced in RAGN. Our experof malicious manipulations. This adjustment is crucial because the
imental results demonstrate that RAGN outperforms baseline models,
 proper attention score is related not only to the structure 𝐴 but also
such as GAT, in terms of both adversarial robustness and generalization
 to the features 𝑋.
to unseen attacks. This alignment between theoretical analysis and
 Furthermore, RAGN continuously adjusts both the graph structure
practical improvements underscores the efficacy of our approach in
 and node features to generate this extra attention score, enhancing the
dynamic and adversarial environments.
 model’s robustness against adversarial attacks. This dynamic adaptation
 allows RAGN to remain sensitive to both the contextual relevance and
3.5. The RAGN framework reliability of node connections, improving its ability to withstand and
 respond to sophisticated adversarial strategies that aim to deceive the
 To address the limitations of existing Graph Attention Networks in attention mechanism. After adjusting the attention mechanisms, RAGN
handling dynamic network environments and sophisticated adversarial employs a self-attention aggregation mechanism to synthesize insights
threats, we propose a Robust Adaptive Graph Network (RAGN). This across the network, producing a comprehensive representation that
approach revises the traditional attention mechanisms in GATs to en- supports global analysis. This aggregated information is then fed into a
hance the detection and defence against malicious network traffic. The softmax classification layer, which categorizes the network’s condition

 7
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Fig. 3. Structure of the robust graph attention network framework.
Note: Schematic diagram of RAGN for a one-step iteration process. During one iteration, structure and feature are modified based on regularization first. Then, the modified
structure is used to revise the attention score and the modified feature is used for nodes’ information aggregation. Finally, the parameters of RAGN are updated based on the
labeled nodes’ loss function and the algorithm enters into the next iteration.

and identifies potential threats based on the overall network state. The original adjacency matrix 𝐴 is defined such that 𝐴[𝑖][𝑗] = 1 if
Each detected threat triggers a tailored response strategy, ranging from there is an edge between nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗, and 𝐴[𝑖][𝑗] = 0 otherwise. This
alerts to automated defensive actions, depending on the severity and binary setup, while straightforward, often fails to capture the nuanced
nature of the identified threat. Feedback from these actions is utilized to interactions in complex data landscapes, particularly under adversarial
continuously refine and update the model, enhancing its effectiveness conditions.
and adaptability. Compared to existing methods, RAGN significantly To address these challenges, we define an objective function that
improves upon traditional GATs by: incorporates both structural fidelity and feature smoothness:

 1. Extending the attention mechanism to adjust scores based on ̄ 2 + 𝛼 ⋅ tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 ̄ = ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖
  (𝐴) ̄ (5)
 𝐹
 both node features and graph structure, addressing the limita-
 Here, ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖ ̄ 2 measures the Frobenius norm, emphasizing minimal
 tions where the graph structure previously did not influence 𝐹
 deviation from the original matrix 𝐴 to maintain structural integrity.
 attention adjustments.
 ̄ where 𝐿 = 𝐷 − 𝐴̄ is the Laplacian matrix and 𝐷 is
 The term tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋),
 2. Introducing an extra attention scoring component specifically
 the diagonal degree matrix of 𝐴,̄ promotes feature homogeneity among
 designed to mitigate the effects of adversarial edges by assigning
 connected nodes. The formulation of the objective function  (𝐴) ̄ incorthem lower attention scores.
 3. Continuously refining the graph structure and node features to porates both the structural fidelity ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖
 ̄ 2 , ensuring minimal devia-
 𝐹
 generate adaptive attention scores that reduce the impact of tion from the observed data, and the feature-based regularization term
 adversarial manipulations.
 ̄ The balance between these terms determines the trade-
 𝛼 ⋅ tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋).
 off between adhering to the observed network structure and adapting to
Through these enhancements, RAGN provides a more robust and ac- new insights derived from node features. The selection of the Frobenius
curate system for detecting and defending against malicious network norm and trace function is theoretically motivated by their propertraffic, effectively addressing the challenges posed by dynamic and ad- ties in matrix analysis, providing a balance between simplicity and
versarial network environments. By integrating these innovative mech- effectiveness in capturing matrix deviations and alignments.
anisms, RAGN sets a new standard in network security technologies,
 The feature smoothness assumption underlying the Laplacian reguoffering a resilient and adaptable approach to safeguarding complex
 larization suggests that connected nodes should exhibit similar features.
network infrastructures against evolving cyber threats. In Fig. 3, we ̄
 This principle is essential in guiding the adaptive adjustments to 𝐴,
show the schematic diagram of RAGN for a one-step iteration process.
 ensuring that connections in 𝐴̄ are strengthened between nodes with
During one iteration, structure and feature are modified based on
 similar features and weakened between those with dissimilar features.
regularization first. Then, the modified structure is used to revise the
 The use of the Laplacian matrix 𝐿 in the objective function to promote
attention score and the modified feature is used for nodes’ information
 feature smoothness across the graph leverages the Laplacian’s properaggregation. Finally, the revised feature matrix, parameters, and graph
 ties in capturing the graph’s structure. The quadratic form tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋) ̄
structure are updated based on the labeled nodes’ loss function and the
 minimizes the difference in features between directly connected nodes,
algorithm enters into the next iteration.
 effectively regularizing the learning process to favor smooth feature
 variations along the edges of the graph. This approach is underpinned
3.6. Graph structure and node feature optimization
 by the theory of semi-supervised learning on graphs, where smoothness
 is a desired property for label propagation.
 The original adjacency matrix 𝐴 in GATs model the graph structure
in a straightforward binary manner, representing the presence or ab- The iterative refinement of 𝐴̄ employs a gradient descent algorithm,
sence of edges. The limitation of this representation is its inability to
 ̄
 where at each step, 𝐴̄ is adjusted to reduce the objective function  (𝐴):
capture the strength or quality of connections, particularly critical in ̄
 𝐴̄ ← 𝐴̄ − 𝜂∇𝐴̄  (𝐴) (6)
analyzing network traffic, where not all connections contribute equally
to the network’s functionality. This limitation motivates the need for ̄ represents the gradient of the objective function with
 Here, ∇𝐴̄  (𝐴)
a matrix 𝐴̄ that reflects the existence of links and also their relevance respect to 𝐴,̄ and 𝜂 is the learning rate, determining the step size in
based on node features and network dynamics. the gradient descent. The iterative refinement process using gradient
 To optimize the structure of the graph, we first introduces a revised descent for updating 𝐴̄ and 𝑋̄ is rooted in optimization theory. The
adjacency matrix 𝐴, ̄ which adjusts the original adjacency matrix 𝐴 ̄ and ∇𝑋̄ are calculated to guide the update steps to
 gradients ∇𝐴̄  (𝐴)
iteratively to enhance the robustness and reliability of GATs. In scenar- ensure each iteration moves towards a local minimum of the objective
ios involving noise or adversarial attacks, the original graph structure function. The use of gradient descent is justified by its effectiveness
represented by 𝐴 may not accurately reflect the true underlying rela- in handling large-scale data and its ability to converge to optimal
tionships among nodes, potentially degrading the model’s performance. solutions.

 8
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 To ensure 𝐴̄ remains a valid adjacency matrix throughout the op- aggregate node information using static weights, treating all edges
timization process, a projection step  (⋅) is applied, which constrains equally during message passing. This approach is limited because it fails
each element of 𝐴̄ to stay within [0, 1]. Additionally, regularization to account for variations in the importance of edges, leaving the model
parameters like 𝛼 are tuned to balance the trade-off between structural vulnerable to adversarial attacks that manipulate graph structure or
fidelity and feature smoothness. The projection steps  and  ensure node features. Adversarial perturbations, such as the addition, deletion,
that the revised matrices stay within feasible bounds, reflecting valid or modification of edges, distort the graph’s underlying patterns, misadjacency and feature representations. These projections are crucial for leading the model and degrading its predictive accuracy. To overcome
maintaining the physical interpretability and computational stability of these limitations, we introduce an attention mechanism to dynamically
the matrices. assign weights to edges, prioritizing meaningful relationships while
 In addition to adjusting the graph structure, RAGN iteratively re- suppressing the influence of irrelevant or noisy connections.
vises the node features to suppress noise introduced by adversarial The core of the attention mechanism is the computation of edgeattacks. The objective is to ensure that the node features align with the specific attention scores, which reflect the relevance of each edge to the
revised graph structure, thereby improving the overall robustness. The task at hand. For an edge (𝑖, 𝑗) connecting nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗, the attention
feature matrix 𝑋 is updated by minimizing the difference between the score 𝛼𝑖𝑗 is calculated as:
original features 𝑋 and the revised features 𝑋, ̄ while also enforcing exp(𝑒𝑖𝑗 )
 𝛼𝑖𝑗 = ∑ , (9)
feature smoothness using Laplacian regularization. The optimization 𝑘∈ (𝑖) exp(𝑒𝑖𝑘 )
problem for feature adjustment is formulated as:
 where 𝑒𝑖𝑗 is the unnormalized attention coefficient, and  (𝑖) denotes
 ̄ 2 + 𝛾 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
𝑋̄ ∗ = arg min ‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖2
 ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ + 𝜆 𝑅𝐴𝐺𝑁 (𝜃, 𝐴, ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ) (7) the set of neighbors of node 𝑖. The softmax function ensures that
 𝑋̄
 the attention scores are normalized, making them interpretable and
where 𝛾 is a non-negative parameter controlling the strength of the
 ensuring that their sum over all neighbors is equal to one.
feature regularization, 𝜆 is a hyperparameter balancing the regular-
 The unnormalized coefficient 𝑒𝑖𝑗 is computed using a learnable
ization and the loss term, and 𝑅𝐴𝐺𝑁 is the RAGN loss function that
 mechanism that captures both feature similarity and task-specific reincorporates node classification accuracy on the labeled set 𝑌𝑝 . The lationships. Specifically:
first term (‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖̄ 2 ), minimizes the difference between the original ( [ ])
 2
features 𝑋 and the updated features 𝑋, ̄ ensuring the updates are not 𝑒𝑖𝑗 = LeakyReLU 𝑎⊤ 𝑊 𝐹𝑖 ∥ 𝑊 𝐹𝑗 , (10)
 ̄ smoothens the features across
too drastic. The second term (tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)), ′
 where 𝐹𝑖 and 𝐹𝑗 are the feature vectors of nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗, 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 is
connected nodes in the graph. It enforces the idea that nodes linked ′
 a learnable linear transformation matrix, 𝑎 ∈ R2𝑑 is a learnable vector
by edges should have similar features (a key assumption in graphs).
 that projects concatenated node embeddings into the attention space,
(𝜆𝐿RAGN ) is the loss function that ensures the updated features help
 and ∥ denotes concatenation. The LeakyReLU activation introduces
the model classify nodes (e.g., benign vs. malicious). The features are
 non-linearity, enabling the attention mechanism to model complex
updated using gradient descent:
 interactions between node features.
 ̄ 2 + 𝛾 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
𝑋̄ ←  (𝑋̄ − 𝜂2 ∇𝑋̄ (‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖ ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ + 𝜆 𝑅𝐴𝐺𝑁 (𝜃, 𝐴, ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ))) (8) The computed attention scores are used to refine the adjacency
 2
 matrix. The revised adjacency matrix 𝐴̄ is updated iteratively based on
where  (⋅) projects the feature matrix onto the valid domain of the following gradient descent rule:
features, and 𝜂2 is the learning rate for the feature update. Together, 𝜕
these terms balance feature preservation, smoothness, and classification 𝐴̄ (𝑘+1)
 𝑖𝑗 = 𝐴̄ (𝑘)
 𝑖𝑗 − 𝜂 ̄ , (11)
 𝜕 𝐴𝑖𝑗
performance. The weights 𝛾 and 𝜆 control the importance of each
aspect. This step updates node features to align them with the revised where 𝑘 represents the iteration step, 𝜂 is the learning rate, and 𝜕𝜕 𝐴̄ 𝑖𝑗
graph structure, making them robust and useful for classification. This is the gradient of the loss function  with respect to 𝐴̄ 𝑖𝑗 . This iterative
two-step process of iteratively adjusting the graph structure and the process ensures that the adjacency matrix dynamically adapts to capfeature matrix allows RAGN to progressively enhance the robustness ture meaningful relationships while mitigating the effects of adversarial
of GAT against adversarial attacks. The next step involves dynamically perturbations.
generating attention scores to further mitigate the impact of adversarial The dynamic attention mechanism employed in our model is deedges. The next step in the RAGN framework involves generating dy- signed to enhance adaptability across various network traffic condinamic attention scores that adjust based on the revised graph structure tions. Traditional attention mechanisms assign pre-defined weights to
𝐴̄ and features 𝑋. ̄ This step is critical to mitigating the impact of
 different input features, limiting their effectiveness when dealing with
adversarial edges by assigning appropriate weights to both positive and dynamic and evolving network behaviors. In contrast, our approach
negative edges during the node aggregation process. utilizes a self-adaptive weighting strategy that enables the model to
 The revision of 𝐴 to 𝐴̄ is based on the hypothesis that nodes with focus on the most relevant traffic characteristics at any given time.
similar features should have stronger connectivity if they contribute This adaptability is particularly beneficial in network environments
positively to the task (e.g., classification, clustering). This assumption is where traffic patterns fluctuate due to varying application demands,
rooted in the homophily principle prevalent in scenarios where similar congestion levels, or external factors such as network attacks or hardnodes tend to be more connected. The theoretical justification for en- ware failures. The mechanism dynamically adjusts its attention weights
hancing connections based on feature similarity is further supported by based on both spatial and temporal dependencies, allowing it to generstudies in spectral graph theory, which suggest that closely connected alize effectively across different traffic scenarios. Whether the network
nodes in a graph’s Laplacian eigenspace tend to share similar features experiences stable, bursty, or periodic traffic, the model can reallocate
and labels. its focus to capture critical trends and correlations, ensuring robust
 performance across diverse conditions. It does not rely on specific
3.7. Attention mechanism traffic types or predefined rules. Instead, it learns the underlying structure of network flows from raw input data, making it well-suited for
 In traditional GATs, the attention mechanism calculates attention heterogeneous network environments.
coefficients 𝛼𝑢𝑣 between neighboring nodes 𝑢 and 𝑣 based solely on In order to achieve this, the attention mechanism in RAGN is
their features. The attention mechanism in RAGN is designed to address grounded in two theoretical principles: feature smoothness and struccritical challenges in this traditional graph representation learning, par- tural consistency. Feature smoothness assumes that nodes connected by
ticularly in adversarial and dynamic environments. For instance, GNNs meaningful edges have similar feature representations. This principle

 9
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

is enforced through a regularization term that penalizes differences in 3.8. Optimization process of RAGN
features between connected nodes:
 ∑
 ̄ 𝐹) = 1
𝛹 (𝐴, 𝐴̄ ‖𝐹 − 𝐹𝑗 ‖2 , (12) The optimization of RAGN involves iteratively updating the graph
 2 𝑖,𝑗 𝑖𝑗 𝑖 structure, node features, and model parameters to ensure robust perwhere 𝐹𝑖 and 𝐹𝑗 are the feature vectors of nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗. Structural formance under adversarial attacks. The overall objective function
consistency ensures that the revised adjacency matrix 𝐴̄ aligns with combines the regularization terms for both graph structure and feathe original graph structure, preventing excessive deviation. This is tures, along with the classification loss on the labeled nodes. The
achieved by incorporating the graph Laplacian 𝐿 = 𝐷 − 𝐴, where 𝐷 optimization process follows an alternating minimization approach,
is the degree matrix, into a structural regularization term: where the graph structure and node features are updated first, followed
 by the model parameters. The optimization process of RAGN is driven
 ̄ = Tr(𝐴̄ ⊤ 𝐿𝐴).
𝛷(𝐴) ̄ (13) by minimizing the following objective function:
The overall optimization objective combines these regularization terms ̄ 𝜃) = re (𝐴,
 ̄ 𝑋,
 total (𝐴, ̄ + 𝜆 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴,
 ̄ 𝑋) ̄ 𝑌𝑝 )
 ̄ 𝑋, (19)
with the task-specific loss:
 This equation combines two objectives to optimize the RAGN model
 ̄ 𝐹 ),
 ̄ + 𝜆2 𝛹 (𝐴,
total = task + 𝜆1 𝛷(𝐴) (14) ̄ is the regularization loss that enforces smoothness
 ̄ 𝑋)
 where re (𝐴,
 in the graph structure and feature matrix. RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴, ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ) is the
 ̄ 𝑋,
where 𝜆1 and 𝜆2 are trade-off parameters balancing the contributions
of structural consistency and feature smoothness. In adversarial set- classification loss for the labeled nodes 𝑌𝑝 , using the RAGN parameters
tings, the attention mechanism significantly enhances robustness. By 𝜃. 𝜆 is a hyperparameter balancing the regularization and classification
 loss. The term 𝐿re (𝐴, ̄ regularizes the graph structure (𝐴)
 ̄ 𝑋), ̄ and the
assigning lower weights to perturbed edges, it reduces the sensitivity
 ̄ ensuring they are smooth and resistant to adversarial
 node features (𝑋),
of the graph embeddings to adversarial perturbations. This robustness
is theoretically supported by the bound on the Frobenius norm of the attacks. It penalizes large changes to the graph and features unless they
perturbed adjacency matrix: improve robustness. The 𝜆𝐿RAGN term focuses on improving classification accuracy. It trains the model parameters 𝛩 to correctly classify
‖𝛥𝐴‖𝐹 ≤ 𝜖, (15) labeled nodes (𝑌𝑝 ) based on the updated graph structure and features.
where 𝜖 represents the adversarial perturbation budget. By reweight- The hyperparameter 𝜆 balances the trade-off between robustness and
ing edges dynamically, the mechanism ensures that 𝛥𝐴 has minimal classification accuracy. This ensures that RAGN learns to simultaneimpact on the model’s performance. Through these properties, the at- ously protect the graph from adversarial attacks and perform accurate
tention mechanism in RAGN provides a robust, and adaptive framework node classification. The regularization loss re is defined as:
for learning from graph-structured data, addressing the challenges of ̄ 2 + 𝛼 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 ̄ 2 + 𝛽 ‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖
 ̄ = ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖
 ̄ 𝑋)
 re (𝐴, ̄ (20)
 2 2
adversarial perturbations, dynamic graphs, and heterogeneous relationships. The mechanism’s ability to selectively prioritize meaningful where ‖𝐴− 𝐴‖ ̄ 2 penalizes the difference between the original adjacency
 2
edges while mitigating noise makes it a critical component of the RAGN matrix 𝐴 and the revised matrix 𝐴. ̄ ‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖̄ 2 penalizes the difference
 2
model. between the original feature matrix 𝑋 and the revised features 𝑋. ̄
 In RAGN, the attention score is enhanced by incorporating the re- ̄ is the Laplacian regularization term that enforces smoothness
 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
vised graph structure 𝐴̄ and generating an additional dynamic attention in the revised feature matrix 𝑋.̄ 𝛼 and 𝛽 are hyperparameters controlscore 𝛼̄ 𝑢𝑣 for each edge. The revised attention score 𝛼̄ 𝑢𝑣 is computed as: ling the influence of these terms. The optimization procedure alternates
 between updating the graph structure 𝐴, ̄ and the
 ̄ the feature matrix 𝑋,
𝛼̄ 𝑢𝑣 = 𝑎̄𝑢𝑣 ⋅ 𝛼𝑢𝑣 (16) ̄
 RAGN parameters 𝜃. The first step is to update the adjacency matrix 𝐴,
Here, 𝑎̄𝑢𝑣 is the revised edge weight obtained from the optimization keeping the feature matrix 𝑋̄ and the RAGN parameters 𝜃 fixed. This is
of the adjacency matrix 𝐴, ̄ which reflects the structural adjustments achieved by minimizing the regularization loss re with respect to 𝐴:̄
made to mitigate adversarial attacks. The goal is to down-weight the ̄ 2 + 𝛼 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 𝐴̄ ∗ = arg min ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖ ̄ (21)
 2
influence of adversarial edges and amplify the importance of positive 𝐴̄
edges. Specifically, 𝑎̄𝑢𝑣 is derived from the structure optimization in The update is performed using projected gradient descent, ensuring that
Step 1 and is used to adjust the original attention scores 𝛼𝑢𝑣 . The final 𝐴̄ remains a valid adjacency matrix (i.e., all elements between 0 and
attention score used for aggregation is then: 1):
 𝛼̄ 𝑢𝑣
𝛼̂ 𝑢𝑣 = ∑ (17) ̄ 2 + 𝛼 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)))
 𝐴̄ ←  (𝐴̄ − 𝜂1 ∇𝐴̄ (‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖ ̄ (22)
 ̄ 𝑣𝑘
 𝑘∈ (𝑣) 𝛼
 2

This dynamic attention mechanism ensures that edges identified as where 𝜂1 is the learning rate for the graph structure update, and  (⋅) is
adversarial (i.e., negative edges) receive lower attention scores, while the projection operator ensuring 𝐴̄ ∈ [0, 1]. Next, the feature matrix 𝑋̄
beneficial edges (positive edges) receive higher attention scores. By it- is updated while holding the graph structure 𝐴̄ and RAGN parameters
erating this process, RAGN progressively increases the ratio of attention 𝜃 fixed. The optimization problem for the feature matrix is:
scores for real edges to adversarial edges, thus improving the overall ̄ 2 + 𝛾 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 𝑋̄ ∗ = arg min ‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖ ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ + 𝜆 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴, ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ) (23)
 2
robustness of the model. The revised aggregation function for node 𝑣 𝑋̄
in layer 𝑘 of RAGN becomes: The feature matrix is updated using gradient descent:
 ( )
 ∑
 (𝑘)
𝐱𝑣 = 𝜎 (𝑘) (𝑘−1)
 𝛼̂ 𝑢𝑣 𝑊 𝐱𝑢 (18) ̄ 2 + 𝛾 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 𝑋̄ ←  (𝑋̄ − 𝜂2 ∇𝑋̄ (‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖ ̄ + 𝜆 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴,
 ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ))) (24)
 2
 𝑢∈ (𝑣)
 where 𝜂2 is the learning rate for the feature update, and  (⋅) is the prowhere 𝛼̂ 𝑢𝑣 is the adjusted attention score, 𝑊 (𝑘) is the weight matrix for jection operator that ensures 𝑋̄ remains a valid feature matrix. Finally,
layer 𝑘, and 𝐱𝑢(𝑘−1) is the feature vector of node 𝑢 from the previous the RAGN parameters 𝜃 are updated, keeping the revised graph struclayer. This dynamic attention score generation step completes the ture 𝐴̄ and the revised feature matrix 𝑋̄ fixed. The RAGN classification
RAGN process, allowing the network to adapt to adversarial attacks loss RAGN is minimized to optimize the model parameters:
by revising both the structure and the attention mechanism, leading
to more robust node embeddings. 𝜃 ∗ = arg min RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴, ̄ 𝑌𝑝 )
 ̄ 𝑋, (25)
 𝜃

 10
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

The parameter update is performed using gradient descent: enhancing the model’s ability to detect anomalous or malicious activity.
 ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ) The revised adjacency matrix highlights the reliable connections while
𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜂3 ∇𝜃 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴, (26)
 reducing the influence of misleading, adversarial edges. Once the adwhere 𝜂3 is the learning rate for updating the RAGN parameters. The jacency matrix has been revised, the next step is to update the feature
optimization process alternates between updating 𝐴, ̄ and 𝜃 for a
 ̄ 𝑋, matrix. The goal of this step is to ensure that the node features accufixed number of iterations or until convergence. The alternating up- rately reflect the true behavior of the network traffic while minimizing
dates ensure that the graph structure and feature matrix progressively the effects of adversarial noise. In the case of network traffic, these
improve, making the model more robust to adversarial attacks. At each features may include packet-related data, IP addresses, communication
iteration, the graph structure is refined to emphasize positive edges frequency, or other attributes relevant to distinguishing between benign
and reduce the influence of adversarial edges. The feature matrix is and malicious entities. The feature refinement process adjusts the node
adjusted to align with the revised structure, and the RAGN parameters features to align with the newly revised graph structure, ensuring
are optimized to improve node classification accuracy under adversarial that traffic nodes with similar behavior remain closely related in the
conditions. The convergence of the process is guaranteed as each step feature space, while nodes representing malicious traffic are more
involves minimizing a convex objective with respect to the current distinctly separated. This step is critical for suppressing any noise or
variable (graph structure, features, or parameters), leading to stable perturbations introduced by adversarial actors, enabling the model to
updates at each iteration. more effectively capture meaningful patterns in the data. After refining
 the graph structure and features, the model parameters are updated
Algorithm 1 The RAGN Algorithm to optimize its classification performance. The RAGN model learns to
 classify nodes (network entities) as either benign or malicious based
 1: Input: Graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐴, 𝑋), Partially labeled nodes 𝑉𝑝 with labels
 on the revised adjacency matrix and updated feature representations.
 𝑌𝑝
 This involves training the model to recognize patterns of normal and
 2: Parameters: Learning rates 𝜂1 , 𝜂2 , 𝜂3 ; Regularization parameters
 malicious behavior within the network traffic graph and to generalize
 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾, 𝜆; Max iterations 𝑇1 , 𝑇2
 ̄ to unknown malicious activity.
 3: Output: Optimized parameters 𝜃 ∗ , Revised adjacency matrix 𝐴,
 During this step, the model adjusts its parameters to minimize
 Revised feature matrix 𝑋̄
 classification errors on the labeled training data, where certain traffic
 4: Initialize 𝐴̄ ← 𝐴, 𝑋̄ ← 𝑋, randomly initialize RAGN parameters 𝜃
 entities are known to be either benign or malicious. As the model
 5: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑇1 do
 parameters are optimized, the model becomes increasingly accurate
 6: Graph Structure Update:
 ( ) at detecting malicious traffic, even when the malicious nodes or in-
 7: Compute gradient: ∇𝐴̄ = ∇𝐴̄ ‖𝐴 − 𝐴‖ ̄
 ̄ 2 + 𝛼 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋)
 ( 2 ) teractions have been adversarially manipulated to evade detection.
 8: Update adjacency matrix: 𝐴̄ ←  𝐴̄ − 𝜂1 ∇𝐴̄
 The training process alternates between these three steps – graph
 9: Feature Matrix Update based on gradient:
 ( ) structure adjustment, feature refinement, and parameter optimization
10: ∇𝑋̄ = ∇𝑋̄ ‖𝑋 − 𝑋‖ ̄ + 𝜆 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴,
 ̄ 2 + 𝛾 tr(𝑋̄ 𝑇 𝐿𝑋) ̄ 𝑌𝑝 )
 ̄ 𝑋,
 2 ( ) – over several iterations. With each iteration, the graph structure, node
11: Update feature matrix: 𝑋̄ ←  𝑋̄ − 𝜂2 ∇𝑋̄
 features, and model parameters are refined to improve the model’s
12: for 𝑗 = 1 to 𝑇2 do
 robustness to adversarial attacks and enhance its classification accu-
13: RAGN Parameter Update:
 ̄ 𝑋,
 ̄ 𝑌𝑝 ) racy. The process continues until a convergence criterion is met, such
14: Compute gradient: ∇𝜃 = ∇𝜃 RAGN (𝜃, 𝐴,
 as when the changes in the graph, features, and parameters between
15: Update parameters: 𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜂3 ∇𝜃
 iterations become negligible, or when a maximum number of iterations
16: end for
 is reached. By iteratively refining both the structure of the network
17: end for
 ̄ and 𝑋̄ and the features of the traffic entities, RAGN progressively enhances
18: Return Optimized 𝜃 ∗ , 𝐴,
 its ability to detect unknown malicious traffic. The final model is
 robust to sophisticated adversarial attacks, effectively distinguishing
 between normal and malicious network traffic even when malicious
3.9. Training process of RAGN actors attempt to manipulate the graph structure or obfuscate their
 traffic behavior. This makes RAGN a powerful tool for network security,
 The training process of RAGN for detecting unknown malicious net- enabling the detection of unknown and evolving threats in network
work traffic involves an iterative optimization strategy that alternates traffic.
between refining the graph structure, updating the node features, and
optimizing the model parameters. This process aims to strengthen the 3.10. Overview of proposed adversarial attack method
model’s ability to distinguish between normal and malicious network
traffic, even in the presence of adversarial efforts to obfuscate malicious To evaluate the robustness of the proposed RAGN model and basebehavior. In the context of network traffic detection, the network line state-of-the-art models, we introduce Semantic-Preserving Adveris represented as a graph where nodes correspond to traffic entities sarial Node Injection (SPAN), a novel adversarial attack method specif-
(such as IP addresses, network flows, or devices), and edges repre- ically tailored for dynamic graph neural networks. Unlike generalsent relationships or interactions between them. The adjacency matrix purpose attacks, SPAN ensures that injected perturbations align with
encodes these connections, while the feature matrix captures relevant the semantic integrity of network traffic, preserving natural commucharacteristics of the traffic, such as packet size, source and destination nication behaviors while effectively disrupting graph structures. This
addresses, or timing information. The first step in the training process is approach makes the attack not only realistic and domain-relevant but
to revise the graph’s adjacency matrix. This is essential for improving also effective in exposing model vulnerabilities. Network traffic graphs
the model’s resilience to adversarial attacks, where malicious entities are dynamic, evolving over time as 𝐺 = {𝐺0 , 𝐺1 , … , 𝐺𝑇 }, where each
may attempt to manipulate the network structure to disguise their snapshot 𝐺𝑡 = (𝑉𝑡 , 𝐴𝑡 , 𝐹𝑡 ) consists of nodes 𝑉𝑡 (e.g., endpoints or debehavior. RAGN adjusts the adjacency matrix by encouraging stronger vices), edges 𝐴𝑡 (e.g., communication links), and features 𝐹𝑡 (e.g., traffic
connections between nodes that exhibit similar traffic patterns (such as statistics). SPAN operates with the following key objectives:
normal traffic nodes) and weakening connections that may have been
adversarially manipulated to obscure the nature of the malicious nodes. • Maximizing Model Disruption: SPAN targets vulnerable nodes and
 This adjustment ensures that the connections in the graph better edges to degrade the performance of tasks like node classification
reflect the true relationships between entities in the network, thereby or link prediction.

 11
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 • Preserving Imperceptibility through semantic alignment: The at- The graph’s dynamic structure is analyzed across time intervals 𝑇 ,
 tack ensures that injected perturbations remain undetected by with the moment of injection 𝐷 = {𝐺𝑇𝑡−2 , 𝐺𝑇𝑡−1 , …} determined by
 anomaly detection systems through semantic alignment. maximizing structural vulnerability and traffic relevance. The temporal
 • Exploiting Temporal and Structural Fragility: By leveraging both traffic intensity 𝑔(𝑡) serves as the proportional weight:
 temporal traffic patterns and structural vulnerabilities, SPAN traffic(𝑡)
 𝑔(𝑡) = . (30)
 strategically injects perturbations that align with real-world dy- max𝑡 traffic(𝑡)
 namics. Injected nodes are strategically connected to nodes in 𝑉𝑡 with high 𝑔(𝑡)
 • Adhering to Budget Constraints: SPAN operates within predefined and fragility scores 𝛿𝑣 . Injected edges 𝐸𝑡𝐼 are designed to target nodes
 limits, such as the number of injected nodes (𝑏), degree budget
 within the 𝑚-hop neighborhood 𝐴𝑚 𝑡 (𝑣) while maintaining realistic com-
 (𝑑), and feature range (𝛥𝐹 ), ensuring computational efficiency
 munication behaviors. The overall change in the embedding function
 and realism.
 due to injected edges is expressed as:
The attack involves injecting a set of malicious nodes 𝑉𝑡𝐼 with features ∑
 𝛥𝑓𝑚 = 𝑤𝑢,𝑚 ℎ𝑘−1,𝑡
 𝑢 , (31)
𝐹𝑡𝐼 into 𝐺𝑡 , connecting them to existing nodes 𝑉𝑡 via edges 𝐸𝑡𝐼 . The 𝑢∈𝐴𝑚
 𝑡 (𝑣)
resulting perturbed graph 𝐺𝑡′ is represented as:
 ( ) ( ) where 𝑤𝑢,𝑚 represents the weights of the affected neighborhood nodes.
 𝐴𝑡 𝐸𝑡𝐼 𝐹𝑡
𝐴′𝑡 = 𝐼 𝐼 , 𝐹𝑡′ = . (27) By focusing on the temporal traffic patterns and structural fragility of
 (𝐸𝑡 )𝑇 𝐴𝑡 𝐹𝑡𝐼
 communication nodes, this method ensures that injected perturbations
Here, 𝐴𝐼𝑡 and 𝐸𝑡𝐼 represent the internal connections between malicious align with plausible network behaviors, addressing both structural
nodes and their connections to the original nodes, respectively. To disruption and semantic integrity.
maintain semantic coherence, SPAN ensures that the injected nodes During the edge selection phase, the features of malicious nodes
simulate plausible traffic behaviors, such as spoofed flows, fake con- have not been fully determined. Therefore, to maximize the perturbanections, or modified communication patterns, without violating the tion impact, we focus on maximizing 𝛥𝑓1 , which is expressed as:
natural structure of network traffic graphs. With these features, SPAN ∑ ∑ ′
provides a rigorous method for evaluating the robustness of graph- 𝛥𝑓1 = 𝛥𝑤𝑢,1 ℎ0,𝑡
 𝑢 + 𝑤𝑢,1 ℎ0,𝑡
 𝑢 , (32)
 𝑢∈𝐴1𝑡 (𝑣) 𝑢∈𝐴1𝑡 (𝑣′ ),𝐴1𝑡 (𝑣)
based models in realistic network traffic scenarios. By targeting both
the structural and temporal aspects of dynamic graphs while pre- where 𝛥𝑤𝑢,1 and 𝑤𝑢,1 denote the respective weights in the perturbed
serving semantic integrity, SPAN ensures effective and imperceptible and original graphs, and ℎ0,𝑡
 𝑢 refers to the hidden representation of node
perturbations that challenge the resilience of modern graph neural 𝑢 before the attack. This strategy ensures that the injected nodes target
networks. structurally significant connections while maintaining the semantic
 coherence of the graph.
3.10.1. Semantic-preserving adversarial node injection To determine the most effective edges for connection, we rely on the
 To exploit the vulnerability of graph neural networks used in net- structural fragility score of the target nodes. For graph convolutional
work traffic classification, the proposed SPAN puts forward a stepwise networks (GCNs) and mean-pooling-based graph neural networks, the
injection strategy, progressively injecting nodes in small batches to weights 𝑤𝑢,1 for connections are computed as:
iteratively refine their connections and features. Vulnerable nodes are 1 1
 𝑤𝑢,1 = , 𝛥𝑤𝑢,1 = , (33)
selected based on both structural fragility quantified by a node’s im- deg(𝑢) deg(𝑣) deg(𝑣)
portance to graph connectivity and semantic relevance, such as critical
 where deg(𝑢) and deg(𝑣) are the degrees of the original and injected
roles in traffic flows. The process comprises three key steps:
 nodes, respectively. These weights capture the structural vulnerability
 1. Selecting the optimal time moments for injection based on tem- of the graph, ensuring that perturbations focus on nodes critical to the
 poral traffic patterns. graph’s overall connectivity and traffic flow.
 2. Identifying structurally fragile edges and nodes using traffic The structural fragility score 𝛿𝑣 of a node 𝑣 is defined as:
 dynamics and vulnerability scores. 1 1
 𝛿𝑣 = 𝑘1 ⋅ + 𝑘2 ⋅ , (34)
 3. Optimizing malicious node features with smoothed adversarial deg(𝑢) deg(𝑣) deg(𝑢)
 feature optimization to balance attack impact and stealth. where 𝑘1 and 𝑘2 are hyperparameters that balance the influence of
 global and local properties. Nodes with higher 𝛿𝑣 scores are more
In this method, the node aggregation process for a given node 𝑣 at time
 vulnerable to graph injection attacks because perturbations involving
𝑡 in the graph neural network is defined as:
 ( ({ }) these nodes significantly impact 𝛥𝑓1 .
ℎ𝑘,𝑡
 𝑣 =𝜙 ℎ𝑘−1,𝑡
 𝑣 , 𝑓 ℎ𝑘−1,𝑡
 𝑢 ∣ 𝑢 ∈ 𝐴𝑡 (𝑣) , To limit the number of edges connected to each injected node and
 ( { 𝑘−1 }) ) (28)
 ensure the attack remains realistic, a degree budget 𝜎𝑡 is introduced for
 𝜓 ℎ𝑘−1
 𝑣 , ℎ𝑢 ∣ 𝑢 ∈ 𝐴𝑡−1 (𝑣)
 the injected nodes such that:
where ℎ𝑘,𝑡 𝑣 is the hidden representation of node 𝑣 at layer 𝑘 and time 𝜎𝑡 = 𝑑 ⋅ 𝑁𝐼 , (35)
𝑡, 𝜙(⋅) is the update function for node embeddings, and 𝜓(⋅) aggregates
historical information. The set 𝐴𝑡 (𝑣) includes the neighbors of 𝑣 directly where 𝑁𝐼 is the total number of injected nodes, and 𝑑 is the degree
or indirectly connected within a specific radius. Assuming the attack limit for each node. The target node set 𝑃 is then defined as:
occurs at time 𝑡, the goal is to perturb the embedding ℎ𝑘,𝑡 { }
 𝑣 by modifying 𝑃 = rank(𝛿𝑣 ) ≤ 𝜎𝑡 , ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝐺𝑡 , 𝑇𝑡−2 , 𝑇𝑡−1 , … . (36)
the neighbors 𝐴𝑡 (𝑣) via injected nodes. Injected nodes 𝑣′ ∈ 𝑉𝑡𝐼 are
initialized with features ℎ𝑘−1,𝑡 𝑣′
 = 0, ensuring realistic integration into Here, 𝑃 includes all nodes 𝑣 with 𝛿𝑣 -value rankings less than the
the graph. The impact of the injection on the embedding ℎ𝑘,𝑡 𝑣 can be
 degree budget 𝜎𝑡 for the selected graph snapshot 𝐺𝑡 . By ensuring that
expressed as: the injected nodes are connected to structurally fragile and traffic-
 ( ) relevant nodes, this strategy guarantees the realism of the perturbations
 ∑
 𝑛 ∑
 𝑘,𝑡,𝑚′
𝛥ℎ𝑘,𝑡
 𝑣 = ℎ 𝑣 − ℎ 𝑘,𝑡
 𝑣 = 𝑝 𝑘 ℎ
 𝑚 𝑚 𝑢
 𝑘−1,𝑡
 + 𝑜 𝛥𝑓𝑚 , (29) in network traffic graphs. Furthermore, the inclusion of degree and
 𝑚=0 𝑚 temporal constraints ensures that the attack adheres to real-world comwhere 𝑝𝑚 represents the propagation coefficients, and 𝑘𝑚 reflects the munication dynamics, making it suitable for evaluating the robustness
impact weight from the neighborhood 𝑚. of graph neural networks under realistic adversarial scenarios.

 12
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

3.10.2. Adversarial feature generation semantic integrity and maximize the attack’s impact. This iterative
 After selecting structurally fragile nodes for adversarial connections, approach ensures the attack respects network-specific constraints, such
the next step is to assign meaningful and realistic features to the as communication behaviors and temporal traffic dynamics, while reinjected malicious nodes. Since the features of malicious nodes are maining imperceptible to anomaly detection mechanisms. SPAN begins
initially set to zero, it is essential to optimize them in a way that by selecting target nodes based on their structural fragility and traffic
maximizes the attack’s impact on model predictions while maintaining relevance. Using the total number of malicious nodes and the degree
imperceptibility. This is particularly important for features such as budget constraints, the method determines the number of target nodes
packet size, protocol type, and flow duration to appear plausible to to attack. For each graph snapshot, the structural fragility score of all
evade detection. To achieve this, we propose a smoothed adversarial nodes is computed using Eq. (34), and the most vulnerable nodes are
feature optimization method. This method generates features 𝐹𝑡𝐼 for identified for connection with malicious nodes. The injected nodes are
malicious nodes such that they align with realistic traffic patterns then connected to these targets, and their features are optimized using
while maximizing the perturbation effect on the model. Specifically, Eq. (38) to ensure alignment with realistic network traffic patterns.
the features are constrained within a valid range to avoid triggering The stepwise injection process repeats until the attack budget (number
anomaly detection mechanisms in the model. To limit the features of malicious nodes 𝑏) is exhausted. After each round of injection,
of malicious nodes and prevent detection, we use a random clipping the attack budget is updated, and the algorithm proceeds to the next
function: round. This iterative refinement ensures that the injected nodes blend
 seamlessly into the dynamic network traffic graph and maximize the
 ⎧min, 𝑥 < min
 ⎪ degradation of model performance.
Random(𝑥) = ⎨𝑥, min ≤ 𝑥 ≤ max (37)
 ⎪
 ⎩max, 𝑥 > max, Algorithm 2 The process of the SPAN attack method
where min and max are the lower and upper bounds of the fea- Require:
ture range, respectively. This ensures that the features of malicious 1: Clean graph 𝐺 = {𝐴−𝑛 , 𝐴−𝑛+1 , … , 𝐴𝑇 }, 𝑋 = {𝐹−𝑛 , 𝐹−𝑛+1 , … , 𝐹𝑇 }
nodes stay within a domain-specific valid range, such as typical val- 2: Parameters:
ues observed in network traffic (e.g., realistic packet sizes or flow • 𝑏: Budget on the number of injected nodes
frequencies). • 𝑑: Degree budget of each injected node
 However, the random clipping function can lead to a zero gradient • 𝛥𝐹 : Constraint on the range of node features
problem, where feature values are clipped at their boundaries, prevent- ′ ,…,𝐹′ }
 Ensure: Attacked graph 𝐺′ = {𝐴′−𝑛 , … , 𝐴′𝑇 }, 𝑋 ′ = {𝐹−𝑛
ing further optimization. This can cause the features to stagnate and 𝑇
 3: Initialize 𝑆 ′ ← 𝑆 + 𝑆𝐼 , 𝐹 ′ ← 𝐹 + 𝐹𝐼
reduce the effectiveness of the attack. To address this limitation, we
 4: Select target time snapshots 𝐷 = {𝐺𝑇𝑡−2 , 𝐺𝑇𝑡−1 , … , 𝐺𝑇 −𝑞 , … }
introduce a smooth and continuous feature optimization function. The
 5: for 𝐺𝑡 ∈ 𝐷 do
proposed smoothed optimization function, Opfeature (𝑥), avoids the zero
 6: Initialize malicious node set 𝐼 ∈ R0×𝑁𝐼 , connection matrix 𝐸𝑡𝐼 ∈
gradient issue by mapping features onto a continuous range: 0×𝑑
 R , and feature matrix 𝐹𝑡𝐼 ∈ R0×𝛥𝐹
 max(1 + sin(𝑥)) + min(1 − sin(𝑥)) 7: while 𝑏 > 0 do
Opfeature (𝑥) = . (38)
 2 8: for 𝑣 ∈ 𝐺𝑡 do
This function ensures that the features of injected malicious nodes are 9: Compute defective fragility score 𝛿𝑣 using Eq. (12)
smoothly updated during optimization, preventing them from becom- 10: end for
ing stuck at the boundaries defined by Random(𝑥). By using Opfeature (𝑥), 11: Select the number of malicious nodes 𝑏seq ∝ 𝑔(𝑡)|𝐷|
we maintain a balance between imperceptibility and the ability to 12: Connect 𝑏seq malicious nodes to the highest fragility target
disrupt model predictions. The optimization of malicious node features nodes
aims to maximize the model’s prediction error while adhering to the 13: Initialize and optimize malicious node features 𝐹𝑡𝐼 using
constraints of imperceptibility. The objective function is defined as: Eq. (15)
min ‖𝑀(𝐺𝑡′ ) − 𝑀(𝐺𝑡 )‖ + 𝜆‖𝐹𝑡𝐼 − 𝜇(𝐹𝑡 )‖, (39) 14: Update the attack budget 𝑏 ← 𝑏 − 𝑏seq
𝐹𝑡𝐼 15: end while
where: 16: Update 𝐴′𝑡 and 𝐹𝑡′ using Eq. (1) and Eq. (2)
 17: end for
 • 𝑀(𝐺𝑡 ) and 𝑀(𝐺𝑡′ ) represent the model’s predictions on the origi- 18: return 𝐺′ = {𝐴′0 , 𝐹0′ }, … , {𝐴′𝑇 , 𝐹𝑇′ }
 nal and perturbed graphs, respectively.
 • 𝜇(𝐹𝑡 ) is the mean feature vector of the original nodes in the graph,
 ensuring that the malicious features are consistent with normal
 network traffic patterns. 4. Experimental setup and evaluation
 • 𝜆 is a hyperparameter that balances the trade-off between maximizing the attack’s impact and maintaining imperceptibility. 4.1. Implementation details

 By using Opfeature (𝑥), the optimization process ensures that ma- In our experiments, we employ a two-layer GAT model, applylicious nodes blend seamlessly into the graph while effectively per- ing a dropout rate of 0.6 to the input of both layers. The model
turbing the model’s predictions. This approach prevents detection by is trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with a learning
anomaly-based defenses and guarantees that the perturbations respect rate of 0.01, applied to both the feature matrix and the adjacency
the semantic integrity of network traffic. matrix. This learning rate ensures that updates are gradual, avoiding
 rapid convergence that could lead to suboptimal solutions. The dropout
3.10.3. Overall attack process of SPAN rate helps prevent overfitting, especially when training on smaller
 The proposed SPAN attack is designed as a stepwise process, partic- datasets, while also maintaining stability in the model’s performance.
ularly suitable for network traffic graphs. The attack process of SPAN The graph structure adjustment strength (𝛼), with values between 0.01
is illustrated in Fig. 4. The method leverages a batch injection strategy, and 1.0; the feature smoothing coefficient (𝛽), tested from 0.01 to
where a small number of malicious nodes are added to the graph in 1.0 to assess its effect on feature smoothness across nodes; and the
each round, and their features are iteratively optimized to maintain adversarial loss coefficient (𝜆), which was varied between 0.01 and 1.0

 13
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Fig. 4. Dynamic graph attack process by SPAN.

to control the trade-off between classification accuracy and adversarial which is critical for handling the large-scale graph structures and
robustness. Once the optimal parameters were selected based on vali- attention mechanisms in RAGN and baseline models. The system has
dation performance, the final evaluation was conducted on the test set. 512 GB of RAM, allowing for efficient storage and computation of
Additionally, robustness was tested by introducing both targeted and large intermediate data such as feature matrices, adjacency matrices,
untargeted adversarial attacks, with perturbation rates ranging from and attention scores. The experiments are conducted on a Linux-based
0% to 25%, enabling us to measure how effectively each model can system (Ubuntu 20.04). The models are implemented using PyTorch
resist adversarial manipulations in the test data. and DGL (Deep Graph Library) [38], which provide efficient handling
 In the graph construction process, edge weights were determined of graph-based computations and allow for flexible implementation of
based on the interactions between network entities. Specifically, an graph neural networks. By running each experiment multiple times
edge between two nodes (e.g., IP addresses) was established if there with different random seeds, we mitigate the potential for randomness
was at least one bidirectional traffic flow between them. The weight in the results, providing a robust statistical basis for performance com-
𝑤𝑖𝑗 of an edge connecting nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗 was calculated as a function of parisons. This experimental setup allows us to fairly assess the ability
the total bytes exchanged, normalized by the maximum traffic volume of RAGN to detect and defend against adversarial attacks, comparing it
observed across all edges. This ensured that edge weights reflected the against state-of-the-art baseline models under the same conditions.
relative strength of interactions. For temporal graphs, edge weights
were dynamically updated within a time window 𝛥𝑡, incorporating the 4.2. Datasets and graph construction
frequency of interactions to capture evolving network behaviors. In
 For this study, we utilized the CICIDS-2018, CTU-13, and USTCadversarial scenarios, such as those involving malicious node injections,
 TFC2016 as benchmark datasets. Each model was trained, validated,
edge weights for injected nodes were constrained to prevent unrealistic
 and tested on the aforementioned datasets, with 80% of the data alloinfluence on the graph structure. This approach ensured that the graph
 cated for training, 10% for validation, and 10% for testing. The training
representation remained robust and reflective of real-world network
 set was used for learning the model parameters, while the validation set
dynamics.
 was employed for hyperparameter tuning. This split allows for optimal
 The hyperparameters for each model were tuned using grid search
 selection of model parameters without overfitting the training data.
to ensure fair comparisons. For a fair comparison with other models,
 Detailed descriptions of these datasets are as follows:
we ensure that each baseline is configured using its respective default
settings. For example, for GCN and GAT, we follow their original 1. CICIDS-2018 [39]: This dataset provides labeled traffic data that
configurations in [37,4]. For E-GraphSAGE, we used the configuration includes a range of different attacks, such as denial of service
in [18], where the number of hidden units is selected from the set {16, (DoS), botnet, and infiltration. From this dataset, we extracted
32, 64, 128} with learning rate of 0.001. In the case of GCN-MHSA, relevant network features, including IP addresses, packet size,
we followed the settings in [10] where they set batch size to 64 and a flow duration, and protocol type. We filtered out incomplete or
dropout rate at 0.5 with epoch size as 50 and a learning rate as 0.01. erroneous flows, resulting in a clean set of labeled flows.
This is consistent across models ensures that each model is tested under 2. CTU-13 [40]: Known for its collection of botnet traffic, the CTUtheir best conditions. Both the inner and outer iterations for training, 13 dataset required careful selection and filtering of benign
denoted as 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 , are set to 10 to allow for adequate convergence and malicious traffic flows. We utilized flow-based aggregation
across models. techniques to capture the behavior of bots and their interactions
 All experiments are conducted using Intel Xeon CPU with multi- with other hosts. Non-malicious traffic was also preprocessed by
ple cores. NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs are used to accelerate training, grouping related flows into coherent sessions.

 14
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 3. USTC-TFC2016 [41]: This dataset, which contains a variety 4.3. Evaluation metrics
 of encrypted malicious traffic, provided challenges in distinguishing between malicious and benign flows based on en- We evaluate the performance of RAGN and the baseline models
 crypted data. We applied feature engineering techniques to using four standard metrics in the field of intrusion detection. The
 extract meaningful attributes from encrypted traffic, such as metrics used in this study to evaluate the performance of the models
 packet timing and flow directionality, ensuring these flows were are Detected Rate, Misclassification Rate, and Accuracy (ACC). These
 appropriately represented for graph construction. metrics are formulated as follows: The Detected Rate is the proportion
 4. UJS-IDS2022 dataset [10]: It is a private dataset comprising of of actual positive instances that were correctly identified by the model:
 real-life normal traffic and abnormal sourced from the Jiangsu
 True Positives (TP)
 Key Laboratory of Security Technology for Industrial Cyberspace Detected Rate = × 100 (40)
 in Jiangsu University. True Positives (TP) + False Negatives (FN)

The raw network traffic data was pre-processed to ensure compatibil- The Misclassification Rate measures the proportion of incorrect
ity with our graph-based model. For each dataset, the raw network classifications (both false positives and false negatives) in relation to
traffic flows were first converted into flow-level features, representing the total number of instances:
individual connections between hosts in the network. A combination Misclassification Rate
of packet-level and flow-level features (e.g., source IP, destination
 False Positives (FP) + False Negatives (FN)
IP, packet counts, byte size, protocol types) were extracted to create = × 100 (41)
a structured representation of each connection. Once the flow-level Total Instances
features were extracted from each dataset, we proceeded to construct The Accuracy (ACC) is the overall proportion of correct classificaa graph where each node represented a network entity (such as an tions, including both true positives and true negatives, out of the total
IP address, a host, or a device). The edges between nodes were es- instances:
tablished based on observed traffic flows, capturing the interactions
 True Positives (TP) + True Negatives (TN)
and communication patterns between the network entities. For each Accuracy (ACC) = × 100
graph, each node in the graph corresponds to a unique entity within Total Instances
the network, such as an IP address or a network endpoint. The features (42)
of each node were derived from the corresponding flow-level features,
 These metrics provide a comprehensive view of the model’s perforincluding the number of connections, types of protocols used, packet
sizes, and traffic volume. These features were critical in capturing the mance in terms of its ability to correctly detect malicious traffic, avoid
behavioral patterns of each network entity. Edges between nodes were misclassifications, and maintain overall accuracy.
defined by the presence of traffic between network entities. If a traffic
flow existed between two nodes (e.g., an IP connection), an edge was 4.4. Baseline models
created. The edge features were derived from the aggregated statistics
of the flows, such as the total bytes transferred, the number of packets We compare the performance of RAGN against a set of state-of-theexchanged, and the duration of communication. Both directed and art baseline models that are graph-based intrusion detection tasks:
undirected graphs were constructed depending on the type of traffic
(e.g., bidirectional traffic for TCP-based connections). 1. GCN-MHSA [10]: Introduces a multi-head self-attention mech-
 During data preprocessing, outlier handling was performed to en- anism into GCN to assign larger weights to important features
sure the quality and reliability of the input data. Outliers in numerical and introduces indirect and direct correlations between network
features, such as packet size and flow duration, were identified using traffic using link homogeneity.
the Interquartile Range (IQR) method. Data points falling outside the 2. GATrans [20]: A novel anomaly detection method that employs
range [𝑄1 − 1.5 × IQR, 𝑄3 + 1.5 × IQR] were excluded as outliers. For an enhanced graph attention network and Transformer model to
network-specific features, domain knowledge was applied to define account for temporal and spatial dependencies respectively.
thresholds. For example, unusually high connection rates (e.g., > 1000 3. FedGAT [42]: This model is based on an attention mechanism
connections/second from a single IP) were flagged and removed. These and the construction of a Federated Graph Attention Network to
preprocessing steps were applied consistently across all datasets to evaluate the interactivity between nodes in the graph, thereby
maintain uniformity and ensure that the constructed graphs accurately improving the precision of internal network interactions. The
reflected the underlying network traffic patterns.
 method achieved comparable accuracy and robustness to tradi-
 In order to evaluate the robustness of RAGN against adversarial
 tional detection methods.
traffic, we introduced simulated adversarial perturbations to the graph
 4. TCGNN [33]: This model converts each network packet into
structure by randomly adding or removing edges. This step allowed us
 an undirected graph and utilizes a two-layer GCN that imto test how RAGN handles manipulated connections that could mislead
the model. Each node was labeled as either benign or malicious, based plements three distinct aggregation strategies. This approach
on the ground-truth labels available in the dataset. In some cases, effectively extracts the latent application representation from the
when the dataset provided flow-level labels (instead of node labels), we graph-structured like a packet. Leveraging the robust capabiliaggregated the flow labels to assign a label to the corresponding node. ties of GNNs in graph representation learning, TCGNN achieves
For example, if a host exhibited multiple malicious flows, it was labeled exceptionally high accuracy in identifying unknown network
as malicious. Conversely, if a host only engaged in benign communica- packets.
tion, it was labeled as benign. Each graph was carefully constructed to 5. EC-GCN [43]: is an end-to-end classification model that learns
balance between sparsity and density, ensuring that the graph structure representative spatial–temporal traffic features hidden in a trafaccurately reflected real-world network traffic without being overly fic time series and then classifies them in a unified framework.
connected or too sparse. This balance was important for ensuring 6. E-GraphSAGE [18]: It leverages Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
that the attention mechanism in RAGN could focus on meaningful to detect and mitigate network-based cyber attacks by capturing
connections. By transforming these datasets into graph structures, we both edge features and topological information of network traffic
captured both the feature-level and relational information inherent in represented in a graph format.
network traffic, which is crucial for the effective detection of malicious
behaviors. The final graph representations were then used as input To evaluate the effectiveness of SPAN, we also compare it against
to our RAGN model, allowing it to learn from both the features of several benchmark attack methods that are commonly used in graphindividual nodes and the communication patterns between them. based adversarial learning.

 15
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 • DICE (Dynamic Iterative Classifier Exploitation) [44]: DICE is a decline in performance. Thus, the results highlight that a balanced
 an attack method that iteratively manipulates node features and feature smoothing approach is crucial for maximizing accuracy.
 edges to degrade the classifier’s performance. The approach works We also evaluate the impact of the adversarial loss coefficient 𝜆
 by exploiting the classifier’s decision boundaries, aiming to force on both validation accuracy and adversarial robustness. As shown in
 misclassification by perturbing nodes in a way that maximizes the the chart, we varied 𝜆 across five different values: 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5,
 classifier’s error. and 1. The results indicate that the model performs consistently well
 • DegAttack (DGA) [45]: DegAttack is a well-known attack method across different values of 𝜆, with minimal fluctuations in validation
 that focuses on degrading the graph by removing nodes with the accuracy and adversarial robustness. A slight drop is observed at 𝜆 = 1,
 highest degree. The method primarily targets highly connected which suggests that a very high value of 𝜆 may slightly hinder the
 nodes, which are considered structurally important, to reduce the model’s overall performance. The adversarial robustness also follows a
 overall connectivity of the graph. similar trend, reflecting the model’s ability to maintain stability against
 • RWCS (Random Walk-based Community Structure) [36]: RWCS is adversarial attacks across a wide range of coefficients. These findings
 an attack method that uses random walks to identify and disrupt imply that the choice of 𝜆 can influence the balance between accuracy
 community structures within a graph. By targeting nodes that and robustness, but the model remains relatively stable within the
 are critical to maintaining community cohesion, RWCS aims to tested range. (See Fig. 5.)
 weaken the overall graph structure.
 5.2. Detection of unknown malicious traffic
5. Experimental results
 Unknown malicious network traffic encompasses network behaviors
 This section presents the experimental results of RAGN in terms of that are new attacks previously not seen by a detection systems. In
its effectiveness in detecting malicious network traffic and defending this study, we employ the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) [35] and
against adversarial attacks. The primary goal of the experiments is to GraphGAN [46] to generate synthetic patterns that closely mimic realassess RAGN’s performance across different datasets, attack scenarios, world zero-day attack traffic. The SBM is utilized to produce one set of
and parameter configurations, demonstrating its advantages over ex- synthetic traffic by modeling the complex interactions within network
isting methods. Additionally, we conduct ablation studies to highlight traffic, thus providing a structured simulation of network behavior.
the impact of key components introduced in RAGN, such as the extra On the other hand, GraphGAN employs a generator to create traffic
attention on edges and the iterative graph structure adjustment. flows from random noise and a discriminator that learns to differentiate
 between real and synthetic flows. After rigorous training, the Graph-
5.1. Parameter determination GAN generator yields another set of synthetic traffic that also aims
 to mirror zero-day attack scenarios. We conduct separate statistical
 In order to determine the optimal learning rate 𝜂𝐀 for updating validations for traffic generated by each model, as shown in Figs. 6
 ̄ and  , we experimented the influence of different values. In the
𝐀, (SBM) and 7 (GraphGAN). These validations confirm that both the SBM
learning rate optimization experiment, we explored a range of learning and GraphGAN traffic closely mimic real-world patterns confirming
rates for updating the adjacency matrix (𝜂𝐴 ) and evaluated the model’s quality samples for mimicking zero-day malicious traffic even though
performance based on both validation accuracy and convergence time. they do not perfectly replicate the complexity and unique features of
The results indicate that a learning rate of 0.001 yields a high validation real ones. These methodologies introduce meaningful variations as in
accuracy of 89%, but requires a convergence time of 30 epochs. As zero-day attack behavior, ensuring that the model does not overfit to
the learning rate increases to 0.01, the validation accuracy remains predefined attack signatures.
high at approximately 88.7%, while the convergence time significantly The models were then trained exclusively on the original dataset,
decreases to 15 epochs, striking a balance between performance and excluding any synthetic traffic, to simulate real-world conditions where
training speed. However, further increasing the learning rate to 0.05 re- zero-day attacks represent entirely novel threats.
sults in a notable decline in accuracy to around 86% and a convergence In the summarized results in Table 4, the proposed RAGN outpertime of 13 epochs. At the highest learning rate of 0.1, the validation formed all baseline models across various datasets when challenged
accuracy drops further to 82%, and convergence time reduces to 10 with zero-day traffic samples. Specifically, RAGN achieved an accuracy,
epochs. These findings suggest that overly aggressive updates can lead precision, recall, and F1-score of 99.17%, 99.21%, 99.13%, and 99.16%
to suboptimal performance. The optimal learning rate for our model is respectively on the CICIDS-2018 dataset. These figures are significantly
0.01, as it provides a favorable trade-off between validation accuracy higher compared to the best-performing baseline model on the same
and convergence speed, achieving high performance while maintaining dataset, TCGNN, which scored 89.19%, 88.13%, 87.58%, and 87.84%
efficient training time. in accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, respectively.
 The experiment on graph structure adjustment strength (𝛼) shows On the GraphGAN version of the CICIDS-2018 dataset, RAGN mainthat moderate values of 𝛼 = 0.05 yield the best performance, achiev- tained high scores with 99.12% accuracy, 99.18% precision, 99.09%
ing around 89% validation accuracy while maintaining a reasonable recall, and 99.13% F1-score. In contrast, the TCGNN, which performed
convergence time. Increasing 𝛼 beyond this point reduces accuracy best among the baseline models under simulated conditions, showed
but accelerates convergence. Conversely, smaller 𝛼 values improve a decrease to 85.27% accuracy, 83.82% precision, 83.21% recall, and
accuracy but prolong convergence. The error bars indicate that model 83.52% F1-score. This stark contrast in performance illustrates the
performance is most stable at 𝛼 = 0.05, with more variance at extreme effectiveness of RAGN’s adaptive mechanisms, particularly its ability
values of 𝛼. Thus, a balanced adjustment strength optimizes both to maintain robustness against new and evolving threat patterns. The
accuracy and convergence speed. differential performance between RAGN and the best baseline mod-
 We conducted another experiment to evaluate the effect of the fea- els is approximately 10% to nearly 15% across all metrics in the
ture smoothing coefficient 𝛽 on the model’s performance. We tested val- simulated settings. On the UJS-2022 dataset, in scenarios involving
ues of 𝛽 ranging from 0.01 to 1.0, specifically 𝛽 = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0. unknown attack traffic, simulated using GraphGAN and SBM methods,
The results show that the highest validation accuracy of 89.19% occurs RAGN exhibit robust performance, maintaining high accuracy (98.12%
at 𝛽 = 0.5, indicating that moderate smoothing yields optimal results. and 98.11%) and precision (98.18% and 98.16%), thereby illustrating
Lower values of 𝛽, such as 0.01 and 0.05, lead to slightly reduced its resilience and adaptive capability against novel adversarial strateaccuracy, while higher values, like 𝛽 = 1.0, cause over-smoothing and gies. Furthermore, RAGN also records the highest recall rates among

 16
 E. Akpaku et al.
 Table 4
 Zero-day malicious traffic detection performance.
 Original data Unknown attack traffic (GraphGAN) Unknown attack traffic (SBM)
 Dataset Metric (%)
 GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN
 Accuracy 83.57 84.63 85.28 86.34 89.19 88.12 99.17 79.18 80.37 81.42 82.53 85.27 84.10 99.12 78.24 79.38 80.67 81.59 84.35 83.18 99.11
 Precision 82.22 83.56 84.37 85.41 88.13 87.06 99.21 77.05 78.54 79.83 80.78 83.82 82.67 99.18 76.13 77.68 78.94 79.89 82.73 81.59 99.16
 CICIDS-
 Recall 81.53 82.98 83.77 84.82 87.58 86.51 99.13 76.23 77.67 79.16 80.02 83.21 82.05 99.09 75.84 77.29 78.73 79.63 82.34 81.20 99.07
 2018
 F1-Score 81.89 83.24 84.06 85.18 87.84 86.78 99.16 76.62 78.02 79.49 80.44 83.52 82.36 99.13 75.99 77.49 78.84 79.76 82.56 81.42 99.11
 FPR 10.57 10.24 9.83 9.54 7.42 7.90 0.32 12.73 12.51 11.82 11.52 9.79 10.22 0.35 12.68 12.43 11.88 11.48 9.77 10.30 0.34
 Accuracy 82.69 83.47 85.12 86.25 89.28 88.21 98.95 81.08 82.12 83.56 84.78 88.05 87.02 98.90 80.21 81.32 82.64 83.83 86.89 85.86 98.88
 Precision 81.53 82.85 84.52 85.83 88.92 87.85 98.89 80.58 81.85 83.04 84.27 87.65 86.58 98.85 79.67 80.95 82.17 83.34 86.45 85.42 98.83
 CTU-13 Recall 80.95 82.35 84.05 85.33 88.45 87.38 98.86 79.08 80.35 81.58 82.75 86.15 85.11 98.82 78.19 79.47 80.69 81.90 85.20 84.17 98.80
17

 F1-Score 81.25 82.60 84.30 85.60 88.70 87.61 98.87 79.83 81.10 82.31 83.52 86.90 85.84 98.83 78.90 80.20 81.43 82.62 85.82 84.79 98.81
 FPR 10.35 10.05 9.55 9.25 7.65 8.15 0.29 11.55 11.25 10.75 10.45 8.95 9.50 0.31 11.50 11.25 10.70 10.40 8.90 9.45 0.30
 Accuracy 88.13 89.04 90.59 91.39 95.17 94.10 99.53 87.58 88.47 89.97 91.15 94.02 93.00 99.48 86.28 87.18 88.71 89.91 92.29 91.25 99.45
 Precision 87.55 88.45 89.95 90.75 94.82 93.75 99.48 86.08 87.07 88.47 89.67 92.83 91.81 99.43 85.08 86.17 87.57 88.77 91.03 90.00 99.40
 USTC-
 Recall 87.05 88.05 89.55 90.35 94.45 93.38 99.45 85.58 86.57 88.07 89.27 92.57 91.55 99.40 84.78 85.87 87.32 88.52 90.78 89.73 99.38
 TFC2016
 F1-Score 87.30 88.25 89.75 90.55 94.65 93.56 99.47 85.83 86.82 88.32 89.52 92.70 91.68 99.42 84.93 86.01 87.45 88.65 90.92 89.86 99.39
 FPR 8.43 8.13 7.73 7.33 3.93 4.15 0.28 9.03 8.83 8.33 8.03 5.63 5.85 0.30 8.98 8.78 8.28 7.98 5.58 5.80 0.29
 Accuracy 90.57 91.63 92.28 93.34 96.19 95.12 99.17 86.18 87.37 88.42 89.53 92.27 91.10 98.12 85.24 86.38 87.67 88.59 91.35 90.18 98.11
 Precision 89.22 90.56 91.37 92.41 95.13 94.06 98.21 84.05 85.54 86.83 87.78 90.82 89.67 98.18 83.13 84.68 85.94 86.89 89.73 88.59 98.16
 UJS-IDS2022 Recall 88.53 89.98 90.77 91.82 94.58 93.51 98.13 83.23 84.67 86.16 87.02 90.21 89.05 98.00 82.84 84.29 85.73 86.63 89.34 88.20 97.87
 F1-Score 88.89 90.24 91.06 92.18 94.84 93.78 98.16 83.62 85.02 86.49 87.44 90.52 89.36 97.13 82.99 84.49 85.84 86.76 89.56 88.42 97.11
 FPR 9.57 9.24 8.83 8.54 6.42 6.90 0.22 11.73 11.51 10.82 10.52 8.79 9.22 0.25 11.68 11.43 10.88 10.48 8.77 9.30 0.24

 Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Fig. 5. Parameter determination experiments.

Fig. 6. Box plots were utilized to analyze features such as (a) Bwd Packet Length Max, (b) Fwd Packets Length Total, (c) Bwd Packet Length Max, and (d) Init Fwd Win Bytes
in the CICIDS-2018 datasets. The presented box plots illustrate the disparities between real and synthetic data, leading to the termination of the GANs training process.

 Fig. 7. Jaccard similarity distributions between clean and GraphGAN’s synthetic datasets.

all models, achieving 98.13% on the original dataset and maintain- SPAN, a dynamic graph attack we introduced in this study, along with
ing commendable performance under attack simulations (98.00% for DICE [44], degattack (DGA) [45], and RWCS [36]. The adversarial
GraphGAN and 97.87% for SBM). The superior F1-scores (98.16% in perturbation levels varied from 2% to 25%, aimed at disrupting the
original, 97.13% in GraphGAN, and 97.11% in SBM scenarios) suggest graph structure. The comparative performance, as detailed in Table 5,
a balanced high performance between precision and recall, which illustrates the superior resilience of RAGN across all attack vectors on
is challenging to achieve in adversarial settings. Additionally, RAGN the CICIDS-2018 Dataset. Under the DICE attack, all baseline models
demonstrates an exceptionally low False Positive Rate (FPR) of 0.22% exhibited higher misclassification rates as the perturbation ratio inin the original data scenario, with only a slight increase to 0.25% and creased. However, RAGN consistently outperformed the other models,
0.24% under GraphGAN and SBM attacks, respectively. maintaining significantly lower misclassification rates at all perturba-
 Such a robust performance by RAGN not only highlights the model’s tion levels. For instance, at a 25% perturbation rate, RAGN achieved
advanced architectural merits but also its practical applicability in a misclassification rate of 7.06%, substantially lower than the next
real-world network environments where adaptability and accuracy are best model, FedGAT, which recorded 17.02%. This trend was similarly
paramount. The ability of RAGN to sustain low false positive rates observed under the DGA attack, where RAGN showcased exceptional
across all datasets further asserts its operational efficacy, a crucial robustness, maintaining a misclassification rate of just 1.16% at 5%
factor for systems deployed in sensitive and critical network infrastruc- perturbation and 4.88% at 25%, in stark contrast to other models
tures. that approached or exceeded 15%. The RWCS attack further validated
 RAGN’s resilience, indicating its capability to effectively counter com-
5.3. Detection performance under different adversarial attacks plex adversarial manipulations. Even at lower perturbation levels of
 2%, RAGN recorded the lowest misclassification rate of 1.34%, and
 In this experiment, we evaluated the resilience of the detection this strong performance was sustained as perturbations increased, with
models against four distinct adversarial attack methods. These included rates of 3.80% at 20% and 4.40% at 25%. The SPAN attack, targeting

 18
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Table 5 Table 7
Attack performance (misclassification rate) on CICIDS-2018 dataset. Attack performance (misclassification rate) on USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
 Attack PTR (%) GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN Attack PTR (%) GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN
 method method
 2 2.05 1.98 1.89 1.94 1.84 1.81 1.22 2 1.20 1.15 1.10 1.05 1.00 0.97 0.462
 5 6.13 5.94 5.81 5.58 5.30 5.14 4.56 5 3.75 3.37 3.25 3.17 3.05 2.95 1.3625
 10 10.17 9.82 9.55 9.16 8.86 8.58 5.28 10 5.75 5.57 5.42 5.25 5.25 4.85 2.25
 DICE DICE
 15 14.10 13.56 13.03 12.42 12.05 11.43 6.10 15 8.05 7.72 7.35 7.02 6.80 6.45 2.95
 20 17.83 17.15 16.52 15.83 15.31 14.48 6.12 20 10.35 9.87 9.35 8.80 8.275 7.70 3.55
 25 21.53 20.63 19.78 18.81 18.07 17.02 7.06 25 12.55 11.95 11.25 10.35 9.55 8.77 3.95
 2 1.97 1.93 1.85 1.82 1.74 1.68 1.00 2 1.125 1.075 1.25 1.00 0.95 0.925 0.43
 5 5.93 5.67 5.49 5.30 5.06 4.85 1.16 5 3.35 3.22 3.10 3.00 2.85 2.77 1.26
 10 9.50 9.19 8.86 8.58 8.27 7.95 1.88 10 5.625 5.40 5.20 5.00 4.75 4.57 2.13
 DGA DGA
 15 13.22 12.63 12.19 11.63 11.16 10.64 3.20 15 7.875 7.50 7.10 6.75 6.37 5.95 2.75
 20 16.99 16.27 15.59 14.92 14.20 13.32 3.24 20 10.10 9.62 9.10 8.55 7.95 7.30 3.37
 25 20.64 19.63 18.72 17.65 16.65 15.59 4.88 25 12.30 11.62 10.85 10.02 9.125 8.35 3.76
 2 2.12 2.06 1.97 1.90 1.81 1.73 1.34 2 1.25 1.20 1.15 1.07 1.25 0.95 0.45
 5 6.33 6.11 5.91 5.66 5.44 5.22 2.50 5 3.55 3.45 3.32 3.22 3.10 2.95 1.35
 10 10.46 10.11 9.76 9.39 9.04 8.59 2.90 10 5.95 5.72 5.50 5.27 5.25 4.75 2.21
 RWCS RWCS
 15 14.59 13.97 13.34 12.78 12.09 11.47 3.72 15 8.75 7.85 7.52 7.10 6.65 6.15 2.85
 20 18.56 17.84 17.01 16.15 15.18 14.12 3.80 20 10.50 9.95 9.45 8.85 8.20 7.55 3.43
 25 22.35 21.32 20.23 19.18 17.88 16.69 4.40 25 12.75 12.10 11.32 10.47 9.52 8.65 3.92
 2 2.01 1.95 1.87 1.80 1.72 1.63 1.14 2 1.17 1.125 1.05 1.00 0.95 0.95 0.42
 5 5.98 5.71 5.55 5.40 5.12 4.88 2.12 5 3.50 3.35 3.25 3.10 2.97 2.85 1.31
 10 9.79 9.44 9.07 8.76 8.39 7.98 2.50 10 5.75 5.65 5.45 5.25 4.97 4.67 2.18
 SPAN SPAN
 15 13.83 13.16 12.61 12.08 11.42 10.76 3.14 15 8.22 7.80 7.35 6.95 6.50 6.00 2.76
 20 17.95 16.88 16.17 15.31 14.38 13.30 3.40 20 10.45 9.90 9.35 8.75 8.25 7.37 3.37
 25 21.83 20.77 19.62 18.49 17.11 15.94 4.50 25 12.70 12.00 11.25 10.30 9.75 8.52 3.86

Table 6
Attack performance (misclassification rate) on CTU-13 dataset. outstanding robustness by consistently maintaining lower misclassifi-
 Attack PTR (%) GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN cation rates compared to its counterparts. At a minimal perturbation
 method
 rate of 2%, RAGN recorded a misclassification rate of 0.92%, which
 2 1.20 1.16 1.10 1.06 1.00 0.98 0.92 remains lower than the other models. As the perturbation rate increased
 5 3.30 3.18 3.04 2.92 2.82 2.74 2.46
 10 5.36 5.14 4.98 4.76 4.58 4.38 4.08
 to 25%, RAGN still outperformed with a rate of 6.56%, while the closest
 DICE competitor model, TC-GNN, registered at 7.18%.
 15 7.38 7.06 6.76 6.40 6.16 5.84 5.42
 20 9.24 8.88 8.50 8.04 7.62 7.18 6.56 Under the DGA attack, the misclassification rates for RAGN started
 25 11.10 10.60 10.08 9.50 8.84 8.16 7.50 at an impressively low 0.84% at a 2% perturbation level, gradually
 2 1.16 1.12 1.06 1.00 0.94 0.90 0.84 increasing to 5.96% at 25% perturbation. This trend of lower misclas-
 5 3.18 3.06 2.96 2.84 2.70 2.58 2.36 sification rates signifies RAGN’s effective handling of complex attack
 10 5.14 4.96 4.78 4.54 4.32 4.14 3.84
 DGA scenarios. For the RWCS attack, RAGN again demonstrated its ef-
 15 7.10 6.76 6.48 6.10 5.74 5.36 4.94
 20 8.94 8.52 8.08 7.58 7.04 6.48 5.96 fectiveness by starting with a misclassification rate of 0.88% at 2%
 25 10.72 10.16 9.58 8.84 8.10 7.40 6.70 perturbation and ending at 6.34% at 25%. This performance is notably
 2 1.24 1.18 1.12 1.06 1.00 0.96 0.88 better than the other models, which showed higher susceptibility to
 5 3.36 3.22 3.12 2.98 2.82 2.70 2.44 this type of attack. The SPAN attack results further demonstrated the
 10 5.42 5.20 4.96 4.72 4.50 4.24 3.94 resilience of RAGN in the dynamic attack environment. At 2% perturba-
 RWCS
 15 7.46 7.12 6.80 6.42 6.04 5.62 5.16
 tion, RAGN achieved a misclassification rate of 0.86%, escalating only
 20 9.36 8.98 8.54 8.04 7.50 6.90 6.34
 25 11.24 10.66 10.00 9.26 8.48 7.80 7.12 to 6.98% at the highest perturbation level of 25%. This outperforms
 other models by a significant margin, particularly under higher levels
 0 1.18 1.14 1.08 1.02 0.96 0.92 0.86
 5 3.24 3.10 3.00 2.86 2.70 2.56 2.32 of perturbation.
 10 5.28 5.06 4.84 4.58 4.36 4.10 3.76 The evaluation on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, as summarized in
 SPAN
 15 7.36 7.02 6.70 6.32 5.88 5.46 5.04 Table 7, presents a comprehensive assessment of RAGN’s capability to
 20 9.30 8.88 8.44 7.88 7.30 6.74 6.16 withstand adversarial conditions when compared to other prominent
 25 11.16 10.58 9.92 9.24 8.40 7.72 6.98
 models. The assessment was conducted using four different attack
 methods: DICE [44], DGA [45], RWCS [36], and SPAN, with perturbation ratios ranging from 2% to 25%. In the context of the DICE
dynamic graph structures, posed a considerable challenge; yet, RAGN attack, RAGN demonstrated remarkable robustness by maintaining sigdemonstrated substantial resilience. Starting from a misclassification nificantly lower misclassification rates across all levels of perturbation.
rate of 1.14% at 2% perturbation, RAGN effectively managed the Notably, at 2% perturbation, the RAGN model achieved a misclassificathreat, capping the misclassification rate at 4.50% at the highest per- tion rate of only 0.462%, and even at the extreme of 25% perturbation,
turbation level of 25%. This performance starkly contrasts with other it upheld a rate of 3.95%, substantially lower than the rates observed
models, which exhibited higher vulnerabilities under similar attack in other models, where misclassification escalated beyond 10%. Under
conditions. the DGA attack, RAGN consistently showcased superior performance,
 For the CTU-13 dataset, we further examined the resilience of the initiating with a misclassification rate of 0.43% at 2% perturbation
detection models against the same four adversarial attacks as previously and concluding at 3.76% at 25% perturbation. This indicates a rediscussed: DICE [44], DGA [45], RWCS [36], and SPAN. The results silient performance trend that starkly contrasts with the next best
depicted in Table 6 clearly illustrate the robust performance of our performing model, E-GSAGE, which concluded at 8.35% at the same
RAGN model in comparison to other models across varied levels of perturbation level. The RWCS attack results further solidified RAGN’s
perturbation from 2% to 25%. With the DICE attack, RAGN showed leading position, starting at 0.45% misclassification at 2% perturbation

 19
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Table 8 These nodes were initialized with features sampled from the same
Attack performance (misclassification rate) on UJS-IDS2022 dataset. distribution as existing nodes in 𝑉𝑡 , ensuring that the new additions
 Attack PTR (%) GCN GATr FedGAT EC-GCN TCGNN E-GrSAGE RAGN were statistically and semantically consistent with the original dataset.
 method
 Simultaneously, existing nodes were removed to mimic device failures
 2 0.95 0.90 0.87 0.85 0.80 0.78 0.35 or targeted disruptions.
 5 2.80 2.60 2.50 2.40 2.30 2.20 1.05
 The removal process followed two strategies: a random selection,
 10 4.50 4.35 4.20 4.05 3.95 3.85 1.78
 DICE
 15 6.75 6.50 6.25 6.00 5.75 5.50 2.50
 where nodes were chosen uniformly across the graph, and a targeted
 20 8.90 8.60 8.30 8.00 7.70 7.40 3.30 selection, where high-degree or high-centrality nodes were prioritized
 25 11.00 10.75 10.50 10.25 10.00 9.75 4.00 for removal to amplify the impact on the graph structure. In addition to
 2 0.92 0.87 0.85 0.83 0.81 0.79 0.34 node dynamics, edges were also incrementally added and removed. The
 5 2.65 2.55 2.45 2.35 2.25 2.15 1.00 newly added edges connected nodes based on the formula of structural
 10 4.40 4.25 4.10 3.95 3.80 3.65 1.70 fragility score (see formula (34)), where deg(𝑢) and deg(𝑣) represent
 DGA
 15 6.60 6.35 6.10 5.85 5.60 5.35 2.40 the degrees of the connecting nodes. This scoring mechanism ensured
 20 8.75 8.45 8.15 7.85 7.55 7.25 3.20
 that newly added edges targeted structurally fragile or underutilized
 25 10.85 10.60 10.35 10.10 9.85 9.60 3.90
 regions of the graph, thereby introducing meaningful disruptions to its
 2 1.00 0.95 0.92 0.90 0.88 0.86 0.40
 structure. The edge removal also followed both a random and a targeted
 5 3.00 2.90 2.80 2.70 2.60 2.50 1.15
 10 4.95 4.80 4.65 4.50 4.35 4.20 1.90 removal approach, which focused on removing connections between
 RWCS critical nodes or edges with high betweenness centrality to simulate
 15 7.15 6.90 6.65 6.40 6.15 5.90 2.65
 20 9.20 8.95 8.70 8.45 8.20 7.95 3.50 link disruptions. Temporal consistency was maintained throughout the
 25 11.25 11.00 10.75 10.50 10.25 10.00 4.25 experiment to ensure realistic transitions between graph states. Newly
 2 0.97 0.92 0.90 0.88 0.86 0.84 0.38 added nodes and edges were integrated into the graph in a man-
 5 2.75 2.65 2.55 2.45 2.35 2.25 1.10 ner consistent with the temporal properties of the network, while
 10 4.70 4.55 4.40 4.25 4.10 3.95 1.85
 SPAN removed nodes and edges were excluded dynamically without causing
 15 6.85 6.60 6.35 6.10 5.85 5.60 2.60
 20 9.00 8.75 8.50 8.25 8.00 7.75 3.45
 abrupt disruptions. 10% and 25% perturbations were applied over time
 25 11.15 10.90 10.65 10.40 10.15 9.90 4.20 steps of the graph’s total nodes or edges, reflecting gradual network
 evolution.
 The detection models were then evaluated at each time step on
 the evolving graph 𝐺𝑡 without retraining, allowing for an assessment
and ending at 3.92% at 25%. The consistent low misclassification of its ability to generalize to unseen dynamic changes. The averaged
rates emphasize RAGN’s effectiveness in neutralizing more complex results over five independent runs are summarized in Fig. 8. On node
adversarial threats. Similarly, for the SPAN attack, RAGN began with perturbation, Figs. 8(c), and 8(d) show the results for the random node
a misclassification rate of 0.42% at 2% perturbation and ended at removal approach while Figs. 8(e) and 8(f) show results for targeted
3.86% at 25%, maintaining the lowest misclassification rates across all nodes for UJS-IDS2022 and USTC-TFC2016 datasets respectively. The
models. This performance is particularly noteworthy given the dynamic results present the performance of the detectors across the different
and sophisticated nature of the SPAN attack, designed to challenge the timestamps and at 10% and 25% perturbation rates. The results are
adaptability of dynamic graph structures. discussed in the following subsections.
 For the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, the results illustrated in Table 8 show
that at a 2% perturbation rate, RAGN achieved a misclassification rate 5.4.1. Time-evolving graph node perturbation
of 0.35%, which is significantly lower than the next best model (E- For random Node Removal, in the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, at a 10%
GrSAGE at 0.78%). This trend continues across all perturbation rates, perturbation rate, accuracy rates for RAGN are notably higher, mainwith RAGN maintaining a lower misclassification rate, culminating taining around 95% to 89.6%, and for the USTC-TFC2016 dataset,
at 4.00% at a 25% perturbation rate, compared to 9.75% for the RAGN shows similar resilience. At a 25% perturbation rate, RAGN’s
least resilient model under the same conditions. These findings shows accuracy remains significantly higher than that of baseline models,
the architectural strengths of RAGN, particularly its ability to handle staying around 94.6% to 88.6%, as depicted in Figs. 8(c). and 8(d). Unadversarial modifications more effectively than other tested models. der targeted node removal, RAGN demonstrates superior performance
 The lower susceptibility of RAGN to adversarial attacks can be compared to baseline models. In the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, RAGN maintains an accuracy rate of approximately 97.4% to 90.4% at a 10%
attributed to its sophisticated integration of node features and dynamic
 perturbation, which only slightly decreases to about 92.9% to 85.9%
adaptations to graph structural changes over time. This capability
 at 25% perturbation, as shown in Fig. 8(e). The USTC-TFC2016 dataset
is crucial for applications in environments where data integrity and
 reveals a similar pattern, with RAGN achieving higher accuracy than
reliability are paramount, such as cybersecurity and network trafthe baselines, maintaining 97.4% to 90.4% at 10% perturbation and
fic monitoring. The results suggest that further improvements and
 around 87.5% to 85% at 25% perturbation, as highlighted in Fig. 8(f).
optimizations in dynamic graph neural network architectures could
 For node Injection, the scenario of node injection showcases RAGN’s
enhance their defense mechanisms against increasingly complex adverrobustness where, even with new node introductions, it outperforms
sarial strategies, thereby bolstering their application in security-critical baselines significantly. For the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, RAGN maintains
systems. accuracy rates well above 87% at 10% perturbation, and around 94% to
 86% at 25% perturbation, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a). The USTC-TFC2016
5.4. Evaluation in time evolving dynamic environments dataset shows similar trends, where RAGN’s accuracy decreases less
 dramatically than that of the baseline models, particularly at higher
 This experiment was designed to test the detection models’ adapt- perturbation levels, as seen in Fig. 8(b). Across all tests, including
ability to dynamic graph attacks based on the proposed SPAN attack random and targeted node perturbations as well as node injections,
method. We used two large-scale proprietary datasets (i.e., the USTC- RAGN consistently outperforms baseline models like GCN, GAT, EC-
TFC2016 and the UJS-IDS2022 datasets) for this experiment. The exper- GCN, and TC-GNN. RAGN exhibits a more gradual decrease in accuracy
iment began with an unperturbed graph, 𝐺0 = (𝑉0 , 𝐴0 , 𝐹0 ), representing with increasing perturbation rates, demonstrating its robustness and
the baseline network state. At each subsequent time step, the graph adaptability. These findings suggest the superiority of RAGN in mainevolved into 𝐺𝑡 = (𝑉𝑡 , 𝐴𝑡 , 𝐹𝑡 ) through structural perturbations and taining high performance under adversarial conditions and indicate
temporal updates. New nodes were injected into the graph at each time its potential for deployment in critical network environments where
step, simulating the arrival of devices or endpoints in the network. resilience to adversarial attacks is paramount.

 20
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Fig. 8. Model performance in different timestamps under different node perturbation rates.

 Fig. 9. Model performance at different timestamps under different edge perturbation rates.

5.4.2. Time-evolving graph edge perturbation reduction, contrasting sharply with the performance dips seen in other
 This experiment evaluated the resilience of the detection models models under the same conditions. This trend continues even under
against edge perturbations across different models revealing distinct 25% perturbation, where RAGN’s accuracy impressively remains above
insights into the resilience of RAGN compared to other models when 85%, as illustrated in Figs. 9(b) and 9(d).
challenged with the SPAN attack. In the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, RAGN Targeted edge perturbations further demonstrates RAGN’s capabildemonstrates exceptional stability, maintaining high accuracy rates ities in managing strategic disruptions effectively. In the UJS-IDS2022
consistently above 90% across different timestamps at a 10% pertur- dataset, despite the aggressive nature of targeted attacks, RAGN’s acbation rate, and showing minimal performance degradation even as curacy only slightly decreases, maintaining a high level of performance
perturbation increases to 25%. This superior performance is reflected throughout the experiment. This resilience is similarly observed in the
in both the Edge Injection and Random Edge scenarios, as depicted in USTC-TFC2016 dataset, where RAGN consistently performs better than
Figs. 9(a) and 9(c), where RAGN significantly outperforms models like the baseline models, particularly under higher perturbation rates, as
GCN, GAT, and FedGAT. shown in Figs. 9(f) and 9(e). RAGN’s consistent high performance in
 In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, RAGN similarly exhibits robust per- both random and targeted edge perturbations highlights its potential
formance, maintaining high accuracy across varying timestamps. At a for deployment in critical network environments where robustness
10% perturbation rate, RAGN’s accuracy starts high and shows little against sophisticated adversarial attacks is paramount.

 21
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Fig. 10. Detection performances under malicious-based node injection and feature generation attack.

5.5. Malicious node injection attack This comparative robustness of RAGN may be attributed to its
 architectural features or the specific way it processes and integrates
 In this subsection, we conducted node classification experiments node features, which may provide a buffer against the disruptive effects
to assess the effectiveness of the proposed SPAN attack method on of adversarial strategies deployed by dynamic graph attack methods.
dynamic GNNs. We use RAGN and the baseline models as targets to Furthermore, models like EC-GCN and EGraphSAGE demonstrate betevaluate their resilience against malicious node injection at different ter performance under higher perturbation conditions across different
perturbation rates. The SPAN method injects malicious nodes at strate- datasets, suggesting that certain models may have inherent or designedgically vulnerable times and locations within the network graph to in resistances to specific types of adversarial manipulations used in
disrupt traffic analysis. Once the nodes are injected, SPAN generates SPAN. This resilience could stem from how these models manage node
adversarial features for these nodes using an optimization function connectivity and feature integration, which might be less susceptible to
designed to maximize the disruption to the target model’s normal the influence of adversarially injected nodes and their features.
operations. By targeting weak points in the network’s structure, SPAN
degrades the performance of systems designed to detect malicious 5.6. Targeted label attack
traffic.
 The results in Fig. 10(a) show that for the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, A targeted label attack is defined as a type of adversarial manipthe accuracy of the baseline models generally decreases from above ulation where the adversary aims to mislead a graph neural network
80% at a 5% perturbation rate to below 70% at a 25% perturbation (GNN) into incorrectly classifying a specific node into a predefined,
rate. Similar trends are observed across the other datasets, though erroneous category. This type of attack is more strategic and malithe initial and final accuracy levels vary, suggesting that the inherent cious compared to untargeted attacks because it degrades the overall
characteristics of each dataset – such as the typical patterns of normal performance of the model and also forces specific, deliberate errors
and malicious traffic – affect how susceptible they are to the SPAN in node classification. In this experiment, we implement the effective
attack. targeted label attack (ETLA) [47] to manipulate graph structures and
 RAGN, the proposed model in this study, shows relative resilience test the malicious traffic detection performance of RAGN and the basecompared to the other models. For example, in the UJS-IDS2022 line models under this attack condition. The ETLA method launches
dataset, while other models’ accuracy dips significantly at a 25% attacks by strategically selecting and modifying edges in a graph’s
perturbation rate – falling to as low as around 63% – RAGN maintains structure to mislead a graph neural network into classifying a target
over 90%. Similarly, on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, RAGN’s accuracy node into a specific category. It uses a combination of stratified node
at a 5% perturbation rate begins near 98% and decreases to near 97% selection, adaptive edge choice strategies, and a temperature-scaled
at 25%, which is notably higher than some competing models like attack loss function to allocate the attack budget and achieve the
GCN-MHSA and FedGAT which drop to around 65%. desired misclassification effectively.

 22
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Fig. 11. Detection performance under Targeted label attack across Datasets.

 From the results in Fig. 11, RAGN maintains an accuracy signifi- time, CPU utilization, memory consumption, throughput, and accuracy.
cantly higher than the baseline models even as the perturbation rate The results, as presented in Table 9, demonstrate that the proposed
increases to 25%. For instance, in the UJS-IDS2022 dataset, RAGN method maintains computational efficiency while ensuring high acretains an accuracy close to 95% at 25% perturbation, while other curacy across different network scales. The execution time exhibits a
models like TCGNN and FedGAT fall below 60%. Similar trends are logarithmic growth pattern as network size increases, confirming that
observable in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, where RAGN outperforms the method scales efficiently. For smaller networks, such as 100 nodes,
counterparts with a consistent margin, holding an accuracy above the execution time is 22.60 s, indicating a lightweight and computation-
90%, contrasting sharply with others that drop to near 58%. In more ally feasible approach. As the network size increases, execution time
sensitive datasets like CTU-13 and CICIDS-2018, where adversarial rises gradually, reaching 42.62 s for 5000 nodes and 45.83 s for 10,000
attacks generally cause a more drastic decline in performance, RAGN nodes. Even for the largest tested network of 100,000 nodes, execution
demonstrates its robustness effectively. For example, in the CTU-13 time remains controlled, ensuring that the method does not impose
dataset, while the accuracy for models like GraphSAGE and RAGN excessive processing costs. This trend suggests that the computational
dips as perturbations increase, RAGN’s accuracy remains approximately complexity of the method remains manageable, making it suitable for
10% higher than GraphSAGE at a 25% perturbation rate, hovering large-scale applications.
around 97% compared to GraphSAGE’s 61%. This pattern repeats in CPU utilization also follows a gradual increase as network size
CICIDS-2018, indicating a strong adaptive capability inherent to RAGN expands. For 100 nodes, CPU usage is 45.02%, increasing to 80.73%
that mitigates the impact of graph structural changes more efficiently for 5000 nodes and reaching 92.18% for 10,000 nodes. The observed
than other models. The substantial decline in accuracy across baseline increase aligns with expectations, as larger networks require more
models with increasing perturbation rates highlights the effectiveness processing power. However, the controlled growth ensures that the
of ETLA’s stratified node selection and adaptive edge choice strategies approach does not become prohibitively resource-intensive, making
in disrupting the graph’s structure. These strategies complicate the task it feasible for real-world deployment. Similarly, memory utilization
of accurately classifying nodes for many networks. In contrast, RAGN’s follows a predictable increase, starting at 89.54 MB for 100 nodes,
architecture demonstrates its effectiveness, adaptability, and resilience 172.07 MB for 5000 nodes, and reaching 189.01 MB for 10,000 nodes.
in maintaining higher accuracy under similar conditions. This controlled growth indicates that while the method demands additional memory as network size increases, it does not introduce severe
5.7. Scalability analysis memory bottlenecks. Throughput, measured in operations per second,
 shows an inverse relationship with execution time. For 100 nodes,
 The scalability evaluation of our approach was conducted using throughput is 44.24 ops/sec, and as network size increases, it declines
GraphGAN-generated network structures with sizes ranging from 100 slightly to 23.46 ops/sec for 5000 nodes and 21.82 ops/sec for 10,000
to 100,000 nodes. The performance metrics assessed include execution nodes. Despite this decline, the results remain well within acceptable

 23
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

 Table 9
 Scalability performance across different network sizes.
 Network size Execution time (s) CPU utilization (%) Memory utilization (MB) Throughput (ops/sec) Accuracy (%)
 100 22.60 45.02 89.54 44.24 98.50
 500 31.41 64.47 121.39 31.83 98.38
 1,000 34.63 72.83 138.77 28.88 98.27
 5,000 42.62 80.73 172.07 23.46 98.15
 10,000 45.83 92.18 189.01 21.82 98.03

limits, indicating that the system maintains a high level of efficiency Table 10
 Results of ablation study results.
even at larger scales. The stability of throughput further supports the
scalability of the method, as it does not exhibit significant degradation Ablation type Dataset Accuracy Misclassification Accuracy
 (%) Rate (%) (+)
that could hinder real-world usability.
 No Dynamic CICIDS-2018 80.5 18.2 +7.3%
 Importantly, the accuracy of the method remains consistently high
 Attention CTU-13 79.8 19.1 +7.8%
across all tested network sizes, confirming its robustness in large-scale USTC-TFC2016 82.4 16.8 +6.2%
scenarios. For 100 nodes, accuracy is 98.50%, and as the network No Feature CICIDS-2018 81.1 17.5 +6.7%
size increases, accuracy remains relatively stable at 98.27% for 1000 Regularization CTU-13 80.3 18.6 +7.3%
nodes, 98.15% for 5000 nodes, and 98.03% for 10,000 nodes. The USTC-TFC2016 83.1 15.9 +5.9%
 No Graph Structure CICIDS-2018 79.2 19.4 +8.1%
slight variations indicate that even as network complexity grows, the Adjustment CTU-13 78.7 20.2 +8.9%
method maintains strong predictive performance without significant USTC-TFC2016 81.9 17.4 +6.7%
degradation. This implies that the proposed approach is well-suited for No Extra Edge CICIDS-2018 80.7 18.0 +7.1%
large-scale network applications. The logarithmic increase in execution Attention CTU-13 80.1 18.8 +7.5%
 USTC-TFC2016 82.6 16.3 +6.3%
time, coupled with controlled CPU and memory utilization, ensures
that the system can handle increasing network sizes without excessive
computational overhead. Additionally, the stability of throughput and
accuracy further strengthens the feasibility of the method for deploy- highlighting the importance of distinguishing between benign and adment in real-world scenarios. The findings validate the scalability of versarial edges. This extra attention mechanism effectively reduces
the approach, reinforcing its applicability in large-scale distributed the impact of adversarial manipulations that attempt to exploit the
computing, IoT networks, and high-traffic communication systems. model’s reliance on graph edges for node classification. Overall, the full
 RAGN model, incorporating all four components, consistently outper-
5.8. Ablation study formed the ablated versions in terms of both detection accuracy and
 robustness to adversarial attacks. The results clearly demonstrate that
 The results of the ablation study clearly highlight the contributions the combination of dynamic graph adjustment, feature regularization,
of each component of the RAGN model to its overall robustness and and adaptive attention mechanisms are essential for improving the
effectiveness in detecting malicious traffic, particularly in the face of model’s performance. Specifically, the RAGN model achieves up to 8%
adversarial attacks. The removal of any one of the four major com- higher accuracy compared to its ablated counterparts, reinforcing the
ponents – the dynamic attention mechanism, feature regularization, effectiveness of the integrated design choices. (See Table 10.)
graph structure adjustment, and extra attention mechanism on edges
– resulted in noticeable declines in performance, both in terms of
 5.9. Application of RAGN and trade-offs
accuracy and resilience to adversarial attacks. First, the ablation of the
dynamic attention mechanism resulted in a significant accuracy drop
 The Robust Adaptive Graph Network (RAGN) is designed for deploy-
(approximately 5%–7%) and a corresponding increase in the misclassification rate (by 10%). This confirms that the dynamic recalibration ment in environments where the nature of attacks can evolve quickly,
of attention scores based on real-time graph structure changes is vital such as enterprise networks, critical infrastructure, and cloud-based
for detecting subtle adversarial modifications to the graph structure. systems. RAGN’s dynamic capabilities make it particularly suitable
Without it, the model behaves similarly to static GAT architectures, for these high-risk settings, where attackers constantly refine their
which are less capable of adapting to new adversarial tactics. techniques to evade detection. The model is designed to analyze net-
 The removal of feature regularization also led to a performance work traffic by constructing it as a dynamic graph, where entities
drop, with a decline in accuracy by around 4%–6%. The absence of like IP addresses, devices, and servers are represented as nodes, and
regularization particularly affected robustness in noisy environments, their interactions (such as data transfers or connection attempts) are
where adversarial feature perturbations became more effective. The modeled as edges. This approach allows RAGN to capture complex
increase in the misclassification rate (8%–9%) further supports the relationships and dependencies within the network traffic, giving it
idea that regularization is essential for smoothing out variations be- a significant advantage over traditional static models. Unlike existing
tween neighboring nodes’ features, making the model more resistant solutions, RAGN continuously refines both the graph structure and node
to feature noise. When the graph structure adjustment component features through an iterative process. This enables it to respond effecwas removed, the model’s ability to withstand structural perturbations tively to evolving threats, including zero-day attacks and adversarial
such as adversarial edge modifications was heavily compromised. The manipulations. The iterative attention mechanism dynamically adjusts
accuracy dropped by 6%–8%, and the misclassification rate increased the importance of each edge in the graph, allowing RAGN to prioritize
by an average of 9%. This indicates that dynamically updating the genuine traffic while reducing the influence of adversarial edges. As a
adjacency matrix during training plays a key role in helping the model result, the model maintains robustness even when attackers introduce
recognize and neutralize adversarial edges that could otherwise mislead subtle perturbations intended to deceive the detection system.
the detection system. RAGN is particularly effective in detecting a wide range of attack
 The final component, extra attention on the edges, was also shown types. For targeted attacks, where adversaries focus on specific nodes,
to be critical. Its removal caused a drop in accuracy by 5%–7%, such as critical servers, RAGN’s dynamic attention mechanism recaliparticularly when dealing with adversarial attacks targeting the edges brates the graph to detect these threats, even when attackers attempt
of the graph. The misclassification rate increased by around 11%, to obscure their activities by modifying traffic patterns. In contrast,

 24
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

untargeted attacks, such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) at- guided by feature smoothness regularization. These advancements entacks, involve overwhelming the network with traffic. RAGN effectively able RAGN to adapt in real-time to adversarial changes, prioritize reliidentifies these large-scale disruptions by analyzing anomalies in the able connections, and mitigate the impact of adversarial manipulations,
traffic graph, even when adversaries introduce random perturbations significantly enhancing its robustness and accuracy.
to evade detection. The model’s robustness extends to random feature We also proposed the Semantic-Preserving Adversarial Node Inattacks, where an attacker manipulates the characteristics of individual jection (SPAN), a benchmark tailored for evaluating the resilience of
nodes, such as packet size, connection duration, or protocol type. dynamic graph neural networks (DGNNs) under adversarial conditions.
RAGN’s use of Laplacian regularization ensures that these feature-level By exploiting structural vulnerabilities and leveraging dynamic graph
perturbations are smoothed across the graph, mitigating their impact on characteristics, SPAN provides a rigorous evaluation framework for
detection accuracy. This ability to filter out random feature noise allows testing RAGN and other models in realistic attack scenarios.
RAGN to remain highly accurate, even in the presence of adversarial Our extensive experiments on four real-world datasets – CICIDSfeature manipulations. 2018, CTU-13, USTC-TFC2016, and UJS-IDS2022 – demonstrate that
 One of RAGN’s key strengths lies in its ability to detect zero- RAGN consistently outperforms state-of-the-art models such as GCNday exploits. These are new, previously unknown vulnerabilities that MHSA, FedGAT, and GATrans across multiple metrics. On UJS-IDS2022,
attackers exploit before they are patched. RAGN’s iterative refinement RAGN achieved a detection accuracy of 98.12% and an F1-score exprocess allows it to detect deviations in network behavior, flagging ceeding 97%, while maintaining a false positive rate as low as 0.22%.
novel attack patterns that other models might miss. This adaptability is These results highlight RAGN’s ability to detect evolving attacks and
crucial for environments where security threats are constantly evolving. adapt to adversarial manipulations. Moreover, RAGN’s performance
Additionally, RAGN excels in identifying coordinated attacks, such as improvement is directly tied to its innovations, such as the dynamic
brute force and botnet activities, by analyzing repetitive patterns in attention mechanism, which enables more effective weighting of edges,
the network graph. The model recognizes the repeated connection and iterative refinement, which reduces the influence of adversarial
attempts typical of brute force attacks, as well as the synchronized nodes and features. Compared to baseline models that struggle with
behaviors of botnets, which involve multiple compromised devices feature perturbations or graph structure manipulation, RAGN demonacting in unison. RAGN’s design makes it particularly effective in strates higher resilience and adaptability, achieving significantly lower
dynamic environments, such as cloud-based architectures where nodes misclassification rates even in high-perturbation scenarios. Beyond
are frequently added or removed. Its ability to adapt in real-time to malicious traffic detection, RAGN sets a new benchmark for graph
changes in the network landscape ensures that it can effectively detect neural networks in high-stakes environments. While our method introboth emerging and evolving threats. While RAGN’s iterative refinement duces mechanisms to enhance robustness, future work could explore
process and dynamic attention mechanism introduce a trade-off in hybrid approaches that combine privacy-preserving techniques, realterms of computational complexity, the increased resource consump- time streaming architectures, and scalable distributed frameworks to
tion is justified in high-risk environments. The iterative refinement ensure that intrusion detection remains both effective and practical in
of graph structures and features, coupled with the dynamic attention large-scale, high-throughput networks.
mechanism, requires additional computational resources compared to
more traditional models. Another important trade-off is while RAGN
 CRediT authorship contribution statement
excels in resisting targeted, zero-day attacks, and random attacks, this
adaptability requires a more intricate training process. The iterative
 Ernest Akpaku: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
adjustments and attention re-weighting, though highly effective in
 Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
enhancing robustness, could pose a challenge in time-sensitive applica-
 Data curation, Conceptualization. Jinfu Chen: Writing – review & edittions or environments with limited computational resources. Therefore,
 ing, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition. Mukhtar Ahmed:
while RAGN offers superior defense capabilities, organizations must
 Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Francis Kwadzo Agassess whether their operational environment justifies the increased
 benyegah: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. William
complexity and computational demands.
 Leslie Brown-Acquaye: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization.
 Deploying deep learning-based intrusion detection systems in largescale network environments presents significant privacy challenges,
as data from multiple sources must be processed while ensuring user Declaration of competing interest
confidentiality and system security. In our approach, RAGN constructs
graph-based representations of network traffic, inherently minimizing The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relaexposure to raw packet payloads to mitigate privacy risks. However, tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
large-scale networks often involve distributed data from various enti- Jinfu Chen reports financial support was provided by National Natural
ties, making them vulnerable to data leakage, inference attacks, and Science Foundation of China. Jinfu Chen reports financial support
unauthorized access. Future research could explore the integration was provided by Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province,
of privacy-preserving techniques with RAGN to further enhance se- China. Jinfu Chen reports financial support was provided by China
curity and compliance with privacy regulations. Specifically, incor- Postdoctoral Science Foundation. Jinfu Chen reports financial support
porating federated learning, data anonymization, differential privacy, was provided by Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province, China. If there
homomorphic encryption, and blockchain-based access control mecha- are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing
nisms could strengthen the privacy protection of RAGN in large-scale financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
networks. to influence the work reported in this paper.

6. Conclusion Acknowledgments

 In this study, we introduced the Robust Adaptive Graph Network This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science
(RAGN), a novel framework designed to address critical vulnerabilities Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62172194, 62202206 and
in Graph Attention Networks (GATs) for detecting malicious network U1836116), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China
traffic, particularly in dynamic and adversarial environments. RAGN (Grant no. BK20220515), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
incorporates key innovations, including a dynamic attention mecha- (Grant no. 2021M691310), and Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province,
nism and iterative refinement of graph structures and node features, China.

 25
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

Data availability [17] Z. Niu, J. Xue, D. Qu, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Zhu, A novel approach based
 on adaptive online analysis of encrypted traffic for identifying malware in IIoT,
 Inform. Sci. 601 (2022) 162–174, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2022.04.018,
 Data will be made available on request.
 URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025522003565.
 [18] W.W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, M. Portmann, E-GraphSAGE: A
 graph neural network based intrusion detection system for IoT, in: NOMS 2022-
References 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium, IEEE Press,
 2022, pp. 1–9, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/NOMS54207.2022.9789878.
 [1] M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku, R.N.A. Sosu, A. Latif, DELM: Deep ensemble [19] X. Luo, Y. Li, H. Cheng, L. Yin, AGCN-domain: Detecting malicious domains
 learning model for anomaly detection in malicious network traffic-based adaptive with graph convolutional network and attention mechanism, Mathematics 12 (5)
 feature aggregation and network optimization, ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 27 (2024) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/math12050640, URL https://www.mdpi.com/
 (4) (2024) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3690637, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2227-7390/12/5/640.
 3690637. [20] C. Wang, G. Liu, From anomaly detection to classification with graph at-
 [2] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, J. Liu, BotMark: Automated botnet detection tention and transformer for multivariate time series, Adv. Eng. Inform. 60
 with hybrid analysis of flow-based and graph-based traffic behaviors, Inform. Sci. (2024) 102357, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2024.102357, URL https://www.
 511 (2020) 284–296, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.09.024, URL https: sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474034624000053.
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025519308758.
 [21] Z. Sun, A.M. Teixeira, S. Toor, GNN-IDS: Graph neural network based intrusion
 [3] L. Zhang, L. Tan, H. Shi, H. Sun, W. Zhang, Malicious traffic classification for IoT
 detection system, in: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Availbased on graph attention network and long short-term memory network, in: 2023
 ability, Reliability and Security, ARES ’24, Association for Computing Machinery,
 24st Asia-Pacific Network Operations and Management Symposium, APNOMS,
 New York, NY, USA, 2024, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3664476.3664515, URL
 2023, pp. 54–59.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3664476.3664515.
 [4] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, Graph
 [22] R. Abu Bakar, L. De Marinis, F. Cugini, F. Paolucci, FTG-Net-E: A hierarchical
 attention networks, 2018, URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903, arXiv:1710.
 ensemble graph neural network for DDoS attack detection, Comput. Netw. 250
 10903.
 (2024) 110508, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110508, URL https://
 [5] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, L.
 www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128624003402.
 Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, in: Proceedings of the 31st
 International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’17, [23] I.J. King, X. Shu, J. Jang, K. Eykholt, T. Lee, H.H. Huang, EdgeTorrent: Real-time
 Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 6000–6010. temporal graph representations for intrusion detection, in: Proceedings of the
 [6] T. Nandy, R. Md Noor, R. Kolandaisamy, M.Y.I. Idris, S. Bhattacharyya, A review 26th International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses,
 of security attacks and intrusion detection in the vehicular networks, J. King RAID ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023,
 Saud Univ. - Comput. Inf. Sci. 36 (2) (2024) 101945, http://dx.doi.org/10. pp. 77–91, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3607199.3607201, URL https://doi.org/
 1016/j.jksuci.2024.101945, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ 10.1145/3607199.3607201.
 pii/S131915782400034X. [24] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, ECNet: Robust malicious
 [7] W. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Tang, S. Wang, J. Tang, Graph structure learning network traffic detection with multi-view feature and confidence mechanism,
 for robust graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 19 (2024) 6871–6885, http://dx.doi.org/10.
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’20, Asso- 1109/TIFS.2024.3426304.
 ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2020, pp. 66–74, http:// [25] D. Zügner, A. Akbarnejad, S. Günnemann, Adversarial attacks on neural netdx.doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403049, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486. works for graph data, in: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International
 3403049. Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’18, Association for
 [8] J. Yuan, H. Yu, M. Cao, J. Song, J. Xie, C. Wang, Self-supervised robust Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 2847–2856, http://
 graph neural networks against noisy graphs and noisy labels, Appl. Intell. 53 dx.doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220078, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.
 (21) (2023) 25154–25170, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10489-023-04836-6, URL 3220078.
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-023-04836-6. [26] H. Dai, H. Li, T. Tian, X. Huang, L. Wang, J. Zhu, L. Song, Adversarial
 [9] Z. Li, F. Yuan, Y. Liu, C. Cao, F. Fang, J. Tan, Heterogeneous graph attention attack on graph structured data, in: J. Dy, A. Krause (Eds.), Proceedings of
 network for malicious domain detection, in: E. Pimenidis, P. Angelov, C. Jayne, the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, in: Proceedings of
 A. Papaleonidas, M. Aydin (Eds.), Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Machine Learning Research, vol. 80, PMLR, 2018, pp. 1115–1124, URL https:
 Learning – ICANN 2022, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2022, pp. 506–518. //proceedings.mlr.press/v80/dai18b.html.
[10] J. Chen, H. Xie, S. Cai, L. Song, B. Geng, W. Guo, GCN-MHSA: A novel [27] D. Zügner, O. Borchert, A. Akbarnejad, S. Günnemann, Adversarial attacks on
 malicious traffic detection method based on graph convolutional neural network graph neural networks: Perturbations and their patterns, ACM Trans. Knowl.
 and multi-head self-attention mechanism, Comput. Secur. 147 (2024) 104083, Discov. Data 14 (5) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3394520, URL https://
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104083, URL https://www.sciencedirect. doi.org/10.1145/3394520.
 com/science/article/pii/S0167404824003882. [28] X. Yang, S. Ruan, J. Li, Y. Yue, B. Sun, TrafCL: Robust encrypted malicious
[11] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, T. Feng, GCN-ETA: High-efficiency encrypted malicious traffic traffic detection via contrastive learning, in: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM
 detection, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2022 (1) (2022) 4274139, http://dx.doi.org/ International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
 10.1155/2022/4274139, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/ ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, pp.
 2022/4274139. 2910–2919, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3679839, URL https://doi.org/
[12] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, S. Li, MTSecurity: Privacy-preserving 10.1145/3627673.3679839.
 malicious traffic classification using graph neural network and transformer, IEEE
 [29] L. Zhang, H. Shi, K. Zhang, H. Sun, W. Zhang, GraphMal: A network malicious
 Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 21 (3) (2024) 3583–3597, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
 traffic identification method based on graph neural network, in: 2023 Interna-
 TNSM.2024.3383851.
 tional Conference on Networking and Network Applications, NaNA, 2023, pp.
[13] F. Zola, L. Segurola-Gil, J. Bruse, M. Galar, R. Orduna-Urrutia, Network traf-
 262–267, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/NaNA60121.2023.00051.
 fic analysis through node behaviour classification: A graph-based approach
 [30] F. Capobianco, R. George, K. Huang, T. Jaeger, S. Krishnamurthy, Z. Qian, M.
 with temporal dissection and data-level preprocessing, Comput. Secur. 115
 Payer, P. Yu, Employing attack graphs for intrusion detection, in: Proceedings
 (2022) 102632, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102632, URL https://
 of the New Security Paradigms Workshop, NSPW ’19, Association for Computing
 www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404822000311.
 Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2020, pp. 16–30, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
[14] S. Chen, B. Lang, H. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, Android malware detection
 3368860.3368862, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3368860.3368862.
 method based on graph attention networks and deep fusion of multimodal features, Expert Syst. Appl. 237 (2024) 121617, http://dx.doi.org/10. [31] G. Ren, G. Cheng, N. Fu, Accurate encrypted malicious traffic identification via
 1016/j.eswa.2023.121617, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ traffic interaction pattern using graph convolutional network, Appl. Sci. 13 (3)
 pii/S095741742302119X. (2023) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app13031483, URL https://www.mdpi.com/
[15] C. Catal, H. Gunduz, A. Ozcan, Malware detection based on graph attention 2076-3417/13/3/1483.
 networks for intelligent transportation systems, Electronics 10 (20) (2021) http: [32] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, B. Chen, A hierarchical approach
 //dx.doi.org/10.3390/electronics10202534, URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079- for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neu-
 9292/10/20/2534. ral networks, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (1) (2021) 9961342, http://dx.
[16] X. Han, S. Cui, J. Qin, S. Liu, B. Jiang, C. Dong, Z. Lu, B. Liu, ContraMTD: doi.org/10.1155/2021/9961342, arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
 An unsupervised malicious network traffic detection method based on con- 10.1155/2021/9961342.
 trastive learning, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, WWW [33] G. Hu, X. Xiao, M. Shen, B. Zhang, X. Yan, Y. Liu, TCGNN: Packet-grained
 ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, pp. network traffic classification via graph neural networks, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.
 1680–1689, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3589334.3645479, URL https://doi.org/ 123 (2023) 106531, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106531, URL
 10.1145/3589334.3645479. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197623007157.

 26
E. Akpaku et al. Computer Networks 262 (2025) 111184

[34] S. Zhang, Z. Zhou, D. Li, Y. Zhong, Q. Liu, W. Yang, S. Li, Attributed Ernest Akpaku holds an M.Phil. in Management Informaheterogeneous graph neural network for malicious domain detection, in: 2021 tion Systems from the University of Ghana. He is currently
 IEEE 24th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work pursuing a Ph.D. in Computer Science and Technology at
 in Design, CSCWD, 2021, pp. 397–403, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CSCWD49262. the School of Computer Science and Communication Engi-
 2021.9437852. neering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. His research
[35] E. Abbe, Community detection and stochastic block models: Recent develop- interests encompass network security, malicious network
 ments, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18 (177) (2018) 1–86, URL http://jmlr.org/papers/ traffic detection, vulnerability detection, and deep learning.
 v18/16-480.html. Ernest is also a professional member of the Association for
[36] J. Ma, S. Ding, Q. Mei, Towards more practical adversarial attacks on graph Computing Machinery (ACM).
 neural networks, in: H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, H. Lin
 (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 33, Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 4756–4766, URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ Jinfu Chen received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science
 files/paper/2020/file/32bb90e8976aab5298d5da10fe66f21d-Paper.pdf. and Technology from Huazhong University of Science and
[37] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently a full
 networks, 2017, URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907, arXiv:1609.02907. professor at the School of Computer Science and Commu-
[38] M. Wang, L. Yu, D. Zheng, Q. Gan, Y. Gai, Z. Ye, M. Li, J. Zhou, Q. Huang, C. Ma, nication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
 Z. Huang, Q. Guo, H. Zhang, H. Lin, J. Zhao, J. Li, A.J. Smola, Z. Zhang, Deep His major research interests include Software Testing, Softgraph library: Towards efficient and scalable deep learning on graphs, 2019, ware Security, and Trusted Software. He has published more
 CoRR, arXiv:1909.01315, arXiv:1909.01315. than 80 papers in some famous journals or conferences.
[39] I. Sharafaldin, A.H. Lashkari, A.A. Ghorbani, Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization, in: International
 Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, 2018, URL https: Mukhtar Ahmed received his BSc. degree in Computer
 //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4707749. Science from BUITEMS, Pakistan, in 2011, and the MS
[40] S. García, M. Grill, J. Stiborek, A. Zunino, An empirical comparison of degree in Computer Science from ILMA University, Pakbotnet detection methods, Comput. Secur. 45 (2014) 100–123, http://dx.doi. istan, in 2021. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree at
 org/10.1016/j.cose.2014.05.011, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ the School of Computer Science and Communication Engiarticle/pii/S0167404814000923. neering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. His research
[41] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, Y. Sheng, Malware traffic classification using interests include malicious network detection, network secuconvolutional neural network for representation learning, in: 2017 International rity, deep learning, and cloud security. He is a professional
 Conference on Information Networking, ICOIN, 2017, pp. 712–717, http://dx. member of the ACM.
 doi.org/10.1109/ICOIN.2017.7899588.
[42] W. Jianping, Q. Guangqiu, W. Chunming, J. Weiwei, J. Jiahe, Federated learning
 for network attack detection using attention-based graph neural networks, Sci. Francis Kwadzo Agbenyegah holds a Ph.D. in Computer
 Rep. 14 (1) (2024) 19088. Science from Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
[43] Z. Diao, G. Xie, X. Wang, R. Ren, X. Meng, G. Zhang, K. Xie, M. Qiao, EC-GCN: Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. He is currently pursuing a
 A encrypted traffic classification framework based on multi-scale graph convo- Ph.D. in Computer Science and Technology at the School of
 lution networks, Comput. Netw. 224 (2023) 109614, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu
 j.comnet.2023.109614, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ University, Zhenjiang, China. His research interests include
 S1389128623000592. software vulnerability prediction and detection, machine
[44] M. Waniek, T.P. Michalak, T. Rahwan, M. Wooldridge, Hiding individuals and learning, and deep learning. Francis is also a member of
 communities in a social network, Nat. Hum. Behav. 2 (2016) 139–147, URL the Internet Society.
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11496208.
[45] Y. Jiang, H. Xia, Adversarial attacks against dynamic graph neural net-
 William Leslie Brown-Acquaye is a Senior Lecturer and the
 works via node injection, High- Confid. Comput. 4 (1) (2024) 100185, http:
 Dean of the Faculty of Computing and Information Systems
 //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hcc.2023.100185, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
 at Ghana Communication Technology University, Accra,
 science/article/pii/S2667295223000831.
 Ghana. He holds a Ph.D. in Automation and Control from
[46] H. Wang, J. Wang, J. Wang, M. Zhao, W. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Xie, M. Guo,
 Tambov State Technical University, Russian Federation.
 GraphGAN: Graph representation learning with generative adversarial nets, Proc.
 His research interests include control systems, pervasive
 the AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 32 (1) (2018) http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v32i1.
 computing, and human-robot interaction.
 11872, URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11872.
[47] F. Cao, Q. Chen, H. Ye, An effective targeted label adversarial attack on graph
 neural networks by strategically allocating the attack budget, Knowl.-Based
 Syst. 293 (2024) 111689, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2024.111689, URL
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705124003241.

 27