5100 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Real-Time Threat Detection and AI-Driven
 Predictive Security for Consumer Applications
 Sugirtha Thayalan, Niranchana Radhakrishnan, T. V. Ramana ,
 Ganesh Gopal Devarajan , Senior Member, IEEE, Marimuthu Karuppiah , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Maryam M. Al Dabel

 Abstract—The growing use of artificial intelligence (AI) in security in consumer applications has become a critical concern.
consumer applications, especially through smart devices and the The integration of Internet of Things (IoT) devices, smart
Internet of Things (IoT), presents both opportunities and security applications, and advanced technologies such as artificial
challenges. Protecting user data and privacy is increasingly
critical as these technologies become part of daily life. Traditional intelligence (AI) and big data analytics holds significant
security models struggle with the large, real-time data generated potential to improve predictive security and threat detection
by these systems, leading to problems with accuracy, scalability, in urban infrastructures. Although smart cities use connected
and threat detection. To address this, we propose a novel technologies to improve public services and streamline resource
framework that combines Collaborative Federated Learning with management, security in consumer applications, particularly in
an edge-cloud architecture for predictive security. Our approach
features the Two-Stage Attention Integrated Graph-based Multi- the context of IoT devices, remains an area of intense focus.
source Spatio-Temporal Data Fusion (2S-AGMSTDF) network, Ensuring the privacy and protection of user data while managing
which processes multiple data sources, including sensor inputs, evolving security threats is paramount for the future of urban
cyber activity, and user behavior patterns. Key components technology [1], [2].
include AKGCN for cyber feature embedding, a GCN-ResNet- Traditional security models, such as signature-based detecbased transformer (GRCMT) for spatial data analysis, and
an Attention-Based LSTM for temporal feature extraction. tion and anomaly detection, are often inadequate to address
By performing local computations at the edge for real-time the diverse and dynamic security challenges arising in conmonitoring and using Federated Averaging at the cloud level, sumer applications [3]. These models typically fail to account
our framework improves accuracy, scalability, and privacy. Real- for the rapidly evolving nature of cyber threats or the
world evaluations show its superior performance in anomaly multidimensional data generated by IoT devices, mobile
detection and predictive security compared to existing methods,
offering a robust AI-driven solution for consumer security. apps, and sensor networks [4]. Centralized data processing
 frameworks, which rely on cloud-based systems, introduce
 Index Terms—Blockchain network, AI-driven security, smart challenges such as scalability, data privacy, and latency in realdevices, IoT security, federated learning.
 time applications. As a result, there is a growing need for
 distributed AI-powered security solutions that can proactively
 detect threats and predict vulnerabilities before they become
 I. I NTRODUCTION manifest [5].
 S URBAN environments grow increasingly complex with Decentralization of data sources, such as cyber data from
A the rapid expansion of smart cities, and ensuring robust social networks, sensor data from smart devices, and temporal
 patterns in user behavior, creates opportunities and challenges
 Received 24 November 2024; revised 30 January 2025; accepted 13 for predictive security [6]. These systems generate large
March 2025. Date of publication 25 March 2025; date of current version
14 August 2025. (Corresponding author: Ganesh Gopal Devarajan.) amounts of heterogeneous data that require sophisticated AI-
 Sugirtha Thayalan is with the Department of Computer Science and driven frameworks capable of processing data efficiently while
Engineering, Indian Institute of Information Technology Tiruchirappalli, ensuring privacy and low latency. One promising approach
Tiruchirappalli 620012, India (e-mail: sugirthat@iiitt.ac.in).
 Niranchana Radhakrishnan is with the Department of Computer Science and is Collaborative and Distributed Federated Learning (FL),
Engineering, Alliance School of Advanced Computing, Alliance University, which enables distributed data processing without sharing raw
Bengaluru 562106, India (e-mail: niranchana.r@alliance.edu.in). data, preserving user privacy while enabling real-time threat
 T. V. Ramana is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Jain University, Bengaluru 560004, India (e-mail: venkatara- detection [7], [8].
mana.t@gmail.com). Federated learning allows edge devices, such as mobile
 Ganesh Gopal Devarajan is with the Department of Computer Science phones, IoT sensors, and local servers, to collaboratively
and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of
Science and Technology NCR Campus, New Delhi 201204, India (e-mail: learn from decentralized data while minimizing the risks of
dganeshgopal@ieee.org). data transfer [9]. In the context of AI-driven security, this
 Marimuthu Karuppiah is with the Presidency School of Computer decentralized approach is ideal for consumer applications
Science and Engineering, Presidency University, Bengaluru 560064, India
(e-mail: marimuthu.k@presidencyuniversity.in). where data privacy and low-latency processing are critical.
 Maryam M. Al Dabel is with the Department of Computer Science and By performing local computations on the edge, the devices
Engineering, College of Computer Science and Engineering, University of process data efficiently and securely without relying on
Hafr Al Batin, Hafar Al Batin 39524, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: maldabel@
uhb.edu.sa). centralized servers [10]. This framework improves real-time
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3554589 security monitoring, improves scalability, and reduces latency,
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY 5101

making it a viable solution for predictive threat modeling in Lv et al. [14] explored the challenges posed by the rapid
consumer electronics [11]. expansion of IoT devices, proposing the use of Network
 Despite its advantages, federated learning models still face Function Virtualization (NFV) and Virtual Network Functions
challenges. Traditional aggregation techniques, like Federated (VNF) to improve service quality. Their preference-based
Averaging (FedAvg), struggle to capture the complex, multi- routing mechanism customizes the VNF chaining process
source data from diverse consumer applications. These models to meet diverse consumer needs, demonstrating significant
may miss intricate relationships between cyber, spatial, and improvements in service acceptance and VNF utilization.
temporal features, reducing predictive accuracy. Advanced Su et al. [15] examined vulnerabilities in consumer elecdata fusion techniques integrating diverse data sources are tronics (CE), specifically focusing on how power consumption
necessary to improve the accuracy in real time of security patterns can reveal running applications. Their work highlights
models [12]. how dynamic power modulation can create predictable patterns
 In this paper, we propose a novel framework for AI-driven exploitable by adversaries, suggesting intelligent application
predictive security in consumer applications, specifically profiling as a potential solution to improve security.
designed to address the limitations of traditional federated Allifah and Zualkernan [16] addressed the security risks of
learning approaches. Our framework integrates collabora- smart home devices based on the Internet of Things, proposing
tive Federated Learning with a multi-source spatial-temporal a methodology to rank device security using the Analytic
data fusion network based on two stages of attention Hierarchy Process (AHP). Their study emphasized the critical
(2S-AGMSTDF) to enhance real-time threat detection and role of network security and vulnerability management in
predictive security. The contributions of this paper include the ensuring the security of IoT devices, offering a framework to
following. evaluate and prioritize security risks.
 • Collaborative Learning in Edge-Cloud Environments: A Yuan et al. [17] explored security flaws in IoT device
 federated learning framework where edge devices col- sharing platforms, specifically regarding authorization-data
 laborate to detect security threats, processing data from management. They introduced SecHARE, a tool that automultiple sources (e.g., cyber, spatial, and temporal) and mates patching of security vulnerabilities in IoT clouds,
 updating a global model with an advanced particle swarm demonstrating its effectiveness in mitigating risks without
 optimization (PSO) based aggregation technique. disrupting functionality.
 • Two-Stage Attention Integrated Graph-Based Multisource
 Data Fusion: The 2S-AGMSTDF Network employs
 attention mechanisms and graph neural networks to fuse III. P ROPOSED 2S-AGMSTDF M ODEL
 data from diverse sources, ensuring effective feature The proposed network model is designed to provide
 extraction and real-time anomaly detection. real-time predictive security in smart city environments by
 • Real-Time and Low-Latency Processing: By leveraging leveraging data from multiple sources within a distributed
 edge computing and federated learning, our frame- AI-driven framework. This system integrates collaborative
 work ensures real-time security monitoring with minimal federated learning within an edge-cloud architecture, where
 latency, ideal for dynamic IoT devices and smart devices. edge nodes handle local data processing, while the cloud
 • Global Aggregation With Advanced FedAvg: The mod- aggregates and refines the security predictions using advanced
 ified Federated Averaging (FedAvg) method improves machine learning techniques.
 traditional aggregation techniques, improving accuracy by In this work, we consider a network structure consisting
 incorporating insights from various edge nodes. of N edge nodes, each responsible for processing localized
 The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews data collected from consumer applications and IoT devices
the existing literature on AI-driven security in consumer deployed throughout the urban environment. Each edge node
applications and IoT devices, highlighting challenges in real- gathers three key types of data:
time threat detection. Section III details the architecture of our External Data: Collected from cyber sources such as social
proposed framework, including the 2S-AGMSTDF Network media platforms, user behavior analytics, and network logs.
and global aggregation techniques. Section IV presents exper- This data provides contextual information on potential threats,
imental setups and comparative analyses with existing models. social interactions, and online activity patterns that can be used
Finally, Section V concludes the paper and suggests future to detect security anomalies and predict cyber threats.
research directions. Spatial Data: Collected from physical sensors installed on
 consumer devices, such as smart home appliances, security
 cameras, and traffic sensors. This data offers insights into
 physical space usage, user movement patterns, and anomalies
 II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW in traffic flow that may indicate suspicious behavior or vul-
 Traditional models like statistical time-series analysis and nerabilities in smart city infrastructure.
hotspot mapping have been foundational in urban technolo- Temporal Data: Data were collected over time, capturing
gies [13], but they fail to account for the non-linear and the temporal dynamics of user behavior, device interactions,
heterogeneous nature of urban dynamics. Although useful for and security events. This data allows the system to recognize
localized insights, these methods cannot fully integrate diverse short-term and long-term trends in cyber-security threats, such
IoT data, limiting scalability and real-time adaptability. as fluctuations in device activity or abnormal access patterns.
5102 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 data present significant challenges for predictive security.
 Safeguarding user data and ensuring privacy require advanced
 AI models capable of processing heterogeneous and spatiotemporal data streams to detect and mitigate threats effectively.

 A. Threat Data Representation
Fig. 1. Proposed framework.
 k ∈ R denote the occurrence of a specific type
 Let di,t
 of threat k (e.g., cyberattack, anomalous device behavior)
 In this work, we propose the 2S-AGMSTDF network, detected in region ai at time t. If
designed to function in a distributed edge cloud environment  
for real-time security monitoring. The system is optimized di,t = di,t
 1
 , di,t
 2
 , . . . , di,t
 K
 ∈ RK
for deployment on resource-constrained devices, balancing
computational efficiency and power consumption. Each edge represents the threat data for all K categories in region ai ,
node processes localized data, including external, spatial, the overall threat data of the system at time t can be written
and temporal information, using lightweight machine learning according to Eqn. (1):
models. The computational complexity at each edge node is  
O(N-D), where N is the number of data points, and D is the Dt = d1,t , d2,t , . . . , dN,t ∈ RK×N (1)
feature dimension. This allows the system to operate efficiently
 The threat data over T time steps is given by Eqn. (2):
on devices such as IoT gateways and smart appliances, with
an estimated memory footprint of 10 MB and a processing D = [D1 , D2 , . . . , DT ] ∈ RK×N×T (2)
time of 50 ms per prediction.
 The data flow between edge and cloud components is
structured to ensure minimal latency and optimized resource B. Local Feature Embedding at Edge Nodes
usage. In our proposed framework, edge nodes process hetero-
 • Data Collection at Edge Nodes: IoT devices and smart geneous threat data using the 2S-AGMSTDF network. This
 appliances continuously generate data, which is pre- network integrates data from multiple sources, including senprocessed locally to extract relevant spatial and temporal sor data from IoT devices, cyber metadata from applications,
 features. and temporal patterns linked to user behavior. The processing
 • Local Model Processing: Each edge node runs lightweight is divided into two stages:
 AI models to detect anomalies and predict potential 1) Feature Embedding Stage:
 threats in real time. This ensures a rapid response without • Cyber Feature Embedding: Using AKGCN for caprequiring constant cloud connectivity. turing relationships in cyber metadata.
 • Federated Learning and Model Updates: Instead of trans- • Spatial Feature Embedding: Using a GCN-ResNetmitting raw data to the cloud, federated learning enables based cross-modulality transformer (GRCMT) to
 edge devices to train local models on their own data. extract spatial features from data from smart devices
 Only model parameters are shared with the cloud, reduc- and IoT sensors.
 ing network congestion, and ensuring privacy-preserving • Temporal Feature Embedding: Using an Attentioncomputation. Based LSTM to model temporal dependencies in
 • Cloud Aggregation and Enhancement: The cloud server user behavior and threat patterns.
 receives model updates from multiple edge nodes and 2) Prediction Stage: The fused feature embeddings are
 performs Federated Averaging to refine a global model. passed to a Sparse Attentive Backtracking LSTM (SAB-
 The updated model is then redistributed to the edge nodes LSTM) for accurate prediction of real-time threats.
 for continuous learning and improved accuracy.
 • Security Insights and Threat Monitoring: The system
 continuously adapts based on new threats detected at C. Edge-Cloud Collaboration for Predictive Security
 the edge or cloud level, providing real-time security Local computations on the edge enable real-time monitoring
 intelligence across all connected devices. of security threats, while Federated Averaging at the cloud
This decentralized approach not only enhances scalability and aggregates insights from multiple edge nodes. This ensures
efficiency, but also minimizes communication overhead while scalable, privacy-preserving AI-based predictive security while
maintaining high security and privacy standards. Figure 1 enhancing system accuracy through collaborative learning.
shows the proposed architecture.
 V. E XTERNAL F EATURE E MBEDDING U SING AKGCN
 IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION In this section, we describe how the AKGCN is used to
 In the context of consumer applications, particularly those embed external features. Each edge node applies an AKGCN
powered by smart devices and Internet of Things (IoT) to process external data, capturing the relationships between
platforms, the increasing volume and diversity of real-time urban entities.
THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY 5103

A. Model Function E. Attention Mechanism for External Features
 The model function f (·) processes historical data C and The attention mechanism assigns importance to neighbors
external characteristics F Ext , producing the external embed- based on external features and regional relationships. The
 (l)
ding ĈT+1 to predict future events and is given by Eqn. (3): attention score αin is calculated according to Eqn. (10):
     
 ĈT+1 = f HeL , F Ext ∈ RK×N (3) (l) (l−1)
 exp LeakyReLU a Wq hi
 (l) (l−1) (l−1)
 Wk rn hn
 (l)
 αin =    
  (l) (l−1) (l) (l−1) (l−1)
 k∈N(i) exp LeakyReLU a Wq hi Wk rk hk
B. Initialization of Features
 (10)
 a) Entity features: Each regional area is initially represented by an embedding based on its attributes, such as where a , Wq(l) , and Wk(l) are learnable parameters, and 
historical data, which is represented as Eqn. (4): denotes concatenation.
 He0 = C ∈ RN×d0 (4)
 F. Message Passing and Aggregation
where N is the number of regions and d0 is the dimensionality
of the initial embedding. The aggregated messages for node i are computed according
 b) External features: External factors such as traffic flow to Eqn. (11):
 (l) (l)
and Points of Interest (POI) influence inside patterns. These mi = αin Wv(l) hn(l−1) (11)
features are represented at each time step t according to n∈N(i)
Eqn. (5):
 FtExt ∈ RJ×N (5) G. Updating Region Embeddings
 The embeddings for the region i are updated as per
where J is the number of feature categories. Aggregating these
 Eqn. (12):
characteristics over T time steps resulted as per Eqn. (6): 
  
 FtExt = F1Ext , . . . , FTExt ∈ RJ×N×T (6) h(l)
 i = σ hi
 (l−1)
 + m(l)
 i (12)

C. Knowledge Graph Construction H. Final Embedding
 The knowledge graph captures spatial and semantic rela- After multiple layers of graph convolution and attentiontionships between regions: based aggregation, the final external feature embedding for the
 a) Adjacency matrix: The spatial relationships between edge node j is calculated according to Eqn. (13):
regions are represented by an adjacency matrix and are given 
 (l+1,j) (l,j) (l,j)
by Eqn. (7): Hext = σ A(j) Hext Wext (13)

 A ∈ RN×N (7) (l,j)
 where Hext ∈ RNi ×de is the embedding, Ni is the number of
where Aij = 1 if regions i and j are connected, and Aij = 0 regions, de is the feature dimension, and A(j) is the adjacency
otherwise. matrix.
 b) Relation embeddings: The relationships between
regions are described by relation embeddings which is given VI. S PATIAL F EATURE E MBEDDING AND F EATURE
in Eqn. (8): F USION U SING GCN-R ES N ET BASED C ROSS M ODALITY
 T RANSFORMER
 Hr(l) ∈ RR×dl (8)
 Each edge node processed spatial data from sensors using
where R is the number of relationship types and dl is the a GCN-ResNet-based Cross-Modality Transformer (GRCMT).
embedding dimensionality at layer l. The GRCMT is a sophisticated framework designed to model
 the spatial dependencies between different regions in an
D. Graph Convolution urban environment. Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs)
 The graph convolution operation aggregates information combines graph convolutional networks (GCNs) to capture
from neighboring nodes. For region i at layer l, the embedding local spatial dependencies, Residual networks (ResNet) to
is updated as per Eqn. (9): stabilize the learning process over deep layers, and a cross-
 ⎛ ⎞ modality transformer to fuse information from various spatial
 hi(l) = σ ⎝ (l) (l) (l−1) ⎠
 αin Wv hn (9) modalities, such as trend, period, and proximity. Each of these
 n∈N(i)
 modalities captures different aspects of spatial relations, and
 the cross-modulality transformer brings them together, enhancwhere: ing the richness of the spatial embeddings. Algorithm 2:
 (l−1)
 • hn is the embedding of neighbor n at layer l − 1, GCN-ResNet and Cross-Modality Transformer with Self-
 (l)
 • αin is the attention score, Attention and Multi-Head Attention.
 (l)
 • Wv is the learnable weight matrix, The GCN-ResNet framework consists of graph-
 • σ is an activation function (e.g., ReLU), convolutional networks (GCNs) to learn the spatial structure of
 • N(i) is the set of neighbors of region i. each region and Residual Networks (ResNet) to introduce skip
5104 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Algorithm 1 GCN-ResNet and Cross Modality Transformer Algorithm 2 Attention-based ConvLSTM (ACL) for Temporal
With Self-Attention and Multi-Head Attention Feature Embedding in Prediction
 1: Step 1: GCN-ResNet for Trend, Proximity, and Period 1: Step 1: Initialize ConvLSTM kernels and attention
 Modalities weights
 2: for each modality (trend, proximity, period) do 2: Step 2: Initialize hidden state H0 and cell state C0
 3: for l = 1 to L do  3: Step 3: For each time step t = 1 to T do:
 (l) (l)
 4: Hmod,G ← σ D−1/2 Aspat D−1/2 Hmod Wmod {Graph 4: 3.1 ConvLSTM Step (Temporal Embedding):
  
 Convolution}   5: ft ← σ Wf ∗ Xt + Uf ∗ H(t−1) + bf {Forget gate}
 5: Hmod,R ← σ Hmod,G + Hmod,previousG {ResNet 6: it ← σ Wi ∗  Xt + Ui ∗ H(t−1) + bi {Input  gate}
 Connection} 7: ĉt ← tanh Wc ∗ Xt + Uc ∗ H(t−1) + bc {Candidate cell
 6: Hmod,previousG ← Hmod,R {Update Residual} state}
 7: end for 8: Ct ← ft C(t−1) + it ĉt {Update cell state}
 8: end for 9: ot ← σ Wo ∗ Xt + Uo ∗ H(t−1) + bo {Output gate}
 9: Step 2: Multi-Head Attention for Trend, Proximity, 10: Ht ← ot tanh(Ct ) {Update hidden state}
 and Period Modalities 11: Step 4: Attention Mechanism:
10: for each modality (trend, proximity, period) do 12: for each time step t = 1 to T do
11: for i = 1 to h do 13: et ← tanh(We ∗ Ht + be ) {Compute attention score}
12: Qmod ← WQi Hmod 14: end for
13: Kmod ← WKi Hmod 15: Step 4.2: Compute attention weights:
 exp(et )
14: Vmod ← WVi Hmod  16: αt ← T {Normalized attention weights}
  k=1 exp(ek )
 Qmod Kmod 17: Step 5: Compute context vector:
15: headi ← softmax √ Vmod 
 18: Htemporal = C ← t αt ∗ Ht {Weighted sum of hidden
 dk
16: end for states}
17: MultiHeadmod ← Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )WO 19: Step 6: Return context vector C (temporal embedding)
18: end for
19: Step 3: Cross Modality Fusion
20: Hconcat ← Concat(MultiHeadtrend , MultiHeadprox ,
 MultiHeadperiod ) future attack occurrences based on recent data. Algorithm 2:
21: Hspatial ← FFN(Hconcat ) {Apply Feed-Forward Network Attention-Based ConvLSTM (ACL) for Temporal Feature
 (FFN)} Embedding for IoT Data
22: Step 4: Return Final Spatial Embedding Input:
 • Temporal data: Xt = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XT } where Xt ∈ Rd
23:
24: return Hspatial represents the extracted spatial features at time t
 • Number of time steps: T
 • Convolution kernel sizes for ConvLSTM gates:
 Wf , Wi , Wc , Wo
connections for stabilizing the learning process. This combined • Attention weight matrix: We
framework is applied to three modalities: trend, proximity, Output: Context vector Htemporal = C (temporal embedand period. The trend modality captures long-term patterns. ding)
The proximity modality captures the spatial dependencies
between neighboring regions based on geographical proximity
 VIII. G LOBAL AGGREGATION AT THE
or adjacency. The period modality captures cyclical or
 C LOUD U SING F EDAVG
recurring patterns in spatial features, such as daily or weekly
fluctuations. After each edge node performs local data prediction, the
 results are transmitted to a central cloud server for global
 aggregation. The cloud server leverages Federated Averaging
 VII. ATTENTION BASED C ONVOLUTION LSTM FOR (FedAvg) to combine the local model parameters from each
 T EMPORAL F EATURE E MBEDDING edge node, thus computing a global model. This process
 To extract the temporal feature, we proposed the Attention- ensures that the cloud aggregates knowledge from all edge
based ConvLSTM (ACL) architecture for embedding the nodes and creates a more accurate global model.
temporal feature. The aim is to improve temporal pattern The aggregation of the local model parameters is performed
learning for attack prediction by combining the strengths by averaging the model weights from each edge node as per
of ConvLSTM and the attention mechanism. Each edge Eqn. (14).
node processes its temporal data using an Attention-Based
 N
ConvLSTM (ACL) architecture. The ConvLSTM captures the 1
 θ global = θ (j) (14)
sequential relationships across time steps, while the attention N
 j=1
mechanism selectively highlights the most relevant time steps.
This combination provides a rich, interpretable representation where:
of temporal attack trends, making it well suited for forecasting • θ (j) represents the model parameters at edge node j.
THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY 5105

Fig. 2. Comparison of Performance Metrics: (a) Smart Home IoT Dataset and (b) Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset.

 • θ global represents the aggregated global model parameters. • Smart Home IoT Dataset: This dataset contains sensor
 Once the global model is computed using FedAvg, the cloud data from smart home devices, including temperature,
server sends the updated global model back to each edge node. motion and security camera data, as well as user behavior
Each edge node then updates its local model with the global logs. Provides information on potential security risks by
parameters, improving its local prediction accuracy based on monitoring abnormal activities in the home environment.
the collective data collected from the entire network. • Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset: This dataset
 This iterative process, where each edge node computes includes network traffic data from IoT devices in a smart
locally, the cloud aggregates globally, and the global model city context. It contains both normal and anomalous
is distributed back to the edge, facilitates distributed and data, useful for detecting malicious activities and security
collaborative learning. As a result, the system benefits from threats on connected devices.
the shared knowledge, which improves the accuracy of attack Figure 2 shows the performance of the 2S-AGMSTDF
prediction across the smart city infrastructure. This continuous model in predictive security for IoT devices and smart platfeedback loop ensures that prediction models evolve and forms is demonstrated through various plots representing the
improve over time, making the system more effective in model’s real-time threat detection capabilities. These plots
anticipating attack patterns. allow for a detailed examination of the model’s prediction
 accuracy, error distribution, and general performance over time
 across multiple IoT devices or communities.
 IX. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION Actual vs. Predicted Threats with Error Bars: The first plot
 In this section, we demonstrate the results for the proposed represents a comparison between actual threat data, predicted
2S-AGMSTDF network for predictive security in consumer threat data, and absolute error for IoT devices on three specific
applications. The performance of the 2S-AGMSTDF model is dates. As shown in the stacked bar graph:
evaluated using various metrics and compared against several The purple bars (actual data) represent the real-time threat
baseline models. Our experiments are carried out on publicly detection observed by IoT devices. The orange bars (preavailable datasets to assess the effectiveness of the proposed dicted data) represent the threat levels predicted by the
model in real-time security monitoring and anomaly detection. 2S-AGMSTDF model. Green bars (Error Data) represent
Evaluation metrics include mean absolute error (MAE), mean the absolute discrepancy between actual and predicted threat
squared error (MSE), and area under the curve (AUC) for values. This plot offers an immediate visual representation of
both the training and testing phases. We provide a detailed how well the model’s predictions align with real-world threat
analysis of the predictive power of the model compared to data across different communities and over time.
baseline approaches such as ARIMA, Att-RNN, MiST and For most IoT devices, the predicted threat levels (orange)
GeoMAN, which are commonly used for anomaly detection closely follow the actual threat levels (purple). This indiin IoT security applications. cates that the 2S-AGMSTDF model is generally effective
 in predicting threats in IoT devices. However, some devices
 (represented by communities with larger green error bars)
A. Dataset show larger prediction discrepancies, particularly in areas with
 For our experiments, we used two widely recognized real- higher threat variability. These errors might suggest that, while
world datasets related to the security of consumer applications. the model is overall accurate, it faces challenges in regions
5106 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Fig. 4. Moving Average for Smart Home IoT Daily Attacks.

 whether it is Smart Home IoT or Cyber-security IoT Anomaly
 Detection. These comparative analyzes illustrate that while
 baseline models such as Random Forest, SVM, XGBoost, and
 Neural Networks offer reasonable performance, the proposed
 2S-AGMSTDF outperforms them, particularly in terms of
 accuracy and error minimization.
Fig. 3. Comparison of Performance Metrics for Two Datasets. The first plot, which focuses on the moving average
 daily attacks of the Smart Home IoT, shows how AI-driven
 predictive security can track attack patterns over time. With
where threat patterns are more volatile or data are more an attack rate 5%, the plot demonstrates occasional bursts
complex. The prediction performance varies over time, as of attacks, with the 7-day moving average smoothing the
demonstrated by the fluctuations in error between different fluctuations to reveal underlying trends. This visualization
dates (June 1, June 15, and July 1). This suggests that while aligns with the concept of real-time monitoring in your
the model is robust, it may benefit from fine-tuning for specific proposed framework, where the system needs to recognize
time periods or device types. emerging attack patterns and provide insights for timely threat
 Smart Home IoT Dataset: This graph compares the MSE mitigation. The moving average helps highlight any deviations
values of five different algorithms, including the proposed 2S- from the normal attack frequency, allowing AI models to
AGMSTDF model, for different train-test ratios (0.7, 0.8, and identify periods of heightened risk, which is essential for
0.9). The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF shows a consistently lower predictive security in consumer applications. By observing
MSE compared to other algorithms like Random Forest, SVM, trends in attacks over time, the system can identify anomalies
XGBoost, and Neural Networks, suggesting that it is better at and provide proactive security measures, ensuring a safer and
predicting IoT sensor data for smart home security. The RMSE more reliable smart home environment. Figure 4 shows the
plot for the Smart Home dataset confirms the trends observed results for the moving average of the daily attacks of the IoT.
in the MSE plot. Since RMSE gives a better idea of error In Fig. 5, illustrating the results for daily attacks on cyber
magnitude in the same unit as the target variable, the proposed security IoT with anomalies detected by Z-Score and Isolation
model has a significantly lower RMSE across all train-test Forest, AI models are able to detect complex threats in real
ratios, showing it is a better fit for predicting abnormal time within IoT systems. With a higher attack rate of 10%, the
activities and security risks in smart home environments. plot shows frequent attack occurrences, while the Z-score and
 Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset: The same compar- Isolation Forest methods help detect anomalies by identifying
ative analysis is applied to the Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly unusual attack behavior. These AI-driven anomaly detection
Dataset. The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF again performs better in techniques are crucial for predictive security, as they allow the
minimizing MSE, which shows its effectiveness in detecting system to differentiate between normal fluctuations and potenanomalies in network traffic data from IoT devices. The lower tial threats. The Federated Learning approach discussed in
MSE indicates the ability of the proposed model to detect your abstract ensures that anomaly detection can be conducted
security threats more accurately compared to the baseline locally at the edge while maintaining privacy, with aggregated
models. The RMSE plot for the Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly insights shared at the cloud level for improved scalability.
Dataset indicates that the proposed 2S-AGMSTDF model Using statistical and machine learning-based techniques, this
consistently delivers better performance than other algorithms. framework improves the system’s ability to provide robust,
This demonstrates its superior ability to capture complex real-time threat detection and mitigation, ensuring a secure and
patterns in network traffic, a crucial task in cyber-security scalable IoT environment.
anomaly detection. Although both GeoMAN and Att-RNN are effective in
 The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF model consistently outper- handling spatio-temporal data, our approach offers significant
forms other algorithms in terms of both MSE and RMSE in innovations in the following ways:
the two datasets, as shown in Fig. 3. This shows its robust- 1) Two-Stage Attention Mechanism: Unlike GeoMAN,
ness and suitability for predictive security in IoT devices, which uses a spatial-temporal attention mechanism
THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY 5107

 Future work will aim to incorporate additional dynamic data
 sources, such as real-time traffic patterns or environmental
 sensors, and explore the use of transfer learning to adapt security models in various consumer applications. This research
 contributes to future-proofing consumer applications, ensuring
 their resilience against evolving cybersecurity threats in an
 increasingly interconnected world.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] P. Dai, Y. Huang, X. Wu, K. Li, H. Xing, and K. Liu, “Freshness
Fig. 5. Anomalies Detection on Cyber-security IoT Daily Attacks. and security-aware cache update in blockchain-based vehicular edge
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 108–121,
 Feb. 2024.
 [2] D.-J. Kim, N. G. B. Amma, and V. Sarveshwaran, “A novel split
 focused on individual dimensions of spatio-temporal learning-based consumer electronics network traffic anomaly detection
 data, our network integrates a two-stage attention mech- framework for smart city environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4197–4204, Feb. 2024.
 anism that processes both source-specific attention and [3] J. Liu and C. Zhang, “Effective analysis and intelligent decision making
 fusion attention. This hierarchical attention improves the of consumer electronics data based on machine learning under smart
 model’s ability to capture interactions across heteroge- city,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4205–4212,
 Feb. 2024.
 neous data sources. [4] G. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Li, P. Hui, and D. Jin, “Blockchain-based data
 2) Graph-Based Data Representation: Unlike Att-RNN, sharing system for AI-powered network operations,” J. Commun. Inf.
 which relies on sequence modeling of spatio-temporal Netw., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–8, 2018.
 [5] I. Bibi, A. Akhunzada, and N. Kumar, “Deep AI-powered cyber threat
 data, our model incorporates a graph-based representa- analysis in IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 7749–7760,
 tion to model spatial relationships explicitly. May 2023.
 3) Federated Learning Integration: Our framework uniquely [6] S. Yu, N. Jho, and Y. Park, “Lightweight three-factor-based privacypreserving authentication scheme for IoT-enabled smart homes,” IEEE
 integrates federated learning within the edge-cloud Access, vol. 9, pp. 126186–126197, 2021.
 architecture, focusing on privacy-preserving real-time [7] M. N. H. Nguyen et al., “Self-organizing democratized learning: Toward
 anomaly detection. Neither GeoMAN nor Att-RNN large-scale distributed learning systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 10698–10710, Dec. 2023.
 explicitly addresses privacy concerns or distributed com- [8] M. Chen et al., “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent
 putations in resource-constrained environments, making progress and future challenges,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39,
 our approach particularly suited for deployment in sen- no. 12, pp. 3579–3605, Dec. 2021.
 [9] W. Iqbal, H. Abbas, M. Daneshmand, B. Rauf, and Y. A. Bangash,
 sitive and decentralized IoT ecosystems. “An in-depth analysis of IoT security requirements, challenges, and their
 4) Optimized for Multi-Source Data Fusion: Although both countermeasures via software-defined security,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 GeoMAN and Att-RNN handle spatio-temporal data, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 10250–10276, Oct. 2020.
 [10] Q. Lin, S. Jiang, Z. Zhen, T. Chen, C. Wei, and H. Lin, “Fed-PEMC:
 they do not explicitly focus on fusing heterogeneous A privacy-enhanced federated deep learning algorithm for consumer
 data types. The 2S-AGMSTDF network architecture electronics in mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 explicitly accounts for this by designing source-specific vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4073–4086, Feb. 2024.
 [11] P. Liu, L. Jiang, H. Lin, J. Hu, S. Garg, and M. Alrashoud, “Federated
 encoders and a fusion attention module, which enhances multimodal learning for privacy-preserving driver break recommendaits ability to handle diverse data inputs effectively. tions in consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
 no. 1, pp. 4564–4573, Feb. 2024.
 [12] W. Yamany, M. Keshk, N. Moustafa, and B. Turnbull, “Swarm
 optimization-based federated learning for the cyber resilience of Internet
 X. C ONCLUSION of Things systems against adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 This study introduces a comprehensive framework for Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1359–1369, Feb. 2024.
 [13] H. T. Dinh, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A survey of mobile
AI-driven predictive security within consumer applications, cloud computing: Architecture, applications, and approaches,” Wireless
particularly those based on smart devices and IoT devices. Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 13, no. 18, pp. 1587–1611, 2013.
By integrating data from various sources, including cyber [14] J. Lv, B. Yi, A. Slowik, P. Li, and J. Chen, “VNF constituted consumer
 application preference for high-quality service provision in IoT,” IEEE
data, sensor data from devices, and user behavior patterns, the Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1071–1079, Feb. 2024.
2S-AGMSTDF Network provides real-time, proactive threat [15] J. Su et al., “Trustworthy IAP: An intelligent applications profiler to
detection, and predictive security. The use of Collaborative investigate vulnerabilities of consumer electronic devices,” IEEE Trans.
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4605–4616, Feb. 2024.
Federated Learning ensures privacy-preserving AI while [16] N. M. Allifah and I. A. Zualkernan, “Ranking security of IoT-based
enabling scalability and real-time response to security threats. smart home consumer devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 18352–18369,
This framework demonstrates how AI can enhance security 2022.
 [17] B. Yuan et al., “Leakage of authorization-data in IoT device sharmonitoring and anomaly detection in consumer electronics, ing: New attacks and countermeasure,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
supporting the development of reliable consumer platforms. Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3196–3210, Jul./Aug. 2024.