IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025 16661

 Reconciling Attribute and Structural Anomalies for
 Improved Graph Anomaly Detection
 Chunjing Xiao , Jiahui Lu, Xovee Xu, Fan Zhou , Member, IEEE, Tianshu Xie , Wei Lu, and Lifeng Xu

 Abstract—Graph anomaly detection is critical in domains [1], [2]. In social welfare, fraudulent medical insurance claims
such as healthcare and economics, where identifying deviations burden healthcare systems [3], [4]. In economic systems,
can prevent substantial losses. Existing unsupervised approaches financial fraud harms businesses, investors, and consumers [5],
strive to learn a single model capable of detecting both attribute
and structural anomalies. However, they confront the tug-of- [6]. On social media, fake news distorts public perception,
war problem between two distinct types of anomalies, resulting triggering panic and confusion [7], [8]. By modeling entities as
in suboptimal performance. This work presents TripleAD, a nodes and their interactions as edges, graph anomaly detection
mutual distillation-based triple-channel graph anomaly detection identifies fraudulent or abnormal nodes deviating from the
framework. It includes three estimation modules to identify the norm [9], [10], offering valuable applications to address these
attribute, structural, and mixed anomalies while mitigating the
interference between different types of anomalies. In the first security and economic threats.
channel, we design a multiscale attribute estimation module to In real-world scenarios, graph anomalies primarily manicapture extensive node interactions and ameliorate the over- fest in three forms: attribute anomalies, structural anomalies,
smoothing issue. To better identify structural anomalies, we and mixed attribute-structural anomalies [11], [12]. The
introduce a link-enhanced structure estimation module in the attribute anomalies usually have a normal neighborhood topolsecond channel that facilitates information flow to topologically isolated nodes. The third channel is powered by an ogy but abnormal node attributes [13], whereas structural
attribute-mixed curvature, a new indicator that encapsulates both anomalies display normal node attributes but possess an
attribute and structural information for discriminating mixed atypical neighborhood topology. Mixed anomalies are charanomalies. Moreover, a mutual distillation strategy is intro- acterized by irregularities in both attributes and structure.
duced to encourage communication and collaboration between Since collecting ground-truth anomaly node labels is prothe three channels. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed TripleAD model against strong hibitively expensive, the main challenge of graph anomaly
baselines. detection lies in identifying anomalies in an unsupervised
 manner [14].
 Index Terms—Attribute anomaly, graph anomaly detection,
graph neural network, mutual distillation, structural anomaly. To address this challenge, existing efforts have been devoted
 to designing unsupervised graph neural networks (GNNs)
 for graph anomaly detection, which primarily fall into two
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 categories: reconstruction-based methods [15], [16], [17]

A S THE Internet rapidly evolves, a growing array of
 anomalies is causing significant disruptions and losses
 and contrast-based methods [18], [19], [20]. Reconstructionbased methods focus on learning node representations by
 reconstructing node attributes and structure and identifying
 Received 28 May 2024; revised 15 January 2025; accepted 7 April 2025.
Date of publication 30 April 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025. anomalies through reconstruction errors. On the other hand,
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation contrast-based methods aim to learn distinguishable node repof China under Grant 62176043 and Grant 62072077, in part by Henan resentations by discriminating the agreements between nodes
Province Science and Technology Development Plan Project under Grant
252102210096 and Grant 242102210065, in part by the Key Research and and their neighborhoods.
Development Program of Henan Province under Grant 251111211300, and Nevertheless, a significant limitation of current methods is
in part by the Key Project of Henan Provincial Department of Education for their reliance on a single, unified model to detect both attribute
Colleges and Universities under Grant 25A520044. (Corresponding authors:
Wei Lu; Lifeng Xu.) and structural anomalies. Specifically, identifying different
 Chunjing Xiao and Jiahui Lu are with the School of Computer and types of anomalies at the same time may lead to a “tug-
Information Engineering, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China (e-mail: of-war” problem, where the optimization for one anomaly
chunjingxiao@gmail.com; lujh@henu.edu.cn).
 Xovee Xu and Fan Zhou are with the School of Information and type may interfere with or diminish the optimization of the
Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technol- other, ultimately degrading overall performance. Given that
ogy of China, Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: xovee@std.uestc.edu.cn;
fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn).
 attribute anomalies and structural anomalies represent inher-
 Tianshu Xie is with the Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Quzhou), ently different types of data, the endeavor to learn distinct
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Quzhou representations using a single model can readily induce inter-
324000, China, and also with Quzhou Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou ference between the two tasks [21], [22]. Recent studies also
Medical University, Quzhou People’s Hospital, Quzhou 324000, China
(e-mail: tianshuxie@std.uestc.edu.cn). highlighted the interference between attributes and structure
 Wei Lu and Lifeng Xu are with Quzhou Affiliated Hospital of Wen- as a key factor in the performance decline of GNNs [23],
zhou Medical University, Quzhou People’s Hospital, Quzhou 324000, China
(e-mail: luwei@wmu.edu.cn; qz1109@wmu.edu.cn).
 [24]. An illustration of this interference problem is depicted
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3561172 in Fig. 1.
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
16662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 4) Mutual Distillation: We propose a mutual distillation
 module to promote knowledge exchange between different channels. It incorporates a triplet distillation loss
 to harness the complementary strengths of the attribute,
 structural, and mixed channels. For the attribute and
 structure estimation modules, we treat each other as
 teacher and student and distill knowledge from the
 teacher to the student. For the mixture estimation module, we consider both attribute and structure estimation
 modules as teachers to guide the reconstruction of the
Fig. 1. Tug-of-war problem between different anomalies. (a) Single-model attribute-mixed curvature. This strategy facilitates a rich
fsin is faced with the tug-of-war issue when detecting attribute and structural
anomalies simultaneously. When simultaneously detecting both anomalies, fsin
 knowledge transfer, enhancing the detection capabilities.
has to compromise the performance of both tasks. (b) This problem can be Our contributions are summarized as follows.
addressed by using three dedicated channels for different types of anomalies.
 1) We propose a new TripleAD framework, which contains
 three distinct estimation modules for detecting attribute,
 structure, and mixed anomalies, mitigating the cross-
 Inspired by the divide-and-conquer strategy widely applied anomaly interference.
in vision [25], [26] and natural language understanding [22], 2) We design a multiscale attribute estimation module,
[27], we propose to decompose the graph anomaly detection leveraging augmented views at varying propagation
into three subtasks to overcome the “tug-of-war” problem. scales to alleviate GNN over-smoothing and boost
Specifically, we propose a novel triple-channel graph anomaly attribute anomaly detection.
detection (TripleAD) framework powered by mutual distil- 3) We devise a link-enhanced structure estimation module,
lation. In TripleAD, we design three distinct channels to which generates an enhanced graph to enable effective
identify the attribute, structural, and mixed anomalies, respec- message passing to isolated nodes and enhances structively. Moreover, these channels engage in mutual cooperation ture anomaly detection.
through teacher-student distillation, enhancing training effec- 4) We propose a curvature-based mixture estimation modtiveness and interchannel learning. This strategy not only ule, which introduces an attribute-mixed curvature to
mitigates the interference problem but also improves the express the mixture of attribute and structure information
detection performance for different types of anomalies. for mixed anomaly detection.
 5) We present a mutual distillation module to prompt
 1) Attribute Channel: This channel employs a multiscale knowledge exchange between three anomaly detection
 attribute estimation module to reconstruct a target node’s channels via teacher-student distillation.
 masked attributes using its neighbors’ attribute and Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
 structural information. By facilitating attribute prop- proposed TripleAD framework in comparison to strong baseagation across multiple scales, it effectively captures lines.
 extensive node interactions for attribute reconstruction.
 The attribute channel relieves the over-smoothing issue II. P RELIMINARIES
 inherent in the multilayer message passing of GNNs and
 boosts the detection of attribute anomalies. A. Problem Statement
 2) Structure Channel: We corrupt a target node’s struc- Now, we formalize the graph anomaly detection task. For
 ture by masking its edges and try to reconstruct the an attributed graph G = (V, E, X), where V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN }
 masked edges utilizing both attribute and neighborhood is a collection of nodes, E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , e M } is a set of edges,
 information. We devise a link-enhanced structure esti- and X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } is the attribute matrix of N nodes. We
 mation module that generates an enhanced graph to have the adjacency matrix A ∈ RN×N containing the structural
 promote information propagation to the isolated nodes. information of both V and E, where Ai j = 1 means there
 This channel encourages node information sharing and exists an edge between nodes vi and v j ; otherwise, Ai j = 0. In
 improves the detection of structural anomalies. this context, the task of a graph anomaly detection model is to
 3) Mixed Channel: We propose a curvature-based mix- rank all the nodes based on computed anomaly scores, thereby
 ture estimation module, which introduces a new placing nodes with significant deviations from the majority of
 indicator—attribute-mixed curvature—to encapsulate reference nodes at higher positions.
 both attribute and structural information for detecting
 mixed anomalies. The dual-focus indicator simultane- B. Graph Curvature
 ously considers the strength of pairwise node con- Graph curvature quantifies the strength of interaction and
 nections and the degree of attribute similarity. By overlap between the neighbors of a pair of nodes [28], [29],
 reconstructing the attribute-mixed curvature, the mixed [30]. Given a pair of nodes (vi , v j ), its curvature is defined as
 channel captures anomalous patterns in both node follows:
 W mi , m j
 
 attributes and structure, facilitating the detection of
 mixed anomalies. κ(i, j) = 1 − (1)
 dist(i, j)
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16663

Fig. 2. Curvature distributions on CiteSeer. Normal-normal pairs (left)
exhibit higher curvature values compared to normal-abnormal pairs (right),
highlighting the potential of curvature as an indicator for anomaly detection.

where dist(, ) is the graph distance between vi and v j and W(, )
refers to the Wasserstein distance between the two probability
distributions, that is, the minimum average traveling distance
via any transportation plan. mi and m j denote the probability
distribution of node vi and node v j , respectively. For node
vi with degree k, its probability distribution is computed as
follows: 8
 <α,
 ˆ if x = i
 mi [x] = (1 − α)/k, if x ∈ N (i) (2)
 ˆ
 0, otherwise
 :

where x = 1, . . . , N indicates the component index of the
distribution vector, α is a coefficient within [0, 1], and N (i) Fig. 3. Overview of the TripleAD framework. The three channels,
denotes the neighbors of vi . the multiscale attribute (left), the link-enhanced structure (right), and the
 curvature-based mixture (middle) estimation modules, are designed to identify
 In general, the graph curvatures of pairwise nodes with anomalies from attribute, structural, and mixed perspectives, respectively.
the same category tend to be higher than those with different Furthermore, these modules interact and collaborate through our designed
categories. This is because nodes with the same category are mutual distillation mechanism to ensure robust anomaly detection.
inclined to share more interactions (i.e., common neighbors)
[29], [31]. Correspondingly, normal-normal node pairs will
have larger curvature values than normal-abnormal node pairs.
 of attribute and structural anomalies. As shown in Fig. 3,
Also, compared to other structural measures (e.g., common
 TripleAD is composed of three channels: the multiscale
neighbor number and personalized PageRank), graph curvature
 attribute estimation module (left channel), the link-enhanced
can effectively capture abnormal connections between different
 structure estimation module (right channel), and the curvaturecommunities [31], aligning well with the anomaly characterbased mixture estimation module (middle channel). These
istics for anomaly detection. Hence, curvature can serve as a
 three channels distinguish anomalies from attribute, structural,
potential indicator for anomaly detection.
 and mixed perspectives. Moreover, a mutual distillation strat-
 To demonstrate its effectiveness, we visualize the normalegy is proposed to promote communication and collaboration
ized curvature distributions of normal-normal and normalbetween the three channels. We note that the three chanabnormal pairs on the CiteSeer dataset. As depicted in Fig. 2,
 nels are sequentially optimized (attribute→structure→mixture)
it is evident that normal-normal pairs tend to exhibit higher
 such that they will not interfere with each other and thus the
curvature values, primarily concentrated between 0.4 and 0.8.
 “tug-of-war” dilemma is circumvented. This sequential opti-
Conversely, normal-abnormal pairs exhibit lower curvatures,
 mization allows each module to focus on learning the optimal
with the majority falling between 0.27 and 0.4. This observaparameters for its specific task (i.e., detecting a particular type
tion supports the utilization of graph curvature as an effective
 of anomaly), effectively avoiding interference from other tasks.
metric for distinguishing anomalous nodes.
 Before the model training, the structure module is pretrained
 III. M ETHODOLOGY for mutual distillation.
 The multiscale attribute estimation module takes the graph
 We begin by providing an overview of TripleAD and with masked attributes as input and produces the reconstructed
subsequently present the details of the three channels designed attributes. To capture both global (long-range interactions) and
for detecting attribute, structural, and mixed anomalies. At last, local information without the over-smoothing problem, this
we illustrate the processes of interchannel mutual distillation module generates multiple augmented views based on different
and model training. feature propagation scales. Then, the augmented views are
 embedded into representations using the encoder network. At
A. Overview of the TripleAD Model last, these representations are combined with the attention
 We propose a mutual distillation-based TripleAD framework mechanism and fed into the decoder to reconstruct the node
to address the interference problem between the detection attributes.
16664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 The link-enhanced structure estimation module takes the introduce additional training burdens that hamper the model
graph with masked structure as input and produces the recon- training efficacy [32], [33]. To this end, we design a multiscale
structed structure. To enable information propagation on the attribute estimation module that can capture complex and rich
target node which is isolated after masking its edges, this node interactions without suffering the over-smoothing issue.
module first connects nodes sharing similar semantics to Unlike conventional GNNs, our module involves propagating
generate an enhanced graph. Then, the original and enhanced features through multiple scales and using an attention mechgraphs are fed into the graph diffusion-based propagation and anism to combine the extracted information. Based on the
MLP-based transformation to compute node representations. different attention scores for each-hop neighbor, our module
Also, the consistency loss between these two graphs is applied can capture attribute information from different-hop neighbors
to enhance the model performance. At last, the representations to estimate the masked node attributes.
are combined and fed into the decoder to reconstruct the To capture the attribute information of the L-hop neighbors,
structure. we perform feature propagation with different scales to gener-
 The curvature-based mixture estimation module takes a ate L feature matrices {X̄(l) }l=1
 L
 . Each is generated as follows:
graph with the attribute-mixed curvature as input and produces
 X̄(l) = (1 − α)ĀX(l−1) + αX (3)
the reconstructed attribute-mixed curvature. To efficiently capture both attribute and structure information, this module where α is a restart probability and X(0) = X is the attribute
introduces the attribute-mixed curvature to reflect both the matrix. Ā = D̃−(1/2) ÃD̃−(1/2) is the normalized adjacency
strength of the structural connection and the attribute similarity matrix, where Ã = A + I and D̃ is P the diagonal matrix of Ã
degree. Furthermore, this module reconstructs the attribute- with the diagonal element as D̃i,i = j Ãi, j . Here, the masked
mixed curvature to identify mixed anomalies. attributes of the target node are initiated as the average of
 The mutual distillation scheme connects three its neighboring node attributes. Subsequently, we obtain the
channels—the attribute-, structure-, and curvature-based augmented feature matrix X̄(l) by an encoder network
mixture modules—to further boost their performance.
 Z(l) = ReLU X̄(l) W1
 
This scheme employs the triplet distillation loss based on (4)
aligning intermediate representations between three channels, where Z(l) ∈ RN×h is the representation of N nodes in the
prompting one to help the other for final anomaly detection. lth scale and W1 is a learnable parameter matrix shared for
The attribute estimation module is promoted by regarding the encoding of the feature matrix. Here, {Z(l) }l=1 is learned
itself as the student and the structure module as the teacher. from a local view to capture the attribute information from
 L
Then, the structure module is advocated by swapping their neighboring nodes, while {Z(l) }l=2 is learned from a set of
roles. Finally, the curvature-based mixture module is advanced high-order views to capture augmented attribute information of
by regarding the other two modules as the teachers. Hence, l-hop distant nodes.
the anomalies are determined by combining the attribute and Through multiscale feature propagation, we now have L
structure detection results. feature representations {Z(l) }l=1L
 from {X̄(l) }l=1
 L
 . Considering the
 difference between different hop nodes, we utilize the attention
B. Multiscale Attribute Estimation mechanism to learn the representation importance
 An attribute-anomalous node typically exhibits a normal
 α(1) , . . . , α(L) = Attention Z(1) , . . . , Z(L)
  
 (5)
neighboring topology but has abnormal attributes [13]. Therefore, for a target node, we propose to mask its attributes where α(l) ∈ RN×1 is the attention values of Z(l) . Furthermore,
and utilize its neighbors’ attributes and topology to estimate for a target node vi with the l-top feature representation
(reconstruct) the target node’s masked attributes. The attribute z(l)
 i ∈R
 1×h
 (i.e., the ith row of Z(l) ), we compute its attention
anomalies are then identified based on the reconstruction error. scores as follows:
 Similar to reconstruction-based methods [5], [15], we  
 ω(l)
 i = q T
 · tanh W Z (l)T
 z i + W X
 xi (6)
consider nodes with a bigger reconstruction error as
anomalies—the rationale behind this assumption is that the 0 0
 where WZ ∈ Rh ×h and WX ∈ Rh ×d are the weight matrices, xi
model is better at memorizing the characteristics of the major- 0
 represents the attribute vector of the target node, and q ∈ Rh ×1
ity normal node. Hence, we need to accurately reconstruct the is the shared attention vector. The final attention weight of the
attributes for normal nodes, but not for anomalies. Following target node vi is obtained by normalizing the attention values
this idea, global information (i.e., long-range node interac- ω(l)
 i with Softmax function as follows:
tions) is highly desired for effective attribute reconstruction.
  X
The reason is that the number of normal nodes is much larger
    
 α(l)
 i = softmax ω (l)
 i = exp ω (l)
 i exp ω(l)
 i . (7)
than the number of anomalies. Considering long-range node l
interactions means that more normal nodes are taken into
account for the attribute estimation. This can let the estimated Larger α(l)
 i implies that the target node vi tends to favor
attributes be close to the normal ones but distant from the the attribute information of the lth hop nodes. Let α(l) =
anomalies, leading to better detection results. diag([α(l)
 i ]), we have the final representation Z by combining
 However, directly stacking multiple GNN layers for learning the representations at different scales
global graph information will not only result in informa- Z=
 X
 α(l) Z(l) . (8)
tion distortion caused by the over-smoothing issue but also l
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16665

 Then, we decode the feature representation Z into node Then, we utilize two FC layers to map X̄ and X̄0 to the
attributes. Similar to the works [34], [35], we leverage a simple intermediate representations H2 and H02 , respectively. The
fully connected (FC) layer to reconstruct the attributes transformation of the masked and enhanced graphs is written
 as follows:
 X̂ = ReLU (ZW2 + b) (9)
 H1 = FC1 X̄; W3 , H2 = FC2 (H1 ; W4 )
 
 (15)
where W2 is a learnable parameter matrix and b is the corre-
 H01 = FC1 X̄0 ; W3 , H02 = FC2 H01 ; W4
  
sponding bias term. At last, we calculate the reconstruction (16)
loss by comparing the estimated attribute matrix with the where W3 and W4 are learnable parameter matrices.
unmasked one Xreal At last, we combine the representations H2 and H02 from
 Lattr = kXreal − X̂k2F . (10) both graphs to estimate the adjacency matrix Â
 Â = fd AGG H2 , H02
 
 (17)
C. Link-Enhanced Structure Estimation
 where fd (·) is the reconstruction function that estimates the
 Structural anomalies generally have abnormal connections
 adjacency matrix by performing similarity or the inner prodwith other nodes while possessing normal attributes [13].
 uct between node representations and AGG(·) denotes the
Therefore, for a target node, we mask its links (edges) and
 aggregation function such as concatenation. We minimize the
assume its attributes are known while the edges are unknown.
 reconstruction error Ladj of the estimated adjacency matrix
Then, we estimate (reconstruct) its structure and further diswith the realistic one
criminate structure anomalies based on the reconstruction
errors of node links. Notably, when we reconstruct node Ladj = kAreal − Âk2F . (18)
structure, the parameters of the attribute channel are frozen
 However, this reconstruction objective has a notable limsuch that the training of the structure estimation module is
 itation. Since the masked and link-enhanced graphs share
not interfered with by the attribute reconstruction.
 model parameters, the learned node representations (especially
 In the masked graph, the target node becomes isolated after
 for the isolated nodes) may be significantly different due to
link masking. During training, the isolated nodes cannot obtain
 the difference in the input structure. Hence, we introduce
knowledge from their neighboring nodes, which may weaken
 a consistency alignment loss, which promotes the semantic
detection performance [36]. To address this issue, we connect
 consistency between the two graphs
nodes sharing similar attribute semantics to generate a linkenhanced graph, which allows information propagation to the Lcons = kH1 − H01 k2F . (19)
isolated nodes. Both the original graph and the proposed linkenhanced graph are used to enhance the node representation This loss encourages the consistency between the original
learning. The learned representations can effectively capture view and link-enhanced view, helping the model extract more
the neighboring information and enhance structure estimation. relevant information w.r.t. the isolated nodes.
 In particular, we employ the k-nearest neighbor (kNN) graph During training, we combine the two losses as the overall
as the link-enhanced graph, where the isolated node is linked objective of the structure estimation, with γ a weighting
to semantic-similar nodes. In the link-enhanced graph, each coefficient
isolated node has at least k neighbors. The kNN graph A0 is Lstr = Ladj + γLcons . (20)
constructed by using the propagated feature X̄
 ( D. Curvature-Based Mixture Estimation
 1, vt ∈ S X̄i , k or vi ∈ S X̄t , k
  
 Ati =
 0
 (11) Mixed anomalies display characteristics that are anomalous
 0, otherwise w.r.t. both attributes and structure in a mixed manner [12],
where S(X̄t , k) is the set of k nodes with the highest similarity [14]. To distinguish mixed anomalies, we design a new indito X̄t . Here, the propagated feature X̄ is computed based on cator, termed attribute-mixed curvature, to reflect the mixed
the masked graph using graph diffusion propagation [see (14)]. nature of attributes and structure, and then we reconstruct this
 Having the link-enhanced graph, we utilize graph diffusion indicator and discriminate mixed anomalies according to the
followed by transformation to compute the node representa- reconstruction error.
tions via two steps: graph-based diffusion propagation and The rationale behind this new indicator for detecting mixed
FC-based transformation. Assuming Ā and Ā0 denote the anomalies is due to the following reasons.
normalized adjacency matrices of the masked and enhanced 1) Graph curvature is indicative of significant disparities
graphs, respectively, graph diffusion propagation for both between normal nodes and anomalies. It quantifies the
graphs can be expressed as follows: interaction or strength of the overlap between pairs of
 connected nodes [28], [29], [30]. As confirmed in [31],
 X(t+1) = (1 − β)ĀX(t) + βX (12) node pairs with the same category tend to exhibit higher
 X 0(t+1)
 = (1 − β)Ā X + βX
 0 (t)
 (13) curvature values, attributing to a greater number of
 shared neighbors, whereas node pairs with different catwhere X = X and β ∈ (0,1] is a restart probability. After T
 (0)
 egories display lower curvature values. In the context of
iterations, we have propagated feature matrices
 anomaly detection, given that neighbors of both normal
 X̄ = X(T ) , X̄0 = X0(T ) . (14) and abnormal nodes are predominantly normal (owing
16666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 to the higher prevalence of normal nodes), abnormal representations. Here, the lth layer representation is obtained
 nodes tend to have lower curvature values due to less by the forward encoding process
 overlap with their neighbors (referring to Section II-B
 c = σ LHc
 (l−1)
 H(l) W(l−1)
 
 for empirical analysis). Therefore, measuring curvature (24)
 allows for the differentiation of abnormal nodes. where σ(·) is a nonlinear activation function, H(0) = X,
 c
 2) Incorporating node attributes into the curvature calcu- and W(l−1) denotes the lth learnable parameter matrix. L
 lation can strengthen its effectiveness in distinguishing refers to the symmetrically normalized Laplacian matrix L =
 mixed anomalies. We incorporate the attribute sim- D̃−1/2 CD̃−1/2 , where D̃c is the degree matrix of C. The
 c c
 ilarity degree into the curvature. Node pairs with attribute-mixed curvature is reconstructed by the obtained
 higher attribute similarity are assigned greater curvature representation
 values—this assignment is relatively higher for normal 
 (L) T
 
 nodes and lower for abnormal nodes since normal nodes Ĉ = f H(L)
 c · Hc (25)
 tend to have higher similarity with their neighbors, where f (·) denotes the FC layers for reconstructing attributewhich are dominated by normal nodes, while anomalous mixed curvature. At last, we compute the reconstruction error
 nodes have lower similarity. Consequently, this con- by comparing the reconstructed curvature and the original one
 sideration decreases the curvature values of anomalies,
 facilitating their detection. Lmix = kC − Ĉk2F . (26)
 1) Computing Attribute-Mixed Curvature: We compute the
attribute-mixed curvature κ(i, j) for node pair (vi , v j ) as fol- E. Mutual Distillation and Model Optimization
lows:
 Now we have the three channels, that is, the attribute,
 κ(i, j) = 1 − W m̂i( j) , m̂ j(i) /d(i, j)
  
 (21)
 structure, and mixture estimation modules. These modules
where d(, ) is the graph distance between vi and v j and are highly correlated and complementary as they try to learn
W(, ) refers to the Wasserstein distance between the two the representations of the same node from different aspects.
distributions. m̂i( j) is defined as a probability distribution Correspondingly, one module can be boosted by receiving
vector of node vi to v j . When calculating m̂i( j) , instead of knowledge from another module. Hence, we argue that a
considering all the neighbors equally, we divide the neighbors teacher-student distillation is beneficial for knowledge transferinto two groups—common and uncommon neighbors—and ring between different modules. However, general distillation
use different strategies for them methods focus on minimizing the difference between the
 teacher and the student [38], [39]. However, our multichannel
 δ, if x = i
 8
 ˆ method requires learning node representations that belong to
 0
 ˆ
 S the same category but also with some differences. Inspired
  
 1
 ˆ
 ij
 ˆ
 < 1 − δ + |N ∩ N | k , if x ∈ Ni ∩ N j
 ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ
 i j
 by [40], [41], we propose to employ the triplet loss of
 m̂i( j) [x] =  S0i j
  (22) metric learning to embed the knowledge of the teacher in
 1
 − δ − , ∈ N − N
 ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ 1 if x i j the output space of the student and simultaneously clarify
 ˆ
 ˆ |Ni − N j | k
 ˆ
 ˆ
 : the difference between their outputs. This scheme enables the
 0, otherwise triple channels to mutually enhance each other to improve the
where x = 1, . . . , N is the index of the distribution vector m̂i( j) , overall detection performance.
δ ∈ [0, 1] is a coefficient, and Ni ∩ N j represents the common Specifically, to enhance the attribute estimation module, we
neighbor set of vi and v j , while Ni −N j refers to the difference consider it as the student and the structure module as the
between the neighbor sets of vi and v j . S0i j = Si j /(1 − δ) is the teacher. Then, we select an anchor sample xa , a positive x p ,
normalized attribute similarity between vi and v j . and a negative xn to form a triplet (xa , x p , xn ). Here, anchor
 xa and positive x p are the representations of the same node
 2) Updating Adjacent Matrix: Furthermore, we normalize
 from the student and the teacher, respectively, and negative
the curvature values from 0 to 1 using a monotonically
 xn is a randomly selected sample that differs from the node
increasing sigmoid function: κ0 (i, j) = 1/(1+exp(−κ(i, j)). The
 of xa . Based on this triplet, the mutual distillation scheme
normalized curvature values are adopted to update the adjacent
 learns representations such that the anchor-to-positive distance
matrix for reconstruction. The original adjacent matrix Ai j is
 is relatively closer than that of the anchor-to-negative. As a
updated to Ci j
 result, this objective can encourage the representations of the
 8
 if i = j same node from both modules to be close but also keep some
 <1,
 ˆ
 differences, meeting the requirement of the two modules with
 Ci j = κ0 (i, j), if Ai j = 1 (23)
 ˆ different goals and distilling knowledge from one module to
 0, otherwise.
 :
 enhance another.
 3) Reconstructing Attribute-Mixed Curvature: Based on the The triplet distillation loss Ldattr is defined as follows:
updated adjacent matrix and the attribute matrix, we use the
 
 2
 X
 Ldattr =
 
 max 0, t x p − s (xa ) 2
GCN [37] as the encoder to embed nodes into representations
 (a,p,n)∈Ω
for reconstructing the attribute-mixed curvature values. Specif-
 − kt (xn ) − s (xa )k22 + m
 
ically, multiple GCN layers are adopted to aggregate node (27)
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16667

where t(·) and s(·) denote outputs of the teacher and the TABLE I
student, respectively, and m is a hyperparameter that defines D ESCRIPTIVE S TATISTICS OF DATASETS
how far away the dissimilarities should be. Ω is an index set
representing each corresponding anchor, positive, and negative. Since we are training the student model, the weight of
the teacher model is frozen.
 For the attribute module, the final training objective is the
combination of the reconstruction loss and the distillation loss

 attr = η1 Lattr + η2 Lattr
 Lfin d
 (28)
 TABLE II
where η1 and η2 are the balancing hyperparameters. H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH S PACE
 Likewise, to boost the link-enhanced structure estimation,
we swap the roles of the two modules, that is, the attribute
module as the teacher and the structure module as the student. The distillation loss for the structure estimation module,
denoted as Ldstr , is derived similar to (27). Consequently, the
final training objective for the structure estimation module is
the combination of the reconstruction loss and the distillation
loss
 str = η1 Lstr + η2 Lstr .
 Lfin d
 (29)
 IV. E XPERIMENT
 Lastly, to advocate the curvature module, we consider both In this section, we carry out performance evaluations to
attribute and structure modules as the teachers to guide the demonstrate the efficacy of TripleAD for graph anomaly
reconstruction of the attribute-mixed curvatures. Similar to detection, as well as the ablation study and sensitivity analysis.
(27), the distillation losses, Lattr str
 mix and Lmix , are obtained when
regarding the attribute and structure modules as the teachers,
respectively. The final distillation loss for the curvature-based A. Experimental Settings
mixture estimation module is 1) Datasets: We conduct experiments on two types of
 datasets, whose details are shown in Table I. We split the
 mix = η1 Lmix + η2 Lmix + Lmix .
 Lfin attr str
 
 (30) datasets into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of
 6:2:2, and hyperparameters are tuned based on the validation
 set.
F. Anomaly Scores
 1) Ground-Truth Anomaly Graphs: Amazon [5] is a co-
 Similar to existing works [17], [42], we distinguish anoma- purchase network and YelpChi [43] is a transaction
lies from normal ones according to the reconstruction error, network, both of which have ground-truth labels of the
that is, the larger the reconstruction error, the more likely anomalies and contain the three types of anomalies.
the objects are anomalies. This is because the anomalies 2) Injected Anomaly Graphs: CiteSeer [13] and ACM
fail to conform to the patterns of the majority and hence [44] are two citation networks, and Flickr [15] is a
cannot be accurately reconstructed. For a given node vi , we social network, with injected anomaly labels. Attribute,
compute its attribute, structure, and attribute-mixed curvature structural, and mixed anomalies are injected into
reconstruction errors as follows: these three datasets using injection ways of previous
 ASattr (vi ) = Xi − X̂i
 2
 (31) studies [13], [15].
 2 2) Baselines: We compare our model TripleAD with vari-
 AS (vi ) = Ai − Âi
 str
 (32) ous baselines from three major categories.
 2
 AS mix
 (vi ) = C0i − Ĉ0i (33) 1) Traditional Methods: AMEN [45], Radar [11], and
 ANOMALOUS [46] employ shallow traditional techwhere C0i and Ĉ0i , respectively, denote the original and recon- niques to implement anomaly detection.
structed node attribute-mixed curvatures, which are computed 2) Reconstruction-Based Approaches: DOMINANT [15],
by averaging the attribute-mixed curvatures (i.e., Ci j and Ĉi j ) AnomalyDAE [47], ALARM [17], ComGA [5], ADAof node pairs involving this node. GAD [48], and GAD-NR [49] perform anomaly detec-
 After combining these three types of reconstruction errors, tion via the autoencoder-based reconstruction technique.
the final anomaly score of node vi is calculated as follows: 3) Contrast-Based Methods: CoLA [13], Sub-CR [19],
 GRADATE [20], and FedCAD [50] conduct anomaly
 AS(vi ) = λ1 · ASattr (vi ) + λ2 · ASstr (vi ) + λ3 · ASmix (vi ) (34)
 detection through contrastive learning.
where λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are three balance hyperparameters. The 3) Experimental Setup: We sequentially optimize attribute,
anomalous nodes are distinguished by the anomaly scores, that structure, and mixture estimation modules, which prevents
is, nodes with higher scores are more likely to be anomalies. interference between the loss functions of the three modules
16668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN T RIPLE AD AND BASELINES ON THE F IVE DATASETS

and ensures that each module learns effectively. For all experiments, we use grid search to find the optimal hyperparameters,
such as the learning rate and number of epochs. The grid
search range for these parameters is shown in Table II.
Note that for the YelpChi dataset, we utilize sparse matrices
instead of dense matrices whenever possible to mitigate outof-memory issues. For other baselines, we retain the settings
described in the corresponding papers to report optimized Fig. 4. Performance with different components.
results.

 Third, the contrast-based methods (e.g., GRADATE and
B. Anomaly Detection Results
 FedCAD) exhibit remarkable performance. These approaches,
 We report the anomaly detection results of TripleAD and the in particular, leverage the unsupervised contrastive learning
baselines in Table III. We use widely used anomaly detection and achieve excellent detection performances. However, a
metrics including the AUC-ROC (AROC) curve, AUC-PR notable limitation of these methods is their reliance on a
(APR) curve, and Macro F1 score (F1). Specifically, we have singular model for detecting both attribute and structural
the following observations. anomalies, which may result in modality interference. In
 First, the TripleAD model demonstrates superior detec- contrast, TripleAD outperforms these methods in nontrivial
tion performance across all evaluated datasets, outperforming margins, validating our motivation for adopting a triplethe baseline models in every metric. This improvement is channel strategy to alleviate the interference between attribute
attributed to our model’s unique approach of learning three anomaly detection and structure anomaly detection. In addidistinct representations, enhanced through a mutual distillation tion, we calculate the runtime of our model, showing that its
scheme. This strategy effectively mitigates the challenges asso- speed is competitive with existing methods and is well-suited
ciated with the interference between attributes and structure for large-scale datasets.
while specifically addressing the detection of mixed anomalies.
 Second, the reconstruction-based methods (e.g., ADA-GAD
and GAD-NR) show good performance compared to the C. Ablation Study
traditional methods. This indicates their effectiveness in cap- We ablate four important components in TripleAD by
turing anomalous patterns from high-dimensional attributes removing one of them from the entire model: 1) in TripleADand complex structures. However, our method significantly Attr, we remove the multiscale attribute estimation module;
outperforms them by employing the triple-channel strategy. 2) in TripleAD-Struct, we remove the link-enhanced struc-
Note that AnomalyDAE, which adopts two modules to com- ture estimation module; 3) in TripleAD-Mix, we remove
pute attribute and structural representations, displays inferior the curvature-based mixture estimation module; and 4) in
performance compared to our model. The main reason is that TripleAD-MD, we remove the mutual distillation scheme.
it fails to mitigate the interference, as it concatenates both As shown in Fig. 4, removing any of the three estimation
representations to simultaneously identify different anomalies modules (i.e., TripleAD-Attr, TripleAD-Struct, or TripleADin the same way. Mix) results in performance degradation, which indicates that
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16669

Fig. 5. F1-scores using the unified scheme and separate scheme.
 Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis for k and γ (AUC).

 further investigated the performance of models trained on one
 type of anomaly (e.g., attribute anomalies) when applied to
 detect another type of anomaly (e.g., structural anomalies).
 The results indicate that the detection performance in such
 cases is suboptimal. These highlight that the unified scheme is
 susceptible to mutual interference, leading to degraded perfor-
Fig. 6. Example of the necessity for mitigating the interference between mance. In contrast, the separate scheme effectively mitigates
attribute and structural anomalies. (a) Structure anomaly degree is diluted due the “tug-of-war” dilemma, improving overall performance.
to the interference of normal attributes. (b) Structure anomaly degree is more
prominent without attribute interference.
 E. Sensitivity Analysis
 1) Neighbor Number k and Weighting Coefficient γ: Here,
these modules are beneficial for accurately detecting anomawe alter the selected neighbor number k [see (11)] and
lies in graphs. Besides, the variant TripleAD-MD does not
 weighting coefficient γ [see (20)] and report their influences
perform the mutual distillation and ignores the knowledge
 on performance for all the datasets in Fig. 7. Our observations
transfer between the three modules. Lacking guidance from
 yield the following insights: 1) too large or too small values
the structure (resp. attribute) estimation module, the attribute
 of k generally undermine performance. Since k determines the
(resp. structure) module generates suboptimal intermediate
 degree of neighboring nodes connected to the target node,
representations, leading to decreased performance. The same
 a small k can hinder the model from capturing complex
explanation applies to the mixture module. Notably, TripleAD
 information in the graph, and a large k might introduce noises
consistently surpasses all its variants, underlining the efficacy
 into the learning process; and 2) it can be observed that
of our designed attribute, structure, and mixture modules in
 when the value of γ is excessively high, the proportion of the
conjunction with the mutual distillation scheme.
 alignment loss significantly surpasses that of the reconstruction
 loss, leading to a decline in anomaly detection performance.
D. Unified Versus Separate This is because, while the model aligns the intermediate
 To evaluate the effectiveness of our three-channel solution representations of the two graphs, it loses its ability to conduct
in mitigating the “tug-of-war” problem, we compare the detec- effective structural estimation based on the reconstruction loss.
tion performance of a unified model versus separate models. 2) Balancing Parameters η1 and η2 : We here discuss the
Specifically, we assess both approaches using two representa- parameters η1 and η2 in the loss function [(28)–(30)]. As
tive baselines: the reconstruction-based DOMINANT [15] and shown in Fig. 8, for a given η1 , setting η2 to 0 results in the
the contrast-based CoLA [13], along with the curvature-based worst performance across all datasets. This observation highmixture estimation module in our model. Under the unified lights the importance of our designed distillation loss. Setting
scheme, the model is trained and evaluated on both attribute a higher value of η1 generally improves the performance. Conand structural anomalies. Under the separate scheme, each versely, an excessively large value of η2 is counterproductive,
model is trained and evaluated first on attribute anomalies and emphasizing too much on the distillation loss will obscure
then on structural anomalies. the difference between these three modules and make the
 Fig. 5 reports the F1 scores of the three methods across five corresponding reconstruction an extremely challenging task.
datasets. Notably, the separate scheme consistently surpasses 3) Triplet Loss Parameter m: We experiment with the
the unified scheme, particularly in datasets with explicitly parameter m in the triplet loss [see (27)] to determine suitable
labeled attribute and structural anomalies (CiteSeer, ACM, and distances for anchor-positive and anchor-negative pairs in the
Flickr). In addition, we illustrate the impact of each scheme on triplet loss during training. For the five datasets we employed,
anomaly degrees in Fig. 6. These results are computed using we maintained consistent parameter settings while varying the
DOMINANT on the CiteSeer dataset. When using the unified values of m. We report the values of the AROC curve on the
model to identify both types of anomalies, the structural five datasets in Fig. 9. As shown, a lower value of m leads to
anomaly degree is decreased due to the influences of normal a poor detection performance. The reason behind this is that a
attributes [see Fig. 6(a)]. Conversely, the structural anomaly lower value will force the teacher and student estimation moddegree is significantly increased when using the separate ules to be more consistent, which diminishes the advantages of
model to distinguish structural anomalies [see Fig. 6(b)]. We our triple-channel strategy. On the other hand, a larger value of
16670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Effects of balancing parameters η1 and η2 on the five datasets in terms of AUC.

 2) Challenges for Applying It to Graph Learning: Despite
 its success, the divide-and-conquer strategy, including the
 MOE algorithm, has been rarely explored in the domain of
 graph learning. The main challenges can be attributed to
 the following two aspects: 1) the focus of graph learning is
 to aggregate node attributes along with graph topology for
 obtaining node representations [4], [53]; on the other hand,
 the divide-and-conquer strategy divides the model or data into
 different parts, conflicting with the idea of graph learning;
 and 2) dividing graph data into different subgraphs may lead
Fig. 9. Hyperparameter m w.r.t. AUC. to information loss, disrupted graph topology, and decreased
 graph learning performance [54].
 3) Divide-and-Conquer on Graph Anomaly Detection: To
m does not necessarily lead to better performance. This means the best of our knowledge, the divide-and-conquer strategy has
that the appropriate difference between the teacher and student not been explored for graph learning. However, we found that
estimation modules is required to achieve optimal detection it is feasible to apply this strategy to graph anomaly detection:
results. the anomalies can be grouped into three types: attribute,
 structural, and mixed anomalies [13], [14]. Then, the detection
 of these three types of anomalies can be handled separately.
 V. D ISCUSSION
 Hence, we introduce the divide-and-conquer strategy into our
A. Divide-and-Conquer Strategy designed framework and decompose the detection tasks into
 three distinct channels. Each channel is designed to detect a
 Our proposed model is inspired by the divide-and-conquer specific type of anomalies and a mutual distillation module is
strategy, which has a wide range of applications in natural proposed to encourage knowledge transfer among channels.
language processing (NLP) [22], [51] and computer vision
[25], [26]. Nevertheless, this strategy is rarely applied to
graph learning. We first discuss the existing applications of the B. Relation to GNNs
divide-and-conquer strategy and the limitations of this strategy
when applied to graph learning. At last, we discuss its potential We now discuss the relation of our proposed multiscale
for graph anomaly detection. feature propagation in the attribute estimation module to the
 1) Existing Applications of Divide and Conquer: The iterative propagation in conventional GNNs.
divide-and-conquer approach is a foundational strategy in 1) Iterative Propagation in Conventional GNNs: As illuscomputational algorithms. It aims to divide the input space trated in Fig. 10(a), given the adjacency matrix A and
into several parts and construct different modules for each part. corresponding feature matrix X, the conventional GNNs com-
These modules are then combined into a unified model [52]. pute intermediate representations by iteratively performing
This strategy not only simplifies complex problems but also propagation/aggregation and transformation
enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of the solutions. It
 Z(l) = GNN(l) A, Z(l−1)
 
has been widely adopted in various fields, including NLP and
 = σ ĀZ(l−1) W(l)
 
visual learning. For NLP, researchers primarily integrate the (35)
mixture-of-experts (MoEs)—which is based on the divide-andconquer strategy—for building models such as large language where l ∈ [1, L], Z(0) = X, Z = ZL represents the final
models (LLMs) [22], [51]. They decompose the language learned intermediate representation from the GNNs, σ(·) is a
model into several functions, where each “expert” learns on nonlinear activation function, such as ReLU, and W(l) denotes
a different input space, effectively enhancing the performance the learnable matrix of each GNN(l) layer.
of downstream tasks. For vision learning, the image is parsed 2) Multiscale Feature Propagation: From Fig. 10(b), it
by different components, each of which is trained following a can be observed that the multiscale feature propagation perdivide-and-conquer learning principle [25], [26]. forms propagation at different scales, generating L propagation
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16671

 is O(Nhd). In the mixture module, the predominant computational cost arises from defining the probability distribution
 of nodes and computing the attribute-mixed curvatures, and
 their respective time complexities are O(N 2 d) and O(|E|N 2 ),
 respectively, where |E| is the number of edges.

 VI. R ELATED W ORKS
 A. Graph Anomaly Detection
 Initial efforts in graph anomaly detection utilized shallow
 techniques to identify anomalous patterns. These approaches
 include ego-graph [45], residual analysis [11], CUR decom-
Fig. 10. Relation of the iterative propagation in GNNs and the multiscale position [46], and clustering methods [55]. However, these
feature propagation in the proposed module. (a) Iteration propagation. (b) Mul- methods suffer from issues such as network sparsity and
tiscale feature propagation. data nonlinearity, which limit their ability to capture complex
 interrelations among nodes in graphs. Due to the advancements
matrices {X̄(l) }l=1
 L
 . Each matrix X(l) aggregates features from a of deep graph learning [56], [57], [58], many deep models
one-hop neighbors have been proposed and achieved considerable success. Some
 of these models leverage labeled data as supervision signals
 X̄(l) = (1 − α)ĀX(l−1) + αX (36) to identify anomalies [59], [60], [61]. However, due to the
 difficulty of collecting anomalous labels, a greater emphasis
where l ∈ [1, L], X0 = X, α ∈ (0,1] is the restart probability, has been placed on unsupervised approaches, which fall into
and Ā is the normalized adjacency matrix. Then, the prop- two groups: reconstruction-based and contrast-based methods.
agation matrices {X̄(l) }l=1
 L
 are encoded by a parameter-shared The reconstruction-based approaches focus on reconstructencoder to obtain L intermediate representations ing node attributes and structure and utilizing the recon-
 Z(l) = σ X̄(l) W
 
 (37) struction errors to identify anomalous nodes [15], [48]. For
 example, DOMINANT [15] employs an autoencoder framewhere W is the learnable matrix whose parameters are work to learn node representations through the reconstruction
shared with the encoder. Then, the intermediate representations of both attribute and structural information. Based on this
{Z(l) }l=1
 L
 are combined to generate the final representation Z by framework, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) and deep
sum operation weighted by the attention score α(l) attention mechanisms have been introduced for graph anomaly
 X detection [16], [62]. Furthermore, ComGA [5] exploits graph
 Z= α(l) Z(l) . (38) community structure and AnomMAN [63] learns diverse data
 Compared to the iterative propagation in traditional GNNs, distributions from multiple perspectives for reconstruction.
the multiscale feature propagation we designed broadens the Moreover, AnomalyDAE [47] learns two separate represenscope of feature propagation while decreasing its depth. While, tations for attribute and structure and combine the learned
unlike traditional GNNs where multiple iterations are required, representations to enhance reconstruction.
our model performs each step only once and therefore, reduc- The contrast-based methods, on the other hand, learn nodeing the parameters introduced by multiple GNN layers. It not level and subgraph-level representations and then adopt level
only increases the efficiency of model training but also avoids agreements to detect anomalies [64], [65]. For example, CoLA
the over-smoothing issue caused by deep GNNs. [13] introduces contrastive learning to detect anomalies by
 contrasting nodes with their neighborhoods. ANEMONE [66]
 performs patch-level and context-level contrastive learning,
C. Complexity Analysis facilitating anomaly detection through statistical analyses of
 The primary computational overheads of TripleAD lie are contrastive scores. Sub-CR [19] conducts intra-view and interin three aspects: the multiscale attribute, the link-enhanced view contrastive learning and then integrates both modules
structure, and the curvature-based mixture estimation modules. based on attribute reconstruction. GRADATE [20] constructs
The time complexity of the propagation in the attribute module a multiview contrastive network that includes node-subgraph,
is O(NLd), where N is the number of nodes, L is the number node-node, and subgraph-subgraph comparisons, combining
of propagation scales, and d is the representation dimension. diverse anomaly information to compute node anomaly scores.
During the training of attribute estimation, the combination The differences between existing unsupervised anomaly
of L representations through the attention mechanism incurs a detection methods and our TripleAD are summarized in
complexity of O(L2 hd), where h is the dimension of Z(l) . In Table IV. Existing deep learning models do not adequately
the structure module, the complexities of the preprocessing for resolve the interference (or “tug-of-war”) between attribute
the masked graph and the enhanced graph are O(NT d) and and structural representation learning. Note that AnomalyDAE
O(NkT d), respectively, where k is the number of neighbors [47] tries to learn attribute and structural representations in
in the kNN graph and T is the number of iterations. In the different channels. However, they concatenate the distinct reptraining of structure estimation, the time complexity per epoch resentations to simultaneously detect both types of anomalies,
16672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

 TABLE IV three different but collaborated representations for detecting
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORKS attribute, structural, and mixed anomalies, respectively. In
 terms of the attribute channel, we designed a multiscale
 attribute estimation module, which explores multiple augmented views based on different feature propagation scales
 to alleviate the over-smoothing issue in traditional GNNs
 and advocate attribute anomaly detection. In terms of the
 [55] structure channel, we devised a structure estimation module
 that generates a link-enhanced graph to promote information
 sharing to the isolated nodes and boost structure anomaly
 detection. In terms of the mixture channel, we presented a
 curvature-based mixture estimation module, which introduces
 a new attribute-mixed curvature to reflect the attribute and
 structure information for mixed anomaly detection. Besides,
 we proposed a mutual distillation strategy that employs a
 teacher-student distillation to exchange knowledge from the
 three channels and refine learned node representations. Extensive experiments demonstrated that the proposed TripleAD
 can alleviate the mutual interference problem and improve
 anomaly detection performance.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] Y. Liu et al., “Generalized video anomaly event detection: Systematic
 taxonomy and comparison of deep models,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
 vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1–38, Jul. 2024.
 [2] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis:
 Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
which cannot avoid the interference between attribute and Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
structure anomaly detection. [3] J. Ma et al., “Fighting against organized fraudsters using risk diffusionbased parallel graph neural network,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
B. Graph Imputation Intell., Aug. 2023, pp. 6138–6146.
 [4] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
 Our model masks a part of attributes or edges and then comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
estimates the masked values, aligning closely with graph impu- Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
tation. There are two main graph imputation tasks: attribute [5] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Feb.
imputation and structural imputation. Attribute imputation 2022, pp. 657–665.
focuses on recovering missing attributes within graphs [67]. In [6] B. Branco, P. Abreu, A. S. Gomes, M. S. C. Almeida, J. T. Ascensão,
this aspect, SAT [68] introduces a feature-structure distribu- and P. Bizarro, “Interleaved sequence RNNs for fraud detection,” in
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
tion matching mechanism for attribute imputation. HGNN-AC Aug. 2020, pp. 3101–3109.
[69] employs topological embeddings to improve attribute [7] V.-H. Nguyen, K. Sugiyama, P. Nakov, and M.-Y. Kan, “FANG: Levercompletion. ITR [70] utilizes structural information for initial aging social context for fake news detection using graph representation,”
 in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2020,
imputation, subsequently refining the imputed latent variables pp. 1165–1174.
using existing attribute and structural information. Addition- [8] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
ally, GNN-based autoencoder and Gaussian mixture model “NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
 in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
have been introduced to fill missing attributes [71], [72], [73]. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 2672–2681.
 Structural imputation (also called link prediction) aims to [9] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detecinfer missing links in a graph [74], [75]. The mainstream tion on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Jan. 2022, pp. 27021–27035.
way is to learn representations for the nodes at either end [10] C. Xiao, S. Pang, X. Xu, X. Li, G. Trajcevski, and F. Zhou,
of a potential link and then combine these representations “Counterfactual data augmentation with denoising diffusion for graph
to compute link existence probability [76]. Based on this anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 6,
 pp. 7555–7567, Dec. 2024.
idea, NBFNet [77] and LLP [78] utilize a GNN-based
 [11] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
encoder to learn node representations and then employ a detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
decoder to predict link existence. Furthermore, counterfactual 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
learning, self-supervised learning, and reinforcement learn- [12] M. Zhu and H. Zhu, “MixedAD: A scalable algorithm for detecting
 mixed anomalies in attributed graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
ing are introduced to improve link prediction performance vol. 34, Apr. 2020, pp. 1274–1281.
[79], [80], [81]. [13] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis,
 “Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-
 VII. C ONCLUSION supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
 no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
 In this article, we presented a novel mutual distillation- [14] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
based (TripleAD) framework. It can effectively relieve the with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
interference between attributes and structure by learning pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2021.
XIAO et al.: RECONCILING ATTRIBUTE AND STRUCTURAL ANOMALIES 16673

[15] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on [41] F. Boutros, N. Damer, F. Kirchbuchner, and A. Kuijper, “Self-restrained
 attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), Sep. triplet loss for accurate masked face recognition,” Pattern Recognit.,
 2019, pp. 594–602. vol. 124, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108473.
[16] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed [42] H. Tong and C.-Y. Lin, “Non-negative residual matrix factorization with
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, application to graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data
 pp. 12249–12263, Dec. 2021. Mining, Apr. 2011, pp. 143–153.
[17] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view [43] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural netframework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. works for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022. pp. 21076–21089.
[18] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative [44] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection
 and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,” on attributed networks,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul.
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233, Dec. 2020, pp. 1288–1294.
 2021. [45] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
[19] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, pp. 207–215.
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in [46] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS: A joint
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2376–2382. modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
[20] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
 learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. [47] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for
 Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 7459–7467. anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
[21] R. Hadsell, D. Rao, A. A. Rusu, and R. Pascanu, “Embracing change: Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
 Continual learning in deep neural networks,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 24, [48] J. He, Q. Xu, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, and Q. Huang, “ADA-GAD: Anomalyno. 12, pp. 1028–1040, Dec. 2020. denoised autoencoders for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI
[22] Z. Chen et al., “Octavius: Mitigating task interference in MLLMs via Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 8481–8489.
 MoE,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2023. [49] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
[23] L. Yang et al., “Graph neural networks beyond compromise between reconstruction,” in Proc. 17th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
 attribute and topology,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, Mar. 2024, pp. 576–585.
 pp. 1127–1135. [50] X. Kong et al., “Federated graph anomaly detection via contrastive
[24] X. Wang, M. Zhu, D. Bo, P. Cui, C. Shi, and J. Pei, “AM-GCN: self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early
 Adaptive multi-channel graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 26th access, Jun. 20, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3414326.
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, [51] W. Chen et al., “Lifelong language pretraining with distributionpp. 1243–1253. specialized experts,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2023,
[25] Y. Tian, O. J. Henaff, and A. Van Den Oord, “Divide and contrast: Self- pp. 5383–5395.
 supervised learning from uncurated data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. [52] Y. Pan, R. Xia, J. Yin, and N. Liu, “A divide-and-conquer method for
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 10063–10074. scalable robust multitask learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
[26] P. Wei et al., “Component divide-and-conquer for real-world image Syst., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 3163–3175, Dec. 2015.
 super-resolution,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
 [53] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell.,
 Springer, 2020, pp. 101–117.
 vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
[27] A. Gidiotis and G. Tsoumakas, “A divide-and-conquer approach to the
 [54] N. Lee, J. Lee, and C. Park, “Augmentation-free self-supervised learning
 summarization of long documents,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech,
 on graphs,” in Proc. AAAI, 2022, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 7372–7380.
 Languages Process., vol. 28, pp. 3029–3040, 2020.
 [55] N. Liu, X. Huang, and X. Hu, “Accelerated local anomaly detection
[28] Y. Ollivier, “Ricci curvature of Markov chains on metric spaces,”
 via resolving attributed networks,” in Proc. 26th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 J. Funct. Anal., vol. 256, no. 3, pp. 810–864, Feb. 2009.
 Intell., Aug. 2017, pp. 2337–2343.
[29] Z. Ye, K. S. Liu, T. Ma, J. Gao, and C. Chen, “Curvature graph network,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Apr. 2020. [56] H. Wu et al., “High-order proximity and relation analysis for cross-
[30] X. Guo, Q. Tian, W. Zhang, W. Wang, and P. Jiao, “Learning stochastic network heterogeneous node classification,” Mach. Learn., vol. 113,
 equivalence based on discrete ricci curvature,” in Proc. Thirtieth Int. no. 9, pp. 6247–6272, 2024.
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021, pp. 1456–1462. [57] Y. Mo et al., “Multiplex graph representation learning via dual cor-
[31] H. Li, J. Cao, J. Zhu, Y. Liu, Q. Zhu, and G. Wu, “Curvature graph relation reduction,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 neural network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 592, pp. 50–66, May 2022. pp. 12814–12827, Dec. 2023.
[32] D. Chen, Y. Lin, W. Li, P. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Measuring and [58] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. Aggarwal, B. Zong, H. Chen, and W. Wang, “Selfrelieving the over-smoothing problem for graph neural networks from attentive attributed network embedding through adversarial learning,” in
 the topological view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2019, pp. 758–767.
 no. 4, pp. 3438–3445. [59] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Addressing
[33] K. Ding, Y.-C. Wang, S. Yan, and H. Liu, “Eliciting structural and heterophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph
 semantic global knowledge in unsupervised graph contrastive learning,” spectrum,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 1528–1538.
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 7378–7386. [60] C. Xiao, S. Pang, W. Tai, Y. Huang, G. Trajcevski, and F. Zhou,
[34] Y. Xie, X. Zhao, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised representation learning via “Motif-consistent counterfactuals with adversarial refinement for graphlatent graph prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conferenceon Mach. Learn., Jan. level anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 2022, pp. 24460–24477. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2024, pp. 3518–3526.
[35] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual [61] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Alleviating
 graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE structural distribution shift in graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Feb. 2023, pp. 357–365.
[36] Y. Liu, K. Ding, J. Wang, V. Lee, H. Liu, and S. Pan, “Learning [62] M. Shao, Y. Lin, Q. Peng, J. Zhao, Z. Pei, and Y. Sun, “Learning graph
 strong graph neural networks with weak information,” in Proc. 29th deep autoencoder for anomaly detection in multi-attributed networks,”
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 260, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 110084.
 pp. 1559–1571. [63] L.-H. Chen et al., “AnomMAN: Detect anomalies on multi-view
[37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph attributed networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 628, pp. 1–21, May 2023.
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017. [64] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE:
[38] J. P. Gou, B. S. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. C. Tao, “Knowledge distil- Graph anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure
 lation: A survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 31, pp. 1789–1819, awareness,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12,
 Jul. 2021. pp. 18172–18185, Dec. 2024.
[39] Y. Tian, S. Pei, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, and N. V. Chawla, “Knowledge [65] J. Hu et al., “SAMCL: Subgraph-aligned multiview contrastive learning
 distillation on graphs: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 8, for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 pp. 1–16, Aug. 2025. vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1664–1676, Jan. 2025.
[40] H. Oki, M. Abe, J. Miyao, and T. Kurita, “Triplet loss for knowledge [66] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
 distillation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2020, Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
 pp. 1–7. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
16674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[67] K. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Data augmentation for deep Xovee Xu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
 graph learning: A survey,” ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newslett., vol. 24, software engineering from the University of Elecno. 2, pp. 61–77, 2022. tronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC),
[68] X. Chen, S. Chen, J. Yao, H. Zheng, Y. Zhang, and I. W. Tsang, Chengdu, China, in 2018 and 2021, respectively,
 “Learning on attribute-missing graphs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
 Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 740–757, Feb. 2022. computer science.
[69] D. Jin, C. Huo, C. Liang, and L. Yang, “Heterogeneous graph neural His research interests include social network data
 network via attribute completion,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, mining and knowledge discovery, primarily focuspp. 391–400. ing on information diffusion in networks, human
[70] W. Tu et al., “Initializing then refining: A simple graph attribute behavior understanding, and spatial-temporal data
 imputation network,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, modeling.
 pp. 3494–3500.
[71] I. Spinelli, S. Scardapane, and A. Uncini, “Missing data imputation
 with adversarially-trained graph convolutional networks,” Neural Netw.,
 vol. 129, pp. 249–260, Sep. 2020.
[72] H. Taguchi, X. Liu, and T. Murata, “Graph convolutional networks
 for graphs containing missing features,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., Fan Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 vol. 117, pp. 155–168, Apr. 2021. degree in computer science from Sichuan University,
[73] Z. Gao et al., “Handling missing data via max-entropy regularized graph Chengdu, China, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
 autoencoder,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, degrees from the University of Electronic Science
 pp. 7651–7659. and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, in
[74] Q. Tan et al., “S2GAE: Self-supervised graph autoencoders are general- 2006 and 2012, respectively.
 izable learners with graph masking,” in Proc. 16th ACM Int. Conf. Web He is currently a Professor with the School
 Search Data Mining, Feb. 2023, pp. 787–795. of Information and Software Engineering, UESTC.
[75] L. Wang et al., “Inductive and unsupervised representation learning on His research interests include machine learning,
 graph structured objects,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Apr. spatiotemporal data management, graph learning,
 2020. recommender systems, and social network data
[76] S. Yun, S. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Neo-GNNs: Neighbor- mining.
 hood overlap-aware graph neural networks for link prediction,” in Proc.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2022, pp. 13683–13694.
[77] Z. Zhu, Z. Zhang, L.-P. Xhonneux, and J. Tang, “Neural bellmanford networks: A general graph neural network framework for link
 prediction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021,
 pp. 29476–29490.
[78] Z. Guo et al., “Linkless link prediction via relational distillation,” in Tianshu Xie received the M.S. degree in computer
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2022, pp. 12012–12033. technology from the University of Electronic Sci-
[79] T. Zhao, G. Liu, D. Wang, W. Yu, and M. Jiang, “Learning from ence and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu,
 counterfactual links for link prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. China, in 2021, where he is currently pursuing the
 Learn., Jan. 2021, pp. 26911–26926. Ph.D. degree.
[80] M. Liu et al., “Self-supervised temporal graph learning with temporal His current research interests include artificial
 and structural intensity alignment,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. intelligence and computer vision.
 Syst., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 6355–6367, Apr. 2025.
[81] L. Wang et al., “Learning robust representations with graph denoising
 policy network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
 2019, pp. 1378–1383.

 Wei Lu received the bachelor’s degree in clinical
 medicine from Wenzhou Medical University, Wen-
 Chunjing Xiao received the Ph.D. degree in comzhou, China, in 2000.
 puter software and theory from the University
 He is currently a Chief Physician at Quzhou
 of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
 People’s Hospital, Quzhou, China. His research
 Chengdu, China, in 2013.
 focuses on advancing interdisciplinary medical-
 He was a Visiting Scholar with Northwestern Uniengineering integration in vascular surgery, with
 versity, Evanston, IL, USA, and University College
 an emphasis on anomaly detection in vascular
 London, London, U.K. He is currently an Associate
 pathology, data-driven clinical decision-making, and
 Professor with the School of Computer and Informatechnological innovation for optimized patient care
 tion Engineering, Henan University, Kaifeng, China.
 outcomes.
 His current research interests include anomaly detection, graph learning, and the Internet of Things.

 Lifeng Xu received the bachelor’s degree in clinical
 laboratory diagnostics from Wenzhou Medical Uni-
 Jiahui Lu received the B.E. degree from the versity, Wenzhou, China, in 2004.
 School of Computer Engineering, Shangqiu Uni- He is currently a Senior Technician at Quzhou
 versity, Shangqiu, China, in 2022. She is currently Third People’s Hospital, Quzhou, China, and also
 pursuing the M.S. degree with the School of a Professor at Zhejiang Chinese Medical Univer-
 Computer and Information Engineering, Henan Uni- sity, Hangzhou, China. His research focuses on
 versity, Kaifeng, China. microbial testing, antimicrobial resistance mecha-
 Her current research interests include anomaly nisms, integration of artificial intelligence in medical
 detection, data analytics, and social network diagnostics, anomaly detection in microbial resisdata mining. tance patterns, and intelligent healthcare system
 development.