IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 5018713

 REDAD: A Reliable Distillation for Image
 Anomaly Detection
 Wenrui Hu , Wei Yu , Yongqiang Tang , Yuan Xie , and Wensheng Zhang

 Abstract— The vanilla knowledge distillation (KD)-based
approach for image anomaly detection (AD) encounters three
main challenges: data shift, normality forgetting, and anomaly
overgeneralization. To effectively address these challenges,
we introduce REDAD, a reliable distillation strategy for AD,
which avoids intricate network designs. Initially, we incorporate
an adaptive teacher model (ATM) that dynamically adjusts
the teacher’s batch normalization (BN) statistics during the
distillation process, aligning the teacher with the target training
data distribution. Next, we introduce a normality remembering
enhancement (NRE) module, designed to compel the student to
learn the most challenging normal feature with high distillation
loss, thereby bolstering normality retention and reducing false
positives. Finally, we present a novel direction-guided regularization (DGR) technique to robustly enlarge the divergence
in abnormal feature pairs, preventing the oversight of abnor- Fig. 1. Issues in KDST-based AD. (a) General KDST method framework.
 (b) Illustration highlighting normality forgetting and overgeneralization probmal regions, or false negatives. Comprehensive experiments on lems. (c) Example of normality forgetting with a normal sample. (d) Example
the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D datasets show that REDAD of anomaly overgeneralization with an abnormal sample.
effectively resolves these three concerns, achieving superior AD
performance compared with its baseline model (exceeding 3.5%
(5.0%, 6.1%) in I-AUROC, 2.3% (1.6%, 1.5%) in P-AUROC,
and 3.2% (5.4%, 3.8%) in PRO). In addition, two real-world
industrial product inspection applications further underscore the
 Among various UAD methods, knowledge distillation (KD)
efficacy and utility of the proposed REDAD method. [7]-based methods establish a student–teacher (S-T) network
 pairing to detect anomalies by pinpointing the feature-to-
 Index Terms— Knowledge distillation (KD), self-supervised
learning, unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD). feature discrepancies [8], as shown in Fig. 1(a). During the
 training phase, the teacher network, pretrained on an image
 I. I NTRODUCTION classification dataset like ImageNet, remains unchanged, while
 the student network is trained exclusively using normal images
T HE objective of image anomaly detection (AD) is to
 identify images that are irregular and precisely locate the
specific areas that deviate from normal patterns. This techfrom the AD task. In the testing phase, the student network is
 expected to mimic the teacher in normal feature regions but
nique for detecting anomalies is used across multiple sectors, diverge in abnormal regions, and this divergence is then used
including industrial inspection [1], [2], medical diagnostics [3], to identify anomalies. Typically, cosine similarity is used as a
[4], and video surveillance [5]. However, in real-world appli- metric to gauge feature discrepancies, owing to its precision
cations, the AD tasks often encounter challenges posed by the in capturing relationships in both high- and low-dimensional
scarcity of abnormal samples and the vast diversity of anomaly data [9]. The remarkable knowledge transfer and learning
types. To address this issue, unsupervised AD (UAD) methods guidance offered by KDST-based methods have propelled
have emerged as a preferred solution as they minimize the need them to the forefront of performance in the field [6]. Beyond
for extensive annotated data [6]. the standard configuration, methods such as STPM [10] and
 MKD [11] enhance their effectiveness by incorporating multi-
 Received 4 November 2024; revised 29 January 2025; accepted 13 February
2025. Date of publication 14 March 2025; date of current version 27 March scale features from various network layers into the distillation
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foun- process, thereby improving overall performance.
dation of China under Grant 62394330. The Associate Editor coordinating the Despite the promising results of KDST-based methods, they
review process was Dr. Shiqian Chen. (Corresponding author: Wenrui Hu.)
 Wenrui Hu and Wei Yu are with China Mobile Research encounter three main issues: data shift, normality forgetting,
Institute, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: huwenrui@chinamobile.com; and anomaly overgeneralization. Regarding data shift, the
yuweiyf@chinamobile.com). distribution of images in the AD task typically differs from
 Yongqiang Tang and Wensheng Zhang are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100089, China (e-mail: that of ImageNet. As the data distribution evolves in the
yongqiang.tang@ia.ac.cn; wensheng.zhang@ia.ac.cn). new task, the BN statistics in the student and teacher models
 Yuan Xie is with the School of Computer Science and Technol- rapidly diverge, resulting in increased KD loss [12]. This diverogy, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (e-mail:
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn). gence hinders the alignment of features between the teacher
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3551571 and student models. With respect to the issue of normality
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

forgetting, the student model, being trained on amounts of with synthetic anomalies. Formally, let the normal feature
anomaly-free data, becomes sensitive to the nuanced patterns vector pairs for the student and teacher be denoted as (φns ,
in normal data due to the long-tail problem. This sensitivity φnt ), which are trained to align closely, the objective of DGR
results in discrepancies in the normal feature representations is to augment the disparity between the perturbed abnormal
between the teacher and student models [refer to Fig. 1(b)], feature pair (φas , φat ). The DGR mechanism achieves this by
thereby increasing the likelihood of false positives in AD adjusting φas away from φat in a mirrored direction when the
[refer to Fig. 1(c)]. To address this, MemKD [13] proposes a cosine angle between φat and φnt is positive, and in the opposite
normality recall memory to reinforce the normality in student- direction when negative. We call this method as RD, as it
generated features, ensuring detailed patterns are accurately effectively addresses the weaknesses of weak discrimination
captured. EfficientAD [14] introduces a hard feature loss or instability found in existing methods such as DeSTSeg [20]
that focuses backpropagation on the output elements with and CDO [15], enabling the detection of both subtle and
the highest loss, reducing false-positive detections on normal pronounced anomalies. A more comprehensive description and
images. analysis can be found in Section III-G. It is crucial to note that
 Anomaly overgeneralization arises when the student model, DGR does not require additional network architectures like
due to its strong generalization capabilities, produces abnormal those mentioned in the aforementioned methods [17], [19],
feature distributions similar to those in the teacher’s domain [20], thus introducing no extra computational costs during
[refer to Fig. 1(b)] [15], [16]. This overgeneralization leads to testing.
the oversight of abnormal regions [refer to Fig. 1(d)]. To tackle The contributions of this study can be summarized as
this problem, various strategies have been devised. Both follows.
AST [17] and ATSN [18] use an asymmetric student–teacher 1) We identify and address three prevalent and independent
structure to widen the gap in anomaly representations between issues within the KDST-based methods. To this end,
teacher and student. On the other hand, reliable direction we introduce a reliable distillation approach, termed
(RD) [19] introduces a reverse distillation approach featuring REDAD, which can simultaneously mitigate these three
a teacher encoder and a student decoder, fostering diversity in challenges within the KDST framework. Furthermore,
anomalous representations. A network structure similar to RD REDAD enhances the performance of the KDST-based
is also proposed in [4]. Some other works suggest that using methods without incurring additional network complexonly normal data for training can lead to low sensitivity to ity or inference costs.
abnormal samples. Therefore, they use self-supervised meth- 2) We design a novel DGR technique that effectively
ods by simulating anomalies to mitigate overgeneralization. amplifies the divergence of anomaly features between
With the help of synthetic anomalies, CDO [15] collabora- the teacher and student models using self-supervised
tively minimizes discrepancies in normal feature distributions training with synthetic anomalies.
and maximizes those in synthetic abnormal feature distri- 3) Extensive experiments across diverse datasets demonbutions, which achieves remarkable performance. Operations strate that REDAD outperforms the current state-ofsimilar to CDO are also proposed in Pull&Push [16]. From the-art KDST-based methods in both image-level and
synthetically corrupted normal images, DeSTSeg [20] trains pixel-level AD tasks.
a denoising student network to match the teacher network The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
feature of the same images without corruption. Therefore, the Section II comprehensively reviews the related works. REDAD
two networks are reinforced to generate distinct features from is illustrated in detail in Section III. Section IV presents
anomalous inputs. thorough experiments, results, and analyses. Finally, Section V
 This study proposes a reliable distillation strategy within the concludes this article and discusses future research directions.
pyramid KDST framework to simultaneously addressing the
three aforementioned issues. Inspired by exemplar-free class
 II. R ELATED W ORKS
incremental learning method [12], we introduce an adaptive
teacher model (ATM) to tackle the data shift problem. This A. Unsupervised AD
ATM updates the BN statistics of the teacher model while Most UAD techniques can be broadly categorized into
keeping the rest of the model parameters fixed during the two approaches: reconstruction-based and feature-embedding
training process, significantly minimizing KD loss. To counter methods [6]. Reconstruction methods, such as autoenthe normality forgetting problem, we propose a normality coders [22], GANs [23], and denoising diffusion [24], assume
remembering enhancement (NRE) module, influenced by the that anomalies in data cannot be accurately reproduced by
online hard example mining (OHEM) technique [21]. Unlike a neural network trained only on normal data. Therefore,
MemKD [13], which uses a memory-intensive mechanism discrepancies in pixel-level reconstruction are used as indito retain normal information, NRE effectively directs the cators for detecting anomalies. Nevertheless, this assumption
student model to concentrate on more complex normal features is not always correct. Occasionally, networks may generalize
by identifying those with highest loss. Furthermore, unlike too much, resulting in false negatives when they mistakenly
EfficientAD [14], which uses a static mining factor, NRE reconstruct anomalies [25].
adopts a gradually decreasing factor to ensure training stability. Currently, feature embedding-based methods are demon-
 To tackle the challenge of anomaly overgeneralization, strating superior performance. These approaches often leverwe devise a direction-guided regularization (DGR) technique age pretrained models to extract comprehensive feature
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

representations. Subsequently, statistical algorithms such as
multivariate Gaussian distribution [26], memory bank [27],
and normalizing flow [28], [29] are used to embed the
distributions of normal features. Anomalies are then identified by comparing the input features against the learned Fig. 2. Some samples of perturbed normal images.
distribution or the stored clustering centers. Despite recent
advances in anomaly localization, statistical algorithms often
struggle with high computational complexity and memory teacher model modification has been explored in traditional
consumption [25]. In addition, normalizing flows can suf- KD scenarios, our approach represents the first application
fer from training instability, compromising the flexibility of to AD.
density estimation [17]. Alternatively, KD-based methods [8],
[10], [15], [17], [19] have emerged as a promising approach. III. M ETHOD
These methods establish a teacher–student network pair and A. Problem Definition
detect anomalies by identifying discrepancies in feature repre-
 For any image xi ∈ R H ×W ×3 in Xtrain ∪ Xtest , where Xtrain is
sentations between expert and apprentice domains, achieving
 a set of anomaly-free training images and Xtest is a test query
state-of-the-art results in AD.
 set containing both normal and abnormal samples. The goal
 of AD is to train a model to recognize and localize anomalies
B. Self-Supervised Mask Training in the query set.
 Despite the absence of genuine anomalous data for training
within the UAD framework, it is feasible to simulate pseu- B. Formulation of General KDST-Based Methods
doanomalous data. This simulation enables the training of an
AD model in a self-supervised manner, thereby enabling it to We denote the pretrained teacher network as φ t and the
explicitly grasp the potential disparities between normal and distilled student network as φ s . For an image xi , φ t and φ s
abnormal samples. Methods such as CutPaste [30] generate extract features from different hierarchies. We define L as the
pseudoanomalies by adding small patches to a normal image subset including the indexes of hierarchies for use. The feature
and training a model to detect these anomalous regions. Simi- map from level l ∈ L is denoted as φ l ∼ φ l (x) ∈ R Hl ×Wl ×Cl ,
larly, DRAEM [31] overlays additional texture images as noise where Hl , Wl , and Cl are the height, width, and channel
onto normal images to generate abnormal regions, focusing size, respectively. For an entry φh,wl
 ∈ R Cl at location (h, w),
on creating textural anomalies. Building on DRAEM [31], the distance between φh,w and φh,w can be formulated as
 t,l s,l

DeSTSeg [20] trains a denoising student encoder–decoder D(φh,wt,l
 , φh,w
 s,l
 ) where D(·, ·) denotes a function for feature-tousing synthetically corrupted normal images, striving to align feature discrepancy calculation. The KD process for the AD
with the features of uncorrupted images captured by the task is to optimize D(φ t , φ s ) using the normal samples in
teacher network. CDO [15] perturbs the input normal image Xtrain .
with Gaussian noise and maps the perturbed image into dis- Let p ∼ (h, w), and define pn and pa as the normal feature
tinct expert and apprentice domains using respective mapping and abnormal feature positions, respectively. The general KD
functions. Alternatively, SimpleNet [25] generates synthetic optimization loss can be succinctly expressed as
anomalies within the feature space, operating under the L P
 n
 1 XX
assumption that defects may not exhibit significant commonpn , φ pn .
 1 − cos φ t,l s,l
 
 L gkd = (1)
ality in the image space. In our system, we incorporate the N l=1 p
 n
principles of DRAEM [31] for anomaly simulation and detect
 Here, the distance metric is based on cosine similarity, given
synthetic anomalies within a KD framework.
 by D(·, ·) := 1 − cos(·, ·). The KDST-based methods assume
 that the discrepancies between φ tpa and φ spa would not be
C. BN Updating in KD significantly affected and keep large during the KD process
 BN, a widely used technique in deep learning, may which merely minimizes the discrepancies between φ tpn and
encounter challenges in situations where the data distribu- φ spn . However, because of the overgeneralization issue, the distion undergoes changes. To facilitate domain transfer, various crepancies between φ tpa and φ spa may also decrease, resulting
domain adaptation methods leverage normalization statistics, in high prediction uncertainty.
as cited in [32], [33], and [34]. In the context of KD, the In KDST-based methods, convolutional neural networks
BN statistics in both the student and teacher models can such as ResNet and its derivatives, which incorporate BN
diverge rapidly, resulting in an elevation of KD loss, as dis- layers, are commonly used as models for both φ t and φ s .
cussed in [12]. Recent studies have investigated the potential During the KD process, the parameters of φ t , including the
of modifying the teacher model through meta-learning to BN statistics derived from pretrained datasets like ImageNet,
enhance knowledge transfer within the conventional KD remain unchanged, while the parameters of φ s are subject to
framework, as exemplified in [35]. Furthermore, research updates in the new AD task dataset. The divergence in BN
on KD, specifically [36], suggests that updating the teacher statistics between φ t and φ s leads to an increase in KD loss,
model’s normalization statistics with data used for student ultimately impeding the precise alignment of features between
training can yield performance improvements. Notably, while the teacher and student models.
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of REDAD. (a) REDAD uses the general KDST framework, integrating a pretrained adaptive teacher network. During training, both
the teacher and student networks receive normal and synthetic anomaly images as input. (b) Module for computing anomaly maps in the inference stage.
(c) Feature flows throughout the distillation training process.

C. Simulated Anomaly Generation
 As mentioned before, the DGR uses synthetic anomalous images for self-supervised mask training. In this study,
we adopt the same algorithm proposed in [31]. Random 2-D
Perlin noise is generated and binarized by a preset threshold
to obtain an anomaly mask m. An anomalous image xâ is
produced by replacing the mask area with a linear combination
of an anomaly-free image xn and an arbitrary image from Fig. 4. ATM modulates the teacher features by estimating normalization
external data source z, controlled by an opacity factor γ , statistics µBN and σBN and optimizing transformation parameters γBN and
 βBN .
chosen at random within the interval [0.15, 1]. The process
is mathematically represented as
 xâ = γ (m ⊙ z) + (1 − γ )(m ⊙ xn ) + (1 − m) ⊙ xn (2) involves updating only the final linear layer [37]. We assign
where ⊙ signifies elementwise multiplication. This anomaly the classification label for the synthetic anomaly image xâ
generation occurs online during the training phase. Fig. 2 as 1 and that for the normal image xn as 0. Let yt (x) represent
displays samples of perturbed normal images across various the predicted probability of the teacher model for an input
datasets. We can see that the anomaly mask generated by image x. The cross-entropy contrast loss is then defined as
random Perlin noise is irregular, resembling actual anomalies. 1 X
 NBN
 log yt xâi 1 − yt xni
  
 L ce = − (3)
D. Formulation of REDAD 2NBN i=1
 The overall architecture of REDAD is depicted in Fig. 3, where NBN is the batch size.
using the same design as general KDST-based methods with- Subsequently, the ATM adjusts the teacher features by
out additional structural components. Distinctions arise during estimating the normalization statistics µBN and σBN and optithe distillation optimization process, highlighted by three mizing the transformation parameters γBN and βBN , as depicted
key aspects, which address the three separate issues. First, in Fig. 4. Specifically, normalization centers and standardizes
we introduce an ATM which updates the BN statistics of the the input x into x̄ = (x − µBN )/σBN using its mean µBN and
teacher model while fixed the rest model parameters during standard deviation σBN . The transformation converts x̄ into the
the training process. ATM allows for significantly reduced output x ′ = γBN x̄ + βBN , where the affine parameters for scale
KD loss, thereby enhancing alignment of features between γBN and shift βBN are optimized based on the loss.
the teacher and student models. Second, we incorporate an
NRE module, which supersedes the general feature distillation F. Normality Remembering Enhancement
in (1) by pinpointing normal feature pairs with low cosine similarity through a dynamically decreasing mining factor. Finally, The NRE encourages the student model to focus on the
we devise a DGR technique to reliably widen the divergence in intricate features that currently mimic the teacher the least
the synthetic abnormal feature regions between the teacher and within normal image regions. We designate these hard features
student, efficiently mitigating the overgeneralization problem. as pnh , and the NRE reformulates the general KD loss L gkd as
 defined in (1), into a new expression
E. Adaptive Teacher Model L Pn 
 h
 1 XX  
 The ATM initially converts the pretrained teacher model into L nre = 1 − cos φ t,l
 pnh , φ s,l
 h
 pn
 (4)
a two-class classification model using linear probing, which Nh l=1 h
 pn
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

Fig. 5. Comparison with and without NRE. (a) Normal training image
with sampling regions. (b) Decreasing curve of the mining factor h. (c) and
(d) Anomaly score maps, respectively, without and with NRE at the tenth
training epoch. (e) t-SNE-generated projection of feature vectors within the
sampling regions [38].

where Nh is the total number of hard features. To identify
pnh , we calculate the h-quantile of the cosine similarity values
 Fig. 6. Illustration of three types of DGR. (a) DD. (b) MDD. (c) RD.
between the teacher and student features. Specifically, the (d) Qualitative comparison with an abnormal sample. The anomaly maps are
h-quantile represents the hth smallest cosine similarity value provided. (e) t-SNE projection of feature vectors within both an abnormal
among all the teacher–student feature pairs. This h-quantile region (⋆) and a normal region (•).
threshold, labeled as dh , allows for the computation of the loss
L nre as the average of all the distances D(φ tpn , φ spn ) for which
cos(φ tpn , φ spn ) < dh . Furthermore, we introduce a progressively Recently, two principal forms of DGR are identified: denoising
decreasing factor h ∈ [0, 1], defined as direction (DD) and maximum discrepancy direction (MDD).
  
 πn E
  This study examines the inherent limitations of both DD and
 h = 1 + (h f − 1) 1 − cos 2. (5) MDD and introduces an innovative RD approach to counteract
 NE
 these weaknesses.
Here, n E indicates the current training epoch index, N E the 1) Denoising Direction: In the DD approach, the synthetic
total number of training epochs, and h f (the final value anomaly regions are treated as noise, prompting the student
of h) is empirically set to 0.001. The diminishing trajectory network to denoise within the feature space. While previous
of h is depicted in Fig. 5(b). The gradual decline of h studies like DeSTSeg [20] have implemented denoising via an
ensures a broader scope of feature distillation during the initial encoder–decoder network, we redefine DD from a regularizastages of training, which contributes to a more stable training tion perspective. Specially, both the normal image xn and its
progression. perturbed version xâ are fed into the student network. The DD
 Fig. 5(c) and (d) showcases a comparative analysis at the regularization loss is then computed as follows:
tenth training epoch, contrasting the anomaly maps without
and with the application of NRE, respectively. Notably, the
 L Pâ 
inclusion of NRE enables the student model to swiftly con- 1 XX  
centrate on intricate features, including the screw thread (•), L dd = 1 − cos φ s,l
 pâ , φ pn̂
 s,l
 (6)
 Nâ l=1 p
screw head at the tip (⋆), and tail edge (×), while effectively â

suppressing the unrelated background. Then the subsequent
training epochs necessitate further refinement for the student where pâ represents the position of the simulated abnormal
model to harmonize challenging normal features with those features, while pn̂ corresponds to normal features, both deterof the teacher model. In addition, Fig. 5(d) depicts the mined by the synthetic anomaly mask m.
t-SNE-based projection [38] of feature vectors after training L dd aims to align φ s,lpâ with φ pn̂ . For distinct anomalies,
 s,l

within the sampled intricate regions, where red denotes φ t,1 , φ p differs from φ p . Since φ p is optimized to mimic φ t,l
 t,l t,l s,l
 pn̂ ,
 â n̂ n̂
green represents φ s,1 enhanced by NRE, and blue corre- we expect φ p to also exhibit differences from φ p . However,
 s,l t,l
sponds to φ s,1 without NRE. This visualization underscores the â
 in cases of subtle anomalies, φ t,l
 â

 pâ may resemble φ pn̂ , leading
 t,l
capacity of NRE to facilitate closer alignment of intricate fea- to weak discrimination due to the approximation sequence
tures between the student and teacher models. Consequently, φ s,l
 pâ → φ pn̂ → φ pn̂ → φ pâ . Fig. 6(a) demonstrates this issue
 s,l t,l t,l
we posit that hard feature distillation by NRE can enhance the of weak discrimination, and Fig. 6(d) DD presents a case of
student model’s ability to recognize normals, thereby reducing Capsules where a subtle anomaly is not detected.
the frequency of false-positive detections.
 2) Maximum Discrepancy Direction: In the MDD
 approach, the objective is to directly optimize φ s,l pâ to attain
G. Direction-Guided Regularization the maximum distance from φ p , echoing the strategy used
 t,l
 â
 The DGR uses a feature direction regularization tech- in CDO [15] and Pull&Push [16]. Specially, xâ undergoes
nique [39] to explicitly amplify the divergence of abnormal simultaneous processing by both the teacher and student
feature pairs between the student and teacher models. networks, resulting in the MDD loss function defined as
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

follows: Algorithm 1 REDAD Pseudocode, PyTorch-Like
 L Pâ  Input: T-S Models (φ t , θ t ) and (φ s , θ s )
 1 XX  
 L mdd = cos φ t,l
 pâ , φ s,l
 pâ . (7) Output: (φ t , θ t ), (φ s , θ s ) and Anomaly Map Sam
 Nâ l=1 p 1 Train: Load (φ , θ ) and Initialize (θ )
 t t s
 â
 2 for x n ← dataloader (Xtrain ) do
 Compared with DD, MDD offers superior discrimination
 3 xâ , m = Perlin (xn ) ⇔ (2)
capabilities. However, in cases of subtle anomalies, MDD
 4 L ce = CE (yt (xâ ), yt (xn )) ⇔ (3)
may induce significant deviations between φ s,l pâ and φ pn̂ . This,
 s,l
 5 L nr e = NRE (φ tpn , φ spn ) ⇔ (4)
in turn, may cause training instability and heighten sensitivity
 6 φ tp , φ sp , φ tp = m ⊙ φ t (xâ ), m ⊙ φ s (xâ ), m ⊙ φ t (xn̂ )
to normal patterns. This instability is illustrated in Fig. 6(b), â â n̂

while Fig. 6(d) MDD showcases an instance where numerous 7 etp , esp , etp = Normalize (φ tp , φ sp , φ tp )
 â â n̂ â â n̂

delicate normal structures are erroneously detected, primarily 8 L r d = DGR (etp , esp , etp ) ⇔ (8)
 â â n̂
due to this heightened sensitivity. 9 L r edad = L ce + αL nr e + β L r d ⇔ (9)
 3) Reliable Direction: To address the drawbacks of both 10 Backward (L r edad ) and Update (θ s ), ATM (θ t )
DD and MDD, we devise the RD regularization technique, 11 end
 12 Test: Load (φ , θ ) and (φ , θ )
 t t s s
which seeks to uphold MDD’s high discriminative capability
while incorporating a directional constraint guided by the 13 for x i ← dataloader (Xtest ) do
similarity between φ t,l pâ and φ pn̂ . Initially, we normalize the
 t,l 14 Sam = CalcAM (φ t (xi ), φ s (xi )) ⇔ (10)
feature vectors of φ t,l pâ , φ pâ , and φ pn̂ to obtain e pâ , e pâ , and e pn̂ ,
 s,l t,l t,l s,l t,l 15 end

respectively. Subsequently, we calculate the projections of et,l pâ
 t,l s,l
and es,l t,l t,l t,l s,l t,l
 pâ onto e pn̂ as qâ⊥n̂ = e pâ ·e pn̂ and qâ⊥n̂ = e pâ ·e pn̂ . Then,
we determine the direction consistency between et,l pâ and e pn̂
 t,l H. Anomaly Score Calculation
 pâ , e pn̂ )). Finally, we formulate the RD
 t,l In the inference stage, we feed each xi ∈ Xtest into both the
using dâ|n̂ = sign(cos(et,l t,l

loss as follows: teacher and student networks. The multihierarchical features
 
 MDD
  φ t,l and φ s,l are extracted and resized to the same spatial
 PC
 L
 1 X X
 Pâ z  }| { z }| { resolution as the first-layer feature map (H1 , W1 ). Then the
 cos et,l , es,l + ||q t,l − d t,l · q s,l ||2 
 
 L rd = pâ pâ â⊥n̂ â|n̂ â⊥ n̂ 2 fused anomaly score can be calculated as
 Nâ l=1 p 
 â L
 X
 p , φp
 1 − cos φ t,l s,l
 .
 
 sp = (10)
 (8)
 l=1
where PC stands for projection constraint. The mechanism of The anomaly score map {s p | p ∈ (H1 , W1 )} is interpolated
RD is illustrated in Fig. 6(c). For subtle anomalies where to have the resolution of the input image size (H0 , W0 ) and
 pâ and φ pn̂ align in the same direction, RD encourages
φ t,l t,l
 Gaussian filtered for smooth boundaries.
divergence between es,l t,l
 pâ and e pâ in the mirror direction, thereby For the anomaly localization task, we can obtain the
mitigating the instability observed in MDD. Conversely, for anomaly mask with a threshold τ by
larger anomalies where these vectors are oriented oppositely,
RD optimizes divergence along the direction of maximum dis- SAL (xi ) := { p|s p > τ, p ∈ H0 × W0 }. (11)
crepancy, thereby preserving MDD’s discriminative capacity. For the image-level AD task, the maximum score of the
 Fig. 6(d) depicts the anomaly maps generated by DD, anomaly map is taken as the AD score
MDD, and RD, respectively. Notably, RD-based regularization
demonstrates an ability to discern subtle anomalies more effec- SAD (xi ) := max s p . (12)
 p∈H0 ×W0
tively than DD, while mitigating sensitivity toward delicate
 The pseudocode for the train and test procedures of REDAD
normal structures, when compared with MDD. In addition,
 is shown in Algorithm 1, where θ is the model parameter.
Fig. 6(e) provides a comparative visualization of features for
both the abnormal and normal regions, using t-SNE [38].
In the abnormal region, the student features for RD (⋆) and IV. E XPERIMENTS
MDD (⋆) are more distant from the corresponding teacher A. Implementation Details
feature (⋆) than the student feature for DD (⋆). Conversely, 1) Dataset Descriptions: The MVTec AD [1] comprises
for the normal region, the student features for RD (•) and 15 datasets for AD, encompassing ten object classes and
DD (•) are closer to the teacher feature (•) than the student five texture types, and serves as a widely recognized stanfeature for MDD (•). This comparative analysis underscores dard for benchmarking AD algorithms. The anomalies within
the proficiency of RD-based DGR in addressing the inherent these datasets primarily consist of various structural changes.
limitations of both DD and MDD. The more recent VisA dataset [40] extends this concept
 Finally, the total loss of REDAD is then expressed as by incorporating a diverse array of objects characterized by
 L redad = L ce + αL nre + β L rd (9) complex structures, multiple instances, and variations in scale.
 VisA represents the largest open-source industrial AD dataset
where α and β serve as regularizers. to date, comprising 10 821 high-resolution color images of
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

 TABLE I
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND PRO ON THE MVT EC [1] DATASETS . AVG . T., AVG . O., AND AVG . A LL
 A RE THE AVERAGE R ESULTS OVER THE T EXTURE , O BJECTIVE , AND A LL C ATEGORIES , R ESPECTIVELY. T HE T OP P ERFORMANCE
 I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

12 different objects. The 3-D dataset MVTec3D AD [41] B. Comparisons to State-of-the-Art Methods
creates a task to localize mainly geometric anomalies in 3-D We conducted a comparative analysis of REDAD’s perobjects. MVTec3D includes 4147 scans captured by a 3-D formance against several prominent competitors, including
sensor from ten object categories, each providing both RGB CFlow [28], ReConPatch [27], DDAD [24], STPM [10],
and point cloud data. When localizing geometry anomalies in MemKD [13], CDO [15], Pull&Push [16], DeSTSeg [20], and
MVTec3D, we do not use 3-D scans, as the proposed REDAD EfficientAD [14]. Notably, CFlow exemplifies the normalizing
only requires RGB images as inputs. flow approach, while ReConPatch and DDAD represent the
 2) Experimental Settings: We used the WResNet50 [42] cutting-edge memory bank-based and reconstruction-based
as the backbone in the S-T models, aiming for a balanced methodologies, respectively. STPM serves as the benchmark
tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency. We configured for general KDST-based methods. CDO, Pull&Push, and
L = 3, enabling the extraction of feature maps from the DeSTSeg are recognized as leading KDST-based approaches,
outputs of the first three hierarchies. All the images in both relevant to our DGR method, as elaborated in Section III-G.
the training and testing datasets were resized to 256 × 256. EfficientAD combines KDST and reconstruction methods,
For data augmentation, we exclusively applied normalization while MemKD integrates KDST and memory bank methods,
with the ImageNet mean and variance to the input images. both achieving state-of-the-art performance. It is worth noting
For optimization, we used the AdamW optimizer with a that ReConPatch, MemKD, Pull&Push, and EfficientAD are
learning rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 32. In addition, not publicly available, whereas the remaining comparison
we adopted an exponential moving average (EMA) [43] with methods are open-sourced.
a decay rate of 0.9 to update the student model parameters. As detailed in Tables I and II, REDAD exhibits supe-
The training process encompassed 100 epochs. Regarding rior performance across both the MVTec and VisA datasets.
the loss function (9), we assigned weights of 1 and 0.1 to Specifically, REDAD achieved notable improvements over the
α and β parameters, respectively. The threshold τ in (11) baseline STPM, with a 3.5% enhancement in I-AUROC, a
was determined as the globally optimal value based on the 2.3% increase in P-AUROC, and a 3.2% boost in PRO for the
F1-score, facilitating the accurate segmentation of abnormal MVTec dataset, and a 5.0% gain in I-AUROC, a 1.6% rise
regions in qualitative evaluations. Finally, we used a Gaussian in P-AUROC, and a 5.4% improvement in PRO for the VisA
filter with a standard deviation of σ = 4 to smooth the dataset. When compared with its closest competitors, includanomaly score map, as described in Section III-H. Model ing CDO, Pull&Push, and DeSTSeg, REDAD demonstrates
training and testing were conducted on a computer equipped superior anomaly image classification and anomaly pixel
with an Intel1 Xeon1 CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. localization capabilities. Furthermore, in comparison to state-
 3) Evaluation Metrics: We adopted the area under the of-the-art methods such as ReConPatch, DDAD, MemAD,
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) based on and EfficientAD, REDAD achieves comparable performance
produced anomaly scores to calculate AD at image-level in I-AUROC and the highest scores in P-AUROC. For the
performance (I-AUROC). Localization performance was eval- 3-D AD dataset MVTec3D, we only compared REDAD with
uated using the AUROC at pixel level (P-AUROC) and STPM, MmeKD, and CDO, as these were the only methods
PRO [8]. For I-AUROC, P-AUROC, and PRO, a higher value that had tested the MVTec3D dataset in their work. It can
indicates better detection performance. be observed in Table III that REDAD outperforms STPM by
 6.1% in I-AUROC, 1.5% in P-AUROC, and 3.8% in PRO.
 1 Registered trademark. In addition, REDAD surpasses CDO in all three metrics.
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE II
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND PRO ON THE V IS A [40] DATASETS . T HE T OP P ERFORMANCE I S H IGHLIGHTED

 TABLE III on the basic setting in (1), we integrated each of the three
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND modules separately, with the results depicted in Fig. 8.
 PRO ON THE MVT EC 3D [41] DATASETS . T HE T OP
 P ERFORMANCE I S H IGHLIGHTED
 1) Data Shift: As illustrated in Fig. 8(a), the implementation of ATM led to a notable reduction in KD loss. This is due
 to the domain adaptation for the feature maps of the teacher
 model by BN updating in ATM, and then they can be highly
 aligned with the feature maps of the student model which
 is learned using the MVTec datasets. The texture category,
 specifically Grid, experienced a more significant decrease
 compared with the object category, Bottle. This disparity is
 attributed to texture category images being less similar to the
 images in the pretrained ImageNet dataset than those in the
 object category [see Fig. 7(a)].
 2) Normality Forgetting: To verify the effectiveness of NRE
 in remembering the normality, we analyzed the cumulative
 histogram distribution (CHD) of normal feature similarity
This exceptional performance in anomaly localization can be between the teacher and student networks using the testing
attributed to two key aspects of our proposed method. First, the datasets. Fig. 8(b) shows that the inclusion of NRE resulted
NRE module enables the model to reinforce intricate feature in a greater proportion of high similarity feature pairs than it
learning between the student and teacher models, thereby without NRE, indicating enhanced consistency of normality.
reducing false alarms. Second, our DGR technique effectively 3) Overgeneralization: To verify the effectiveness of DGR
controls the distillation of synthetic anomalies between the in overcoming anomaly overgeneralization, we analyzed the
teacher and student models, thereby endowing the model with CHD of anomaly feature similarity between the teacher and
high discriminative power for anomalies. In other words, when student networks using testing datasets. For the abnormal
facing scenes with complex detailed structures and subtle regions, Fig. 8(c) clearly demonstrates that the application
defects, REDAD often outperforms other competitors. of DGR shifted the model’s focus toward lower similarity,
 To underscore the exceptional performance of REDAD, indicating a heightened level of discrepancy.
Fig. 7 displays qualitative outcomes from selected samples
across the MVTec, VisA, MVTec3D, and our curated datasets D. Ablation Studies
of vacuum flasks and wheel hubs. These results highlight
 We conducted ablation studies to assess the individual
REDAD’s consistent efficacy in identifying a broad spectrum
 contributions of REDAD’s components, and the outcomes
of defects. This achievement is attributed to REDAD’s ability
 using the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D datasets are presented
to simultaneously address the prevalent challenges within the
 in Table IV. By contrasting Case 1 with Cases 2, 3, and 4,
KDST framework, including data shift, normality forgetting,
 it becomes evident that ATM, NRE, and RD individually
and anomaly overgeneralization, thereby ensuring its effectiveexhibit enhanced performance over the baseline KDST. This
ness across various industrial applications.
 observation underscores the efficacy of each component when
 evaluated in isolation. Furthermore, in comparing Case 3 with
 Case 4, our analysis reveals that NRE surpasses RD in image-
C. Issues’ Mitigation
 level performance, whereas RD excels over NRE at the pixel
 We assessed the effectiveness of the proposed ATM, NRE, level. We hypothesize that NRE’s ability to efficiently address
and DGR modules in addressing issues present in general the challenges associated with normalcy retention, as discussed
KDST-based methods. The MVTec dataset is used, and the in Section III-F, significantly reduces false-positive detections,
texture and object categories are analyzed separately. Based thereby enhancing image-level AD. Concurrently, the explicit
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

Fig. 7. Qualitative results of the proposed REDAD on (a) MVTec, (b) VisA, (c) MVTec3D, and (d) collected datasets of vacuum flasks and wheel hubs.
Original images, ground-truth masks, and anomaly maps are listed from top to bottom.

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON REDAD

Fig. 8. Issues’ mitigation verified using the MVTec dataset. The categories
of texture (top) and objects (bottom) are analyzed separately. (a) Loss plots to
verify the influence of ATM using grid (top) and bottle (bottom) categories. our integrated REDAD approach attains superior performance,
(b) Similarity statistics of normal regions to verify the influence of NRE. emphasizing the complementary nature and synergistic effects
(c) Similarity statistics of abnormal regions to verify the influence of DGR.
 of the three modules. In addition, we evaluated three types
 of DGR methods—DD, MDD, and RD—in Cases 5, 6,
 and 7, respectively. The outcomes affirm that the proposed
utilization of synthetic anomalies through DGR effectively RD method outperforms others, reinforcing its reliability and
improves anomaly pixel localization. Ultimately, in Case 7, efficacy.
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

E. Comparison of Different Backbones and Resolutions TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT BACKBONES AND
 The choice of backbone architecture and image resolution R ESOLUTIONS U SING THE MVT EC DATASET
significantly affects the performance of localization
tasks [28]. This research evaluates various backbones,
such as ResNet18, ResNet34, ResNet50, ResNet101, and
WResNet50, at two resolutions, 256 × 256 and
512 × 512, using the MVTec dataset. The results
are shown in Table V. Our findings indicate that
WResNet50 at 256 × 256 offers the optimal balance between
accuracy and efficiency. Larger models with increased
 TABLE VI
parameters, such as ResNet101, even at 512 × 512, yield
 C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON IN T ERMS OF I NFERENCE S PEED (FPS)
minimal improvements or, in some cases, show no significant AND M ODEL S IZE (MB)
enhancement in performance. Consequently, for this study,
we have selected WResNet50 operating at 256 × 256.

F. Complexity Evaluation
 This study assesses the computational and memory complexity of the proposed REDAD, focusing on inference speed
and model size. STPM [10], CDO [15], Pull&Push [16],
and REDAD share identical network architectures during
inference; thus, their inference speeds and model sizes can
be considered equivalent. In contrast, DeSTSeg [20] and
MemKD [13] augment the fundamental student–teacher structure with additional components, theoretically resulting in
slower inference times compared with methods based solely
on the student–teacher framework. The inference speed of
the diffusion-model-based DDAD [24] largely depends on
the noise time step configuration, whereas ReConPatch [27],
which uses a memory-bank approach, depends on the memorybank’s dimensions. Given these dependencies, neither DDAD
nor ReConPatch is suitable for a fair comparative analysis. Fig. 9. Thresholds established using the globally optimal F1-score for each
 category across the test datasets of MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D.
Consequently, we selected CFlow [28] and EfficientAD [14]
as benchmarking counterparts.
 The comparison of inference speeds and model sizes is
 eter L, and the h-qunatile in (5). The metrics I-AUROC,
shown in Table VI. The inference speed was measured on
 P-AUROC, and PRO are threshold-agnostic, thereby avoiding
a computer with an Intel Xeon CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla
 bias in model performance evaluation. However, in practical
V100 GPU. All the models were assigned to the GPU for
 applications, setting a threshold is necessary to obtain final
inference acceleration, and the data input time was factored
 AD results. Fig. 9 illustrates the thresholds established using
in during the evaluation of each method’s inference speed.
 the globally optimal F1-score for each category across the
The model size is defined as the size of all the floating point
 MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D test datasets. It can be observed
parameters in the corresponding model. CFlow consists of a
 that the optimal thresholds relative to the F1-score fall within
feature-extraction network and a decoder. Since the decoder is
 the interval [0.5, 0.8]. Notably, the optimal thresholds for
typically more complex, CFlow has a larger model size and a
 MVTec3D lie within a narrower and higher range of [0.7, 0.8],
slower inference speed than REDAD. EfficientAD integrates a
 compared with those of MVTec and VisA. This phenomenon
student–teacher architecture with a denoising decoder. Genercan be attributed to the reduced background interference and
ally, this combination would result in a slower inference speed
 simpler targets with more pronounced defects in the MVTec3D
and a larger model size compared with REDAD. However,
 dataset [see Fig. 7(c)], leading to higher confidence in the
EfficientAD trains a lightweight patch description network
 anomaly scores produced by the model. Consequently, the
(PDN) to boost its inference speed. As a result, EfficientAD
 selection of threshold τ in practical applications should condemonstrates faster inference and a relatively efficient model
 sider specific scenarios. For instance, a high threshold, such
size. Therefore, to further enhance REDAD’s inference speed
 as 0.6 or 0.7, can ensure high precision in settings with clean
and reduce its memory footprint, adopting a smaller and more
 backgrounds and clear defects. Conversely, a lower threshold,
efficient backbone is a promising approach.
 like 0.4 or 0.5, may be appropriate for complex backgrounds
 or subtle defects to maintain high recall.
G. Parameters’ Analysis The hierarch parameter L also significantly influences
 This study analyzes three critical hyperparameters: the model performance. Lower level feature maps capture detailed
anomaly localization threshold τ in (11), the hierarch param- information from images, while higher level feature maps
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT H IERARCHS

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT h-Q UANTILE Fig. 10. Inspection of surface defects on vacuum flasks and car wheel hub.
 (a) Inspection device of vacuum flasks, ① stripe light sources, ② camera,
 ③ vacuum flask, and ④ rotating rod. (b) Inspection device of wheel hub,
 ① robotic arm, ② camera, ③ blue planar light source and reflector, and
 ④ wheel hub.

 TABLE IX
 DATASET D ESCRIPTION AND P ERFORMANCE ON VACUUM
extract coarser semantic features. REDAD uses a pyramid F LASKS AND W HEEL H UBS
structure to compare differences between teacher and student
model feature maps at various levels for AD. Table VII
presents the detection effectiveness under different hierarchs.
Using only the top-level feature map (L = 1) leads to a notable
decline in performance on the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D
datasets, as many fine-grained anomalies go undetected. Con- The image solution of both the datasets is 2448 × 2048.
versely, incorporating all the stage feature maps (L = 5) does To detect tiny defects, high-definition images were divided into
not improve performance and even causes a slight decrease 4 × 4 patches, which were then fed into the models during
due to increased noise from finer grained features. Therefore, both the training and testing phases. We used 6000 normal
we selected L = 3 as the hierarch parameter to balance detail images to train the models for both the vacuum flasks and
and semantic information effectively. wheel hubs. The rest of images were used for testing. The
 The h-quantile of the cosine similarity values between the performance results are detailed in the rightmost column of
teacher and student features is used to identify the hard Table IX, and the visual detection results are displayed in
normal feature in the NRE module of the proposed REDAD. Fig. 7(c). The quantitative and qualitative evaluations demon-
In REDAD, a gradual decline of h is implemented [see (5)]. strate that the proposed REDAD method achieved impressive
To demonstrate the benefits of this gradual decline, we com- performance in AD.
pared it with fixed values of h. The results are presented in In real industrial production lines, high-speed processing is
Table VIII. Specifically, h = 1.0 indicates no hard example essential due to the fast pace. Patch preprocessing, however,
mining, while h = 0 implies no utilization of normal features can lead to increased processing time. On the contrary, without
for distillation. It is evident that when h = 0, the model patch preprocessing, it becomes challenging to detect minute
performance is significantly degraded, highlighting the impor- defects. Therefore, the decision on how to patch must consider
tance of distillation using normal features. Comparing h = factors such as production speed, defect size, and hardware
1.0 and h = 0.1 reveals that excessive hard example mining resources. In addition, compared with the existing AD datasets,
from the beginning of training leads to a decline in model our collected datasets exhibit significant interclass differences
detection performance. In contrast, comparing h = 1.0 and between patches within the image dataset. Taking wheel
h = 0.5 shows that moderate hard example mining enhances hubs as an example, different models of wheel hubs have
performance. The gradual hard example mining approach distinct structures. As the number of product models increases,
adopted by REDAD achieves the best performance. This is a substantial amount of normal images are required to train
because the gradual decline of h ensures a broader scope of the model, which imposes a heavier training burden. Furtherfeature distillation during the initial stages of training, thereby more, the introduction of new wheel hub models necessitates
contributing to a more stable training progression. retraining of the model, further complicating its deployment
 and application.
H. Real-World Applications V. C ONCLUSION
 For additional validation, this study has compiled two In this article, we introduce REDAD, a reliable image
real-world industrial inspection datasets: vacuum flasks and AD technique designed to address issues such as data shift,
aluminum alloy car wheel hubs, both meticulously annotated normality forgetting, and anomaly overgeneralization present
pixel-by-pixel. The used inspection equipment and exemplar in general KDST-based methods. REDAD consists of three
images are showcased in Fig. 10. Comprehensive details components: ATM, NRE, and DGR, each targeting the respecregarding the datasets are provided in the central column of tive issues. The effectiveness of the synergistic effect of these
Table IX. The study has amassed a collection that includes three modules has been validated through ablation experi-
30 varieties of vacuum flasks with six types of defects ments. Our method has undergone thorough testing on three
and 20 types of wheel hubs with nine types of defects. benchmark datasets (MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D) for AD,
5018713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

with outcomes showing considerable enhancements compared [15] Y. Cao, X. Xu, Z. Liu, and W. Shen, “Collaborative discrepancy
to other leading methods. Specifically, compared with the optimization for reliable image anomaly localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 10674–10683, Nov. 2023.
baseline model STPM [10], REDAD exceeds 3.5% (5.0%, [16] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Chen, “Pull & push: Leveraging
6.1%) in I-AUROC, 2.3% (1.6%, 1.5%) in P-AUROC, and differential knowledge distillation for efficient unsupervised anomaly
3.2% (5.4%, 3.8%) in PRO for the three datasets, respectively. detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
 vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2176–2189, May 2023.
In addition, we analyze the impact of model structure, input
 [17] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Asymimage resolution, number of hierarchical feature maps, and metric student–teacher networks for industrial anomaly detection,” in
anomaly localization threshold on model performance, as well Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
as conduct complexity evaluation, providing a more com- pp. 2591–2601.
 [18] J. Zhu, P. Yan, J. Jiang, Y. Cui, and X. Xu, “Asymmetric teacher–student
prehensive evaluation. Furthermore, we validate REDAD on feature pyramid matching for industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
two collected real-world industrial product inspection datasets, Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13, 2024.
confirming its effectiveness in practical applications. [19] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 Looking ahead, given the prevalence of data streams with one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
frequent product changes in industrial manufacturing, we plan [20] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
to incorporate REDAD into a continuous image AD learning Segmentation guided denoising student–teacher for anomaly detection,”
framework to accommodate such dynamic industrial environ- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
ments. In addition, to meet the demand for lower inference
 [21] A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and R. Girshick, “Training region-based
latency, we will further adopt a more lightweight backbone object detectors with online hard example mining,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
to improve inference efficiency while maintaining detection Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 761–769.
accuracy. [22] A. Vasilev et al., “Q-space novelty detection with variational autoencoders,” in Proc. MICCAI Int. Workshop Comput. Diffusion MRI,
 Jan. 2020, pp. 113–124.
 R EFERENCES [23] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and
 U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection
 [1] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54,
 AD—A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly pp. 30–44, May 2019.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [24] A. Mousakhan, T. Brox, and J. Tayyub, “Anomaly detection with
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592. conditioned denoising diffusion models,” 2023, arXiv:2305.15956.
 [2] K. Liu, H. Wang, H. Chen, E. Qu, Y. Tian, and H. Sun, “Steel [25] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
 surface defect detection using a new Haar–Weibull-variance model in for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 unsupervised manner,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 66, no. 10, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
 pp. 2585–2596, Oct. 2017.
 [26] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis-
 [3] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
 “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Com- in Proc. ICPR Int. Workshops Challenges, 2021, pp. 475–489.
 put. Surv., vol. 54, pp. 1–37, Dec. 2020.
 [27] J. Hyun, S. Kim, G. Jeon, S. Hwan Kim, K. Bae, and B. J. Kang,
 [4] M. Liu, Y. Jiao, J. Lu, and H. Chen, “Anomaly detection for med-
 “ReConPatch : Contrastive patch representation learning for industrial
 ical images using teacher–student model with skip connections and
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 multiscale anomaly consistency,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
 (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 2041–2050.
 pp. 1–15, 2024.
 [28] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
 [5] A. Vijayan, B. Meenaskshi, A. Pandey, A. Patel, and A. Jain, “Video
 unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional noranomaly detection in surveillance cameras,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Advancemalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 ment Technol. (ICONAT), Jan. 2022, pp. 1–4.
 (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
 [6] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
 Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024. [29] J. Jiang, S. Wei, X. Xu, Y. Cui, and X. Liu, “Unsupervised anomaly
 detection and localization based on two-hierarchy normalizing flow,”
 [7] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
 [8] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed [30] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfstudents: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191. pp. 9659–9669.
 [9] F. Tung and G. Mori, “Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation,” [31] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminain Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
 pp. 1365–1374. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
[10] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student–teacher feature pp. 8310–8319.
 pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. [32] D. Wang, E. Shelhamer, S. Liu, B. A. Olshausen, and T. Darrell, “Tent:
 Conf., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–14. Fully test-time adaptation by entropy minimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[11] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee, Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–15.
 “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc. [33] S. Schneider, E. Rusak, L. Eck, O. Bringmann, W. Brendel, and
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, M. Bethge, “Improving robustness against common corruptions by
 pp. 14897–14907. covariate shift adaptation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
[12] F. Szatkowski, M. Pyla, M. Przewi˛eźlikowski, S. Cygert, B. Twardowski, (NIPS), 2020, pp. 11539–11551.
 and T. Trzciński, “Adapt your teacher: Improving knowledge distillation [34] Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Shi, J. Liu, and X. Hou, “Revisiting batch norfor exemplar-free continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. malization for practical domain adaptation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Comput. Vis. Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2023, pp. 3504–3509. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2016, pp. 1–10.
[13] Z. Gu et al., “Remembering normality: Memory-guided knowledge [35] W. Zhou, C. Xu, and J. McAuley, “BERT learns to teach: Knowledge
 distillation for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF distillation with meta learning,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16401–16409. Linguistics, 2022, pp. 7037–7049.
[14] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “EfficientAD: Accurate visual [36] B. Heo, J. Kim, S. Yun, H. Park, N. Kwak, and J. Y. Choi,
 anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF “A comprehensive overhaul of feature distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 127–137. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1921–1930.
HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION 5018713

[37] S. Kornblith, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Do better ImageNet models trans- Yongqiang Tang received the B.S. degree from
 fer better?” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. the Department of Automation, Central South Uni-
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2656–2666. versity, Changsha, Hunan, China, in 2014, and the
[38] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, Chi-
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008. nese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China,
[39] Y. Wang, L. Cheng, M. Duan, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, and S. Kong, in 2019.
 “Improving knowledge distillation via regularizing feature norm and He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 direction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Jan. 2023, State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelpp. 20–37. ligence Systems, Institute of Automation, CAS.
[40] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot- He has published more than 60 papers in major
 the-difference self-supervised pretraining for anomaly detection and international journals and conferences including the
 segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, ICML, NeurIPS, SIGKDD, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS
 pp. 392–408. AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE
[41] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3D- P ROCESSING (TIP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA (TMM), IEEE
 AD dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” in T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 Proc. 17th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag. Comput. Graph. Theory N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS), IEEE T RANS -
 Appl., 2022, pp. 202–213. ACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE), IEEE
[42] B. S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” in Proc. T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING (TGRS), IEEE
 Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2016, pp. 87.1–87.12. T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY
 (TCSVT), and IEEE J OURNAL OF B IOMEDICAL AND H EALTH I NFORMAT-
[43] D. Brotons, T. Vogels, and H. Hendrikx, “Exponential moving average of
 ICS (JBHI). His current research interests include machine learning, computer
 weights in deep learning: Dynamics and benefits,” Trans. Mach. Learn.
 vision, and data mining.
 Res., pp. 1–27, Jan. 2024.

 Yuan Xie received the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 (CAS), Beijing, China, in 2013.
 He is currently a Professor at the School of
 Computer Science and Technology, East China Nor-
 Wenrui Hu received the B.S. degree from the mal University, Shanghai, China. He has published
 School of Optoelectronics, Beijing Institute of Tech- more than 100 papers in major international journology, Beijing, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. nals and conferences including the ICML, NeurIPS,
 degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese CVPR, IJCAI, CIKM, ACMMM, IEEE T RANS -
 Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, in 2014. ACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE
 He was an Associate Professor at the Precision I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 Perception and Control Research Center, Institute ON I MAGE P ROCESSING (TIP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA
 of Automation, CAS. He is currently a Researcher (TMM), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANS -
 at China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing. His ACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS),
 research interests include computer vision, pattern IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE),
 recognition, and artificial intelligence. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING (TGRS),
 and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECH -
 NOLOGY (TCSVT). His current research interests include machine learning,
 computer vision, and data mining.

 Wensheng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree
 Wei Yu received the B.S. degree from the Depart- in pattern recognition and intelligent systems
 ment of Computer Engineering, Beijing University from the Institute of Automation, Chinese
 of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China,
 China, in 1994, and the master’s degree from the in 2000.
 School of Computer Science and Technology, BUPT, He joined the Institute of Software, CAS, in 2001.
 in 1997. He is a Professor of machine learning and data
 He was an Associate Professor at the School of mining and the Director of the Research and
 Computer Science and Technology, BUPT. He is Development Department, Institute of Automation,
 currently the Director of the Service Technol- Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). He is also
 ogy Department, China Mobile Research Institute, with Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China.
 Beijing. His research interests include telecommuni- His research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition, and
cation network, Internet, big data, and artificial intelligence. artificial intelligence.