IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 2313

 Reliable Open-Set Network Traffic Classification
 Xueman Wang , Yipeng Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yingxu Lai , Zhiyu Hao ,
 and Alex X. Liu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The widespread use of modern network communications necessitates effective resource control and management
in TCP/IP networks. However, most existing network traffic
classification methods are limited to labeled known classes and
struggle to handle open-set scenarios, where known classes coexist
with significant volumes of unknown classes of traffic. To solve
this problem more accurately and reliably, we propose RoNeTC.
This method achieves high-precision classification by enhancing
feature extraction and quantifying the reliability of classification Fig. 1. The red ‘×’ marks indicate instances where unknown classes have
decisions through uncertainty estimation. For feature extraction, been incorrectly classified as known classes.
we divide each packet of a flow into three views for parallel
training, integrating both local and global feature representations
across multiple packets to enhance accuracy. We devise a second- which can only recognize known application classes. As
order classification probability to quantify the reliability of shown in Fig. 1, in open-set scenarios containing both known
the classifier’s results and to visualize the reliability of openset flow classification in terms of uncertainty. Additionally, we and unknown classes, traditional closed-set classifiers fail to
dynamically fuse classification decisions from multiple views, identify unknown classes of flows. Typically, they wrongly
evaluating decision uncertainty to classify known and unknown classify all unknown classes as known ones, significantly
flows and ensure robust, reliable results. We compare RoNeTC reducing the accuracy of the classification results. To address
with four state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in six open-set scenar- this issue, several scholars have begun initial explorations into
ios. RoNeTC outperforms the other methods by an average of
25.94% in F1 across all open-set scenarios, indicating its superior correctly classifying known and unknown application traffic in
performance in open-set network traffic classification. open-set scenarios.
 Open-set network traffic classification can be broadly cat-
 Index Terms—Network security and privacy, open-world network traffic classification, unknown classes, deep learning. egorized into two groups based on the type of model input:
 packet payload-based methods [4], [5] and packet time seriesbased methods [1]. The packet payload method uses raw bytes
 I. I NTRODUCTION from the packet as model inputs. However, features focuses
 solely on the byte contents within a packet, making it difficult
T HIS paper focuses on network traffic classification in
 open-set environments, which are scenarios that contain
both known and unknown classes of network traffic. Network
 to capture the correlation between different packets of a flow.
 Methods based on packet time series primarily use the total
traffic classification is a task that associates network traffic packet length from the network layer as input and focus on
with application protocols or the applications that generate constructing the time series correlation of packets in a flow.
the traffic. It is crucial for network security areas such as dif- However, these methods often omit crucial protocol fields,
ferentiated services, network intrusion detection, and resource such as port number, window size, and server name indication,
assignment [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. in the transport or application layers, which are vital for
However, with the rapid development of network technology, classifying network traffic.
a new challenge has emerges. This challenge arises from Open-set network traffic classification can also be roughly
the mismatch between the increasing number of unknown divided into two categories according to its threshold division:
application classes and the limitations of traditional classifiers, methods based on classification probability thresholds [4], [5]
 and methods based on gradient thresholds [1]. The classi-
 Received 11 June 2024; revised 7 December 2024 and 24 January 2025; fication probability threshold-based uses a softmax function
accepted 10 February 2025. Date of current version 27 February 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of to output a classification probability value for each sample
China under Grant 62472011 and in part by the Beijing Natural Science and divides the probabilistic threshold to classify known and
Foundation under Grant L244009. The associate editor coordinating the review unknown flow with the help of a Cumulative Distribution
of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Mika Ylianttila.
(Corresponding author: Yipeng Wang.) Function (CDF) of probability scores. The gradient threshold-
 Xueman Wang, Yipeng Wang, and Yingxu Lai are with the College based methods evaluate the feed-forward inference derived
of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, from backpropagation and classify by evaluating gradient sen-
China (e-mail: wangxueman@emails.bjut.edu.cn; yipeng.wang1@gmail.com;
laiyingxu@bjut.edu.cn). sitivity for known and unknown classes flows. Both methods
 Zhiyu Hao is with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 102629, China use softmax to output the classification probability value of
(e-mail: haozy@zgclab.edu.cn). the flow and assign the corresponding labels based on the
 Alex X. Liu is with Midea Group, Foshan 528311, China (e-mail:
alexliu360@outlook.com). classification probability. However, since the softmax function
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3544067 tends to inflates the classification probability values due to
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Next, to measure the reliability of classification decisions,
 we construct second-order classification probabilities using the
 Dirichlet distribution. The Dirichlet distribution is parameterized with evidence supporting the classification, forming
 a distribution of classification probabilities distributions and
 expressing decision reliability through uncertainty estimates.
 Finally, dynamically fuse classification decisions from multiple views. The uncertainty of each view’s classification
 decision is used as a weight, resulting in the final reliable
Fig. 2. Classification probability density figure for known and unknown classification decision and the overall decision uncertainty. In
classes output by softmax function.
 open-set flow classification, we distinguish between known
 and unknown classes based on decision uncertainty and further
 subdivide the known classes of flows based on the probability
its computational mechanism, leading to unreliable results value of the decision.
[12], [13]. This issue becomes more pronounced in open-set Our major contributions in this paper can be concluded as
scenarios. follows:
 As shown in Fig. 2, for the unknown class flows, the • We propose RoNeTC, a novel robust and reliable method
softmax function still outputs highly confident classification for open-set network traffic classification. RoNeTC
probability value (> 95%) and wrongly assigns the unknown achieves reliable classification results by measuring the
class flows to the known class label sets, resulting in unreliable degree of reliability of the classification decisions and
results. accurately distinguishing between known and unknown
 In this paper, we propose RoNeTC, a Reliable Open- classes based on decision uncertainty.
Set Network Traffic Classification. RoNeTC is based on • We combine multi-view and global-local feature reprea key insight: Due to a priori knowledge of the known sentations to achieve fine-grained feature characterization.
classes, the classification decision output by the classifier for Reliable classification decisions are obtained by conknown class flows, which is the probability mass function structing second-order classification probabilities and
of the sample, is highly certain. For unknown class flows, decision uncertainty estimates. In addition, we dynamthe probability mass function is uncertain. Therefore, we ically fuse classification decisions from multiple views
can deal with the classification problem of network traffic based on uncertainty, enhancing the reliability and robustin an open-set environment by quantifying the reliability of ness of open-set classification.
the classifier’s output decision. This involves enhancing the • We compare RoNeTC with four SOTA open-set clasclassifier’s decision process by utilizing uncertainty estimates, sification methods across six open-set scenarios. The
adding a metric into the classifier’s decision in the form of experiments show that RoNeTC outperforms the other
a second-order classification probability, and visualising the methods in F1 by an average of 25.94% in all openreliability of the classification decision in an intuitively prob- set scenarios, demonstrating its superior classification
abilistic manner. For known class flows, the classifier outputs a capabilities.
classification probability value with a highly confident decision The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we
reliability metric, leveraging prior knowledge from training. introduce several recent related works. In Sections III and IV,
In contrast, for unknown class flows, due to the absence of we present the technical details of each phase of RoNeTC. In
training samples and inconsistency with known class distribu- Section V, we evaluate RoNeTC with real-world application
tions, the classifier still provides a classification probability datasets. We compare RoNeTC with existing methods in
value but with a lower confidence decision metric. Using Section VI. Finally, we conclude our work in Section VII.
this decision reliability metric, we can accurately distinguish
between known and unknown class flows and subdivide known II. R ELATED W ORK
classes.
 Network traffic classification can be broadly divided into
 RoNeTC aims to classify known and unknown classes in
 closed-set and open-set scenarios, depending on the applicaopen-set scenarios while ensuring the reliability and robustness
 tion environment. Table I provides a summary of the related
of classification decisions. To fully utilize the effective inforwork.
mation from packets, our input includes raw bytes from the
network layer, transport layer, and application layer of multiple
packets in one flow. Combined with multi-view learning, each A. Network Traffic Classification in the Closed-Set Scenarios
view captures global features across multiple packets and local In recent years, the field of network traffic classification
features within a single packet. To avoid inflated classification [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [18], [23] in a closedprobabilities from the softmax layer, we remove it and model set setting has experienced rapid advancement, fueled by the
the second-order classification probabilities. This approach proliferation of deep learning techniques. Li et al. [2] were
provides trustworthy classification results with an uncer- the first to use deep learning techniques to analyze packet
tainty estimation metric for the reliability of the classification payloads for network traffic classification. They designed a
decision. BSNN network that consists of a recurrent neural network

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2315

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION

and an attention mechanism. Aceto et al. proposed MIMETIC [5] is a classification method for analyzing encrypted network
[3], a multi-model deep learning solution for network traffic traffic using path signature features. It constructs traffic paths
classification. MIMETIC enables the examination of net- based on session packet lengths, converts these into salient
work traffic from complementary views. Later, Aceto et al. structural features, and employs multi-scale path signatures
[14] expanded on the idea of multi-modality based on deep alongside random forests for both closed and open-set traffic
learning and proposed DISTILLER, which combines deep classification. However, in the open-set context, ETC-PS is
learning with multi-task learning. The aim of DISTILLER limited to two coarse classifications: known and unknown.
is to overcome the limitations of single-task deep learning. However, all the open-set network traffic classification meth-
Nascita et al. [15] pioneered the application of deep learning ods mentioned above rely on regular classification networks
model interpretation in network classification by introducing with softmax functions to compute classification probabilities.
the MIMETIC-ENHANCED framework. This framework aims In the open-set scenarios, the use of softmax to calculate
to enhance the reliability and interpretability of network flows classification probabilities is not reliable.
using interpretable artificial intelligence (XAI) techniques.
Xiao et al. proposed EBSNN [16], an extended byte segment
neural network to classify network traffic. EBSNN divides C. Discussion on Conformal Prediction
a packet into header segments and payload segments, which Uncertainty is defined as the measure of the reliability
are then fed into encoders composed of the recurrent neural of classification results, unlike traditional models that only
networks with the attention mechanism. Wang et al. [10] output the classification probability of a sample. Our proposed
proposed TaTic, a two-stage early classification scheme for method, RoNeTC, outputs the model’s classification decision
encrypted traffic, which quickly distinguishes between ‘easy through a Dirichlet distribution, which includes the predicted
flow’ and ‘hard flow’ by observing only the first few packets. value of the sample and the uncertainty. Visualize how con-
Nascita et al. [19] employed advanced interpretable techniques fident the model is in the decisions it outputs by quantifying
to analyze flow reliability at the biflow level within a mul- uncertainty.
timodal, multitask framework, thereby achieving faster and Conformal Prediction is a framework designed to provide
more efficient classification models. reliable and quantitative uncertainty estimates for ML and
 DL prediction results. Based on statistical theory, it expresses
 prediction uncertainty by generating a confidence interval or
B. Network Traffic Classification in the Open-Set Scenarios a confidence set instead of a single point prediction.
 All of the above methods assume that there are only known We demonstrate the advantages of using the Dirichlet disclass flows in the environment. However, in real applica- tribution in open-set network traffic classification from the
tions there is a mixture of known class flows and unknown following points.
class flows. Therefore, open-set network traffic classification, Sample-Level Distribution Information: The Dirichlet diswhich is crucial for improving network traffic management, tribution can provide sample-level probabilistic distribution
has become a focus of attention. AutoUA [4] is an open- information for open-set network traffic classification, enabling
set flow classification method for autonomous learning. This finer-grained decision-making. In contrast, Conformal Predicmethod involves conducting flow classification on an open-set tion only offers confidence intervals, which are insufficient for
classification dataset using a classifier trained with known- detailed analysis in complex scenarios.
class samples, and then setting a probability threshold to Dynamic Adaptability: Encrypted traffic often contains both
classify known and unknown-class. GradBP [1] is similar to plaintext and encrypted packets. By leveraging a multi-view
AutoUA, but it differs in threshold calculation. Instead of approach to process network traffic and incorporating the
using a probability threshold, it employs a gradient threshold. Dirichlet distribution, it is possible to dynamically integrate
Here, the threshold is derived from the assessment of feed- information from different views, thereby better adapting to
forward inference through gradient backpropagation. ETC-PS complex network traffic environments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 3. Overview of RoNeTC, including training phase and classification phase.

 Handling Unknown Samples: In open-set network traffic
classification, where the quantity and distribution of unknown
classes are unpredictable, the Dirichlet distribution does not
rely on historical data calibration. It can efficiently adapt
to changes in data distribution in real-time. In contrast,
Conformal Prediction requires offline calibration, lacking the
flexibility and dynamism needed for such scenarios.

 III. T RAINING P HASE OF RO N E TC
 Our proposed RoNeTC framework, designed for reliable
network traffic classification in open-set settings, is depicted in
Fig. 3. It comprises four modules: Flow Preprocessing, Global-
Local Feature Extractor, Opinion Generator, and Opinion
Fusion. In the training phase, since no samples of unknown
class are involved, we can only rely on the prior knowledge of Fig. 4. A flow is divided into three parts, each represented as a separate view:
 IP Header, Transport Layer Header, and Packet Payload, and then encoded
the known class. To obtain more reliable classification results into a two-dimensional tensor.
for open-set network traffic, we design the Flow Preprocessing
module to divide each packet of a bi-directional flow into
three distinct views according to the TCP/IP protocol stack.
 views to comprehensively capture the features of known class
Subsequently, we apply the deep learning-based feature extracflows. We intercept the first l packets of a bi-directional
tor to each view, performing inter-packet and intra-packet
 flow, where each packet shares the same 5-tuple (i.e., the
feature refinement to achieve global-local feature extraction.
 same source IP address, source port, destination IP address,
Each view then outputs a classification opinion, namely, a
 destination port, and the Layer 4 protocol). To more finely
classification decision accompanied by a measure of decision
 utilize packet characteristics, we divide each packet of a flow
reliability termed the opinion uncertainty, generated through
 into three views according to the TCP/IP protocol stack,
an opinion generator that utilizes second-order classification
 as shown in Fig. 4. In this module, the network layer is
probabilities. Finally, the ultimate classification decision and
 represented by the ‘IP Header View’, the transport layer
its associated uncertainty are determined by dynamically inteby the ‘Transport Layer Header View’, and the application
grating all classification opinions through the opinion fusion
 layer by the ‘Packet Payload View’. Each packet of a flow
module, using the uncertainty of each viewpoint as a weighting
 is divided into three sets of data to form three views, and
factor.
 the one-dimensional bytes of each view are converted into
 two-dimensional tensor through the embedding layer. A flow
A. Flow Preprocessing sample is processed by the flow processing module to generate
 The main objective of this subsection is to transform raw two-dimensional tensors, representing three views of multiple
network traffic into a tensor for use in subsequent feature packets within a single flow. To prepare for the subsequent
extractor. To construct this input tensor, we combine multiple deep learning-based feature extractor, each view is trained in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2317

Fig. 5. (a) The Global-Local Feature Extractor. (b) The schematic of global feature representation. Each color represents a packet. Medium-sized solid grid
lines indicate patches, assumed to be p × p in size (divided by dashed lines). The Transformer operates at the corresponding positions between the patches
(shown by the red curves with arrows).

parallel within the feature extractor. This design facilitates the use the Transformer [24], [25] to compute global dependengeneration of classification decisions and their corresponding cies at corresponding positions between patches, generating
reliability metrics for each view. XT ∈ RP×N×D . We then fold XT back into its original tensor
 arrangement to obtain XF ∈ RH×W×D .

B. Global-Local Feature Extractor XT (p) = Transformer(XU (p)), 1 < p < P (1)
 The Global-Local Feature Extractor is designed to extract In the experimental setup, we use the initial first l packets
local features within individual packets and global features of each flow. To capture the global feature representation of
across multiple packets. This extractor, which combines CNN the entire flow, we design a specific method: every r packets
and Transformer techniques, is illustrated in Fig. 5(a). In are arranged in a non-overlapping, cross-shaped configuration
contrast to the weak correlation observed within single packets and combined into a tensor that serves as a channel. As an
of a flow sequence, the inter-packet correlation proves to example, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b), suppose we process the
be strong and significant [17]. This characteristic sets our initial first 12 packets of a bi-directional flow and splice every
approach apart from prior methods [8], [16], which only four packets together to form a tensor that serves as a channel.
account for local information from a single packet. It allows us This approach results in a total of three channels. Finally, a
to fully extract flow characteristics from both intra- and inter- p× p patch is delineated on each channel (with p commonly set
packet aspects. Therefore, we designed a global-local feature to 2 in the experiments), and Transformer operation is used to
extraction module to provide sufficient evidence for the sub- perform global feature extraction at the corresponding position
sequent modeling of second-order classification probabilities of each patch.
and for estimating uncertainty in classification decisions. Feature Fusion: In this process, XF is projected into a
 The Global-Local Feature Extractor is comprised of three low C-dimensional space using a point-wise convolution and
parts: the local feature representation, the global feature then combined with X via a concatenation operation. These
representation, and the feature fusion. Specifically, for an input concatenated features are subsequently fused by another CNN
tensor X ∈ RH×W×C , where H, W, and C are the height, width, layer, producing X0 ∈ RH×W×C .
and number of channels of the input embedding of the single
view, respectively.
 Local Feature Representation: This part is employed to C. Single View Opinion Generator
encode the local feature information of a single packet in In order to quantify the degree of reliability of the classifithe flow sequence. It uses a standard convolutional layer with cation results output by the classifier, we express the reliability
a 3 × 3 receptive field, followed by a point-wise (or 1 × 1) of these results in a convenient and intuitive probabilistic
convolution layer that projects the tensor to a high-dimensional manner. We design the opinion generator specifically to add a
space (D-dimensional space, where D > C) by learning linear reliability metric to the classification results of the classifier.
combinations of the input channels to generate XL ∈ RH×W×D . In this context, the opinion refers to the outcome produced by
 Global Feature Representation: This part combines all the the opinion generator, which includes both the classification
packets of a flow to generate a global feature representation. decision and uncertainty value that indicates the reliability of
First, we unfold XL into N non-overlapping small blocks, that decision. In this module, we use uncertainty estimation to
known as patches p ∈ {1, 2, · · · , P}. Patches at the same posi- measure the reliability of the classification decision for each
tion across different packets represent the same field within view. This is achieved by modeling second-order classification
those packets. Extracting features from patches at the same probabilities, which form a distribution of classification probaposition enables capturing the state transition information of bility distributions with uncertainty. Since the softmax function
the same field across packets, resulting in XU ∈ RP×N×D . Here inflates the probability values, it can easily output high prob-
P = w × h is the patch size, w ≤ n and h ≤ n are the height ability values for the unknown classes in open-set scenarios
and width of the patch, respectively, N = HW P is the number of [12], [13], leading to the misclassification of unknown classes
patches, and the number of channels D is unchanged. Next, we as known ones. To avoid the above problem, we replace

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

the softmax function with a softplus layer and introduce the
Dirichlet distribution to uncertainty estimation, which helps in
constructing the distribution of the classification probability
distribution [26], [27].
 More specifically, for the v-th view, assume there are K
classes. The value derived from the softplus layer serves
as a measure of support for classifying the sample into a
specific class k (i.e., Evidence ev = [1, · · · , evk , · · · , evK ]), where
evk ≥ 0 represents the value of evidence learned by the model
to classify this sample into the k-th class. Parameterizing Fig. 6. Fuse the classification opinions of the two views and use the three
the Dirichlet distribution αv = 1, · · · , αvk , · · · , αvK (where
 
 vertices of the triangle to represent the three classes. Within the triangle, red
αvk = evk + 1) with evidence, the Dirichlet distribution is given indicates high probability density, while blue signifies low probability density.

by:
 K
 8
 < 1 pαk −1 for p ∈ SK
 decisions for each view in each sample adaptively. Therefore,
 ˆ Y
 D(p | α) = B(α) k=1 k (2) it is necessary to dynamically fuse the classification decisions
 ˆ
 : from all views based on the uncertainty in the opinions. In
 0 otherwise
 subsection III-A, we partition a flow into three views (i.e.,
 The Dirichlet distribution is a probability density func- IP Header, Transport Layer n˚ Header, o and Packet Payload) to
 tion for possible values of the probability mass func- v K
 learn the opinions M = bk k=1 , u for each view separately,
 v v
 tion (PMF) p. Here, B(α) is the K-dimensional beta each consisting of the classification decision and its associated
nfunction, and SK is the Dirichlet strength, o and SK = uncertainty, which serves as an indicator of the decision’s
 PK
 p | k=1 pk = 1 and 0 ≤ p1 , . . . , pK ≤ 1 . reliability. In order to fuse the three views with classification
 We use the Dirichlet distribution to quantify the probability decision
 ˚ uncertainty to form a reliable final joint opinion
density of classification, treating each classification decision M = {bk }k=1 K
 , u , we introduce the Dempster-Shafer evidence
from different views as distinct opinions. This method assigns theory [26], [29], [30] to fuse the classification opinions from
a belief score b to each class and introduces uncertainty u to different sources.
the classification decision. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the figure presentsn an exampleo
 ˚ 1 K
 X K of fusing opinions from two views, M1 = bk k=1 , u1
 uv + bvk = 1 (3) n˚
 K
 o
 k=1 and M2 = b2k k=1 , u2 . Each view gathers evidence e and
where uv ≥ 0 and bvk ≥ 0 (k = 1, . . . , K) represent decision parameterizes the Dirichlet distribution to obtain the view with
result uncertainty and the belief score (i.e. probability) of class uncertainty u and belief score b of classification decision.
k-th, respectively. The calculation of these values is expressed Ultimately, the final joint opinion M is then derived using
as follows: the fusion criterion.
 ev K M = M1 ⊕ M2 (5)
 bvk = kv , uv = v
 S S The specific belief score and uncertainty are given by:
 X K K
 X
 Sv = evi + 1 = avi (4) bk =
 1
 b1k b2k + b1k u2 + b2k u1 , u =
  1
 u1 u2 (6)
 i=1 i=1 1−C 1−C
 v C = i, j b1i b2j represents a measure of the degree of conflict
 P
where S is the Dirichlet intensity at the v-th view.
 When the classifier detects increased evidence for the k- 1
 between two probability score sets. 1−C is the normalization
th class in a sample, both the probability and belief score factor.
for that class increase, thereby reducing the uncertainty of The joint opinion M from the three views is also derived
its classification decision. Conversely, when evidence is scant, based on the aforementioned fusion criterion. The subsequent
the belief score approaches zero, which increases the overall evidence and Dirichlet distribution parameters are induced as:
uncertainty of the classification decision, tending it toward K
one on the scale. Ideally, for samples from known classes, S = , ek = bk × S , ak = ek + 1 (7)
 u
the uncertainty of their decisions is close to zero due to
 To more concretely illustrate the fusion of opinions from
prior knowledge, while for samples from unknown classes,
 multiple views, we present the example of two views in
the uncertainty is significantly higher than zero due to having
 open-set scenarios. When there is a lack of evidence favoring
never been seen. For class k in the current view v, the expected
 classification in both views, this leads to low joint belief scores
probability p̂vk of an opinion is equal to the projection of the
 αv and final prediction probabilities, and increased joint uncer-
Dirichlet distribution onto the base, i.e., p̂vk = S kv [28]. tainty in the classification opinions. In contrast, if both views
 receive sufficient evidence, the outcome is high joint belief
D. Multi-View Opinion Fusion scores and reliable, high-scoring final prediction probabilities,
 Since the reliability of classification decisions varies across alongside reduced joint uncertainty. When a significant dispardifferent views and samples, we need to assess the reliability of ity exists in the amount of classification evidence between the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2319

two views, we give preference to the view with the stronger IV. C LASSIFICATION P HASE OF RO N E TC
evidence. Thus, the joint uncertainty for unknown samples, The aim of the classification phase is to identify unknown
which the classifier has never encountered, is significantly classes and accurately classify known classes into their respechigher than for known classes. Based on the aforementioned tive corresponding label sets. After the training phase is
analysis, the joint uncertainty between known and unknown complete, the feature extractors for the three views and the
samples varies greatly—specifically, the classification decision opinion fusion module, which includes the joint classification
uncertainty for known samples is considerably lower than for decision and its associated uncertainty, are utilized. This uncerunknown samples. Consequently, we apply this principle to tainty refers to the reliability of the decision. Subsequently,
classify known and unknown classes in the open-set scenario. the knowledge gained from the aforementioned processes is
 used in the open-set classification phase. In this phase, the
E. Joint Loss threshold is determined using joint uncertainty to distinguish
 In this subsection, we construct our loss function. The between known and unknown classes. Uncertainty hinges
common cross-entropy loss function is: on the characteristic that flows with higher belief scores in
 K
 X classification and more reliable classification outcomes have
 Lce = − yi j log pi j ,
 
 (8) correspondingly lower uncertainty, thus being classified into
 j=1 the known class. Conversely, flows with lower belief scores
where pi j is the prediction probability that the i-th sample is and unreliable classification results exhibit correspondingly
predicted to be class j. Since we use the Dirichlet distribution higher uncertainty, hence being classified into the unknown
to simulate the distribution of the classification probability class.
distribution, and we denote the loss function after amending To facilitate the identification of the optimal threshold,
Eq. 8 as: we draw inspiration from Youden’s index [31]. We define a
 2 3 function η(σ) = 2 ∗ T PRs(σ) − FPRs(σ) based on the true
 K K
 positive rates (TPRs) and false positive rates (FPRs) of the
 Z X
 1 Y αi j −1
 Lace (αi ) =
 
 4 −yi j log pi j 5 pi j dpi samples. The optimal uncertainty threshold is then determined
 B (αi )
 j=1 j=1
 by identifying the threshold σ̂ that maximizes the function,
 K
 X i.e., σ̂ = argmaxσ η(σ), and considering the range around this
 = yi j ψ (S i ) − ψ αi j
 
 (9) threshold.
 j=1

where ψ(·) is the digamma function and Lace represents the V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
integral of the cross-entropy on the Dirichlet distribution. In this section, we detail the experimental setup, parameter
 To differentiate the classification evidence generated by data selection and ablation study of RoNeTC.
samples according to their contributions to the classification,
more evidence is produced for the correct labels of the known
classes, while less evidence is generated for the open-set A. Experimental Settings
unknown classes. We penalize unknown classes by using KL 1) Dataset: We use three publicly available datasets for
divergence to produce less evidence of classification, The KL comprehensive evaluation in both closed-set and open-set
divergence term is denoted as: settings. Detailed information on each dataset is provided in
 Table II.
 KL D (pi | α̃i ) kD (pi | 1)
  
 0   1 Dataset-I: The UNSW traffic dataset was sourced from
 PK
 Γ α̃
 k=1 ik different web-based devices and collected and stored in a smart
 = log @ QK A device environment built on campus by Sivanathan et al. [32].
 Γ(K) k=1 Γ (α̃ik ) The data collection period spanned from October 1, 2016, to
 April 13, 2017, covering approximately 26 weeks, and was
 2 0 13
 XK XK
 + (α̃ik − 1) 4ψ (α̃ik ) − ψ @ α̃i j A5 (10) organized into different pcaps by date. The selection criteria
 k=1 j=1 for the classes specified exactly 1,000 samples per class.
 Dataset-II: The CIC dataset (2022) [33] is utilized for the
where Γ(·) is the gamma function and ãi = yi + (1 − yi ) ai is
 behavioral analysis and vulnerability testing of various IoT
the adjustment parameter of the Dirichlet distribution that is
 devices that operate on protocols such as IEEE 802.11, Zigbee,
set to prevent the evidence of true label from being penalized
 and Z-Wave. We select 500 samples for each class.
to zero. Consequently, the loss function of a single view flow
 Dataset-III: The Mapps dataset [34], derived from the
feature is then:
 ‘MApps’ public mobile application traffic dataset, was col-
 L (αi ) = Lace (αi ) + λt KL D (pi | α̃i ) kD (pi | 1)
  
 (11) lected by Pham et al. in 2021. The authors recruited ten student
where λt > 0 is the balance factor. Combining the classification volunteers to collect traffic consistently over six months using
opinions of flow characteristics from three views, the final joint eight different smartphones. We chose flow numbers ranging
classification loss function is: from 500 to 1,000 per class.
 N
 " 3
 # To rigorously and comprehensively evaluate the reliability
 Lall =
 X
 L (αi ) +
 X
 L αi v
 
 (12) and robustness of RoNeTC in open-set settings, we elaboi=1 v=1
 rately established six unknown scenarios reflecting open-set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II stack: the IP Header, the Transport layer Header, and the
 B RIEF D ESCRIPTION OF THE DATASET Packet Payload—collectively referred to as the three views.
 In this way, we can perform a multi-view adaptive fusion
 of classification opinions, based on the classification decision
 and its uncertainty for each view of each flow, with the
 uncertainty indicating the reliability of that decision. This
 process results in the final classification decision and its associated uncertainty, which are then applied to the classification
 tasks in open-set scenarios. We select appropriate parameters
 for open-set scenarios in six open-set settings (Scenario-A
 to Scenario-F), with the experimental results displayed in
 Table IV. Its experimental results in the conventional closedset environment are shown in Table V.
 1) Open-Set Network Traffic Classification: In the following, we evaluate the effects of the parameter experiments
 for each of the six open-set scenarios, and the results are
 shown in Table IV. As the number of bytes b and the number
 of packets l increase, the F1 also increases. However, in
 Scenario-A, Scenario-C, and Scenario-F, where b is 128 and
 256, the increase in the size of the input tensor leads to
 the model capturing more useless features along with useful
 ones. Furthermore, as the number of packets l increases, the
 dimension of the input tensor also increases, leading to a rise
 in the volume of the input space. This results in sparser data
 and higher computational complexity. Therefore, in all these
 scenarios, as the values of b and l increase, the F1 initially
 TABLE III increase and then decrease.
 O PEN -S ET S CENARIOS D IVISION In Scenario-A, we design Dataset-I as the known class
 sample set and Dataset-II as the unknown class sample set.
 We select 128 bytes (b = 128) and 8 packets (l = 8) as the
 optimal parameters for the current scenario. As demonstrated
 in Table IV, this configuration results in the highest openset classification F1 of 96.44% among various combinations
 of byte and packet counts. Specifically, this parameter set
 achieves a Rec of 95.92% and a Pre of 97.22%. Scenario-
 B, in alignment with the known class samples of Scenario-A,
conditions based on three datasets, as detailed in Table III.
 employs Dataset-I, whereas the unknown class samples are
For clarity, we take Scenarios-A as an example. We use the
 derived from Dataset-III. For this configuration, we choose
entire set of Dataset-I as known samples, partitioning them
 256 bytes (b = 256) and 16 packets (l = 16) as the optimal
into training, validation, and test sets that represent 60%, 20%,
 parameters. With these settings, the classification F1 reaches
and 20% of the number of each class, respectively. In the
 a maximum value of 98.16%, and its corresponding Rec =
context of open-set testing, all samples from Dataset-II in
 98.11% and Pre = 98.32% are also close to the maximum
Scenario-A are treated as unknown classes and included in
 value. Although Scenario-B and Scenario-A share the same
the test sets.
 known classes, the open-set classification performance of
 2) Metrics: We define the metrics employed to evaluate
 Scenario-B surpasses that of Scenario-A. This improvement
RoNeTC, specifically Recall, Precision, and F-macro, which
 is attributed to the greater disparity between the known and
will hereafter be referred to as Rec, Pre, and F1, respectively.
 unknown class samples in Scenario-B, making them easier to
The source code is available at: https://github.com/xuemandistinguish.
xm/RoNetTC/tree/main.
 The known class samples for both Scenarios-C and
 Scenarios-D are sourced from Dataset-II. In Scenario-C, the
B. Parameter Selection unknown class samples are taken from Dataset-I and are
 In order to achieve better classification performance, we entirely categorized as the test set. For this scenario, we select
optimize the experimental setup through parameter selec- 256 bytes (b = 256) and 4 packets (l = 4) as the optimal
tion experiments. We capture the initial first l packets of parameters. Under these conditions, the open-set classification
each bi-directional flow, where l ∈ {4, 8, 12, 16}, and inter- achieves a maximum F1 of 94.56%. Scenario-D is based on
cept the initial first b bytes of each packet, where b ∈ Dataset-III as the unknown class, and b = 256, l = 16 is
{64, 128, 256}. According to Section III-A, we partition the selected as the best parameter for this scenario, based on
packet into three components based on the TCP/IP protocol the criterion of maximum classification F1, which is 94.03%,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2321

 TABLE IV
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF O PEN -S ET PARAMETER S ELECTION

 TABLE V
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF C LOSED -S ET PARAMETER S ELECTION

corresponding to Rec of 91.68%, Pre of 97.27%. Scenarios-
C and D share the same known classes; however, Scenario-C
has approximately one-third the number of unknown samples
compared to Scenario-D. Consequently, the F1 for Scenario-C
is slightly higher than that of Scenario-D, despite the identical
known classes.
 Scenarios-E and F use Dataset-III as a known sample set. In
Scenario-E, Dataset-II is the unknown sample set, achieving
the highest classification F1 of 91.71%, which corresponds
to optimal parameters b = 256 and l = 16. However, in
Scenario-F, Dataset-I serves as the unknown class. Using Fig. 7. Uncertainty distribution KDE figures for Known and Unknown Classes
 in six open-set scenarios.
an F1 of 93.26% as the benchmark, the optimal parameters
selected are b = 256 and l = 4. Given that Scenarios-E and F
have a significantly larger number of known classes compared
to other scenarios, they exhibit the lowest classification F1. characteristics for both known and unknown classes. Ideally,
However, the larger quantity of unknown class samples in known classes should exhibit high belief scores and low
Scenario-E than in Scenario-F introduces additional classifica- uncertainty, while the optimal scenario for unknown classes is
tion interference, resulting in the lowest effect among the six characterized by low belief scores and high uncertainty. The
open-set classifications observed in Scenario-E. In contrast, uncertainty values of all known samples in the graph are tightly
Scenario-B, with its smaller number of known classes and clustered around the scale 0. However, in Fig. 7(c)(f), there
greater disparity between known and unknown class samples, is a slightly looser distribution of known classes due to the
achieves the highest classification F1 of 98.16% in the open- large number of known classes and the best effect of known
set classification. class classification is only 94.88%. Nevertheless, these values
 Uncertainty Analysis: As depicted in Fig. 7, we present a remain tightly concentrated on the left side of the x-axis. In
plot illustrating the uncertainty distribution for both known contrast, the uncertainty values of the unknown class samples
and unknown samples within the open-set context. In sub- should be far from the 0 point of the scale due to their lower
section III-D and section IV, we delve into the optimal belief scores. This is indeed the case for the unknown classes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VI
 R ESULTS OF V IEWS A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

 TABLE VII conduct extensive ablation studies on these two features. We
 R ESULTS OF C HANNEL A BLATION E XPERIMENTS assess the experimental outcomes using the F1, and the results
 are presented in Tables VI and Tables VII.
 1) Multi-View Ablation Studies: We analyze the ablation
 effects on the IP Header, Transport Layer Header, and Packet
 Payload by considering single-view and dual-view permutations, denoted as RoNeTC-S and RoNeTC-D, respectively. The
 results are presented in Table VI. Notably, among the three
 broad classes—RoNeTC-S, RoNeTC-D, and RoNeTC—our
 proposed three-view scheme, RoNeTC, consistently achieves
in the subfigure, all of which are essentially distant from the the highest F1 in all open-set scenarios, demonstrating superior
0 scale. This presents a stark contrast with the known classes, performance. On the contrary, the single-view RoNeTC-S
which are densely clustered around the 0 scale. Especially in exhibits the largest decline and the poorest performance in
Fig. 7(c)(f), the uncertainty values of certain unknown classes open-set classification. Although it splices three parts into
cluster around scale 1, providing a clear distinction from the a single view using the same amount of information as
known classes. RoNeTC, the performance still suffers from varying degrees
 2) Closed-Set Network Traffic Classification: Similarly, we of degradation. The results clearly demonstrate that employing
conduct a parametric analysis in the conventional closed-set multiple views to finely handle uncertainty estimation for each
environment, defined as the closed-set environment containing view and enhance their reliability proves more effective for
only known classes. The experimental results for the three open-set classification.
closed-set scenarios are presented in Table V. On Dataset-I, 2) Packet Splicing Methods for Global Feature Represenall combinations of the number of bytes and packets achieve tation: In this part, each packet in the flow is treated as
excellent classification results, with F1, Rec, and Pre all an individual tensor to form a channel, which we refer to
above 99%. The optimal results are observed in closed-set as RoNeTC-O. The results are presented in Table VII. As
network traffic classification using parameter settings of 128 described in subsection III-B, the global feature representation
bytes (b = 128) and 8 packets (l = 8), where all three illustrated in Fig. 5(b) employs a splice approach that arranges
metrics reach 99.96%. On Dataset-II, the effectiveness of every p packets of a flow in a non-overlapping, cross-shaped
traffic classification gradually improves as the number of bytes arrangement into a tensor and treats it as a channel.
increases. The optimal performance is achieved with a byte Our experiments show that RoNeTC achieves the best
count of 256 (b = 256) and a packet length of 4 (l = 4), performance in all six scenarios. More specifically, the F1
recording 99.11% for both F1 and Rec, and 99.13% for Pre. of RoNeTC-O decline in all open-set scenarios relative to
 As the number of classes increases and classification com- RoNeTC, indicating poorer performance in open-set clasplexity rises, there is a noticeable decrease in the overall sification. Most notably, the F1 in Scenario-F decreases
network traffic classification results. On Dataset-III, which significantly, highlighting that RoNeTC-O struggles in comhas the highest number of classes, the classification results plex situations with numerous known classes and ambiguous
are slightly weaker compared to the previous two closed-set identification of unknown classes. Our findings affirm that
datasets. However, with parameters set at b = 256 and l = 12, RoNeTC, based on the principle that the correlation between
it still achieves an F1 of 94.88%, a Rec of 94.39%, and a Pre packets is greater than within packets, delivers superior
of 96.04%. performance and greater robustness in challenging open-set
 environments.
C. Ablation Study
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the RoNeTC dynamic multi- VI. E XPERIMENTAL C OMPARISON W ITH SOTA M ETHODS
view uncertainty assessment and the global packet splicing In this section, in order to fully evaluate the reliability
approach within the global-local Transformer module, we and robustness of our proposed method, RoNeTC, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2323

 TABLE VIII TABLE IX
 C OMPARISON W ITH T HE SOTA M ETHODS IN THE C OMPARISON W ITH T HE SOTA M ETHODS IN THE O PEN -S ET S CENARIOS
 C LOSED -S ET S CENARIOS

conduct experimental comparisons with state-of-the-art
(SOTA) open-set network traffic classification methods in
two major scenarios: open-set and closed-set scenarios. The
SOTA methods for network traffic classification in open-set
scenarios are as follows:
 • ETC-PS [5]: ETC-PS constructs traffic paths using
 sequences of packet lengths, applies path transformations
 to extract information, and finally computes multi-scale
 path signatures to handle both open-set and closed-set
 network traffic methods. superior closed-set classification performance. On Dataset-I,
 • AutoUA [4]: AutoUA is an autonomous learning frame- RoNeTC attains an optimal 99.96% across all three metrics.
 work for open-set network traffic classification. It uses However, as the number of classes increases, the classifithe first l packets of each flow as input to build a cation effectiveness of all methods decreases. For instance,
 CNN network to identify network traffic. In the orig- in Dataset-III, which has the highest number of classes, all
 inal paper, AutoUA plots the Cumulative Distribution methods encounter the worst classification performance ability,
 Function (CDF) based on probability values, using the such as AutoUA obtaining an F1 of 87.77%. Nevertheless,
 probability values on the CDF corresponding to the 1 −  RoNeTC maintains strong recognition capabilities, reaching an
 ( represents Accuracy) of known classes as thresholds to optimal value of 94.88%. The confusion matrix of RoNeTC
 distinguish between known and unknown classes. is presented in the Appendix. Overall, our RoNeTC method
 • GradBP (max): GradBP [1] is a method for evaluating consistently achieves excellent results in network traffic clasfeed-forward inference using deep learning gradient back- sification on closed-set scenarios.
 propagation. It selects the gradient of the input layer
 from the first step of backpropagation as a threshold
 to classify flows into known and unknown classes. In B. Comparison on Open-Set Network Traffic Classification
 addition, GradBP is designed with two gradient thresh- Methods
 olding methods. The first one is GradBP (max), where the
 For the experimental comparison of network traffic classifigradient threshold is computed as the maximum value of
 cation for closed-set scenarios, the RoNeTC method achieves
 the gradient.
 excellent classification results. Next, we will move to more
 • GradBP (square root): The second gradient threshold
 complex open-set scenarios for further comparison. Our expermethod of GradBP is GradBP (square root). This method
 imental comparison results with four state-of-the-art open-set
 is the same as GradBP (max), except that its gradient
 network traffic classification methods across six open-set scethreshold is computed as the square root of the sum of
 narios are shown in Table IX.
 the squares of the gradient.
 Our proposed method, RoNeTC, consistently achieves the
 highest values across all metrics, demonstrating superior per-
A. Comparison on Closed-Set Network Traffic Classification formance in open-set classification compared to the other
Methods methods. Particularly in Scenario-B, RoNeTC excels with an
 We begin by comparing the performance of all methods on impressive F1 of 98.16%, which reflects excellent classificaregular closed-set network traffic classification to observe the tion of known classes and robust recognition of both known
experimental results, displayed in Table VIII. We conduct an and unknown classes in the open-set scenarios. RoNeTC
experimental comparison between RoNeTC and other SOTA also demonstrates excellent classification performance in the
open-set network traffic classification methods across three relatively complex Scenario-E and Scenario-F, achieving F1
closed-set datasets. On all datasets, our method RoNeTC of 91.71% and 93.26%, respectively. Combining the results
achieves the highest values on all metrics, demonstrating of previous closed-set comparison experiments, our RoNeTC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

method achieves excellent classification results on both closedset and open-set scenarios.
 ETC-PS [5] processes open-set network traffic by performing binary classification to distinguish between known
and unknown classes. To adapt this approach for identifying
unknown classes and further classifying known classes, we
plot the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the output
probability values of ETC-PS. We select the point corresponding to the last flat region of the CDF, where the probability
value stops increasing, as a threshold to distinguish the known
from the unknown class. In Table IX, the F1 of ETC-PS
in each open-set scenarios is second only to our method,
RoNeTC. It performs best in Scenario-A, achieving an F1 of
93.03%, which is 3.41% lower than that of RoNeTC. The
classification performance of ETC-PS decreases significantly
as the number of known classes increases, with the worst
results in Scenario-E, which has the largest number of known
and unknown classes. In this scenario, ETC-PS achieves an
F1 of only 70.79%, which is 20.92% lower compare to our
RoNeTC.
 AutoUA [4] is utilized in open-set network traffic comparison experiments, with parameter settings that are consistent
with the optimal parameters for each scenario, as derived
from Table IV. The results of these experiments are shown
in Table IX. Among all open-set scenarios, AutoUA achieved
its best performance in Scenario-F, recording the highest F1
of 65.85%, with a Rec of 87.11% and a Pre of 59.80%.
This indicates superior recognition of known classes over
unknown ones. Conversely, AutoUA was least effective in
Scenario-D, where it recorded an F1 of 36.11%, marking
 Fig. 8. Comparison of ROC curves and AUC values for the known and
a significant decrease of 57.92% compared to our method unknown classes in six open-set scenarios with the SOTA methods.
RoNeTC. Overall, in open-set scenarios, AutoUA’s recall
consistently exceeds its precision. This indicates that while
AutoUA is able to identify most flows of the known classes
(high recall), it also incorrectly classifies many unknown class GradBP (max) consistently outperforms GradBP (square root)
flows as known class flows (low precision). This suggests in open-set classification. Notably, GradBP (max) demonthat AutoUA’s ability to recognize unknown classes needs strates consistently higher Rec than Pre across all scenarios,
improvement. underscoring its strong ability to identify known classes.
 GradBP [1] uses the sequence of packet lengths for the Conversely, GradBP (square root) exhibits greater Pre than
first 100 packets from the original bi-directional flow as input Rec, indicating a more effective identification of unknown
for all training data in open-set scenarios, as specified in the classes.
original paper. The threshold calculation is divided into two To clearly illustrate the open-set classification capability,
methods: GradBP (max) and GradBP (square root). we plot the ROC curves for both known and unknown classes
 GradBP (max) achieves the best performance in Scenario-A and calculate the AUC values, as shown in Fig. 8. RoNeTC
among all the open-set scenarios, with 85.19% for F1, 92.08% consistently achieves the highest AUC values across varifor Rec, and 79.20% for Pre. This is the highest in both F1 and ous scenarios, performing best in Scenario-B with an AUC
Rec among all scenarios. However, compared to our proposed value of 99.66%. Its ROC curve is closest to the upper left
method, RoNeTC, the F1 of GradBP (max) is still lower corner, indicating a low false positive rate and a very high
by 11.25%. The weakest performance occurs in Scenario-B, true positive rate. This demonstrates that the classifier can
where the F1 is only 66.15% and the Rec significantly exceeds accurately classify known classes while rarely misclassifying
the Pre. Overall, GradBP (max) does not perform as well with unknown classes as known class flows, correctly identifying
unknown classes in open-set scenarios as it does with known almost all unknown samples in this scenario. In contrast, all
classes. other methods lie below the RoNeTC curve as the false posi-
 GradBP (square root) reaches peak performance in tive rate changes, particularly AutoUA and GradBP (square
Scenario-E, with an F1 of 80.31%, a Rec of 63.28%, and root), which show a lower true positive rate at the same
a Pre of 94.10%. It degrades to its worst performance in false positive rate. This indicates that their classification
open-set classification in Scenario-D, with an F1 of 52.83%, performance for known and unknown classes is inferior to
which is 41.20% lower than our method, RoNeTC. Overall, RoNeTC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2325

 Fig. 10. Heat map of field importance for TLS flow that does not include
 the Handshake process.

Fig. 9. Comparison of F1 before and after adding a large number of unknown
classes in six open-set scenarios with the SOTA methods. The colored sections
with stripes indicate the magnitude of the decrease in F1 after addition.

 TABLE X
 O PEN -S ET S CENARIOS C HANGES FOR ROBUSTNESS A NALYSES

 Fig. 11. Heat map of the field importance of TLS flow that contains the
 Handshake process.

 Fig. 11, highlighting the heat maps of the three views of
 encrypted flows. Fig. 10 represents a TLS flow without the
 handshake process, while Fig. 11 represents a TLS flow with
C. Robustness Analysis the handshake process. In both figures, it can be observed that
 In our open-set Scenario-A and B, C and D, and E and in the IP header and Transport layer header views, certain
F, each pair shares the same known training dataset, with fields within a single packet, as well as their corresponding
the only difference being the unknown class set. We aim to positions across packets, are critical for classification, such
assess the robustness performance of each open-set classifi- as the “Total Length” and “Time to Live” in the IP header
cation method by adding additional unknown sample classes view at their important positions, and the “Window Size” in
while maintaining the original known samples, parameters, and the Transport layer header view. Since these positions are fixed
thresholds unchanged. The experimental setup is detailed in across packets, we can effectively model the global features of
Table X. Initially, each scenario involves one dataset for known the flow by capturing the state transition relationships between
classes and another for unknown samples. We expanded this different packets. In contrast, the payload view shows that, due
setup by adding an additional dataset as unknown samples set to encryption, the importance of these fields for classification
without adjusting any parameters, including thresholds. The is significantly reduced. This is particularly evident in Fig. 10,
results depicted in Fig. 9 reveal noteworthy fluctuations in which does not include the handshake process. However, for
the F1 across the majority of open-set classification methods. Fig. 11, as it includes the handshake process, the first packet is
For instance, AutoUA exhibits a substantial decrease in F1 in plaintext, allowing extraction of information that contributes
across all scenarios upon the inclusion of unknown classes. significantly to classification.
Meanwhile, ETC-PS, recognized as one of the premier classification comparison methods overall, experiences a significant E. Discussions
decline specifically in Scenario-MixA and MixC. In contrast,
 Currently, network traffic classification in open-set scenarios
our proposed method, RoNeTC, demonstrates only minor
 relies on a fixed number of intercepted packets and bytes for
fluctuations. Although there is a slight 3% downturn in F1
 feature extraction. To handle flows that do not meet this fixed
in Scenario-MixB and MixF, it still achieves the highest F1
 number, padding with zeros is typically applied. However,
overall. This outcome highlights RoNeTC’s superior classifiin real-world scenarios, the number of packets and bytes in
cation performance and excellent robustness when the number
 network traffic fluctuates. This fixed-length feature extraction
of unknown classes is significantly increased.
 method lacks flexibility and often leads to wasted storage and
 computational resources.
D. Interpretability of Our Proposed Method Especially for real-time classification, easily identifiable
 To explore what features the model has learned from classes might be accurately classified with only the first few
network traffic, in this subsection, we use an open-source packets and a small number of bytes. However, to maintain
tool, “Lime” [35], which can explain the predictions of any uniform input for the model, it is often necessary to wait for
classifier, to help us understand the prediction results of the capture of additional packets. This significantly increases
RoNetc. The results on Dataset-I are shown in Fig. 10 and processing time and reduces classification efficiency. There-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XI TABLE XII
 C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF RO N E TC T IME C ONSUMPTION OF RO N E TC IN THE C LASSIFICATION P HASE
 IN THE C LASSIFICATION P HASE

 differences in terms of “Feature Extractor Time”, “Dirichlet
 Distribution Time”, “Total Time”, and “Throughput”. For
 example, in Scenario-E(48 classes, 16 packets, with both batch
fore, dynamically processing feature extraction could become size and byte count set to 256), the “Feature Extractor Time”
a promising research direction for network traffic classification is 1.97 × 10−5 s/flow, the “Dirichlet Distribution Time” is
in open-set scenarios. 3.43 × 10−6 s/flow, the “Total Time” is 2.31 × 10−5 s/flow, and
 the “Throughput” is 43290 flows/s. In contrast, in Scenario-
F. Computational Complexity B(13 classes, 16 packets, with both batch size and byte count
 set to 256), the “Feature Extractor Time” is 1.97 × 10−5 s/flow,
 We present the computational complexity of the core
 the “Dirichlet Distribution Time” is 3.53 × 10−6 s/flow, the
components during the classification phase, namely the
 “Total Time” is 2.32 × 10−5 s/flow, and the “Throughput” is
global-local feature extractor and the Dirichlet distribution.
 43103 flows/s.
Specifically, we demonstrate the computational complexity
 Notably, when the batch size in Scenario-A is set to
of these core components for a single view during the
 the same as other scenarios (denoted as Scenario-A, with
classification phase. The results are presented in Table XI,
 a batch size of 256), the differences in “Feature Extracwhere Table XI(a) provides the meanings of acronyms, and
 tor Time”, “Dirichlet Distribution Time”, “Total Time”, and
Table XI(b) presents the computational complexity details.
 “Throughput” are similarly negligible compared to the other
Since this is the classification phase, loss calculation is
 scenarios. These findings demonstrate that the time cost of
unnecessary, and thus KL divergence is excluded from the
 RoNeTC is less influenced by the number of classes and
computational complexity.
 more significantly affected by the batch size. In scenarios
 From Table XI(b), it can be seen that the computational
 with a large number of samples, increasing the batch size
complexity of the Dirichlet distribution is O(K 2 ), where K
 can enhance processing efficiency. Alternatively, multi-GPU
represents the number of traffic classes. The computational
 parallel processing can also be considered.
complexity of the Dirichlet distribution is related to the
number of classes, whereas the computational complexity of
the global-local feature extractor is independent of the number VII. C ONCLUSION
of classes. Moreover, we have the following relationship: In this paper, we propose a novel and reliable open-set
 network traffic classification method, RoNeTC. The method
  
 H·W
 O · (C · d + N · d · (H head + d) + N · d · f ) is based on uncertainty estimation to quantify the reliability
 p2
 of the classification results and to demonstrate the decision
  O(K 2 ) (13)
 reliability of open-set flow classification in a probabilistic
 Therefore, the computational cost of our method is less manner, achieving robust and reliable performance. It comaffected by the number of classes. bines multiple views by dividing a packet into three segments
 Additionally, we perform a quantitative analysis. We ana- and extracting both global and local features from across
lyzed the time consumption of RoNeTC’s classification phase and within packets from each view respectively, making full
in six open-set scenarios. The details of the scenario settings use of the prior knowledge of the known class samples to
are presented in Table XII(a), and the time consumption results improve the accuracy rate. We perform uncertainty estimaare shown in Table XII(b). The experiments are conducted on tion by designing second-order classification probabilities and
an A800 GPU paired with a 14 vCPU Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold assess the reliability of classification decisions by constructing
6348 CPU @ 2.60GHz. For each of the six open-set scenarios, a distribution of classification probability distributions based
RoNeTC is run 20 times during the testing phase, and the on the classification evidence for each view. Finally, the
average processing time is recorded. classification decisions from multiple views are dynamically
 The results indicate that RoNeTC achieves the highest pro- fused through the Dempster combination rule. We extensively
cessing speed and throughput in Scenario-A, reaching 220,361 evaluate RoNeTC on six open-set scenarios consisting of three
flows/second. Across the other scenarios, there are minimal datasets, as well as adding a large number of unknown samples

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANG et al.: RELIABLE OPEN-SET NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 2327

 [3] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
 encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
 [4] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
 filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Oct. 2020, pp. 397–405.
 [5] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
 paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 [6] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
 lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
 [7] R. F. Bikmukhamedov and A. F. Nadeev, “Lightweight machine learning
 classifiers of IoT traffic flows,” in Proc. Syst. Signal Synchronization, Generating Process. Telecommun. (SYNCHROINFO), Jul. 2019,
 Fig. 12. Confusion Matrix of ReNeTC on Dataset-I. pp. 1–5.
 [8] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Aug. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [9] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
 [10] Y. Wang, H. He, Y. Lai, and A. X. Liu, “A two-phase approach to fast
 and accurate classification of encrypted traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1071–1086, Jun. 2023.
 [11] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-transformer:
 Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
 by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.
 [12] J. Van Amersfoort, L. Smith, Y. W. Teh, and Y. Gal, “Uncertainty
 estimation using a single deep deterministic neural network,” in Proc.
 Fig. 13. Confusion Matrix of ReNeTC on Dataset-II. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9690–9700.
 [13] J. Moon, J. Kim, Y. Shin, and S. Hwang, “Confidence-aware learning
 for deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
 pp. 7034–7044.
 [14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
 Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
 [15] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
 [16] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
 “EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
 pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
 [17] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and X. Liu, “A multi-scale
 feature attention approach to network traffic classification and its
 model explanation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 2,
 pp. 875–889, Jun. 2022.
 [18] G. Bovenzi et al., “Benchmarking class incremental learning in deep
 Fig. 14. Confusion Matrix of ReNeTC on Dataset-III. learning traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 51–69, Feb. 2023.
 [19] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in mulfor robustness comparisons. The experimental results show timodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
that RoNeTC is capable of handling open-set network traffic Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023.
 [20] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
classification with superior robustness and reliability. for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
 pp. 589–606.
 [21] Y. Chen and Y. Wang, “MPAF: Encrypted traffic classification with
 A PPENDIX multi-phase attribute fingerprint,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 The confusion matrices of RoNeTC on the three closed-set vol. 19, pp. 7091–7105, 2024.
 [22] Y. Qian et al., “Enhancing resilience in website fingerprinting: Novel
datasets are shown in Fig. 12, Fig. 13, and Fig. 14. adversary strategies for noisy traffic environments,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 7216–7231, 2024.
 R EFERENCES [23] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “AIpowered internet traffic classification: Past, present, and future,” IEEE
 [1] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 168–175, Sep. 2024.
 traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,” [24] S. Mehta and M. Rastegari, “MobileViT: Light-weight, general-purpose,
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118, Dec. and mobile-friendly vision transformer,” 2021, arXiv:2110.02178.
 2021. [25] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 [2] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “Byte segment neural for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
 network for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. [26] A. P. Dempster, “A generalization of Bayesian inference,” J. Roy. Stat.
 Quality Service, Sep. 2018, pp. 1–10. Soc. B, Methodol., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 205–232, 1968.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[27] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential deep learning to Yingxu Lai received the Ph.D. degree from Chiquantify classification uncertainty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. nese Academy of Sciences in 2003. She joined the
 Syst., vol. 31, Jan. 2018, pp. 1–11. College of Computer Science, Beijing University of
[28] B. A. Frigyik, A. Kapila, and M. R. Gupta, “Introduction to the Dirichlet Technology, in 2003. She was a Visiting Scholar
 distribution and related processes,” Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. Washington, with Arizona State University from 2013 to 2014.
 Washington, DC, USA, Tech. Rep. UWEETR-2010-0006, 2010, vol. 6, She is currently a Full Professor. She has had
 pp. 1–27. over 70 papers published in various international
[29] K. Sentz and S. Ferson, “Combination of evidence in Dempster–Shafer journals and conferences. Her research interests
 theory,” Sandia Nat. Lab., CA, USA, Tech. Rep. SAND 2002-0835, include cloud computing, network security, edge
 2002. computing and trusted computing. She is an Asso-
[30] A. Jsang, Subjective Logic: A Formalism for Reasoning Under Uncer- ciate Editor of Journal of Artificial Intelligence
 tainty. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018. and Technology.
[31] N. J. Perkins and E. F. Schisterman, “The youden index and the optimal
 cut-point corrected for measurement error,” Biometrical J., J. Math.
 Methods Biosci., vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 428–441, Jun. 2005.
[32] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments
 using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
 vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
[33] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
 Security Trust (PST), 2022, pp. 1–11. Zhiyu Hao received the Ph.D. degree in com-
[34] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
 puter system architecture from Harbin Institute of
 “MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic Technology in 2007. He is currently a Profesusing deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. sor with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing.
 Security Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 1025–1038. He has published over 40 papers in journals and
[35] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust conferences, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 you?’ Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2016, TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS
 pp. 1135–1144. AND S ECURITY , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 SERVICES COMPUTING. His research interests
 Xueman Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. include network security and system virtualization.
 degree in computer technology with the College of
 Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. Her current research interests
 include network traffic classification and artificial
 intelligence.

 Alex X. Liu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Yipeng Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the degree in computer science from The University
 Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Institute of Texas at Austin in 2006. He is currently the
 of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of President of the Software Engineering Institute and
 Sciences (CAS), China, in 2014. He is currently the Chief Security Officer of Midea Group. Before
 with the College of Computer Science, Beijing that, he was the Chief Scientist of Ant Group and
 University of Technology, China. He has published further before that, he was a Professor with the
 more than 50 research papers in refereed inter- Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
 national journals and conferences, such as IEEE Michigan State University. His research interests
 TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS include cybersecurity, cloud computing, dependable
 AND S ECURITY , IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON computing, and privacy-preserving computing. He
 NETWORKING, the IEEE International Conference is a member of Academia Europaea, a member of European Academy of
on Network Protocols, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND Sciences and Art, an IET Fellow, an AAIA Fellow, and an ACM Distinguished
SERVICE MANAGEMENT. His research interests include networking, network Scientist. He received the IEEE & IFIP William C. Carter Award in 2004,
security, and machine learning. He was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at the National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 2009, Michigan State
the IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) for his pro- University Withrow Distinguished Scholar (Junior) Award in 2011, and
tocol format inference technology. He serves as a Regular Reviewer for IEEE Michigan State University Withrow Distinguished Scholar (Senior) Award in
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE/ACM 2019. He received the Best Paper Awards from SECON-2018, ICNP-2012,
TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE SRDS-2012, and LISA-2010. He has served as the TPC Co-Chair for ICNP
COMPUTING, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, 2014 and IFIP Networking 2019. He has served as an Editor for IEEE/ACM
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING and an Area Editor for Computer Com-
TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, munications. He is also an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
and IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL. He serves as a Program Com- DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
mittee of IJCAI-21, IJCAI-22, IJCAI-23, IJCAI-24, and IJCAI-25. MOBILE COMPUTING.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. Downloaded on February 27,2026 at 09:52:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.