168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Resource-Efficient Low-Rate DDoS Mitigation With
 Moving Target Defense in Edge Clouds
 Yuyang Zhou , Member, IEEE, Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Zhi Ouyang, Student Member, IEEE,
 and Zongyao Chen , Student Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Edge computing (EC) and container technology have users to access cloud services and resources anywhere and
been widely used to increase the flexibility of computing resources anytime. Nevertheless, the emergence of real-time applicaand meet the real-time requirements for delay-sensitive applica- tions, especially Internet of Things (IoT) applications [3],
tions. However, it has been shown that edge clouds suffer from
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, especially low-rate points to the fact that cloud computing cannot solely provide
DDoS (LDDoS) attacks, which can be stealthily crafted to evade efficient services for delay-sensitive requests. To deal with
detection. Unfortunately, the existing techniques cannot provide this problem, edge computing (EC) [4] is proposed to meet
effective protection, and the amplifying resource consumption the real-time requirements and has been widely studied in
and service delay incurred by defense greatly diminish the scientific and commercial fields of IoT [5]. Compared to
efficiency of the security system. To tackle these problems, this
paper exploits Moving Target Defense (MTD) techniques and traditional cloud computing, EC has the advantage of lower
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for mitigating the impact transmission delay, as the computation tasks are transferred
of LDDoS attacks in a resource-efficient way by effectively from the remote cloud center to edge clouds [6], which process
partially invalidating, avoiding, and tolerating malicious traffic data in the proximity of IoT devices without requiring a large
that improves the Web services’ security and quality with lower amount of data exchange [7].
overhead. We first design several lightweight MTD mechanisms
by utilizing the built-in functionalities of container-based applica- As the key to the success of cloud computing, virtualization
tions. To further optimize resource utilization, we formulate the undoubtedly enhances the flexibility and utility of underlying
interaction between attacks and MTD deployment as a Markov hardware, and provides stability in aspects of cost and resource
decision process (MDP), and adopt a deep Q-network (DQN) efficiency [8]. Due to the latest advances in lightweight virtualalgorithm to achieve the best trade-off between effectiveness and ization techniques, containers [9] have been rapidly developed
overhead. The simulations prove the effectiveness of the proposed
approach in LDDoS mitigation, with a significant improvement and widely used, especially in microservices, IoT, and EC,
of up to 31.7% in security and 26.95% in service quality when due to fewer resources and flexible deployment [10]. The
compared with other practical strategies, and the experimental combination of EC and containers will provide the potential
results also demonstrate that our method exhibits the lowest to develop a wide range of new services and applications [11],
response time per request of 276.66 ms and the lowest webpage hence bringing innovation and driving new businesses.
load time of 1.413 s with only 2.44% additional memory usage in
comparison with previous works in the high workload scenario. Despite the advantages and broad applications of edge
 computing, the number of security problems [12], [13], as
 Index Terms—Low-rate distributed denial-of-service attacks,
 well as the difficulty in solving these issues in EC-assisted
moving target defense, resource efficient, deep reinforcement
learning, edge computing. applications, has dramatically increased with the continuous expansion of scale [14]. The rapid growth in IoT
 devices, coupled with weak security protection, has pro-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 moted the IoT-based Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
 N RECENT years, cloud computing [1], [2] has been
I considered an emerging paradigm because it enables end
 attack [15], [16], [17], which remains one of the most challenging areas of research for the EC environment. Recent
 research has shown that advanced attackers could elaborately
 Manuscript received 29 May 2023; revised 22 April 2024 and 24 May
2024; accepted 9 June 2024. Date of publication 13 June 2024; date of mimic the patterns of legitimate users to construct malicious
current version 14 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the requests [18] and launch a DDoS attack in a stealthy fashion,
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62202097 and
Grant No. 62072100, in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
 which is being called the Low-rate DDoS (LDDoS) attack [19].
under Grant No. 2024T170143 and Grant No. 2022M710677, in part by the Due to the strong concealment and destructiveness [20],
Jiangsu Funding Program for Excellent Postdoctoral Talent under Grant No. LDDoS attacks have the potential to produce more damage
2022ZB137, and in part by the Southeast University-China Mobile Research
Institute Joint Innovation Foundation under Grant No. CMYJY-202100163.
 (e.g., service interruption, service quality degradation, etc.)
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for without suitable detection and effective defense methods.
publication was N. Zincir-Heywood. (Corresponding author: Guang Cheng.) Therefore, LDDoS mitigation has become a crucial chal-
 The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, also with Purple Mountain
 lenge, and it attracted researchers to propose methods that
Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China, and also with the Jiangsu Province can effectively defeat stealthy attacks. Most of the existing
Engineering Research Center of Security for Ubiquitous Network, Nanjing DDoS mitigation methods (e.g., firewall [21], intrusion detec-
211189, China (e-mail: yyzhou@seu.edu.cn; chengguang@seu.edu.cn;
oyzhi@seu.edu.cn; solar1s@seu.edu.cn).
 tion system [22], traffic redirection [23], etc.) rely on prior
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3413685 knowledge about the attack characteristics, however, these
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 169

 shifting the attack surface to confuse attackers. Specifically,
 we establish lightweight MTD mechanisms based on the
 built-in functionalities of the containers, to force attackers to
 continuously chase the target. In order to achieve resourceefficient defense, we exploit deep reinforcement learning
 (DRL) [32] to develop an adaptive and intelligent strategy
 that dynamically mitigates the QoS degradation caused by
 LDDoS attacks within limited edge resources. We first formulate the interaction between attack and defense deployment
 as a Markov decision process (MDP). Then, we adopt a
 deep Q-network (DQN) algorithm to obtain the best trade-off
 between resource use and effectiveness. Finally, we conduct a
 set of extensive simulations and experiments to demonstrate
 the effectiveness of our method. The main contributions of this
 paper are summarized as follows:
 • We present a novel LDDoS mitigation approach, namely
 RE-MTD, to ensure enhanced security and acceptable
 overhead by deeply exploiting MTD and DRL techniques.
 To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first
 MTD-based solution for defeating hard-to-detect LDDoS
Fig. 1. Bird’s-eye view of the proposed LDDoS mitigation approach. attacks in a resource-efficient manner.
 • We propose novel MTD mechanisms specifically
 designed for the EC environment by leveraging the
 intrinsic characteristics of containers. These lightweight
methods suffer from efficiency and accuracy, which could be and flexible mechanisms can be developed and deployed
insufficient and hysteretic in the LDDoS attack scenarios. This rapidly, and are effective in collaboratively mitigating
prompts a need for proactive protection of the EC environment LDDoS attacks across a wide range of attack strengths
to effectively defeat LDDoS attacks. and scales.
 In the last few years, Moving Target Defense (MTD) • We introduce a DRL-based framework to facilitate
has emerged as a promising proactive solution for DDoS defense deployment within limited resource constraints.
mitigation [24], [25]. It aims to defend against cyberattacks We formulate the interaction between the LDDoS attacks
in a proactive manner by introducing uncertainty and unpre- and the MTD mechanisms as an MDP, and we utilize a
dictability on the attacker side [26], [27]. MTD-based methods DQN algorithm to solve the optimal policy, which allows
usually modify the attack surface of the protected system, us to achieve resource-efficient defense by balancing
to reduce the opportunity of being exploited by attackers, resource consumption and mitigation effectiveness.
forcing them to continually investigate the target system and • We evaluate our method through simulations and
increasing their efforts to launch a successful attack [28]. real-world experiments. The results demonstrate that
 However, there still exist several drawbacks in these RE-MTD can effectively mitigate LDDoS attacks,
MTD-based studies. Prior work has been proposed against even in resource-constrained environments. Furthermore,
flooding attacks, which cannot be directly applied to LDDoS RE-MTD outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methmitigation due to the considerable differences in attack ods in terms of both QoS and security, while imposing
mechanisms [29]. Also, existing methods suffer from a lack less overhead.
of strategic guidance for defense deployment, thus strong The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
attackers may bypass MTD techniques through long-term review the related work in Section II, and we provide the
exploration [30] and wage attacks successfully. Furthermore, threat model in Section III. Section IV demonstrates the
frequent MTD adaptations (e.g., network reconfiguration, vir- details of MTD mechanisms and Section V introduces the
tual machine (VM) migration) may have negative effects on DRL-based strategy. Section VI presents the evaluation results.
the EC environment by reducing the quality of service (QoS) We discuss the limitations of our work and future challenges
on top of high overhead [31], which could be improved. These in Section VII. Finally, we conclude in Section VIII. All the
reasons motivate us to achieve an effective balance between notations used in this paper are shown in Table I.
resource use and security improvement with lightweight MTD
mechanisms and optimized strategies.
 II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
 To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a novel LDDoS mitigation method, namely RE-MTD, for A. LDDoS Attacks in the EC Environment
preventing LDDoS attacks by establishing and deploying MTD DDoS attacks have always been a huge threat [14], and
techniques in a resource-efficient way. Fig. 1 shows the bird’s- attackers have been modifying their attack format to evade
eye view of the proposed method. The key insight of this detection [33]. In recent years, LDDoS has emerged as
work is to develop ever-changing network properties, thus a sophisticated attack [34]. This attack exploits specific
170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE I
 L IST OF T ERMINOLOGIES W ITH T HEIR E XPLANATORY T ERMS Software-Defined Networking (SDN) environment. However,
 this method cannot be applied to non-SDN scenarios. With the
 formulation of the Slow DDoS attack scenario by queueing
 theory, Li et al. [19] regulated the number of containers
 for different users and proposed an attack mitigation method
 based on resource allocation, but it lacks deployment guidance
 with an optimized strategy. Fu et al. [47] utilized sequential information to build the frequency domain features and
 proposed Whisper to detect malicious traffic in real time.
 It was resistant to some attacks, but the feature extraction
 and construction operations are consuming considerable costs.
 Tripathi and Hubballi [41] utilized the Chi-Square distance
 between the legitimate and attack traffic for the detection
 of LoRDAS attacks against HTTP/2. In addition, an event
 sequence analysis-based scheme was proposed by Tripathi [48]
vulnerabilities through semantic methods and sends malicious to detect attacks with a real-time strategy, however, it cannot
requests at a low frequency [35]. maintain high accuracy once the characteristics of attack traffic
 According to [36], LDDoS attacks can be divided into three change.
categories: The first is QoS attack that aims to deteriorate the
QoS of the victim. For example, in Shrew attack [37], the
attacker launches attack pulses based on the Retransmission C. MTD-Based Solutions
Timeout (RTO) mechanism of TCP sender [38], shutting off Recently, a series of MTD-based methods have been
most of the legitimate TCP sources and greatly diminishing the proposed to defeat high-rate DDoS attacks in the cloud
QoS of normal users. The second is Slow DDoS attack which environment. The main goal of these solutions is to force
targets Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) servers [39]. It attackers to chase the wrong targets with higher efforts and
occupies hundreds of HTTP connections and prevents it from costs, thereby keeping DDoS attacks away from the protected
processing further requests, significantly increasing webpage system.
loading time or rendering it inaccessible [40]. The third type is Debroy et al. [49] mitigated DDoS attacks by optimizing
Service Queue attack that directly affects the data processing the frequency of VM migrations in the SDN-enabled cloud
queue of the services. For example, the Low-Rate DDoS environment. However, this method suffers from heavy overattacks against Application Servers (LoRDAS) [41] repeatedly head. In a similar scenario, Zhou et al. [24] proposed an MTD
insert malicious requests to occupy the service queue, so the framework based on adaptive network configurations and a
server cannot process other incoming packets. signaling game model to improve the effectiveness. Although
 We mainly focus on Slow DDoS mitigation in this paper this scheme optimizes the defense strategy based on game
due to the development of IoT applications, especially mobile theory, it may be ineffective against stealthy low-rate attacks.
Web applications in the EC environment. To achieve lightweight DDoS defense in the EC environment, Zhou et al. [50] adopted container migrations and
 utilized the Reinforcement Learning (RL) method to optimize
B. LDDoS Mitigations in the EC Environment defense strategies, however, it does not have multiple defense
 Traditional DDoS detection methods [22], [42], [43] utilize mechanisms or achieve a trade-off between effectiveness and
attack patterns, such as byte or packet sequence, to identify resources. Similarly, Zhang et al. [25] modeled the configumalicious traffic using Machine Learning (ML) or Deep ration mutation as a Markov decision process and defeated
Learning (DL) algorithms. Nevertheless, they may fail due to DDoS attacks based on the solver of optimal network configthe absence of typical features in LDDoS attacks. urations. They also proposed a collaborative mutation-based
 To cope with this problem, researchers have presented other MTD (CM-MTD) method [51], which dynamically adjusts
mitigations against these attacks. For instance, Wu et al. [44] network properties and invalidates different stages of the
explored the multifractal characteristics over a small scale cyber kill chain with DRL-based guidance. Nevertheless, these
of network traffic to detect attack traffic by the algorithm methods are equipped with high computation resources. In
of multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MF-DFA). addition, Osei et al. [52] formulated an optimization problem
Nevertheless, as attackers become aware of the detection using a game-theoretic model for DDoS attack mitigation and
rules, the accuracy will continue to decrease. Tang et al. [45] Kim et al. [32] exploited deep reinforcement learning to build
proposed an improved adaptive Kohonen Network clus- a moving target defense countermeasure framework. Although
tering algorithm for TCP-targeted attack detection, which these schemes protect network systems against DDoS attacks,
can detect attack bursts and estimate the beginning and it does not guarantee the QoS of the deployed services.
end times of attacks. However, the clustering-based method Table II entails a comprehensive feature analysis and commay misclassify attack traffic as benign. Besides, they also parison of RE-MTD with state-of-the-art works. RE-MTD
proposed LtRFT [46], a Learning-To-Rank (LtR) based is the individual approach that supports resource-limited
scheme for mitigating LDDoS attacks targeted at flow tables in EC environment and lightweight defense deployments by
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 171

 TABLE II
 F EATURES C OMPARISON B ETWEEN RE-MTD AND S TATE - OF - THE -A RTS W ORKS

leveraging the inner characteristics of containers as MTD Especially, we consider a rational and tactful attacker who
mechanisms, and exploits the DRL algorithm to optimize aims to maximize his/her damage to the EC environment in
effectiveness against LDDoS attacks while reducing unneces- this study. That is, the attacker will amplify the attack effect
sary overhead. The major drawback of the existing works is as much as possible by carrying out LDDoS attacks based
that the static and deterministic patterns provide opportunities on the controlled IoT devices, maximizing the number of
for stealthy attackers to evade malicious traffic detection, compromised service replicas or legitimate users that suffer
resulting in low accuracy and limited effectiveness. Also, from these attacks.
the previous MTD-based solutions were primarily designed
to mitigate high-rate flooding attacks with high economic B. Attack Process
costs and resource consumption. Unlike the earlier works, RE- To formally depict the details of the attack process, we
MTD establishes a proactive LDDoS attack-targeted method assume that the attacker performs a multi-round attack by folto prevent and tolerate malicious requests without relying on lowing the Cyber Kill Chain (CKC), from early reconnaissance
attack patterns. The proposed method enables multiple edge to the actual attack, as follows:
servers to achieve resource-efficient defense while considering • The attackers first utilize scan tools (e.g., Nmap and
a wide range of attack strengths and scales. ZMap) to perform reconnaissance on the edge cloud, but
 may only obtain short-term and fragmentary results due
 to the existence of MTD mechanisms.
 III. T HREAT M ODEL • According to their existing knowledge and experience,
 In our investigation, we consider an edge cloud in which attackers assess the impact they will have on potential
exists a couple of containers to provide Web services for victims prior to taking actions, and select appropriate
legitimate users. We assume that the key infrastructure and the container instances as attack targets.
service provider are trusted, while the attackers come from an • The attackers then carry out LDDoS attacks on these
external network. To perform a comprehensive analysis and container-based Web services to accomplish their destrucdevelop effective countermeasures against these attacks, we tive goals via cyber weapons (e.g., SlowHTTPTest1 and
consider a threat model in terms of explicit assumptions about RU-Dead-Yet2 ).
the attack goal, implementation process, and capabilities the • Following that, they evaluate the payoffs obtained from
attackers have. launching attacks and move on to the next round of
 reconnaissance.
A. Attack Goal
 C. Attacker’s Capabilities
 In general, attackers exploit the inherent vulnerabilities
 The key to fighting a DDoS attack is resource competition,
of HTTP protocols and stealthily send attack requests to
 the defender will never cope with it if the attacker owns
fill the connection pool of container-based Web services.
 unlimited resources. Therefore, we focus on an attacker who
Consequently, legitimate users’ HTTP connection attempts
would be denied, thereby downgrading their experiences or 1 https://github.com/shekyan/slowhttptest
further causing network paralysis. 2 https://sourceforge.net/projects/r-u-dead-yet/
172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 2. An overview of the proposed MTD-based mitigation mechanisms, including (a) service scaling, (b) service replicas, and (c) port hopping.

controls a botnet that consists of a certain number of IoT edge computing scenarios, and the accompanying high latency
devices, and we scope his/her capabilities as follows: cannot meet the real-time requirements of IoT applications.
 • We assume that the attacker can wage LDDoS attacks in To overcome the aforementioned limitations of existing
 a stealthy fashion and has the ability to evade detection work, we propose a few container-based mitigation methods
 at the very beginning of attacks. with lightweight properties, which can be flexibly deployed
 • Given the limited resources that the attacker can afford, with a small overhead. Specifically, we leverage dynamicity,
 he/she cannot compromise all the serving containers redundancy, and variability to design these MTD mechanisms
 among the edge cloud. corresponding to the characteristics of Slow DDoS attacks, to
 • According to the information collected during the recon- effectively maintain service availability and optimize resource
 naissance phase, all attackers will strategically choose consumption. Fig. 2 shows an overview of the proposed MTDtargets to maximize their attack effect. based mitigation mechanisms.
 • Due to the different characteristics of attackers, their
 behavior patterns will also be different. A cursory A. Service Scaling
 attacker’s actions may be immutable during the attack,
 As we discussed in Section III, LDDoS attackers first
 while the actions of a tactful attacker may change based
 craft and send a massive number of requests. Then, they
 on the continuous observation of the victims.
 exploit HTTP behavior to keep the request connections open
 For the sake of not weakening the attacker’s ability, we
 by sending each request body very slowly. In this case,
assume that he/she may know in advance that there exist
 HTTP requests from legitimate users cannot be received and
some defensive methods but not their specific deployment. In
 processed by Web services. According to the characteristics
addition, tactful attackers have the ability to adjust actions or
 of filling HTTP connections by the Slow DDoS attack, we
turn to another target, however, they may insist on taking the
 exploit the dynamicity in the context of MTD to utilize service
same action on the initial target due to reconnaissance results
 scaling for dynamically defeating it.
and comprehensive judgment.
 The scaling of service enables service providers to consistently increase or decrease the desired computing and
 IV. MTD-BASED M ITIGATION M ECHANISMS storage resources of container-based applications, according
 In order to compromise the system from the external to resources needed to handle all incoming requests or
network, the attacker has to identify potential targets and events. Despite the fact that it is primarily an operation and
explore weaknesses that can be exploited during the reconnais- maintenance technology, fluctuation in resources caused by
sance phase. To weaken the attacker’s inherent time and cost service scaling will directly affect the maximum number of
advantages, MTD has emerged as a proactive defense mech- supported connections. When the defender scales up one of
anism that breaks the static nature by dynamically moving the running Web services, it will be able to allow more parallel
the attack surface and creating uncertainty on the attacker’s HTTP connections. In contrast, the number of connections the
side. The existing MTD techniques have demonstrated their container can support will decrease as it has been scaled down
effectiveness in greatly enhancing network resilience and to release some resources.
effectively protecting the system from attacks [53]. Specifically, when the maximum number of connections
 Due to the capabilities of elastic capacity provisioned in exceeds the capacity that an attacker can occupy (the attacker
the cloud, a lot of MTD techniques have been implemented owns limited resources), it is possible for the container to
to defeat high-rate DDoS attacks, such as IP address ran- process additional requests from legitimate users, thereby
domization, topology mutation, and VM migration. Regardless ending the current LDDoS attack. Conversely, we can scale
of the effectiveness of these solutions, the high resource down some idle containers to release unnecessary resources
consumption makes them unsuitable for resource-constrained if there is no attack. This feature enables us to flexibly
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 173

manipulate the resource consumption of the protected service This implementation of an SDN controller may bring extra
and achieve efficient defense by strategically scaling the overhead and result in a single point of failure, while attackers
container. In addition, since service scaling has been built could break through the address translation once they receive
into many container management systems (e.g., Kubernetes, real IP addresses. Therefore, to mitigate the attack efficiently
Docker Swarm, etc.), we can easily deploy this mechanism without introducing additional risks, we adopt the method of
in the EC environment, and exploit it to implement moving port hopping as the MTD mechanism to prevent attack traffic
target defense without deteriorating the QoS of the protected from reaching the target.
application. In particular, the modified port number can be generated
 using a hash function (e.g., SHA-256) with a shared session
B. Service Replicas key among legitimate users [57]. Besides, the Real-Time Clock
 (RTC) is strictly synchronized via an external server with the
 Generally, a service replica is a copy of the running service
 Network Time Protocol (NTP) [58]. In the container-based
created from the template of the primary container-based
 EC environment, the port hopping mechanism can be realized
service. This technology fulfills the service provider’s purpose
 in a lightweight way (e.g., modification of configuration files
by creating and deleting replicas on demand to reach the
 via the APIs of the management platform), to dynamically
desired number at any given time. In the proposed method,
 change the port number of a particular service. As a result, the
replicas can be utilized to effectively release the negative
 LDDoS attacker will lose the information of the entry point
impact of malicious requests on the container due to its
 when it works, and will have to spend extra time and effort
redundancy to provide additional services.
 to determine the new port number after the move. Fortunately,
 As an example, we can create a replica of the high-load (or
 with the help of the Web cache, the problem of dropping
compromised) Web service, and redirect half of the currently
 existing connections caused by this movement will not be
active connections to the new container, thus generating a
 easily perceived by users, and we discuss the time overhead
connection pool with about half the load. After that, the
 caused by port hopping in the reward function in Section V-A4.
upcoming requests can be processed as long as the attacker
is unable to fill the enlarged connection pool further. Even
if the powerful attacker can increase its attack strength to V. DRL-BASED O PTIMAL MTD D EPLOYMENT
open new connections, we can also mitigate the attack by
creating multiple replicas. As another example, it is possible Despite the effectiveness brought by MTD mechanisms,
to reduce the number of running replicas, in the case of little unreasonable deployment will weaken the effect and incur
attacking firepower and a large amount of idle resources, additional resource consumption. Therefore, it is necessary to
effectively reducing resource consumption without affecting optimize strategies for resource-efficient defense. As expected,
defense performance. we aim to improve the resilience and survivability of protected
 Similarly, there have been corresponding technologies in services against LDDoS attacks within the constraints of
the container management systems that can help us quickly limited edge resources. At the same time, according to the
implement this MTD mechanism. For example, an appli- different characteristics of the proposed MTD mechanisms,
cation deployment is usually composed of a set of pods fair and reasonable selection of them in different attack
in Kubernetes, therefore, we can achieve service replication scenarios is also essential in decision-making [59]. Due to
by deploying multiple identical pods and routing different the advantages of dealing with continuous control problems,
requests to one of the corresponding pods [54]. especially in dynamic situations, we adopt the method of DRL
 to solve the optimization problem of MTD deployment.
C. Port Hopping
 Despite the capability of the above MTD mechanisms to A. Problem Formulation and Environment Modeling
mitigate LDDoS attacks via resource scheduling, there is In this section, we first consider an edge cloud that provides
still a chance that the radical attacker might concentrate all multiple container-based services for legitimate users. Then,
their firepower to strike a specific target, leaving computing we formulate the interaction between LDDoS attacks and
resources unavailable for resisting attacks in the action phase. the MTD deployment as an MDP problem, which can be
Thus, it is necessary to design another MTD mechanism to completely described through its state space, action space,
prevent the attack from causing further damage when it occurs transition probabilities, and reward function as follows.
in the event of limited resources. 1) State Space: We denote the set of services deployed in
 Unlike MTD mechanisms that rely on resource scheduling, the edge cloud by N, written as N = {1, 2, . . . , N }, where
hopping-based mechanisms should move an entry involved in N indicates the maximum number of services that can be
the attack chain so that the LDDoS attack can be stopped accommodated. Also, we consider MTD operations in discrete
immediately. Although the existing methods can certainly time steps T = {1, 2, . . . , T }, where T denotes the time
mitigate attacks, there are some unavoidable drawbacks in horizon. According to the basic idea of MDP, the system state
part of them. For example, IP address randomization is useful St is only related to the state and action of the previous time
in preventing unauthorized attackers from achieving network step.
reconnaissance, but its deployment usually relies on SDN In our scenario, the intelligent agent is responsible for
architecture [55] or virtual-real IP address translation [56]. observing the state of every service at the beginning of each
174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

time step, which can be represented as container security status, additional deployment resources, and
 time cost, which can be represented as
 sn (t) = {rn (t), cn (t), en (t), pn (t)}, n ∈ N, (1)
 q
 Rt = αRt + βRts − ζRte − ηRtc , t ∈ T, (4)
where rn (t) is a binary value to indicate the running status
for the nth service, cn (t) denotes the number of current where α, β, ζ, and η are coefficients for balancing the reward.
connections, and en (t) represents the resource consumption First, the reward
 N of service quality fluctuations is defined
for computation and storage. In addition, pn (t) is the port q Δčn (t)
 by Rt = N n=1
 , where Δčn (t) ∈ (−1, 1) denotes
number at this time step. Thus, we can obtain that St = n=1 rn (t)
 the change in the load rate (the ratio of the current number
{s1 (t), s2 (t), . . . , sN (t)}, where t ∈ T. of connections to the upper limit). Second,the reward of
 2) Action Space: We assume that the agent makes defense N
 φn (t)rn (t)
decisions in an independent manner, implying that it may container security status is defined by Rts = n=1N ,
 n=1 rn (t)
decide to take different actions on specific services. An where φn (t) is an indicator that represents whether this
intelligent agent can execute one of three MTD mechanisms container is in a secure state, if so, its value is assigned
as described in Section IV. Hence, we can define the action as 1, otherwise its value is assigned as 0. Then, we can
space for any state in St as define the reward of additional deployment resources as Rte =
 N
   n=1 Δen (t), where Δen (t) represents the difference in the
 rep hop
 At = Ãsca t , Ãt , Ãt , t ∈ T, (2) deployment resource consumption at time step t. Finally, the
 reward of time overhead is defined as the number of hopping
 Here, the action space is discrete. Specifically, Ãsca =  hop
 t
 sca , a sca , . . . , a sca } denotes the decisions of service scaling
 services, which can be expressed as Rtc = N n=1 at,n .
{at,1 t,2 t,N Thus, the first part of the reward function in Eq. (4)
at time step t, where at,n sca = 1 represents the capacity expansca = −1 means scaling
 captures the number of requests made to the Web services,
sion of the n-th service whereas at,n providing motivation for the intelligent agent to execute
down this service. Similarly, Ãrep t
 rep rep
 = {at,1 rep
 , at,2 , . . . , at,N } appropriate MTD mechanisms. It aims to minimize the impact
denotes the actions of service replicas for all deployed of malicious connections on normal requests and enhance
 rep
services, where at,n = 1 denotes the creation of a copy for the the overall QoS for legitimate users. The second part is an
 rep
n-th service whereas at,n = −1 represents deleting a replica. indicator that reflects the security status of the specific service.
Furthermore, Ãhop
 t
 hop hop
 = {at,1 hop
 , at,2 , . . . , at,N } shows a series It drives the agent to choose a strategy at each step to strive
 hop to prevent malicious traffic from reaching the victim and
of port hopping decisions on this edge cloud, where at,n = 1
 maintain system security. Furthermore, the implementation of
triggers the change of the port number for the given service.
 ∗ = 0 indicates no action, that is, MTD mechanisms necessitates additional computing resources
It is worth noting that at,n
 and introduces time overhead. Consequently, the objective
this MTD mechanism will not be implemented on this service
 of the third part is to minimize the utilization of defensive
at this time.
 resources beyond the service requirements. Additionally, the
 3) Transition Probabilities: Let St × At × St+1 → [0, 1]
 fourth part emphasizes the reduction of unnecessary time
denote the state transition function. Hence, P (s  |s, a) is the
 overhead through the strategic planning of the port hopping
transition probability to s  at the next time step, given that the
 mechanism.
current state St is s while the agent chooses action a ∈ At
 5) Convergence: The proposed MTD-based method aims
in this time step. This probability depends on the state of the
 to learn a strategy π for maximizing cumulative rewards,
system, the way the attacker wage LDDoS attacks, and the
 which can optimize resilience to LDDoS attacks and resource
actions taken by the defender. Especially, we will obtain a
 utilization in the EC environment. Therefore, we define it as
binary transition probability for deterministic transition, which
 the long-term value, thereby the value function V π can be
can be expressed as
 expressed as
  
 P s  |s, a ∈ {0, 1}, ∀s, s  ∈ St+1 , a ∈ At , (3) T
 
 π π
 V (s) = E γ t−1 R(t|St = s) , (5)
 For example, if the defender decides to remain static while
 t=1
the attacker maintains current malicious connections, then the
system state will not have a transition and P (s  |s, a) = 0, where E() is the expectation operator and γ ∈ (0, 1) is a
where a is an array of all zeros and s  = s. Another example discount factor that ensures the agent considers the future
is the decision to change the port number in the absence of consequences of making an action at each state. It can be also
attacks, which can directly determine the following system shown by manipulating the reward series in Eq. (5) that the
state. long-term value satisfies the Bellman equation [61] as
 4) Reward Function: In MDP, the reward function moti-  
 V π (s) = R(s, a) + γE V π s  , (6)
vates an agent to take appropriate actions in each state to help
the agent reach the optimum policy [60]. Bear in mind that our where R(s, a) is the immediate reward received after taking
goal is to maximize the resource efficiency of proposed MTD action a in state s and V π (s  ) is the value function for the
mechanisms against LDDoS attacks. Thus, when a defensive successor state s  .
action is selected at time step t, we define the reward Rt Theorem 1: Given a finite state and action space MDP, for
with four key factors, including service quality fluctuations, every policy π and state s, we can have V π (s) ≤ V ∗ (s).
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 175

 Proof: Suppose there exists a policy π that satisfies where Q π (s, a) is the mathematical expectation of the long-
V π (s) > V ∗ (s) for some states. Consider taking the optimal term return that is generated by a strategy. According to the
policy π ∗ at state s, V ∗ (s) can be expressed as the maximum goal of MDP, all actions selected by the optimal strategy will
expected return over all possible actions such that result in the maximum return. Hence, we can describe the
     optimum action-value function and the optimum policy by the
 V1∗ (s) = max R(s, a) + γE V1∗ s  , (7) following equations, respectively.
 a∈At

 Based on our assumption, V π (s) > V ∗ (s), thus Q ∗ (s, a) = max Q π (s, a), (14)
     π
 V π (s) > max R(s, a) + γE V ∗ s  , (8) π ∗ (s) = arg max Q π (s, a), (15)
 a∈At π

 Since the value function V π (s) when taking the policy π This means that for all actions selected by the optimal
can be computed based on Eq. (6), we can deduce that strategy, that is, A(t) = π ∗ (s), will maximize the action-
       value function Q π (s, a) in Eq. (13), and satisfy Q ∗ (s, a) ≥
R(s, a) + γE V π s  > max R(s, a) + γE V ∗ s  , (9) Q π (s, a), ∀s ∈ St , a ∈ At .
 a∈At

 This inequality implies that there must exist an action whose
value function is greater than the maximum expected return B. DQN-Based Resource-Efficient Defense Strategy
obtained by taking the action at state s according to the Although the optimal strategy can be acquired by solving
optimal policy π ∗ . In other words, policy π is yielding a the MDP via dynamic programming or exhaustive search,
higher expected return at state s compared to the optimal it is impossible to trace state transition probabilities matheaction prescribed by π ∗ , which means that we can improve the matically because of dynamic defensive actions and complex
policy π ∗ by choosing a different action a at state s. However, state space. Recently, RL has been proposed as a promising
this contradicts the definition of the optimal policy, which is solution that can be used to solve the optimization problem
designed to maximize the expected return at each state. via trial-and-error. For example, Q-learning is a well-known
 Therefore, the assumption that V π (s) > V ∗ (s) for some RL algorithm based on temporal difference, which can learn
state s cannot hold, and we can conclude that the value the optimal strategy by interacting with the environment in a
function of any policy is less than or equal to the return of certain period of time and continuously maintaining a Q-value
the optimal policy, i.e., V π (s) ≤ V ∗ (s) for all states s. table [63]. According to Bellman equation [61], the Q-value
 Theorem 2: Given a finite state and action space MDP, there can be expressed as
exists a unique optimal value function V ∗ (s).
 Proof: Assume that there exist two distinct optimal value Q(St , At ) = (1 − λ)Q(St , At ) + λ[Rt + γ max Q(St+1 , At+1 )],
functions V1∗ and V2∗ for any state s. Considering the (16)
difference between the two optimal value functions, we can
describe it as where λ denotes the learning rate, which affects the learning
 speed of Q(St , At ).
 D(s) = |V1∗ (s) − V2∗ (s)|, (10)
 However, the conventional Q-learning algorithm suffers
 By substituting V1∗ (s) and V2∗ (s) into the Bellman opti- from several disadvantages, such as state space explosion,
mality equation, we can deduce that overestimation of action values, and long convergence time.
       It is impractical to adopt Q-learning for this attack-defense
 D(s) ≤ γE V1∗ s  − V2∗ s  = γE D s  , (11) scenario with a large state and action space. Fortunately, DRL
 can effectively capture network dynamics while solving com-
 Using the contraction mapping principle [62], the distance
 plicated optimization problems with a low time complexity,
between two value functions should reduce with each iteration.
 thereby improving problem-solving efficiency. Hence, DRL
Hence, we can show that the right-hand side of the above
 is a promising method to address the resource management
equation is less than or equal to γD(s), such that
 problem for MTD deployment.
 D(s) ≤ γD(s), (12) In this regard, we import Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to
 solve the MDP problem, in which the learning speed will not
 Since γ < 1, the only way for this inequality to hold be significantly affected by the dimension of state and action
is when D(s) = 0, that is, V1∗ (s) = V2∗ (s). Thus, we space. The DQN algorithm transforms the update problem
have proven the uniqueness of the optimal value function in of the Q-value table into a function fitting problem, and the
MDPs. approximate value function is parameterized as
 In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm, the learning
agent estimates an action-value function (alternatively, Q-value Qω (St , At ) ≈ Q(St , At ), (17)
function) to determine the optimal action in each state. We
define the action-value function such that where ω is the model parameter of the neural network.
 T The objective function value in the network training process
 
 π π
 Q (s, a) = E γ t−1 R(t|St = s, At = a) , (13) gradually approaches the optimal Q value, thereby solving the
 t=1 optimization problem rapidly.
176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 Algorithm 1: DQN-Based MTD Deployment 2) Illustration: Consider six services with initial state S1 =
 1 Initialize the Q-value network Qω (St , At ) with ω; {s1 (1), s2 (1), s3 (1), s4 (1), s5 (1), s6 (1)} in an EC environ-
  
 2 Initialize the target network Qω − (St , At ) with ω
 − = ω; ment, where s1 (1) is the status of the first service that includes
 3 Initialize the experience replay buffer B; a four-tuple and can be obtained by using Eq. (1). Among
 4 for episode = 1 to K do these services, two of them (e.g., Service 2 and Service 5) are
 5 Initialize and acquire the initial state S1 ; being under LDDoS attacks, resulting in abnormal service
 6 for t = 1 to T do
 7 Select an action At at the state St via the ε-greedy state (s2 (1), s5 (1)). If we exploit existing methods such
 policy; as [32], [52], the network configurations of victim services are
 8 Compute the immediate reward Rt via Eq. (4); continuously changeable according to specific rules or algo-
 9 Obtain the next state St+1 via Eq. (3); rithms, which cannot guarantee long-term effectiveness against
10 Store transition (St , At , Rt , St+1 ) in B; powerful attackers when they are aware of the adaptation
11 if the capacity of B ≥ M then
12 Randomly select a batch of samples patterns.
 {(Si , Ai , Ri , Si+1 )M
 Diversely, the proposed DQN-based strategy finds the
 i=1 } from B;
13 if Si = ST then  for terminal time step optimal defensive action via trial-and-error. It may select A1 =
 hop hop
14 yi = Ri ; (a1,2 , a1,5 ) at the first time step and obtain the reward
15 else  for non-terminal time step R1 and state S2 using Eqs. (3) and (4). As the learning
16 yi = Ri + γ maxa  Qω − (Si+1 , a  ); phase progresses, it learns experience from the stored buffer,
 Minimize L = M 1 M (y − Q (S , A ))2 ; and minimizes the loss function by using Eqs. (5)–(17) and
17 i=1 i ω i i
 immediate reward at each time step. When attackers have
18 Reset ω − = ω every C steps;
 sufficient knowledge and keep waging attacks on these two
 victim services until T time step, this strategy adjusts defensive
 actions to AT = (aT sca , a sca ) according to current Q-value
 ,2 T ,5
 network Qω (ST , AT ) for reaching the best trade-off between
 effectiveness and resource consumption. That is, it scales up
 1) Algorithm: Here, we illustrate the MTD deployment the victim containers within resource constraints to support
process in Algorithm 1. Specifically, at the beginning of more connections and tolerate malicious requests without
the training period, we initialize the Q-value network compromising service quality. Therefore, we can obtain the
with the parameter ω in Line 1. The target network optimal suggestion for defense deployment according to the
with the same parameter and the experience replay buffer DQN algorithm, which allows for improved robustness and
B are initialized in Line 2 and Line 3, respectively. resilience against LDDoS attacks by determining effective
Subsequently, Line 4 starts the main loop of the proposed MTD mechanisms to prevent attack requests or tolerate malialgorithm, and the iteration starts from an initial state S1 cious traffic with lower overhead.
until finishing T time steps, which is called an episode Although this algorithm does not conduct attack detection,
(Lines 4-6). changes in service status will become an important indicator
 In each episode, the agent utilizes ε-greedy policy for select- of assessing system security and rewards brought by actions.
ing an action At in Line 7. This implies that it can derive the Furthermore, the proposed method is not triggered by specific
optimal strategies and avoid staying in local optimization. The events, but relies on time steps for decision-making. Thus,
algorithm exploits with probability 0 ≤ ε ≤ 1 to take a random a smaller time interval will help timely update and optimize
action or chooses the optimal strategy with probability 1 − ε. strategies. In practice, defenders may be required to contin-
It is worth noting that ε initially remains high and gradually uously perform or change defensive actions during intense
decreases after having sufficient experience. Then, Line 8 attacks, or they may remain inactive for several time steps to
obtains the immediate reward Rt according to Eq. (4) and reduce resource usage in the event of low threat.
Line 9 receives the next state St+1 through the state transition.
Since Q-network follows an experience replay approach, the VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
transition (St , At , Rt , St+1 ) is stored in the replay buffer B in
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of our LDDoS
Line 10.
 mitigation mechanism through extensive simulations and
 In order to ensure stability, the agent will learn from experiexperiments. First, we introduce the values of main parameters
ence and randomly select a batch of M samples from the replay
 used in our simulation and discuss the results under different
buffer at each time step in Line 12. Then, Line 13 determines
 attack scenarios. And then, we study the effectiveness and
if any of the selected samples reached the termination status,
 resource consumption of the proposed MTD-based mitigation
that is, whether this training episode ends at this time step.
 mechanisms and compare them with other practical strategies
If so, the target value is expressed as yi = Ri , otherwise,
 on the testbed under LDDoS attacks. Finally, we compare our
it will be represented as yi = Ri + γ maxa  Qω− (Si+1 , a  ),
 approach with the SOTA methods in real-world experiments.
where γ is a discount factor and a  is an arbitrary action. After
that, Line 17 minimizes the  loss function L at each time step,
 1 M 2 A. Simulation Setup
which is defined as L = M i=1 (yi − Qω (Si , ai )) . Finally,
Line 18 updates the parameter of the target network every C First of all, we consider an edge cloud with multiple
steps. container-based Web services deployed in our simulation.
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 177

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 K EY PARAMETERS U SED IN THE S IMULATION H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR THE DQN A LGORITHM

Herein, we build the custom EC environment to train RL
agents based on OpenAI Gym [64], which is a widely used
Python-based toolkit for connecting agents to RL problems.
We utilize the official Gym API3 to model environments In each test, the current policy was evaluated with the average
as a Python env class, which enables us to create the EC return during 10 episodes for reducing the uncertainty of the
environment and Web service instances very easily. environment. Specifically, we repeated the procedure for ten
 In detail, we set the maximum capacity of services with training runs with random seeds from 1 to 10 to obtain the
corresponding resource consumption on the edge cloud, and results, and analyzed the performance of the proposed MTDthe maximum number of connections for running a Web based mitigation under four different scenarios according to
service is also presented. We have specified the legitimate the threat model in Section III.
access of normal users and the available range of the port In detail, we define these attack scenarios as follows.
hopping mechanism in the env class. Besides, we simulate • Attackers with a single and constant (S & C) target. In
LDDoS attackers to send malicious traffic from a certain this scenario, the LDDoS attackers will select a target
number of connections after preseted reconnaissance time in initially and continuously attack it until the horizon.
the environment. It is worth noting that in order to analyze • Attackers with a single and variable (S & V) target. The
the performance of the proposed method in different attack adversaries are able to dynamically select targets based
scenarios, we have adopted different action configurations for on their knowledge, and they can choose to attack current
the potential attack targets and attackers’ characteristics. services or adjust their targets at each step.
 Finally, we execute the proposed MTD mechanisms and • Attackers with multiple and constant (M & C) targets.
DQN algorithm in the simulated EC environment. In each The attackers in this scenario will spread their malicious
episode, the intelligent agent decides current defensive actions requests equally across multiple services.
and port configurations, and then distributes these decisions to • Attackers with multiple and variable (S & V) targets.
all services. Table III summarizes the key parameters in our The attackers will allocate malicious requests to multiple
simulation-based experiments, and the main hyperparameters services according to different weights, which can be
of DNNs are shown in Table IV. Note that the appropriate changeable as needed over time.
coefficients in the reward function are determined based on our
understanding of the task and by reference to Reference [25],
 B. The Impact of Attack Strength
to guide the agent’s learning and improve its performance.
However, there may be other factors at play, such as the initial The effectiveness of the proposed method is evaluated in
state, action selection policies, and environmental changes. terms of the average return during the training phase. The
Therefore, we discuss the limitations in Section VII. performance under different attack strengths is presented in
 DRL models often require an adequate number of training Fig. 3, where the x-axis represents the number of episodes,
iterations to converge to an optimal solution, therefore, it is and the y-axis denotes the average return obtained from the
significant to ensure that it has sufficient time to converge test under the current episode.
and stabilize its internal representations and weights, leading Regarding Fig. 3, the average return gradually increases for
to improved performance. Nevertheless, excessive episodes all the attack scenarios, from a negative value to the highest
may also result in high computational demands. To strike a return of 50 when defending against 10 attackers under M &
balance between the training time required and the available C and M & V scenarios. The increase implies the effective
computational resources, we performed 10,000 episodes of training of the intelligent agent under different scenarios, and
training and ran a test at every 500 steps, which allows especially, the average return value of 50 indicates that all
for substantial learning while being mindful of practical services are in a normal state with less resource overhead and
considerations. In each test, the summation of all rewards in proves the resource efficiency of the proposed method against
each episode without a discount factor is viewed as a return. low-intensity attacks. Although more attackers pose a more
 significant challenge to defense methods, our solution still
 3 https://github.com/openai/gym exhibits positive effectiveness (e.g., the average return values
178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. The average return of the proposed method under different LDDoS attack scenarios. (a) Impact of different numbers of static attackers to wage
the same attack target, (b) Impact of different numbers of dynamic attackers to compromise a single attack target, (c) Impact of different numbers of static
attackers to simultaneously wage multiple attack targets, (d) Impact of different numbers of dynamic attackers to deliver attacks on multiple targets.

are more than 19 eventually when defeating 50 attackers) due reward outcomes (can be seen in Fig. 3 (a) and (c)). For instance,
to the guidance from the DQN-based strategy. the proposed method achieved a return value of around 50 when
 Across all the cases in Fig. 3, we can see that the proposed defending against 10, 20, and 30 attackers in the M & V scenario.
method incurs the lowest effectiveness against 50 attackers, That is, our approach selects similar defensive actions under
achieving the approximate return value of 24, 19, 20, and 22, relatively low attack intensity, resulting in comparable defensive
respectively. The underlying reason is that when there are 50 effectiveness. This phenomenon can be attributed to the fact
attackers, all available connections that the services can handle that in scenarios with a constant attack target, the proposed
are occupied according to the simulation setup, resulting in a method, when facing relatively low-intensity attacks, tends to
serious shortage of computational resources for defense. As prioritize the service scaling and replication mechanisms through
a result, the intelligent agent can only make decisions in a the DQN algorithm to minimize unnecessary time overhead.
limited action space and the strategy derived from the DQN However, as the attack intensity increases and available resources
algorithm will tend to drive all containers to change their port gradually diminish, the method shifts its focus to the port hopping
numbers, leading to a slight decrease in return. Given the mechanism to ensure security. However, this observation has
resource limitations and similar effectiveness of implementing not been observed in the multi-target scenarios, particularly in
port hopping, we did not further discuss the returns in scenarios the variable multi-target setting. In this case (can be seen in
with a higher number of attackers. Moreover, we assume that Fig. 3 (d)), the defensive reward continually decreases as the
all the legitimate users request services at a stable rate in our attack intensity increases with the number of attackers. The
simulation, however, there may exist a sudden surge of requests underlying reasons for this are twofold. Firstly, the protected
from a part of newcomers in real scenarios. Therefore, we targets need to be dynamically adjusted due to changes in
discuss the limitations in Section VII. the attack strategy. Secondly, the resource scheduling for the
 Besides, the maximum return under single-target attack multi-target scenario is more complex, making it infeasible to
scenarios is around 45 whereas that in multi-target attack achieve high defensive rewards through similar defensive actions
scenarios can reach up to 50. This may be attributed to two alone.
reasons, the first is that the strategy space of the proposed
method is limited when dealing with single-target attacks,
because it is necessary to avoid damaging the security status C. The Impact of MTD mechanisms
of other normal services. The second is that when the system To analyze the impact of different MTD mechanisms on
recovers from multi-target attacks, it will incur a higher return the effectiveness and to demonstrate the necessity of the three
based on the reward function. Another interesting observation mechanisms designed in this work, we individually evaluate
is that when defending against attackers with multiple and the performance of the three MTD mechanisms as well as their
constant targets, the effectiveness is almost the same, ranging combined application against the aforementioned four kinds of
from 45 to 50 if there are no more than 40 attackers, as attack scenarios in this section. Additionally, in low-intensity
illustrated in Fig. 3(c). This can be attributed to the attack attack scenarios where resources are relatively abundant, the
characteristic in which attackers evenly distribute malicious differences in defensive reward resulting from varying defenrequests, MTD techniques can fully utilize existing sufficient sive actions cannot be fully manifested. Therefore, to validate
resources to effectively resist attacks and improve security. the importance of appropriate defensive action orchestration
Note that the performance in most variable scenarios is lower with a high level of intensity, we compare the effect of service
than that in constant scenarios. This phenomenon indicates that scaling, service replicas, port hopping, and their combined
attackers will be more threatening when they can dynamically deployment in terms of the average return against 50 LDDoS
adjust their attack targets, and also proves the necessity of attackers.
designing MTD mechanisms to deal with them. As we can see from Fig. 4, the combined MTD mechanisms
 There is an interesting observation that in scenarios with a have a significant advantage over any of a single mechanism,
constant attack target and a relatively small attacker population, achieving the average return value of around 28, 20, 20, and
the proposed methodology has demonstrated remarkably similar 26 on all attack scenarios. Especially, when dealing with the
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 179

Fig. 4. The comparison of the proposed MTD mechanisms under different LDDoS attack scenarios. (a) Impact of different defense mechanisms against
constant single-target attacks, (b) Impact of different MTD techniques to defeat variable single-target attacks, (c) Impact of different MTD mechanisms to
defend against constant multi-target attacks, (d) Impact of different defensive methods to mitigate variable multi-target attacks.

Fig. 5. The comparison of the proposed DQN-based MTD deployment strategy with two baseline strategies under different LDDoS attack scenarios.
(a) Comparison of different defensive strategies against constant single-target attacks, (b) Impact of different MTD strategies to defeat variable single-target
attacks, (c) Impact of different deployment strategies to defend against constant multi-target attacks, (d) Effectiveness of different strategies to mitigate variable
multi-target attacks.

constant single-target attack, there is a significant increase in can conclude that the proposed solution can optimize the
the average return (at most from −10 to 28) after switching scheduling of different MTD mechanisms, thereby improving
the port hopping to the combined mechanisms. The underlying resource efficiency significantly.
reason is that independently deploying an MTD mechanism
is ineffective in mitigating LDDoS attacks, whereas the combination of multiple MTD mechanisms can seamlessly work D. The Impact of Deployment Strategies
together to strengthen the defense, thereby resulting in a higher To further examine the effectiveness and overhead of our
return value. Moreover, it is worth noting that both service approach, particularly the impact of different decision-making
scaling and service replicas will bring negative returns across methods, we consider the aforementioned attack scenarios
all scenarios, achieving the return value of at least −5, −5, against LDDoS adversaries, and compare the proposed DQN-
−50, and −47, when defeating powerful LDDoS attacks. This based policy with two baseline strategies as follows.
result discloses that the unreasonable MTD deployment may • Random strategy. The defender randomly performs an
not increase the effectiveness against attacks, but will cause action from the proposed MTD mechanisms on a random
unnecessary waste of computing resources. service at each time step.
 With more details, we further observe that the port hopping • Deterministic strategy. The defender selects a determinisis similarly effective to the combined mechanisms, achieving tic action on the victim services according to the current
an average return value of around 20 under the multi- system status and expert knowledge.
target attack scenarios. Due to the settings of the simulation Similar to Section VI-C, we also set up an LDDoS attack
environment, all available connections that the services can scenario with 50 attackers to investigate the Web performance
handle are occupied, leaving insufficient idle computational of the aforementioned strategies under high-intensity attack
resources for scaling up or creating replicas when there are 50 conditions in this section. We first measure the number of conattackers. Therefore, we cannot defend through the scheduling nections induced by the different defense strategies, thereby
of physical resources and must instead choose port hopping evaluating the Web service quality. Subsequently, we compare
to block LDDoS attack traffic. Although it may affect the the number of Web services protected by the proposed policy
experience of current legitimate users, it effectively maintains and other baseline strategies across all edge environments.
service availability under high-intensity attacks. Even in the Finally, we analyze the defensive resource utilization required
presence of a larger number of attackers, as defense remains for deploying these strategies under varying attack scenarios.
restricted to port hopping, the defensive rewards will be similar 1) QoS Evaluation: In order to verify the capability of
to the scenario with 50 attackers. Since there is no significant the proposed approach to maintain QoS while guaranteeing
difference in returns, we did not further discuss scenarios efficient performance, we evaluate the average rate of availwith a higher number of attackers in our study. Last but able connections for all the Web services deployed on the
not least, according to the results among all scenarios, we edge cloud. Fig. 5 depicts the QoS performance of different
180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE V
 R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION OF THE D IFFERENT D EPLOYMENT S TRATEGIES W HEN D EFENDING AGAINST 50 LDD O S ATTACKERS

defensive strategies against four kinds of LDDoS attacks,
where three broken lines represent the random strategy, deterministic strategy, and DQN-based strategy.
 As we can see, the deterministic strategy exhibits a gradual
upward trend and finally achieves an available connection rate
of 0.372, 0.392, 0.177, and 0.184 across four kinds of attack
scenarios. Similarly, the proposed DQN-based strategy also
reaches convergence as the time step increases, achieving the
available connection rate of 0.428, 0.45, 0.428, and 0.442,
respectively. This observation indicates that these strategies
will ensure sufficient resources for providing network services
to legitimate users. Meanwhile, the DQN-based strategy
achieves a higher available connection rate (at most a 26.95%
 Fig. 6. The comparison of different deployment strategies for implementing
increase under the variable multi-target scenario) when com- the MTD mechanisms against powerful LDDoS attacks.
pared with the deterministic strategy. This can be attributed to
the success of the DRL method in obtaining a better strategy
than that of acquiring expert knowledge, leading to higher QoS under this scenario. Due to the guidance of the DQN-based
within limited resources. strategy, our approach is capable of keeping more than 8
 Nevertheless, the QoS of the random policy exceeds the Web services running at all times. The results disclose that,
DQN-based policy in several time steps under the variable regardless of the behavior and preference of the attackers, the
single-target scenario, achieving at highest connection rate of resistance of the proposed method is significantly higher than
0.467, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). This is because the ran- using other defensive strategies.
domly selected action has a certain probability to significantly Another interesting observation is that the average
increase QoS, but it may bring unnecessary overhead and performance of the random policy is slightly higher (at most
incur lower effectiveness. Furthermore, there is a dramatic a 4% increase under the M & C scenario) than that of the
fluctuation in the QoS of the random strategy across all the deterministic strategy. The underlying reason may be that the
scenarios. Especially, the connection rate of this strategy fluc- random strategy does not consider the negative effects it may
tuates between 0.334 and 0.467 under the S & V scenario. The have on QoS (see Fig. 5) and happens to improve security due
underlying reason is that unreasonable defense deployment to some extreme actions. In addition, the lower effectiveness of
driven by the random policy may affect the normal operation the deterministic strategy suggests that consistently following
of the Web service itself, causing instability in the QoS and certain patterns, rather than dynamically selecting the optimal
affecting the user experience. Therefore, we can conclude defensive strategy, would negatively impact security.
that the proposed DQN-based strategy can help the defender 3) Overhead Evaluation: To provide some additional
maintain a high level of QoS and provide users with stable insights on the defense resource consumption against attackers
Web services even under high-intensity LDDoS attacks. with different attack strengths, we report the resource usage
 2) Security Evaluation: To intuitively exhibit the for the defense deployment according to these three strateperformance of our approach against LDDoS attacks, we first gies, which is presented in Table V. Note that the resource
measure the average number of surviving services during 50 consumption is quantitatively measured based on the resource
time steps. Then, the results under different attack scenarios usage of the minimum service in Table III, that is, 1 means
are compared with other strategies, as illustrated in Fig. 6. that this strategy will use 0.1-core CPU and 0.5 GB RAM.
 As we can see, the DQN-based policy can protect more We observe that when compared with the multi-target sceservices from attacks than the other two strategies in all narios, the defense resource consumption of all three strategies
scenarios, achieving the average survivability rate of 0.98, is lower in the S&C and S&V scenarios. For example, the
0.97, 0.97, and 0.95, respectively. Especially, the average random strategy incurs an average resource consumption of
number of available services with our method is almost 1.5 28.46 under the S & V scenario while 42.79 units of defensive
times that under the random policy and the deterministic resources need to be involved in the M & C scenario. The
strategy, when defending against attackers with multiple and reason for this observation may be that more resources need
variable targets. And beyond that, the other two strategies can to be mobilized to participate in defensive actions when
prevent at most 63.8% of Web services from being attacked the targets are relatively scattered. Meanwhile, there is no
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 181

significant difference (at most 2.63 units of resources incurred switch and adopts an advantage actor-critic algorithm for
by the random strategy) in resource usage between the constant HAM.
scenario and variable scenario. This result may indicate that In our experiments, the testbed is composed of a Dell
the resource consumption needed for defense deployment is PowerEdge R630 server and a Dell PowerEdge R430 server.
not so much determined by the attacker’s behavior patterns Each Dell PowerEdge R630 has 24-core CPU, 64 GB of RAM,
in selecting attack targets. Instead, it is largely influenced by and 4 TB hard disk storage, and Dell PowerEdge R430 has
the intensity and scale of the attack. As another example, 4-core CPU, 16 GB RAM, and 120 GB disk storage. The
attackers under the variable scenario may choose the same or SDN controller is deployed using Ryu4 v4.3.4 on the Dell
similar target as in a constant scenario over several time steps, PowerEdge R430 server, in which we also deploy several MTD
which will also lead to similar defensive actions and resource mechanisms and the intelligent agent as modules. For the edge
utilization. cloud deployment, we utilize OpenStack Queens Devstack5
 It is also worth noting that the random strategy con- in another server, and we deploy containerized services with
sumes 31.09, 28.46, 42.79, and 40.85 units of resources on some built-in functions, including scaling up/down, creating
average under all four kinds of scenarios, representing the replicas, and container migration. In addition, the bandwidth
lowest resource utilization among all the strategies under of each link is configured as 1 Gbps.
consideration. However, it is difficult to make this strategy In summary, we include a controller and four edge clouds,
a high resource efficiency one due to the unstable QoS each with a capacity of 16GB RAM, in the testbed. We deploy
and lower survivability brought by it. Although the resource a free and open Web service namely bWAPP6 in each edge by
usage of the DQN-based strategy proposed in this paper pulling the image from DockerHub. We use the Apache HTTP
is only slightly higher than that of the deterministic strat- server benchmarking tool7 to simulate normal user access
egy, it can be considered an acceptable overhead because requests, where the number of concurrent connections varies to
of its significant improvement in QoS (at most a 26.95% represent different system loads. To evaluate the effectiveness
increase) and security (at most a 31.7% increase) evaluated of these methods against high-intensity and large-scale attacks,
in Sections VI-D1 and VI-D2. There is another observation we launch LDDoS attacks on all running services by using the
that the DQN-based policy consumes 45.24, 44.32, 49.8, and SlowHTTPTest tool. Specifically, we utilize a 10-second time
49.6 units of defensive resources across all attack scenarios. interval and generate a total of 100 connections per second for
The resource usage of our method is very close to 50, each edge cloud, and track the attack target if the port number
which is exactly the maximum amount of resources we can has been altered. In this scenario, without the implementation
afford in our simulations. This result proves that the proposed of any defense mechanisms, all Web services would become
approach can maximize the utilization of limited resources inaccessible due to being overwhelmed by a large volume of
and achieve a perfect balance between defense effectiveness malicious connections.
and resource utilization when defending against high-intensity Furthermore, to assess the performance of various methods
attacks. under different resource constraint conditions, we configure varying numbers of concurrent user connections μ. For
 instance, when μ = 200, the protected system has relatively
E. Comparison With Previous Works abundant available resources. Conversely, when the concur-
 We conduct experiments in a real-world testbed and com- rency level reaches 800, the system must allocate a substantial
pare our approach with the SOTA methods as follows. amount of resources to handle user requests, leaving only a
 • OpenMTD [65]. It employs a hybrid approach that diminished portion for defense deployment.
 integrates network address shuffling and port hopping 1) Response Time: To analyze the effectiveness of different
 techniques to resist attacks. The high-frequency and low- defensive schemes, we evaluate the average response time
 frequency mutation cycles are set at 30 and 120 seconds, of each method on the server side by simulating a total of
 and the hopping period is 20 seconds. 10,000 normal requests and LDDoS attack requests lasting
 • FastMove [66]. It protects Web servers from DDoS for 300 seconds. The results under different system loads are
 attacks using a network address change mechanism presented in Fig. 7, where the x-axis represents the percentage
 through multiple proxies, in which we set 10 replicas for of requests served, and the y-axis denotes the response time
 each Web server and a time interval of 10 seconds in our obtained from the test within these parts of requests.
 experiments. We can make the first observation that the response time of
 • CMDP-MOS [50]. It combines admission control and ser- all methods gradually increases as the number of concurrent
 vice migration to mitigate DDoS attacks. Also, it adopts connections grows. This increase implies the impact of system
 the constrained Markov decision processes (CMDP) to loads on the response time is significant when dealing with
 model the optimization problem and presents an MTD attacks of equal intensity. We can also observe that the
 optimal strategy (MOS) algorithm to guide defense proposed method consistently exhibits the lowest response
 deployment.
 • ID-HAM [67]. It integrates host address mutation (HAM) 4 https://ryu-sdn.org
 with deep reinforcement learning to slow down network 5 https://opendev.org/openstack/devstack
 reconnaissance intelligently. In detail, it transforms the 6 https://hub.docker.com/r/raesene/bwapp
 real IP addresses of hosts into virtual ones by OpenFlow 7 https://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/programs/ab.html
182 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. The request time of different schemes when defeating LDDoS attacks under different system loads, where μ represents the number of concurrent
connections. (a) Comparison of different defensive methods when requests come from 200 concurrent connections, (b) Impact of different approaches to
defeat attacks within 400 concurrent connections, (c) Impact of different solutions to defend against attacks under 600 concurrent connections, (d) Response
efficiency of different schemes to mitigate attacks when there are 800 concurrent connections.

time across various system workloads. Specifically, under
lower workloads such as the scenario with 200 concurrent
connections, the RE-MTD approach achieves a response time
of less than 100 ms for 93% of the requests. In contrast, the
FastMove, CMDP-MOS, and ID-HAM methods only respond
to requests within this timeframe for 2%, 11%, and 32%
of the requests, respectively. Notably, the OpenMTD method
fails to achieve this for any request. Moreover, under the
condition of 800 concurrent connections, the RE-MTD method
is able to effectively handle requests, with only 6% of requests
requiring 300ms or more response time. In contrast, the
other methods exhibit longer response times, particularly with
FastMove, where 97% of requests fail to complete within Fig. 8. The comparison of time per request experienced by users when
300ms. This substantiates that the proposed approach can equipped with different defensive schemes.
effectively mitigate attacks, which prevents the Web service
from being overwhelmed by a large number of connections
initiated by attackers, even in the presence of limited available 2) Quality of Experience: In order to assess the user
resources. As a result, it is capable of effectively safeguarding experience from the user’s perspective during webpage access,
legitimate user access and can operate efficiently under varying we measured both the average response time per request
resource constraint conditions. and the webpage loading duration in our experiments. As
 Furthermore, there is another interesting observation that depicted in Fig. 8, we can observe that as the system workload
the advantage of RE-MTD over other methods also gradually increases, the speed at which the Web service responds to user
expands as the number of concurrent connections increases. requests slows down, consistent with the results obtained from
For instance, when handling 80% of the requests, compared our server-side testing (see Fig. 7). This is attributed to the
to the second-best method, RE-MTD reduces the response increased processing pressure on the server due to a higher
time by approximately 40 ms, 70 ms, 120 ms, and 130 ms number of concurrent connections, resulting in longer response
for concurrent connection counts of 200, 400, 600, and times for each request.
800, respectively. The underlying reason may be that the Nevertheless, we note that RE-MTD still exhibits the lowproposed method in this study incorporates Web service est average response time, reaching 68.36 ms, 136.50 ms,
quality as a crucial component of the reward function in the 215.98 ms, and 276.66 ms for 200, 400, 600, and 800
MDP modeling. Additionally, the MTD mechanisms devised concurrent connections, respectively. Particularly in the high
in this study, such as service scaling and service replicas, workload scenario (μ = 800), RE-MTD outperforms alterdo not differentiate between attack-induced states and high- native approaches such as OpenMTD and FastMove. By
load states. Consequently, while other MTD methods may reducing the response time by over 1 second, RE-MTD is able
be limited to addressing attacks, RE-MTD adopts a broader to ensure a favorable user experience even when there are
global perspective. Even under high workload conditions insufficient defensive resources available. This phenomenon
where there are insufficient defensive resources, it lever- can be attributed to the fact that OpenMTD and FastMove
ages the DQN algorithm to output the optimal strategy, methods lack defense designs specifically targeting low-rate
thereby maximizing service performance within the current attack scenarios and the fixed frequency of adaptations is not
resource constraints. As such, RE-MTD not only effectively efficient in defending against dynamically evolving attackers.
handles the malicious connections generated by attacks, but As a result, malicious connections impede the response of
also simultaneously optimizes the load balancing and system legitimate requests.
performance for the substantial volume of legitimate user Fig. 9 illustrates the webpage loading times when deploying
requests. different defense methods, with each subplot representing a
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 183

 TABLE VI
 M EMORY U SAGE R ATIOS OF D IFFERENT S CHEMES W HEN D EFENDING AGAINST LDD O S ATTACKS U NDER D IFFERENT W EB S ERVER L OADS

 3) Resource Consumption: Due to the limited resources of
 edge devices, it is essential to develop defense methods that are
 highly resource-efficient. Therefore, in this section, we evaluate the memory usage of the aforementioned defense methods
 under different system workloads and present experimental
 results in Table VI.
 As we can see, the memory overhead required for deploying various methods increases noticeably as the number of
 concurrent connections grows. This substantiates that under a
 fixed total resource capacity, a higher volume of user requests
 will result in more constrained resources available for defense.
 FastMove exhibits the highest or near-highest memory usage
 rate in all scenarios, reaching 49.79%, 64.08%, 79.33%,
Fig. 9. The average load time of Web services when deploying different and 92.62%, respectively. Particularly in the high workload
solutions under different service loads. (a) Comparison of different methods scenario (μ = 800), FastMove even reaches a maximum
when requests come from 200 concurrent connections, (b) Impact of different
schemes on the load time within 400 concurrent connections, (c) Impact of memory usage ratio of 98.37%, imposing a significant burden
different approaches on dealing with 600 concurrent connections, (d) Web on the normal operation of the system. This can be attributed
performance of different solutions when there are 800 concurrent connections. to FastMove directly creating 10 replicas for each Web service
 without dynamic adjustments during runtime, thus consuming
 a substantial amount of system resources.
different system workload level. The dark blue shaded area Furthermore, we can make an observation that CMDPrepresents the loading time of the first byte, while the light MOS performs better than OpenMTD at lower workloads,
blue bars indicate the loading time of the full webpage. As but it consumes more system resources at higher workloads,
the RE-MTD method simultaneously considers both defense with an average increase of 3.91% in memory usage ratio at
effectiveness and service quality in its defensive decision- μ = 800. The underlying reason for this could be the different
making, we also observe that it exhibits significant advantages MTD mechanisms employed by the two methods. Specifically,
over other approaches in terms of the loading times of both the OpenMTD utilizes network address shuffling and port hopfirst byte and the complete webpage across various workload ping to prevent attackers from probing and targeting real
conditions. This demonstrates the excellent scalability of services, while CMDP-MOS employs admission control and
the proposed method under different scenarios. Particularly, container migration for collaborative defense across multiple
when μ = 800, RE-MTD completes the loading of the full edge servers. Therefore, at lower workloads, CMDP-MOS
webpage within 1413 ms. In contrast, ID-HAM and CMDP- filters out malicious connections through its admission con-
MOS require approximately 1800 milliseconds, FastMove trol mechanism, while OpenMTD requires resource-intensive
takes over 2100 milliseconds, and OpenMTD approaches address and port adjustments. However, at higher workloads,
nearly 2500 milliseconds. In terms of the loading time of CMDP-MOS may utilize container migration to transfer the
the first byte, the proposed method requires only 362ms, promised service to another server, introducing higher system
while FastMove and OpenMTD take 679 ms and 815 ms, resource consumption.
respectively, which is nearly 1.9 times and 2.3 times that of There is another important observation that ID-HAM
RE-MTD. The underlying reason could be that ID-HAM and exhibits the lowest resource overhead, with memory usage
CMDP-MOS are more inclined towards eliminating and block- rates of 11.57%, 44.62%, 49.01%, and 76.19% at μ =
ing attacks, thereby neglecting performance optimization in 200, 400, 600, and 800, respectively. The proposed method
resource-constrained scenarios. On the other hand, OpenMTD in this paper follows closely, requiring only an additional
and FastMove employ fixed time intervals for network address 2.44%, 2.54%, 5.97%, and 2.44% of memory usage, respecshuffling or port hopping, which inadvertently provide oppor- tively, without incurring further memory consumption due to
tunities for strategically-minded attackers and result in longer changes in resource constraint conditions. Similarly, this can
load time because of malicious connections. be attributed to the differences in MTD mechanisms. Since
184 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

the host address mutation module of ID-HAM is deployed offensive and defensive actions, it may significantly affect the
on the SDN controller and switches, there are no additional effectiveness of the proposed method in the real world. A
resource overheads on the Web service side. On the other hand, more detailed model formulation may be a possible solution,
the container scaling and replica creation mechanisms of RE- in which we can incorporate random noise into the description
MTD are deployed on the service side, inevitably resulting of the environment, and utilize data-driven approaches to
in increased overheads. However, ID-HAM specifically targets automatically determine the parameters to fit the practical
the network reconnaissance phase and lacks a defense mech- scenario.
anism designed to counter LDDoS attacks. Its higher request In the end, although our approach is not bulletproof, we
response time and webpage loading time indirectly indicate believe that it significantly improves the security of the EC
its disadvantage in terms of defense effectiveness. In contrast, environment and ensures the QoS under LDDoS attacks in a
RE-MTD addresses the limitations of existing MTD methods, resource-efficient manner.
demonstrating the ability to dynamically maintain service
availability even under high workloads and low resource VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
availability conditions. Given the advantages of the proposed Owing to the advantages of MTD techniques, existing work
method in terms of defense effectiveness and service quality has shown that MTD-based solutions can mitigate DDoS
assurance, as well as its efficient deployment under various attacks in a more proactive and effective way. However, most
resource constraint conditions, we conclude that this approach of the recent studies were not suitable for hard-to-detect
is capable of addressing LDDoS attacks in a highly resource- LDDoS attacks, which are usually launched by stealthy attackefficient manner. ers. In addition, the high resource consumption of current
 solutions limits their deployment in the EC environment.
 VII. L IMITATIONS AND O PEN I SSUES To cope with the aforementioned challenges, we have
 exploited MTD to defeat LDDoS attacks in a proactive
 Despite the very promising results achieved by the proposed manner, by continuously shifting the network properties and
MTD-based method, it is clear that such an approach exhibits dynamically misleading attackers. In detail, we have first
some limitations. First, as previously discussed, resource com- designed three lightweight MTD mechanisms via the built-in
petition is actually the most critical part of the confrontation functionalities of the container-based applications. We have
between the attacker and the defense, the proposed method then considered optimizing the MTD deployment by exploiting
cannot withstand a radical and powerful attacker whose MDP and a DQN algorithm to achieve resource-efficient
resource ownership is far greater than that of the defender. defense. The simulations demonstrate the effectiveness of
In this case, the attacker may send malicious requests to all our method and its advantages over other practical strateserving containers simultaneously, limiting the dimensions of gies in terms of performance and overhead. To the best of
action space. Note that this is the result of extreme resource our knowledge, this is the first to overcome the challenge
inequality between both sides rather than a vulnerability of of LDDoS attacks through the deployment of MTD. This
the approach itself. Therefore, we can solve it via cooperative approach allows one to significantly improve edge security
defense among multiple edges, which can be investigated in without high resource consumption.
the future. In future work, we plan to investigate a distributed col-
 The proposed approach focuses on effective defense against laborative defense framework among multiple edge clouds
external attacks in the EC environment. Nevertheless, the to resist cyber attacks. Based on diverse MTD mechanisms
MTD-based solution may fail when the adversary gains suffi- and flexible virtualization technologies, edge servers will
cient knowledge of the target system, and especially in the case be able to jointly defend against large-scale DDoS attacks
that he/she is an insider attacker who has access to sensitive without encountering resource bottlenecks. Another future
resources and privileged system accounts. Thus, it might be development is to extend our work to defeat more advanced
very difficult to defeat these attacks because legitimate users attackers, who may be capable of developing attack strategies
and insider attackers cannot be distinguished especially at the through reinforcement learning. We aim to defeat intelligent
beginning of attacks. Further, this attacker can amplify the LDDoS attackers while optimizing the efficiency and resource
attack effect by blocking the MTD functionality and hijacking consumption of defense.
other nearby edges. Fortunately, some solutions have been
proposed to deal with the insider threat, such as security
 R EFERENCES
information and event management or zero trust policy. In this
respect, it is also a challenge to seamlessly integrate MTD with [1] Y. Al-Dhuraibi, F. Paraiso, N. Djarallah, and P. Merle, “Elasticity in
 cloud computing: State of the art and research challenges,” IEEE Trans.
existing defensive methods to maximize resource efficiency. Services Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 430–447, Apr. 2018.
 Another limitation of our approach may be its performance [2] P. Kumar and R. Kumar, “Issues and challenges of load balancing
would be affected by the network environment or user behav- techniques in cloud computing: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
 vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2019.
iors. In this work, we assume that the network environment is [3] F. Metzger, T. Hoßfeld, A. Bauer, S. Kounev, and P. E. Heegaard,
relatively stable and legitimate users access Web services in “Modeling of aggregated IoT traffic and its application to an IoT cloud,”
a consistent frequency. However, both increased demand and Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 679–694, Apr. 2019.
 [4] Q. Duan, S. Wang, and N. Ansari, “Convergence of networking and
network upgrades can result in significant changes in network cloud/edge computing: Status, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE
availability and performance. Although this is not caused by Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 148–155, Dec. 2020.
ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS 185

 [5] K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Guo, and J. Wu, “Green Industrial Internet [29] N. Agrawal and S. Tapaswi, “Defense mechanisms against DDoS attacks
 of Things architecture: An energy-efficient perspective,” IEEE Commun. in a cloud computing environment: State-of-the-art and research chal-
 Mag., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 48–54, Dec. 2016. lenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3769–3795,
 [6] Y. Wu, “Cloud-edge orchestration for the Internet of Things: 4th Quart., 2019.
 Architecture and AI-powered data processing,” IEEE Internet Things J., [30] M. Yu, T. Xie, T. He, P. McDaniel, and Q. K. Burke, “Flow table security
 vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12792–12805, Aug. 2021. in SDN: Adversarial reconnaissance and intelligent attacks,” IEEE/ACM
 [7] Y. Zhang, X. Lan, J. Ren, and L. Cai, “Efficient computing resource Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2793–2806, Dec. 2021.
 sharing for mobile edge-cloud computing networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. [31] S. Sengupta, A. Chowdhary, A. Sabur, A. Alshamrani, D. Huang, and
 Netw., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1227–1240, Jun. 2020. S. Kambhampati, “A survey of moving target defenses for network
 [8] C. Xu, X. Ma, R. Shea, H. Wang, and J. Liu, “Enhancing performance security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1909–1941,
 and energy efficiency for hybrid workloads in virtualized cloud envi- 3rd Quart., 2020.
 ronment,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 168–181, [32] S. Kim et al., “DIVERGENCE: Deep reinforcement learning-based
 Mar. 2021. adaptive traffic inspection and moving target defense countermeasure
 [9] C. Pahl, A. Brogi, J. Soldani, and P. Jamshidi, “Cloud container framework,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4,
 technologies: A state-of-the-art review,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., pp. 4834–4846, Dec. 2022.
 vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 677–692, Sep. 2019. [33] Z. Liu et al., “Jaqen: A high-performance switch-native approach for
[10] R. Zhou, Z. Li, and C. Wu, “An efficient online placement scheme for detecting and mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with programmable
 cloud container clusters,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 5, switches,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur. 21),
 pp. 1046–1058, May 2019. 2021, pp. 3829–3846.
[11] L. Ma, S. Yi, N. Carter, and Q. Li, “Efficient live migration of edge [34] K. Doshi, Y. Yilmaz, and S. Uludag, “Timely detection and mitigation of
 services leveraging container layered storage,” IEEE Trans. Mobile stealthy DDoS attacks via IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
 Comput., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 2020–2033, Sep. 2019. Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2164–2176, Oct. 2021.
[12] R. Gupta, I. Gupta, A. K. Singh, D. Saxena, and C.-N. Lee, “An IoT- [35] M. Yue, J. Li, Z. Wu, and M. Wang, “High-potency models of LDoS
 centric data protection method for preserving security and privacy in attack against cubic+ red,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 cloud,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 2445–2454, Jun. 2023. pp. 4950–4965, 2021.
[13] R. Gupta, D. Saxena, I. Gupta, and A. K. Singh, “Differential and [36] V. D. M. Rios, P. R. Inacio, D. Magoni, and M. M. Freire, “Detection
 TriPhase adaptive learning-based privacy-preserving model for medical and mitigation of low-rate denial-of-service attacks: A survey,” IEEE
 data in cloud environment,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 217–221, Access, vol. 10, pp. 76648–76668, 2022.
 Dec. 2022. [37] M. Yue, M. Wang, and Z. Wu, “Low-high burst: A double potency
[14] J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Toward edge-assisted Internet of Things: varying-RTT based full-buffer shrew attack model,” IEEE Trans.
 From security and efficiency perspectives,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 2, Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2285–2300, Oct. 2021.
 pp. 50–57, Apr. 2019. [38] R. Xie et al., “Disrupting the SDN control channel via shared links:
[15] I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “A Attacks and countermeasures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 5,
 survey of IoT-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical pp. 2158–2172, Oct. 2022.
 infrastructures and services,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, [39] C. Kemp, C. Calvert, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and J. L. Leevy, “An approach
 no. 4, pp. 3453–3495, 4th Quart., 2018. to application-layer DoS detection,” J. Big Data, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 22,
[16] M. Du and K. Wang, “An SDN-enabled pseudo-honeypot strategy for 2023.
 distributed denial of service attacks in Industrial Internet of Things,” [40] M. Ghaznavi, E. Jalalpour, M. A. Salahuddin, R. Boutaba, D. Migault,
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 648–657, Jan. 2020. and S. Preda, “Content delivery network security: A survey,” IEEE
[17] Q. He et al., “A game-theoretical approach for mitigating edge Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2166–2190, 4th Quart., 2021.
 DDoS attack,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, [41] N. Tripathi and N. Hubballi, “Slow rate denial of service attacks against
 pp. 2333–2348, Aug. 2022. HTTP/2 and detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 72, pp. 255–272, Jan. 2018.
[18] R. Gupta, D. Saxena, I. Gupta, A. Makkar, and A. K. Singh, [42] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “Flowguard: An
 “Quantum machine learning driven malicious user prediction for cloud intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE
 network communications,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 174–178, Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, Oct. 2020.
 Dec. 2022. [43] J. Li, L. Lyu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, and X. Lyu, “FLEAM: A federated
[19] Z. Li, H. Jin, D. Zou, and B. Yuan, “Exploring new opportunities to learning empowered architecture to mitigate DDoS in industrial IoT,”
 defeat low-rate DDoS attack in container-based cloud environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4059–4068, Jun. 2022.
 IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 695–706, [44] Z. Wu, L. Zhang, and M. Yue, “Low-rate DoS attacks detection based
 Mar. 2020. on network multifractal,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 13,
[20] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance and no. 5, pp. 559–567, Oct. 2016.
 features: Mitigating the low-rate TCP-targeted DoS attack via SDN,” [45] D. Tang, X. Wang, X. Li, P. Vijayakumar, and N. Kumar, “AKN-
 IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444, Jan. 2022. FGD: Adaptive Kohonen network based fine-grained detection of
[21] L. Zhou, H. Guo, and G. Deng, “A fog computing based approach to LDoS attacks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
 DDoS mitigation in IIoT systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 85, pp. 51–62, pp. 273–287, Feb. 2023.
 Aug. 2019. [46] D. Tang, Y. Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate the
[22] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Jiang, and M. Dai, “Building an efficient intrusion low-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled flow
 detection system based on feature selection and ensemble classifier,” tables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157,
 Comput. Netw., vol. 174, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 107247. 2023.
[23] Z. Liu, H. Jin, Y.-C. Hu, and M. Bailey, “Practical proactive DDoS-attack [47] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 mitigation via endpoint-driven in-network traffic control,” IEEE/ACM detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1948–1961, Aug. 2018. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[24] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, and S. Yu, “An SDN-enabled proactive defense [48] N. Tripathi, “Delays have dangerous ends: Slow HTTP/2 dos attacks into
 framework for DDoS mitigation in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. the wild and their real-time detection using event sequence analysis,”
 Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 5366–5380, 2021. IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1244–1256,
[25] T. Zhang et al., “How to mitigate DDoS intelligently in SD-IoV: A Jun. 2024.
 moving target defense approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, [49] S. Debroy et al., “Frequency-minimal utility-maximal moving target
 no. 1, pp. 1097–1106, Jan. 2023. defense against DDoS in SDN-based systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
[26] J.-H. Cho et al., “Toward proactive, adaptive defense: A survey on Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 890–903, Jun. 2020.
 moving target defense,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 1, [50] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Chen, and S. Jiang, “Toward proactive
 pp. 709–745, 1st Quart., 2020. and efficient DDoS mitigation in IIoT systems: A moving target defense
[27] J. Tan et al., “A survey: When moving target defense meets game theory,” approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2734–2744,
 Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 48, May 2023, Art. no. 100544. Apr. 2022.
[28] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, and Z. Chen, “Cost-effective [51] T. Zhang et al., “When moving target defense meets attack prediction
 moving target defense against DDoS attacks using trilateral game and in digital twins: A convolutional and hierarchical reinforcement learning
 multi-objective Markov decision processes,” Comput. Secur., vol. 97, approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3293–3305,
 Oct. 2020, Art. no. 101976. Oct. 2023.
186 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

[52] A. B. Osei, S. R. Yeginati, Y. Al Mtawa, and T. Halabi, “Optimized Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
 moving target defense against DDoS attacks in IoT networks: When B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
 to adapt?” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2022, University, Nanjing, China, in 1994, the M.S. degree
 pp. 2782–2787. in computer application from the Hefei University
[53] G. Mani et al., “Machine learning based resilience testing of an address of Technology in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in
 randomization cyber defense,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., computer network from Southeast University in
 vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 4853–4867, Dec. 2023. 2003, where he is a Full Professor with the School
[54] K. Toczé, A. J. Fahs, G. Pierre, and S. Nadjm-Tehrani, “VioLinn: of Cyber Science and Engineering. He has authored
 Proximity-aware edge placementwith dynamic and elastic resource or coauthored seven monographs and more than
 provisioning,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2023. 100 technical papers, including top journals and
[55] S.-Y. Chang, Y. Park, and B. B. A. Babu, “Fast IP hopping randomization conferences like IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
 to secure hop-by-hop access in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service N ETWORKING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND
 Manag., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 308–320, Mar. 2019. S ECURITY, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, and
[56] X. Xu, H. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Chang, “An adaptive IP IEEE INFOCOM. His research interests include network security, network
 hopping approach for moving target defense using a light-weight CNN measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a Distinguished Member of
 detector,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2021, Art. CCF.
 no. 8848473.
[57] K. Zeitz, M. Cantrell, R. Marchany, and J. Tront, “Changing the game:
 A micro moving target IPv6 defense for the Internet of Things,” IEEE
 Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 578–581, Aug. 2018.
[58] R. E. Navas, H. Sandaker, F. Cuppens, N. Cuppens, L. Toutain, and
 G. Z. Papadopoulos, “IANVS: A moving target defense framework for
 a resilient Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun.
 (ISCC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[59] J. Tan, H. Jin, H. Hu, R. Hu, H. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “WF-MTD:
 Evolutionary decision method for moving target defense based on
 Wright-Fisher process,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20,
 no. 6, pp. 4719–4732, Dec. 2023.
[60] A. H. Anwar, C. A. Kamhoua, N. O. Leslie, and C. Kiekintveld,
 “Honeypot allocation for cyber deception under uncertainty,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3438–3452, Sep. 2022.
[61] X. Li, L. Dong, L. Xue, and C. Sun, “Hybrid reinforcement learning
 for optimal control of non-linear switching system,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9161–9170, Nov. 2023.
[62] Y. Gao, A. Abate, L. Xie, and K. H. Johansson, “Distributional Zhi Ouyang (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 reachability for Markov decision processes: Theory and applica- B.S. degree in information security from the Nanjing
 tions,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, early access, Dec. 11, 2023, University of Posts and Telecommunications in
 doi: 10.1109/TAC.2023.3341282. 2021. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree
[63] K. Zhong, Z. Yang, G. Xiao, X. Li, W. Yang, and K. Li, “An with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 efficient parallel reinforcement learning approach to cross-layer defense Southeast University. His research interests include
 mechanism in industrial control systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. moving target defense, cyber deception, and network
 Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2979–2990, Nov. 2022. security.
[64] G. Brockman et al., “Openai gym,” 2016, arXiv:1606.01540.
[65] R. Poschinger, N. Rodday, R. Labaca-Castro, and G. Dreo Rodosek,
 “Openmtd: A framework for efficient network-level MTD evaluation,”
 in Proc. 7th ACM Workshop Moving Target Defense, 2020, pp. 31–41.
[66] N. Bandi, H. Tajbakhsh, and M. Analoui, “FastMove: Fast IP switching
 moving target defense to mitigate DDoS attacks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Depend. Secure Comput. (DSC), 2021, pp. 1–7.
[67] T. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Kuang, and L. A. Grieco, “How to
 disturb network reconnaissance: A moving target defense approach
 based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Security, vol. 18, pp. 5735–5748, 2023.

 Yuyang Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 degree in electronic information engineering from
 the Nanjing University of Science and Technology
 in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace security
 from Southeast University in 2021, where he is ZongYao Chen (Student Member, IEEE) received
 currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow with the B.S. degree in information security from Hainan
 the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. He University in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
 has published in some of the topmost journals master’s degree with the School of Cyber Science
 and conferences like IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON and Engineering, Southeast University. His major
 I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE research interests include moving target defense,
 T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, android malware detection, and reverse engineering.
and ACM CCS, and is involved as a reviewer and a technical program
committee of several journals and conferences in the field. His major research
interests include moving target defense, DDoS mitigation, and intrusion
detection. He is a member of CCF.