IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 677

 RETRIAL: Robust Encrypted Malicious Traffic
Detection via Discriminative Relation Incorporation
 and Misleading Relation Correction
 Jianjin Zhao , Member, IEEE, Qi Li , Zewei Han , Junsong Fu , Guoshun Nan , Member, IEEE,
 Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, and Bharat K. Bhargava , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Encryption techniques greatly ensure the confi- I. I NTRODUCTION
dentiality and integrity of network communications. However,
they also allow attackers to conceal malicious activities within
encrypted traffic, posing severe cybersecurity challenges. Current
detection methods primarily rely on statistics and correlation
analysis. However, both statistical features and inter-entity rela-
 T HE widespread adoption of encryption techniques in
 modern network applications significantly enhances the
 confidentiality and integrity of network communications.
tions can be easily obfuscated. Moreover, issues with low-quality Nonetheless, it also retains a gray area for threat actors
data and fixed feature sets limit the generalizability and adapt- to conceal malicious activities within encrypted traffic, such
ability to defend against various evasion techniques. Robustifying
encrypted malicious traffic detection in adverse conditions is still as malware delivery, Command-and-Control (C&C) channels,
an open problem. In this paper, we propose RETRIAL, a robust and data exfiltration. The ubiquitous nature and inherent
encrypted malicious traffic detection system via discriminative opacity of encrypted traffic pose a formidable challenge to
relation incorporation and misleading relation correction. The network security management [1], [2], [3].
key motivations behind RETRIAL are to accurately leverage the Many efforts have been made to detect encrypted malicious
rich relations among flows for contextual analysis, and correct
misleading ones for robust threat detection. Specifically, we traffic [4], [5], [6]. Traditional methods based on decryption or
construct a relational multigraph and develop a tailored Graph signatures [7], [8], to varying degrees, present issues related
Attention Network (GAT) to selectively incorporate contextual to privacy violations and limited adaptability. In response, an
information. Then we retrieve multi-order neighborhood simi- increasing number of studies embrace machine learning as a
larity graphs as observations for adaptive relation correction. viable solution [9], [10], [11]. These studies typically rely on
Following an iterative scheme, both detector performance and
graph topology mutually optimize. To validate the robustness of statistical analysis of unencrypted fields and flow metadata
RETRIAL, we simulate various adverse conditions by randomly to distinguish between benign and malicious traffic. However,
dropping packets and greedily injecting perturbation edges. The threat activities such as Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
experimental results show that RETRIAL is competitive in ideal attacks and ransomware campaigns may manifest in complex
condition. Under adverse conditions, though the performances and distributed forms, rendering statistical analysis of individof other state-of-the-art methods degrade significantly, RETRIAL
consistently exhibits superior performance with a maximum ual flows insufficient.
reduction of only 5.88% in F1, highlighting its robustness in Recently, another emerging trend involves in-depth corthreat detection. relation analysis across flows to reduce false positives and
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic analysis, malicious traffic improve robustness. The interactions between network entidetection, graph representation learning. ties essentially constitute a graph structure, which has been
 explored in recent studies [12], [13], [14]. ST-Graph [4]
 Received 11 April 2024; revised 19 September 2024; accepted 15 Octo- captures spatio-temporal behaviors by graph representation
ber 2024. Date of publication 11 December 2024; date of current version learning. 3D-IDS [5] introduces a multi-layer graph diffusion
7 January 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natu- method for dynamic intrusion detection. Additionally, RAPIER
ral Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172055, Grant 61972039,
Grant 62222201, Grant U20B2045, and Grant U23A20304; in part by [15] and HYPERVISION [16] analyze various flows to mitigate
the National Defense Basic Scientific Research Program of China under label noise and extract robust interaction patterns respectively,
Grant JCKY2021602B002; in part by Beijing Nova Program under Grant achieving considerable progress.
20220484174; and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under
Grant M23020. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article In a nutshell, existing studies achieve accurate and robust
and approving it for publication was Dr. Daisuke Mashima. (Corresponding detection primarily by improving training data quality and
author: Qi Li.) designing more resilient features, however, which are insuf-
 Jianjin Zhao, Qi Li, Zewei Han, Junsong Fu, and Guoshun Nan
are with the Department of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University ficient to tackle the continuously evolving threat landscape.
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: First, the issue of low-quality testing data persists, underjianjinzhao@bupt.edu.cn; liqi2001@bupt.edu.cn; hanzewei@bupt.edu.cn; mining the model generalizability. Second, fixed feature sets
fujs@bupt.edu.cn; nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn).
 Meng Shen is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, limits the adaptability to cope with dynamic evasion strategies.
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shen- Thus, we advocate to adaptively integrate and correct various
meng@bit.edu.cn). interactions, mitigating the adverse effects induced by evasion
 Bharat K. Bhargava is with the Department of Computer Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 USA (e-mail: bbshail@purdue.edu). techniques and generating more representative flow features
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3515821 for robust detection.
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 To fully exploit the potential of complex relations, three A. Decryption-Based Methods
challenges need to be addressed: relation complexity, sig-
 Decryption-based methods decrypt encrypted contents for
nificance and reliability. Firstly, network entities may share
 inspection, which reduce connection security, introduce addimultiple and various relations, while current solutions oftentional attack vectors, and require additional computation time
times oversimplify the complex interactions, failing to map
 and delay. The common practice employed by enterprises is
their multifaceted nature. Secondly, the significance of difto deploy a MitM proxy between client and server. Durumeric
ferent relations varies, requiring a systematic measurement to
 et al. [22] investigate the potential vulnerabilities introduced
discriminatively incorporate them for fine-grained contextual
 by popular middle-boxes and security software, and conclude
information aggregation. Lastly, due to the prevalence of
 recommendations for both vendors and the security commuevasion techniques [17], [18], [19], [20], it is difficult to assess
 nity. Instead of prematurely intercepting TLS connections,
the reliability of relations. Potential spurious relations will
 Wilkens et al. [23] advocate for a passive and transparent
inevitably lead to erroneous decision-making in detection.
 TLS decryption solution by selectively forward TLS key to
 In this paper, we develop a robust system, namely
 trusted servers to enable selective decryption for forensic
RETRIAL, that aims to detect encrypted malicious traffic
 analysis. In any case, the idea of decryption-based methods
via selectively exploring the rich relations among flows and
 stands in opposition to the fundamental principle of encryption
correct the misleading of them. The key motivations behind
 techniques, raising issues concerning security and privacy.
RETRIAL are to accurately model the rich relations among
flows, selectively leverage them for correlations, and correct those misleading ones to defend against obfuscation B. Signature-Based Methods
techniques for adaptive relation correction and robust threat Signature-based methods involve extracting signatures for
detection. known malicious traffic. Besides IP and domain block lists,
 Specifically, we first construct a relational multigraph Salesforce [7], [8] develops fingerprints tailored for TLS
incorporating semantic identities and behavioral similarities communications, including JA3, JA3S and JARM. JA3 and
and record relation information as edge types to compre- JA3S are passive observations for TLS clients and servers,
hensively model the complex interactions between flows. while JARM is to actively scan to build a fingerprint for server-
Then we develop a tailored Graph Attention Network (GAT) side applications. Despite their utility, the frequent updates
[21] to encode relation information into attention calcula- and diverse sources of block lists complicate the fingerprinting
tion and selectively incorporate contextual information. To process. To generate practical block lists, Ramanathan et al.
correct those misleading relations, we retrieve multi-order [24] propose BLAG to aggregate multiple block lists feeds and
neighborhood similarity graphs as observations, estimate and produce an accurate and timely block list for detection. Dong
approximate optimal graph based on Bayesian inference et al. [25] propose MBTREE, a host-level network behavior
and Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. Following fingerprint to detect encryption Trojans. Though signaturean iterative optimization scheme, RETRIAL realizes mutual based detection methods are efficient and accurate, they cannot
optimization of both GNN encoder and graph topology. To adapt to dynamic and unknown attack patterns.
evaluate the robustness of our system, we randomly drop
packets and generate perturbation edges to simulate network
fluctuations and adversarial attacks. Extensive experimental C. Statistics-Based Methods
results show the superiority of our work under various adverse Statistics-based methods extract flow metadata as features
conditions. and perform statistical analysis to fit a decision boundary
 In sum, the contributions of this paper are as follows: between malicious and benign. Early studies primarily focus
 • We propose RETRIAL, a practical encrypted malicious on TLS traffic. Anderson and McGrew [9], [10], [11] pertraffic detection system for robust threat detection and form a series of measurement studies on observable features
 adaptive relation correction. within TLS handshake message, highlighting its potential in
 • We design a relational multigraph, and develop a tailored malware analysis. They also emphasize the significance of
 GAT to encode relation information into neighborhood statistical flow metadata for malicious traffic detection. On
 aggregation for accurate contextual flow encoding. the basis, Wang et al. [26] leverage Convolutional Neural
 • We correct misleading relations through Bayesian infer- Network (CNN) to achieve malware traffic classification with
 ence and EM algorithm, achieving mutual optimization the first 784 bytes of each flow. Fu et al. [27], [28] develop
 of detector performance and graph topology iteratively. WHISPER by applying discrete Fourier transformation on per-
 • We simulate various adverse conditions by packet manip- packet feature sequences to extract sequential information
 ulation and edge perturbation. Extensive experimental in the frequency domain. As encryption protocols continue
 results validate the superior robustness of RETRIAL. to advance, observable information diminishes. A notable
 example is the Encrypted Server Name Indication (ESNI)
 II. R ELATED W ORK extension [29], which encrypts the server name requested by
 In this section, we review the relevant studies on malicious the client and keeps user browsing data private. Moreover,
traffic detection, which can be mainly divided into four cate- evasion techniques (e.g., domain fronting and fast-flux) easily
gories, decryption-based, signature-based, statistics-based and obfuscate those statistical features, posing new challenges to
correlation-based methods. detection.
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 679

 TABLE I 1) Passive Adversary: Passive adversary’s goal is to disrupt
 C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER C ORRELATION -BASED M ETHODS web service availability and overwhelm network bandwidth.
 Though passive adversary does not proactively seek to evade
 detection, the interference with network traffic leads to loss or
 distortion of critical features like packet lengths, thereby compromising the efficacy of detectors. In terms of capabilities, we
 assume that passive adversary can merely cause packet loss,
 and has no access to traffic data or detectors. Consequently,
 passive adversary performs black-box attacks, requiring no
 knowledge about the model structure or model feedback.
 2) Proactive Adversary: Proactive adversary’s goal is to
D. Correlation-Based Methods
 generate adversarial traffic and exploit the vulnerabilities
 Correlation-based methods improve detection capabilities inherent in learning-based models to evade detection. Proactive
by leveraging the rich relations among network entities. There adversary is able to utilize various evasion techniques to
are mainly two avenues for correlation analysis. One involves obfuscate the relations and mislead the decision of detectors.
aggregating flow-level features, while the other constructs In this work, we propose to model the rich relations among
graphs to model entity relations. For example, Dai et al. [30] flows as a graph and leverage GNN for detection. We assume
and Cui et al. [31] employ the former by aggregating 5- that proactive adversary, armed with full knowledge about the
tuple flows to characterize network behaviors at service level graph and the model, performs white-box attacks. Notably, this
(4-tuple) and channel level (2-tuple). For more flexible corre- assumption is impractical in real-world scenarios. We augment
lations, Zhao et al. [32], Li et al. [13] and Hong et al. [33] the proactive adversary’s capabilities and knowledge to further
integrate various relations into an informative graph and utilize validate the robustness of our solution.
GNNs for analysis. To realize accurate and robust detection and tackle various
 Recent studies have increasingly leveraged correlation anal- adversaries, the design goals of RETRIAL are threefold.
ysis for robust detection. Qing et al. [15] estimate the a) Elaborate Relation Incorporation: It should be able
distribution of training data to mitigate label noise in data to elaborately model the complex relations among flows for
preparation. Fu et al. [16] design robust graph structural fea- comprehensive correlation analysis.
tures within a flow interaction graph in feature engineering. In b) Discriminative Relation Encoding: It should be able
contrast, our work focuses on adaptively correcting misleading to discriminatively encode relation information to focus more
interactions induced by various evasion techniques during both on those relations that really matter in threat detection.
training and detection phases. c) Adaptive Relation Correction: It should be able to
 To achieve this, we construct a relational multigraph and adaptively correct misleading relations introduced by adverrecord the relation type as the edge type to comprehensively saries to defend against evasion techniques and realize robust
capture the rich relations. On this basis, we employ a tailored detection.
GAT to selectively aggregate neighbor information considering relation types for contextual flow encoding. Moreover, B. Evasion Technique
we modify the graph topology to approximate the optimal To extend the life of threat campaigns, threat actors have
graph estimated by Bayesian inference. Following an iterative developed many techniques to evade detection. Traditional
optimization scheme, RETRIAL achieves adaptive relation cor- encrypted malicious traffic detection methods primarily rely
rection and robust threat detection. Table I compares RETRIAL on unencrypted data fields (e.g., TLS handshake parameters)
with other correlation-based methods. and statistical flow metadata (e.g., packet lengths, numbers
 and times). Recent studies further take the rich interactions
 III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION among network entities (e.g., components and hosts) into
 consideration.
 In this section, we first describe our threat model to deter- Here we briefly review several common evasion techniques
mine the adversary’s goals, capabilities and knowledge, and that distort available features and correlations and refine the
correspondingly set the design goal of RETRIAL. Then, we adversaries’ capabilities, motivating us to cautiously analyze
review common evasion techniques and specify those that can the rich relations within flows.
be employed by passive and proactive adversaries. With this 1) DDoS Attack: Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
background, we formally present the problem definition of attacks coordinate multiple compromised hosts to overwhelm
encrypted malicious traffic detection under various adverse the target with massive volumes of traffic, rendering its serconditions. vice inaccessible to legitimate users. The numerous requests
 exhaust the targets’ CPU and memory resources, resulting in
 significant performance degradation and packet loss.
A. Threat Model
 2) Packet Obfuscation: Packet obfuscation techniques
 We delineate between two types of adversaries: passive and manipulate packets to distort statistical flow metadata. For
proactive, based on the adversary’s goals. Accordingly, their example, Obfs4 bridge relay, a common pluggable transport
capabilities and knowledge exhibit notable distinctions. in Tor, is able to pad packets with random sizes and split
680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
 T HE E VASION T ECHNIQUES E MPLOYED BY A DVERSARIES N OTATIONS IN T HIS PAPER

large packets into smaller packets. Additionally, recent studies
[34], [35], [36] seek to adaptively modify packet features to
obfuscate traffic analysis with minimal performance overhead.
 3) Fast Flux: Fast flux techniques used by threat actors
involve rapid shifting between IP addresses to delay or evade
detection. In a fast flux network, multiple IP addresses are
associated with a single domain name with frequent switches
by altering Domain Name System (DNS) resource records,
rendering IP-based blocking efforts difficult.
 4) Distributed C&C: C&C architectures have evolved significantly, transitioning from centralized to Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
and random. In centralized C&C, all compromised hosts are relations among flows, where V denotes the node set, E
controlled by a single server following a client-server scheme. denotes the edge set, X denotes the node features, R denotes
Conversely, P2P C&C empowers each infected host to work the edge type set, and A = {Ar |r ∈ R} denotes the adjacency
as a bot leader, distributing commands to other nodes. Taking matrix set segregated by relations. It is notable that G is
one node down does not affect the whole botnet. Random unreliable since there may exist spurious relations introduced
C&C leverages various sources, such as social media, Content by various obfuscation techniques.
Delivery Network (CDN), and Internet Relay Chat (IRC), to Given the original relational multigraph G with adjacency
issue commands, with better resilience against disruptions of matrix set A and partial labels Y, the goal of RETRIAL is
key botnet components. to train a GNN encoder fΘ (·) with parameter Θ for robust
 5) Domain Fronting: As a geographically distributed net- threat detection and estimate the optimal multigraph G with
work that deploys edge nodes in different regions worldwide, adjacency matrix set S to correct misleading relations. The
CDN caches web resources in proxy servers and delivers objective function of RETRIAL can be formally defined as
content to users from the nearest nodes for faster responses. X
 min L (A, X, Y) = L fΘ (S, X)i , yi ,
 
However, threat actors exploit the redirection capabilities of (1)
 Θ,S
 yi ∈Y
CDNs as domain fronts to obfuscate the intended destination
of encrypted traffic (i.e., the IP address and the domain name where fΘ (X, S)i is the predicted label of node vi given by the
of malicious services). Domain fronting has been actively GNN encoder, and L(·) is the loss function that measures the
abused to provide malicious content. difference between the predicted and true labels.
 The evasion techniques employed by passive and proactive
adversaries, along with their impact on information distortion, IV. D ESIGN D ETAILS OF R E T RIAL
are summarized in Table II. Typically, passive adversary
may conduct DDoS attacks, causing random packet loss, A. Framework Overview
while proactive adversary may intentionally disguise the mali- In this work, we propose RETRIAL to achieve robust
cious behavioral patterns and manipulate correlations through encrypted malicious traffic detection in adverse conditions.
various evasion techniques. These techniques illustrate the As illustrated in Fig. 1, scReTrial consists of four comadversaries’ potential capabilities, such as modifying per- ponents: relational multigraph construction, contextual flow
packet features, switching IP addresses, and using legitimate encoding, Bayesian graph estimation, and iterative model
server configurations like certificate. Although the adversaries optimization.
may employ other techniques, the listed are sufficient to obfus- 1) Relational Multigraph Construction: We construct a
cate comprehensive information in encrypted traffic analysis. multigraph by modeling encrypted flows as nodes and rich
 relations as edges respectively. In the relational multigraph,
C. Problem Definition the information available in encrypted traffic including unen-
 In this paper, we aim to develop a robust encrypted mali- crypted data fields and observable flow metadata is utilized to
cious traffic detection system (i.e., RETRIAL) to defend against correlate flows. We establish connections between flows with
adversarial attacks and evasion techniques. The notations used identical semantic fields or similar communication patterns.
in this paper are summarized in Table III. The corresponding relation information is recorded as edge
 Specifically, we construct a relational multigraph G = types for subsequent analysis. We will detail how to construct
{V, E, X, R} with adjacency matrix set A to model the rich the relational multigraph in Section IV-B.
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 681

 Fig. 1. The overview of our robust encrypted malicious traffic detection system RETRIAL.

 2) Contextual Flow Encoding: To alleviate the adverse optimization not only corrects those false relations but also
effects induced by evasion techniques, we selectively incor- promotes the detector performance. We will describe the
porate the neighborhood information of flows for contextual details of iterative model optimization in Section IV-E.
flow encoding. In particular, we adopt tailored Graph Attention
Network (GAT) as an encoder. It extends original graph B. Relational Multigraph Construction
attention mechanism by considering edge types in importance
 To exploit the rich relations among flows for accurate threat
calculation, enabling the assignment of importances to differdetection, we consider the information available in encrypted
ent nodes from various relations. We will present the tailored
 traffic to construct a comprehensive relational multigraph G,
GAT layer for contextual flow encoding in Section IV-C.
 where flows are modeled as nodes and their rich relations are
 3) Bayesian Graph Estimation: Assuming an optimal graph modeled as edges respectively.
with relation corrected, it enables our encoder to derive better 1) Node Feature Extraction: In the relational multigraph,
flow representations. We aim to estimate the optimal graph each node represents a bi-directional network flow. We conand modify our relational multigraph to approximate it. To struct a feature vector for each node/flow by considering both
this end, we compute multi-order neighborhood similarities to unencrypted data fields and statistical flow metadata.
construct k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) graphs as observations a) Unencrypted Data Fields: Unencrypted Data Fields
to infer the optimal graph. Although they may contain errors include critical information within the network and transport
when viewed individually, they can be combined to reflect the layers (e.g., IP address, port, transmission protocol, and TCP
optimal graph. We calculate the probability of mapping the flags). Notably, TLS handshake messages in plaintext like
optimal graph to observations and utilize Bayesian inference ClientHello, ServerHello and Certificate enable client
to reverse it and estimate the posterior distribution. We will and server to authenticate each other and negotiate important
provide a detailed estimation process in Section IV-D. parameters for subsequent encrypted communications, which
 4) Iterative Model Optimization: We follow an iterative relatively reflect the reliability of flows.
optimization scheme to mutually optimize the relational multi- b) Statistical Flow Metadata: Statistical Flow Metadata
graph and the GNN encoder. In each iteration, we first is mainly derived from packet sequence information. We
update the parameters of GNN encoder by typical gradient compute various statistical variants (e.g., mean, minimum,
descent to obtain better observations. We then utilize Bayesian maximum, variance, standard deviation) of packet lengths and
inference to derive the posterior probability of the optimal inter-arrival times to form statistical flow metadata. Though
graph and maximize it with EM algorithm [37]. The iterative statistical flow metadata cannot provide deep insight about the
682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 for multiple edges (a.k.a. parallel edges) between nodes.
 We record relation information as edge types to construct
 relational multigraph for subsequent analysis.

 C. Contextual Flow Encoding
 In our relational multigraph, the complex relations among
 flows provide valuable contextual information for multi-flow
 correlation, however, which also bring noise to threat detection
 due to various evasion techniques. To selectively encode
 the contextual information into flow representations, we utilize a tailored graph attention network as an encoder. It
 extends original graph attention mechanism by considering
 both node features and edge types in importance calculation
 [38], enabling us to focus on those contextual flows that really
Fig. 2. A motivation example for computing DTW/Jaccard distance between matter.
packet length sequences. The responses from compromised hosts to identical
commands vary due to different host configurations and environments. DTW
 Specifically, the encoder stacks tailored GAT layers to
distance captures the temporal similarities in sequences, accounting for the aggregate multi-order neighbor information and derive condynamic nature of packet transmission over time. Jaccard distance measures textual flow representations for detection. In each layer, we
the overlap of unique packet lengths irrespective of their temporal order.
 maintain a learnable edge-type embedding rψ(e) for each edge
 type ψ(e) ∈ R, where ψ(·) is an edge type mapping function.
content of flows, it does facilitate inferences about the network The tailored GAT layer takes both node features h and edge
behaviors of flows. types e as input and maps them into higher-level embed-
 2) Graph Topology Construction: We consider the rich dings by linear transformations, respectively parameterized by
relations among flows to construct the graph topology. Refer- weight matrix W and W r . Then we perform self-attention
ring to the node features, connections are established between operation a(·) to compute attention scores by considering both
flows that share the same semantic fields or similar commu- node embeddings and edge type embeddings as
nication patterns. There are in total five types of relations.
 β̂i je = a Whi , Wh j , W r rψ(e)
 
 a) IP/Port Relation: We establish connections between (2)
flows with the same destination IP and destination port. The that indicate the importance of node j to node i when
combination of IP address and port number identifies specific considering the type of edge e between them. To capture
internet services and applications. structural information, we compute β̂i je for all nodes j ∈ Ni
 b) Fingerprint Relation: We establish connections and all edges e ∈ Ei j , where Ni is the neighbors of node i,
between flows with the same JA3 and JA3S fingerprints. and Ei j is the set of edges between node i and node j. Then
JA3 and JA3S are the MD5 hashes of the gathered fields we normalize the scores across all possible neighbors of node
in ClientHello and ServerHello messages. Salesforce has i using softmax function as
demonstrated that it is feasible to identify malicious commu- exp β̂i je
 
 α̂i je = softmax j βi je = P P .
 
nications by JA3&JA3S fingerprints. (3)
 exp β̂ike
 c) ServerName Relation: We establish connections k∈Ni e∈Eik
between flows with the same hostname in Server Name
 We sum up the scores of all edges between node i and
Indication (SNI) extension, which allows a server to host
 node j to measure the importance of node j to node i when
multiple services with different certificates on the same IP
 considering all the relations as
address and port number. X
 d) Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) Relation: We con- α̂i j = α̂i je . (4)
struct a k-NN graph for flows utilizing bidirectional packet e∈Ei j
length sequences, with DTW distance as the distance metric. Following the original GAT, we implement self-attention
DTW distance quantifies the similarity between two temporal operation a with a single-layer feed-forward neural network,
sequences that may vary in speed. parameterized by a weight vector a, and LeakyReLU actie) Jaccard Relation: Similar to DTW relation, Jaccard vation function. The normalized attention scores are fully
distance gauges dissimilarity between sample sets by com- expanded as
puting the difference between the sizes of the union and the 
 exp LeakyReLU aT [Whi ||Wh j ||W r rψ(e) ]
 P
intersection of two sets, divided by the size of the union. e∈Ei j
 We present an example in Fig. 2 to illustrate the motivation α̂i j = P P  .
 exp LeakyReLU aT [Whi ||Whk ||W r rψ(e) ]
for using DTW and Jaccard distances as metrics to construct k∈Ni e∈Eik
k-NN graphs, which complement each other, providing a (5)
comprehensive characterization of behavioral similarities. To derive better flow representations, we adopt several
 The aforementioned simple graphs are merged into a com- tricks to enhance the encoder’s capability, including edge
prehensive relational graph. Since flows may share more than residual connection, node residual connection, and multi-head
one relations, our relational graph is a multigraph, allowing attention. Here we formally define these techniques.
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 683

 1) Edge Residual Connection: We add residual connections where Girj ∈ {0, 1} denotes whether the edge between node vi
to the raw attention scores α̂ across layers since residual and node v j exists in G r , and ci equals true label yi if node vi
attention scheme has been demonstrated effective in previous is in the training set, otherwise predicted label zi .
studies. The final attention scores at the lth layer can be In graph generation, we have assumed the underlying
expressed as structure of the optimal graph as a prior constraint. Next,
 α(l) (l) (l−1)
 i j = (1 − γ) α̂i j + γαi j , (6) we introduce some external observations to infer the optimal
 graph.
 2) Node Residual Connection: We also add residual con-
 2) Observation Mapping: Though the original graph topolnection to the node embeddings across layers to mitigate
 ogy and the multi-order neighborhood similarities during
the over-smoothing issue in GNN. The aggregation process
 aggregations may be unreliable or conflicting, they reflect
(i.e., linear combination of the neighbors and ELU activation
 the optimal graph from different perspectives. We treat them
function) at the lth layer can be expressed as
 0 1 as external observations, combine them to reduce biases,
 X and establish connections between these observations and the
 h(l)
 i = ELU
 @ α(l) (l) (l−1)
 ij W hj + W (l) (l−1) A
 res hi , (7) optimal graph.
 j∈Ni During contextual flow encoding, we aggregate rich contexwhere W res is a learnable weight matrix to unify the dimen- tual information through a GNN encoder, which stacks tailored
sions of node embeddings across layers. GAT layers to aggregate multi-order neighbor information.
 3) Multi-Head Attention: We extend the self-attention oper- The node embeddings from its hidden layers capture the
ation to be multi-head by repeating the computations and structural information from local to global. We consider all
aggregations K times independently. Correspondingly, Equa- the intermediate node embeddings to compute multi-order
tion (6–7) are updated as neighborhood similarities as multi-view observations, which
 are importance evidences for inferring the optimal graph.
 α(l) (l) (l−1)
 i jk = (1 − γ) α̂i jk + γαi jk , (8) We take out the intermediate node embeddings across layers
 H = {H(0) , H(1) , . . . , H(l) } to construct k-NN graphs. Combined
 0 1
 K X
 h(l) α(l) (l) (l−1)
 + W res (l) (l−1) A with the original graph A, we form the multi-view observation
 i = ELU i jk W k h j .
 @ || (9)
 k hi
 k=1
 j∈Ni set O as
 O = {A, O(0) , O(1) , . . . , O(l) }, (11)
D. Bayesian Graph Estimation where O(i) denotes the k-NN graph generated by H(i) , charac-
 Through fine-grained attention computation, the encoder terizing i-order neighborhood similarity.
focus more on important neighbors to derive flow representa- These observations provide multifaceted insights into the
tions, alleviating the adverse effects of misleading relations to optimal graph, raising another question: how to map the availa great extent. Assume that there exists an optimal graph with able observations onto the optimal graph? It is challenging
relations corrected, we aim to modify our relational multigraph to accurately infer the optimal graph from these observations
to approximate it. due to their potential unreliability and conflicts. However,
 1) Graph Generation: Here is the question: how to assume conversely given the optimal graph, mapping it onto these
the generation of the optimal graph to correct those spurious observations is relatively straightforward, which has been
edges and achieve better performance? A naive idea may be proven feasible [39], [40].
removing those edges between malicious nodes and benign Specifically, we assume that the edge observations are
nodes, which requires the optimal graph to exhibit latent independent Bernoulli random variables conditioned on the
community structure. Stochastic Block Model (SBM) as a ground truth Girj in the optimal graph with a true positive
generative model for graphs, is a good choice to guide the rate αr and a false positive rate βr . Suppose that we observe
underlying structure generation of the optimal graph, where Ei j edges between node vi and v j out of the M (i.e., |O|)
edges are more common within communities than between observations, the probability of mapping the optimal simple
communities. In other words, the probability of an edge’s graph G r for relation r to the observations is formalized as
existence between two nodes depends only on their community Y r
attributions (i.e., true labels and predicted labels). P (O|G r , αr , βr ) = [αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j ]Gi j
 Formally, the optimal multigraph G can be segregated into i< j
 r
a set of simple graphs {G r |r ∈ R} by relations. The generation × [βr Ei j (1 − βr ) M−Ei j ]1−Gi j . (12)
of each optimal relational simple graph G r takes the form of
 After successfully generating the optimal graph constrained
a probability distribution P(G r |Ωr , Y, Z), where Ωr denotes
 by SBM and establishing connections between the observa-
SBM parameters, Ωrci c j denotes the probability that an edge
 tions and the optimal graph, we proceed to present our graph
exists between node vi within community ci and node v j within
 estimation process based on Bayesian inference.
community c j , Z denotes predicted labels, and Y denotes true
 3) Graph Estimation: To estimate the optimal graph G,
labels. Given Ωr , Y, and Z, the probability of generating the
 we collect the available information including true labels Y,
optimal simple graph G r for relation r is formalized as
  1−Girj predicted labels Z, and observations O as prior knowledge.
 r
 Additionally, we constrain the underlying structure of the
 Y
 P (G r |Ωr , Y, Z) = Ωrci c j Gi j 1 − Ωrci c j , (10)
 i< j optimal graph by introducing SBM parameters Ωr in graph
684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

generation, and establish connections between the observa- 2) Relational Multigraph Optimization: To estimate the
tions and the optimal graph by introducing the parameters of optimal multigraph G, we perform an independent estimation
Bernoulli distribution αr and βr in observation mapping. on its subgraphs {G r |r ∈ R} segregated by relations. Specif-
 With these preliminary preparations, the posterior prob- ically, we first introduce its probability distribution q(G r ) as
ability P(G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O) can be calculated with latent variables. Subsequently, we employ EM algorithm to
Equation (10)–(12) by applying Bayes’ theorem as perform maximum likelihood estimation of the probability of
 Equation (14) in the presence of latent variables q(G r ). EM
P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O) algorithm iteratively determines the probability distribution of
 P (O|G r , αr , βr ) P (G r |Ωr , Y, Z) P (Ωr ) P (αr ) P (βr ) latent variables q(G r ) and update the values of parameters
 = , (13)
 P (Y, Z, O) Ωr , αr , and βr , allowing for a comprehensive exploration
 of the underlying structure of the optimal graph. Followwhere P(Ωr ), P(αr ), P(βr ), and P(Y, Z, O) are the probabiliing typical EM algorithm, relational multigraph optimization
ties of the parameters and those available information, which
 involves iterative application of Expectation step (E-step) and
are assumed to be independent.
 Maximization step (M-step).
 By summing up the probabilities of all possible structures
 E-step. It is more convenient to maximize the log of the
of the optimal graph G r , we get the posterior probabilities of
 likelihood function. Because the logarithm is monotonically
parameters Ωr , αr , and βr as
 increasing function of its argument, maximization of the log of
 X
 P (Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O) = P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O) . (14) a function is equivalent to maximization of the function itself.
 Gr Since log(·) is a convex function, using Jensen’s inequality for
 a random variable x, we have
 As such, we introduce latent variables q(G r ) to denote the
 log E (x) ≥ E log x .
 
probability of the optimal simple graph G r for relation r. By (17)
finding maximum likelihood of parameters Ωr , αr , and βr ,
we determine the distribution of latent variables q(G r ) and Referring to Equation (17), we rewrite the complete log r
 )
estimate the adjacency matrix Qr for the optimal simple graph likelihood function of Equation (14) by multiplying it by q(G
 q(G r )
G r for relation r as to create a lower bound as
 X log P (Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
 Qrij = q (G r ) Girj , (15)
 X q (G r )
 Gr = log P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
 q (G r )
where Qrij ∈ [0, 1] denotes the probability that an edge between G r

 P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
  
node vi and node v j exists in the optimal simple graph G r for
 = log E
relation r. q (G r )
 The aforementioned procedure is applied for each relation P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
  
r ∈ R to estimate the adjacency matrix Sr of the optimal ≥ E log
 q (G r )
simple graph G r . Subsequently, we combine them to derive X P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
the optimal multigraph G to better depict the rich relations = q (G r ) log . (18)
 r
 q (G r )
among flows. G

 To make the bound tight (i.e, make the inequality hold with
E. Iterative Model Optimization equality), we require that the random variable as
 In this section, we introduce our iterative optimization P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
 log = c, (19)
scheme to alternatively optimize the GNN encoder and the q (G r )
relational multigraph. This mutual optimization workflow
 where c is a constant that does not depend on G r . Since q(G r )
facilitates adaptive relation correction and robust threat detec- r
tion. P of ther optimal simple graph G
 is the probability distribution
 for relation r that satisfies G r q(G ) = 1, we have
 1) GNN Encoder Optimization: We construct a relational
multigraph to model the rich relations among flows, and trans- P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
 q (G r ) = P . (20)
form encrypted malicious traffic detection problem into a node P (G r , Ωr , αr , βr |Y, Z, O)
 r
classification task. For semi-supervised node classification, we G
compute the cross-entropy loss over all labeled nodes in the Substituting Equation (10) into Equation (20), we get the
training set as expression for q(G r ) as (21), as shown at the bottom of the
 X next page.
 min L(A, X, Y) = − yi ln zi . (16)
 Θ In E-step, we create the lower bound of log-likelihood
 yi ∈Y
 by applying Jensen’s inequality. To hold equality, we make
 Guided by labeled nodes, we minimize the loss to optimize the random variable constant and determine the probability
GNN parameters Θ through gradient descent, which not only distribution q(G r ) of the optimal simple graph G r .
yields better flow representations for threat detection, but also M-step. To push the lower bound and maximize the log
derives more accurate observations for graph optimization. likelihood, we take derivatives with respect to each parameter
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 685

Ωr , αr , and βr for the right side of Equation (18) while holding We alternate between E-step and M-step until a convergence
q(G r ) constant as criteria (i.e., the difference between the updated and the
 " # previous parameters is less than tolerance λ) is met.
 X X Girj 1 − G r
 i j
 q (G r ) − = 0, (22) To improve computational efficiency and reduce noise, we
 r
 Ωrci c j 1 − Ωrci c j eliminate edges with low confidence scores by masking out
 G i< j
 X X  Ei j M − Ei j  those elements smaller than a non-negative threshold  to get
 r
 q (G ) Girj − = 0, (23) a sparse adjacency matrix S r as
 r
 αr 1 − αr
 G i< j (
 
  Ei j M − Ei j
  1 Qrij ≥ 
 S irj = (30)
 X X
 r
 q (G ) 1 − Gi j r
 − = 0. (24) 0 otherwise.
 r
 βr 1 − βr
 G i< j
 Given the updated multigraph with homophily, the GNN
 By swapping the order of summations, we eliminate Girj to
 encoder can be further optimized to exploit the benefits of
independently derive simple expressions of parameters Ωr , αr ,
 the refined topology and ensure that the encoder is better
and βr as 8N
 xy
 aligned with the updated multigraph, potentially improving its
 ˆ
 < if x , y, performance on unseen data.
 Ω xy =
 r n n
 x y (25) 3) Workflow Overview: With a detailed exploration of the
 : 2N xx
 ˆ
 otherwise, aforementioned components, we now present the complete
 n x (n x − 1)
 workflow of RETRIAL to integrate these standalone compowhere nents into a cohesive system. During the preparation phase,
 X
 nx = I(ci = x) raw traffic captures are split into 5-tuple flows, and flowi level features, including data fields and flow metadata are
 X extracted to construct the relational multigraph as the orig-
 N xy = Qrij I(ci = x)I(c j = y),
 inal input. The training process is outlined in Algorithm 1.
 i< j
 Initially, all parameters of RETRIAL are randomly initialized
 Qrij Ei j
 P
 i< j for subsequent iterative optimization. In each iteration, we first
 α =
 r
 , (26) update the GNN encoder parameters Θ to form observations
 M Qrij
 P
 i< j O as evidences, and then independently estimate the adjacency
 P
 (1 − Qr i j) Ei j matrices S of its subgraphs segregated by relations R using
 i< j EM algorithm. Following this, a sparsification step is applied
 βr = , (27)
 P with a threshold  to refine the relational multigraph. After τ
 M 1 − Qrij
 i< j iterations, this workflow yields a reliable relational multigraph
 with corrected relation along with a well-trained GNN encoder
 In M-step, we find parameters Ωr , αr , and βr to maximize
 capable of robust detection.
the log likelihood by differentiating and solving for each
parameters respectively.
 With updated Ωr , αr , and βr , we substitute Equation (21) V. E XPERIMENTS
into Equation (15) to estimate the adjacency matrix Qr for the A. Experimental Setup
optimal simple graph G r as 1) Datasets: We validate RETRIAL’s performance and
 Ωrci c j αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j robustness on three datasets: CTU, MTA, and USTC-TFC2016
 Qrij = . datasets. Table IV summarizes the details of these datasets.
 Ωrci c j αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j + (1 − Ωrci c j )βr Ei j (1 − βr ) M−Ei j CTU dataset, released by Czech Technical University, serves
 (28) as a benchmark for encrypted malicious traffic detection tasks,
 In this way, we estimate the adjacency matrix Qr of G r which comprises both normal and malware traffic across
using Equation (28). The probability distribution q(G r ) of the various scenarios. This dataset consists of 130,716 flows with
optimal simple graph G r can be rewritten as a total size of 21.6 GB.
 r
 MTA dataset is a collection of traffic captures related to
 Y r
 q (G r ) = Qrij Gi j (1 − Qrij )1−Gi j . (29)
 i< j malware infections. We reserve encrypted flows as positive

 Qh iGirj h  i1−Girj
 Ωrci c j αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j 1 − Ωrci c j βr Ei j (1 − βr ) M−Ei j
 i< j
 q (G r ) = iGirj h i1−Girj
 PQh 
 Ωrci c j αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j 1 − Ωrci c j βr Ei j (1 − βr ) M−Ei j
 G r i< j
 h iGirj h  i1−Girj
 Ωr
 Y ci c j α r Ei j
 (1 − α r M−Ei j
 ) 1 − Ωr
 ci c j βr Ei j
 (1 − βr M−Ei j
 )
 =   . (21)
 i< j Ωrci c j αr Ei j (1 − αr ) M−Ei j + 1 − Ωrci c j βr Ei j (1 − βr ) M−Ei j
686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 The Optimization Algorithm of RETRIAL tion patterns to derive resilient representations respectively.
 In contrast, RETRIAL explicitly addresses interactions noise,
 providing a direct defense against advanced threats.
 3) Metrics: Following common practice in previous studies
 [5], [16], we select F1-score (F1) and the area under the ROC
 curve (AUC) as evaluation metrics.
 4) Setup: RETRIAL is deployed on a DELL server equipped
 with a 24-core Intel Xeon 6240R CPU @2.40GHz, Ubuntu
 20.04, 64 GB memory, and 2×NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs.
 To obtain more reliable results, we repeat each experiment
 ten times to calculate the average and standard deviation of
 evaluation metrics.
 We divide each of the three datasets into training and testing
 sets with a 7:3 ratio. To address the common pitfall of data
 snooping in learning-based security systems, we construct the
 relational multigraphs separately for training and testing data.
 The corresponding adjacency matrices Atrain and Atest are
 concatenated into block diagonal matrices as
  
 Atrain 0
 A= , (31)
 0 Atest
 where the off-diagonal blocks (i.e., the lower-left and
 upper-right corners) contain only zeros. Instead of directly
 constructing adjacency matrices with both training and testing
 data, this data organization ensures that no information from
 testing data is exposed during the training phase, effectively
 preventing data snooping. During iterative optimization, potential connections between training and testing data may emerge
 within the updated graph topology. To mitigate this data
 snooping, we mask the upper-right corner block. Here, data
 snooping specifically refers to test snooping, and it should be
 noted that temporal and selective snooping pitfalls are not a
 concern in this work.
 TABLE IV To validate the robustness of RETRIAL, we define passive
 DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS and proactive adversaries and simulate two attack scenarios to
 map them. To simulate a passive adversary, we perform blackbox attacks by randomly dropping packets with a packet loss
 rate rl ∈ {10%, 20%, 30%}. To simulate a proactive adversary,
 we conduct white-box attacks by greedily injecting perturbation edges into relational multigraph with an edge perturbation
 rate r p ∈ {5%, 10%, 15%} by computing the gradient of the loss
 function with respect to the graph structure.
and capture encrypted traffic of benign applications from a To assess the scalability of RETRIAL in handling general
backbone router of the campus network as negative. It consists encrypted traffic, we exclusively parse raw bytes for USTCof 483,080 flows with a total size of 106 GB. TFC2016 dataset and construct a relational multigraph without
 USTC-TFC2016 dataset is released by University of Sci- considering fingerprint and certificate relations.
ence and Technology, China for malware traffic detection 5) Implementation: RETRIAL is primarily developed in
evaluation, which contains the network traces of ten types of C++ (GCC version 11.4.0) and Python (version 3.8.18). To
benign applications and ten types of malware. It consists of promote transparency and repeatability, we make the source
388,037 flows with a total size of 3.7 GB. code of RETRIAL public.1
 2) Baselines: To comprehensively evaluate the effective- For relational multigraph construction, RETRIAL extracts
ness of RETRIAL, we select seven baselines, including three features with PcapPlusPlus (version 22.05) and computes
single-flow analysis methods (i.e., JOY [10], USTC-TK [26], DTW distances with dtaidistance (version 2.3.10). Then it
and CICFLOW [41]) and four multi-flow correlation methods leverages PyTorch (version 1.6.0) and DGL (version 0.6.1)
(i.e., MALDISCOVERY [33], RS-GAT [32], RAPIER [15] and to implement a tailored graph attention network to selectively
HYPERVISION [16]), where RAPIER and HYPERVISION are encode contextual information. In Bayesian graph estimation,
also robust detection solutions designed to mitigate label
noise in low-quality training datasets and learn flow interac- 1 https://github.com/MetaRockETC/ReTrial
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 687

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS OF R E T RIAL AND BASELINES IN I DEAL C ONDITIONS

it derives k-NN graphs as evidence using Scikit-learn (version forms HYPERVISION and RETRIAL, since RAPIER effectively
1.3.2). Finally, we implement the EM solver and iteratively correct those noisy labels. Although HYPERVISION’s graph
optimize the relational multigraph and the GNN encoder to topology and flow interactions basically remain unaffected by
achieve adaptive relation correction and robust threat detection. these issues, the noise affects the final evaluations.
 We also note that though RETRIAL introduce more inter-
B. Performance Analysis actions including noise, it outperforms most baselines. The
 In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of RETRIAL reason behind this is that RETRIAL selectively aggregates
and other baselines on three datasets in terms of both efficacy relation information and iteratively correct those misleading
and efficiency. relations to mitigate noise. To further improve the performance
 1) Efficacy: Table V summarizes the experimental results of RETRIAL, two key strategies can be considered. First, more
of all methods in ideal conditions. In general, RETRIAL and all rigorous data cleaning is necessary. Instead of broadly labeling
baselines perform well on TLS and general encrypted traffic entire PCAP files as benign or malicious, finer-grained labels
datasets in ideal conditions. Specifically, RAPIER, USTC–TK, should be assigned based on flow-level features, particularly
and RETRIAL are basically the top three models with minimal for flows associated with clearly legitimate or suspicious
performance differences. server names. This would minimize labeling errors and reduce
 A notable observation is that statistical analysis methods noise. HYPERVISION excels in this regard with its fine-grained
are highly competitive, which suggests that single-flow fea- packet/flow-level labeling. Second, graph construction must be
tures including data fields, flow metadata, and raw bytes approached carefully. The use of reliable access lists or block
remain effective in ideal conditions without adverse influences. lists to avoid noisy interactions between benign and malicious
However, HYPERVISION has demonstrated that single-flow flows is essential for improving detection performance.
features can be easily obfuscated by typical evasion strategies. 2) Efficiency: We evaluate the efficiency of RETRIAL with
Moreover, the superiority of most multi-flow correlation meth- two state-of-the-art robust detection methods (i.e., RAPIER and
ods, especially HYPERVISION is not as evident as expected. HYPERVISION) across different phases: preparation, training,
In some cases, incorporating relations even degrades perfor- and detection. Following the experimental setup in RAPIER,
mance. RS–GAT and MALDISCOVERY that model relations we take a subset of CTU dataset and set the training size as
among flows as graphs, fail to achieve the expected perfor- 500. The time overheads are presented in Table VII.
mance improvements but results in a negative gain. In summary, HYPERVISION demonstrates faster perfor-
 To find out why multi-flow correlation methods are unsat- mance than RAPIER and RETRIAL mainly for two reasons.
isfactory, we review the traffic data, extracted features, and First, HYPERVISION is developed in C++, which offers better
correlations. The reasons are twofold. First, partial correlations computational efficiency than RAPIER and RETRIAL develare disturbances. For example, in CTU dataset, both RS–GAT oped in Python. Second, their insights to achieve robustness
and RETRIAL consider IP/Port relation. We count 3,891 unique are fundamentally different. HYPERVISION aims at modeling
destinations in the benign part and 7,035 unique destinations in flow interaction patterns to learn graph structural features,
the malicious part, with 357 overlapping between them. Sim- whereas, RAPIER and RETRIAL focus on adaptive optimizailarly, for fingerprint and ServerName relations, we observe tions to mitigate label noise and interaction noise, respectively.
87 and 554 overlaps, respectively. These overlaps introduce The preparation phase includes feature extraction, label
noisy interactions, and mislead decisions. Second, label noise correction and data augmentation for RAPIER, and graph
significantly affects performance. The overlap in server names construction for HYPERVISION and RETRIAL. We can see
between benign and malicious includes legitimate websites that most of the time overheads in RAPIER are attributed
like “accounts.google.com” and “en.wikipedia.org”, which to label correction and data augmentation implemented by
explains why single-flow analysis methods perform better generative models. In contrast, the time-consuming operations
than most correlation analysis methods, since correlations in RETRIAL primarily involve the iterative optimization impleamplify the noise. Also, it highlights why RAPIER outper- mented by graph structure learning. The distance computations
688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VI
 ROBUSTNESS C OMPARISONS OF R E T RIAL AND BASELINES W ITH D IFFERENT PACKET L OSS R ATES

 TABLE VII baselines. Notably, in adversarial attack simulation, we exclu-
 T IME OVERHEAD C OMPARISON sively compare RETRIAL with graph-based baselines that take
 flows as nodes since the simulation is implemented by adding
 interactions to modify the graph.
 1) Network Fluctuations: We randomly drop packets to
 simulate network fluctuations. Table VI summarizes the experimental results with varying packet loss rates.
 Overall, as the packet loss rate increases, most baselines
 exhibit notable performance degradation due to distortion
 TABLE VIII
 of statistical features, while RETRIAL demonstrates superior
 T IME OVERHEAD OF R E T RIAL IN E ACH I TERATION
 robustness in most cases. HYPERVISION also performs well,
 likely because packet loss primarily affects statistical features,
 while structural features remain largely unaffected, which play
 a more decisive role in ensuring detection robustness.
 The performance of RAPIER declines notably under network
during graph construction also contribute to the time overfluctuations, as its label correction and data augmentation
head. Despite these differences, the robust features learned by
 strategies are not designed to address the feature distortion.
HYPERVISION and the noise mitigation strategies for labels
 Similarly, JOY and CICFLOW, which rely heavily on singleand interactions employed by RAPIER and RETRIAL are both
 flow statistical features, experience considerable performance
critical advancements to improve detection robustness.
 degradation. USTC–TK, utilizing each flow’s first 784 bytes, is
 For further analysis, Table VIII presents the time overhead
 less affected by packet loss, as each flow consists of multiple
per iteration during the iterative optimization process. The
 packets, and a 30% packet loss has a minor impact on its
epoch number is set to 200, with an early stopping criterion
 features. For RS–GAT and MALDISCOVERY, the connections
of 20. As the iterations progress, the GNN encoder converges
 between flows mitigate information loss. RETRIAL further
earlier. On average, the time overhead per iteration is about
 enhances them by restoring missing relations, achieving supe-
0.78 seconds.
 rior performance under significant network fluctuations. In
 summary, the adverse effects of packet loss are less severe than
C. Robustness Analysis expected. Both structural features and selective aggregation
 In this subsection, we simulate two types of adverse con- of contextual information are effective in mitigating packet
ditions to validate the robustness of RETRIAL and other loss.
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 689

 TABLE IX
 ROBUSTNESS C OMPARISONS OF R E T RIAL AND BASELINES W ITH D IFFERENT E DGE P ERTURBATION R ATES

 Fig. 3. Visualization of attention scores computed by the original GAT and our tailored GAT.

 2) Adversarial Attacks: We greedily inject perturbation fine-grained manner. We design a tailored GAT that computes
edges by computing the gradient of loss function to simulate edge-level attention to aggregate neighbor information for conadversarial attacks. Table IX summarizes the experimental textual flow encoding. To intuitively present the improvement
results with varying edge perturbation rates. of RETRIAL compared to the original GAT, we take node v162
 Similarly, as the edge perturbation rate rises, the perfor- from CTU dataset with a 15% perturbation rate as an example
mances of RS–GAT and MALDISCOVERY experience signif- and visualize its node-level attention scores and edge-level
icant degradation, whereas RETRIAL demonstrates robustness attention scores in Fig. 3.
against adversarial attacks. Notably, MALDISCOVERY exhibits As shown in Fig. 3a, node v162 has 8 neighbor nodes
better robustness compared to RS–GAT. This can be attributed connected by 19 edges of 6 types of relations. In our relational
to the fact that MALDISCOVERY constructs a k-NN graph multigraph, the existence of multiple edges between two nodes
with a small number of edges compared to the complex means that two flows share multiple relations. The original
graph structure in RS–GAT. Consequently, the impact on GAT fails to handle this situation since it merges parallel
MALDISCOVERY is minimal. Though RETRIAL constructs edges into one singular edge and simply computes nodea relational multigraph incorporating complex relations, sus- level attention scores to aggregate neighbor information. In
ceptible to adversarial attacks, it maintains high detection contrast, our tailored graph attention mechanism considers
performance in both all tasks. This underscores the efficacy relation information to compute edge-level attention, achievof RETRIAL in correcting misleading relations, highlighting ing fine-grained neighborhood aggregation. By comparing
its robustness in the face of adversarial attacks. Fig. 3b and Fig. 3c, it is apparent that node-level and edgelevel attention mechanisms prioritize different neighbor nodes.
 Notably, node v6 holds significant importance in node-level
D. Detail Analysis aggregation, while its relevance diminishes considerably in
 RETRIAL and all baselines demonstrate satisfactory perfor- edge-level aggregation. We also observe that IP/Port, selfmance in both binary detection and multi-class classification loop, and DTW relations are the top three relations that
scenarios, whether applied to TLS traffic or general encrypted really matter in node v162 ’s neighborhood aggregation. With
traffic. Additionally, RETRIAL consistently exhibits stable accurate node representations, we can obtain better obserperformance under adverse conditions, in contrast to the vations and estimate reliable graph topology for relation
significant degradation observed in other baselines. In this correction.
subsection, we analyze the details of RETRIAL from three 2) Graph Topology: To assess the graph topology improveaspects: attention score, graph topology, and performance. ment of RETRIAL, we take CTU dataset with a 15% edge
 1) Attention Score: RETRIAL constructs a relational multi- perturbation rate as a case study, run RETRIAL with 10
graph with parallel edges to model complex relations in a iterations to estimate better graph topology. Specifically, we
690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 4. Visualization of graph topology of the original multigraph and estimated multigraph after 10 iterations.

 99.80% F1 and 99.97% AUC on the training set, and 99.66%
 F1 and 99.45% AUC on the testing set. Besides, we observe
 that even though the performance has converged during the
 training of GNN encoder, further improvement is achievable
 after each iteration of graph optimization, which demonstrates
 that RETRIAL achieves robust threat detection and adaptive
 relation correction mutually in an iterative manner.
 Fig. 5. Visualization of performance improvement.
 E. Ablation Study
sample two-order neighbors of benign node v0 and malicious
node v899 to visualize the original and estimated multigraph We conduct a comprehensive ablation study on RETRIAL
in Fig. 4, with malicious node denoted in green and benign to further determine the efficacy of each key component.
denoted in pink. Specifically, we compare the full RETRIAL with three variants:
 As shown in Fig. 4a, the original multigraph displays a • w/o RM removes relational multigraph construction. It
chaotic topology induced by a 15% edge perturbation rate constructs a simple graph and does not discriminate
simulating adversarial attacks. The perturbations introduce relations. Its encoder degenerates into vanilla GAT [21].
a multitude of connections of various relations between • w/o AM removes attention mechanism, but it tackles
benign and malicious flows, which introduce noise during relations by performing relation-specific transformations
neighborhood aggregation, severely affecting the detection individually. Its encoder degenerates into R-GCN [42].
performance. Taking benign node v0 as an example, it is • w/o IO removes iterative optimization and solely optimize
observed to be connected to malicious nodes v1645 and v1189 as the GNN encoder by typical gradient descent.
depicted in Fig. 4b. After 10 iterations of graph optimization as Table X reports the results of RETRIAL and its variants on
shown in Fig. 4c, we observe that many connections between three dataset with a 30% packet loss rate (rl = 30%) and a
benign and malicious flows are removed and the estimated 15% edge perturbation rate (r p = 15%).
graph exhibits strong homophily. Also, benign node v0 does As can be seen, RETRIAL achieves the most robust
not have any malicious neighbors in our sampled graph in detection performance with remarkable stability across all
Fig. 4d. This empirical observation demonstrates that our datasets. The results of RETRIAL and w/o RM validate the
work, RETRIAL, is proficient in deriving an improved graph efficacy of our proposed strategy for relational multigraph
topology that maintains homophily to effectively correct construction. Instead of preserving the parallel edges, w/o
misleading relations and improve GNN’s overall detection RM simply merge them into one singular edge, which causes
performance. notable loss of information. Furthermore, comparing RETRIAL
 3) Performance: RETIRAL iteratively optimizes the topol- with w/o AM, we observe that though R-GCN is proficient
ogy of relational multigraph and the parameters of GNN for modeling relational data, it fails to discriminate between
encoder to achieve adaptive relation correction and robust different neighbors and neglects explicit consideration of
threat detection. Here we take MTA dataset as a case study to relation information in neighborhood aggregation. Finally,
see how the performance goes as the iterations increase. We we evaluate the iterative optimization scheme and find
run RETRIAL with 10 iterations. In each iteration, the GNN that RETRIAL outperforms w/o IO after several iterations of
encoder is optimized with 50 epochs. optimization of both the GNN encoder and the graph topology.
 Fig. 5 illustrates the progressive performance improve- Overall, RETRIAL outperforms all variants by integrating
ment of RETRIAL with successive iterations. Generally, the the rich relations, fine-grained attention mechanism, and
detection performance of RETRIAL exhibits a consistent iterative optimization based on Bayesian inference and EM
improvement trend. Initially, RETRIAL achieves 96.81% F1 optimization, which substantiates the contributions of three
and 98.33% AUC on the training set, along with 96.69% F1 key components for the robustness of RETRIAL.
and 98.27% AUC on the testing set. After 10 iterations of opti- Moreover, we observe that the performance of RETRIAL’
mization, RETRIAL achieves notable improvements, reaching variants significantly varies across binary detection and
ZHAO et al.: RETRIAL: ROBUST ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 691

 TABLE X
 A BLATION S TUDY OF R E T RIAL AND I TS VARIANTS ON USTC-TFC2016 DATASET

multi-class classification tasks. On CTU and MTA datasets C. Robustness Analysis
(binary detection), iterative optimization (IO) is the most criti- RETRIAL, RAPIER, and HYPERVISION are all designed
cal component to improve the robustness compared to relation for robust detection with different emphases. RAPIER aims
multigraph (RM) and attention mechanism (AM). However, to reach the full potential of low-quality training data by
RM and AM contribute more on USTC-TFC2016 dataset correcting noisy labels and synthesizing new training data
(multi-class classification) than IO. These results indicate that during preparation phase. HYPERVISION utilizes graph coniterative optimization is more effective in tasks with fewer nectivity, sparsity, and statistical features to model robust
classes. Conversely, in a more complex classification tasks flow interaction patterns. In RETRIAL, we focus on accurately
with a larger number of communities, the efficacy of iterative modeling the rich relations among flows and adaptively correct
optimization is heavily dependent on the accuracy of the graph those induced by evasion techniques during training and
topology and the performance of GNN encoder. testing phase. A promising future direction is to integrate label
 In summary, the combination of IO, RM and AM makes correction and robust features along with relation correction
RETRIAL robust to defend against network fluctuations and to further improve the robustness across all phases.
adversarial attacks. IO contributes more in binary detection
tasks, while RM and AM are more effective in multi-class
classification tasks. D. Topology Considerations
 VI. D ISCUSSION RETRIAL aggregates neighbor information in contextual
 flow encoding component to implicitly incorporate topological
A. Homophily Assumption
 information. However, HYPERVISION has demonstrated that
 Retrial employs a tailored GAT as the backbone GNN, some ignored structural features (e.g., node in-degrees and
where both the GNN encoder and the graph estimator are out-degrees) are effective for malicious traffic detection. In
built upon an ideal homophily assumption, that is, nodes future work, we could explicitly encode node degrees as node
with similar embeddings and identical labels tend to connect. features for neighborhood aggregation. Moreover, exploring
However, this assumption does not always hold in real-world alternative graph construction strategies, such as communicagraphs, and the performance of GNN models on such graphs tion graphs that naturally model the interactions between hosts,
may degrade significantly and might be even worse than a could also improve detection efficiency and efficacy.
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model that does not leverage
any contextual information. In this work, we modify the rela- VII. C ONCLUSION
tional multigraph to maintain good homophily and stimulate
the GNN encoder’s potential. In the face of severe security In this paper, we present RETRIAL, a robust encrypted
threats and rapidly evolving evasion techniques, we consider malicious traffic detection system that can effectively tackle
to integrate advanced GNNs tailored for heterophilous graphs adversarial attacks and evasion techniques. The key motivafor better generalization. tions behind RETRIAL are to adaptively integrate and correct
 various interactions, mitigating adverse effects induced by
B. Efficiency Concerns evasion techniques and generating robust flow features for
 RETRIAL constructs a relational multigraph to model the robust detection. Specifically, RETRIAL constructs a relational
rich relations among flows and optimizes the graph topology multigraph and adopts a tailored GAT to selectively aggregate
to correct those spurious ones, which prioritizes retroactive neighbor information. By taking intermediate node embedanalysis over real-time alerts. The efficiency of RETRIAL may dings to construct k-NN graphs as observations, RETRIAL
encounter limitations in large-scale networks. As the number estimates the optimal graph based on Bayesian inference.
of flows increases, the graph construction and inference time Following an iterative optimization scheme, RETRIAL alternaof RETRIAL significantly escalate. Future efforts could explore tively optimizes the GNN encoder by typical gradient descent
flow aggregation algorithms to reduce graph scale, and inte- for robust threat detection and refines the relational graph
grate high-performance implementations of graph construction by EM algorithm for adaptive relation correction. Extenand distance calculation to improve the efficiency. sive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of
692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

RETRIAL in encrypted malicious traffic detection, even in the [20] Y. Sharon, D. Berend, Y. Liu, A. Shabtai, and Y. Elovici, “TANTRA:
face of network fluctuations and adversarial attacks. Timing-based adversarial network traffic reshaping attack,” IEEE Trans.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3225–3237, 2022.
 [21] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
 R EFERENCES Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
 [22] Z. Durumeric et al., “The security impact of HTTPS interception,” in
 [1] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA. Internet
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network Society, 2017, pp. 1–14.
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., [23] F. Wilkens, S. Haas, J. Amann, and M. Fischer, “Passive, transparent,
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019. and selective TLS decryption for network security monitoring,” 2021,
 [2] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: arXiv:2104.09828.
 An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May [24] S. Ramanathan, J. Mirkovic, and M. Yu, “BLAG: Improving the accu-
 2019. racy of blacklists,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego,
 [3] D. Han et al., “DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learning- CA, USA. Internet Society, 2020, pp. 1–15.
 based anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM [25] C. Dong, Z. Lu, Z. Cui, B. Liu, and K. Chen, “MBTree:
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3197–3217. Detecting encryption RATs communication using malicious behavior
 [4] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based tree,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3589–3603,
 network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def., 2021.
 2022, pp. 495–509. [26] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware
 [5] C. Qiu et al., “3D-IDS: Doubly disentangled dynamic intrusion traffic classification using convolutional neural network for represendetection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data tation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017,
 Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 1965–1977. pp. 712–717.
 [6] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic [27] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 [7] J. A. Lindeman and Laura, “TLS fingerprinting with JA3 and [28] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
 JA3S,” Salesforce, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, Tech. Rep., robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://engineering.salesforce.com/tls- no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
 fingerprinting-with-ja3-and-ja3s-247362855967/ [29] M. Trevisan, F. Soro, M. Mellia, I. Drago, and R. Morla, “Does domain
 [8] J. A. Lindeman and Laura, “Easily identify malicious servers name encryption increase users’ privacy?,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
 on the Internet with JARM,” Salesforce, Inc., San Francisco, Commun. Rev., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 16–22, Jul. 2020.
 CA, USA, Tech. Rep., Nov. 2020. [Online]. Available: [30] R. Dai, C. Gao, B. Lang, L. Yang, H. Liu, and S. Chen, “SSL
 https://engineering.salesforce.com/easily-identify-malicious-servers- malicious traffic detection based on multi-view features,” in Proc.
 on-the-internetwith-jarm-e095edac525a/ 9th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., Chongqing, China, Nov. 2019,
 [9] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic pp. 40–46.
 with contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur., [31] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq:
 Vienna, Austria, Oct. 2016, pp. 35–46. A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic
[10] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” 2023.
 in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, [32] J. Zhao, Q. Li, S. Liu, Y. Yang, and Y. Hong, “Towards traffic
 Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732. supervision in 6G: A graph neural network-based encrypted malicious
[11] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of traffic detection method,” SCIENTIA SINICA Informationis, vol. 52,
 TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 270–286, Feb. 2022.
 no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018. [33] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
[12] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, [34] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Subverting website
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
[13] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624.
 network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans. [35] H. Yan et al., “Automatic evasion of machine learning-based network
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023. intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
[14] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity: vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 153–167, Jan. 2024.
 Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural [36] M. Shen et al., “Real-time website fingerprinting defense via traffic
 network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, cluster anonymization,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
 no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024. 2024, pp. 3238–3256.
[15] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for [37] R. Wang et al., “Graph structure estimation neural networks,” in Proc.
 detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 342–353.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 1–18. [38] Q. Lv et al., “Are we really making much progress? Revisiting, bench-
[16] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious marking, and refining heterogeneous graph neural networks,” 2021,
 traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. arXiv:2112.14936.
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. San Diego, CA, USA: Internet Society, 2023, [39] E. Abbe, “Community detection and stochastic block models: Recent
 pp. 1–18. developments,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 177, pp. 1–86,
[17] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of 2018.
 machine learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas [40] R. Liao et al., “Efficient graph generation with graph recurrent attention
 Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021. networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, Jan. 2019,
[18] M. Wei, “Domain shadowing: Leveraging content delivery networks pp. 4255–4265.
 for robust blocking-resistant communications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX [41] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of
 Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2021, pp. 3327–3343. Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst.
[19] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traf- Secur. Privacy. Porto, Portugal: SciTePress, 2017.
 fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network [42] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov,
 traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, and M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional
 pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021. networks,” in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., 2018, pp. 593–607.