4228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Robust Detection of Malicious Encrypted Traffic via
 Contrastive Learning
 Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Jinhe Wu, Ke Ye, Ke Xu , Fellow, IEEE, Gang Xiong, Member, IEEE,
 and Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Traffic encryption is widely used to protect com- clearance, malicious traffic tries to hide its distinctive features
munication privacy but is increasingly exploited by attackers to through traffic encryption, where potential attackers protect
conceal malicious activities. Existing malicious encrypted traffic their traffic using encryption protocols such as SSL/TLS [2].
detection methods rely on large amounts of labeled samples
for training, limiting their ability to quickly respond to new As demonstrated by the report of WatchGuard threat lab [3],
attacks. These methods also are vulnerable to traffic obfuscation 91.5% of malware arrived over encrypted connections by the
strategies, such as injecting dummy packets. In this paper, we end of 2023.
propose SmartDetector, a robust malicious encrypted traffic detec- The traditional malicious traffic detection methods try to
tion method via contrastive learning. We first propose a novel find abnormal traffic by searching predetermined signatures in
traffic representation named Semantic Attribute Matrix (SAM),
which can effectively distinguish between malicious and benign packet payload [4]. However, traffic encryption protocols such
traffic. We also design a data augmentation method to generate as SSL/TLS [2] make packet contents invisible, leading to
diverse traffic samples, which makes the detection model more the inefficacy of the methods based on deep packet inspection
robust against different traffic obfuscation strategies. We propose (DPI). To detect malicious traffic hidden in encrypted traffic,
a malicious encrypted traffic classifier that first pre-trains a recent studies resort to machine learning approaches and
model via contrastive learning to learn deep representations from
unlabeled data, then fine-tunes the model with a supervised extract statistical features [4] or sequence features [5] that
classifier to achieve accurate detection even with only a few are independent of packet contents to build machine learning
labeled samples. We conduct extensive experiments with five classifiers. As a result, malicious traffic detection is usually
public datasets to evaluate the performance of SmartDetector. regarded as a classification problem.
The results demonstrate that it outperforms the state-of-the- However, existing methods are still hampered by two-fold
art (SOTA) methods in three typical scenarios. Specifically, in
the evasion attack detection scenario, SmartDetector achieves an challenges, i.e., efficiency and robustness. Efficiency means
F1 score and AUC above 93%, with average improvements of that a method can quickly respond to new types of attacks.
19.84% and 18.17% over the SOTA method, respectively. The existing methods usually require a large volume of well-
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, contrastive learning, labeled data for model training [4], [6], [7]. When new
encrypted traffic analysis. attacks appear, it is quite time-consuming to collect adequate
 malicious samples and retrain the classifiers. For instance, even
 if researchers use two dozen computers for traffic crawling, it
 I. I NTRODUCTION still takes two weeks to collect sufficient dataset for model

W ITH the prosperity of Internet applications, the volume
 of network traffic has increased dramatically, which
brings an outbreak trend of cyber attacks. According to the
 training [8]. Robustness means that obfuscated malicious traffic can also be accurately detected. The existing methods
 can easily be defeated by evasion attacks [5], [8], [9], [10],
Check Point Report [1], world-wide weekly cyber attacks i.e., obfuscating the original traffic by adding manual noises.
increased 42% in the first half of 2022. To bypass the security For instance, evasion attacks [11] can change the features
 of malicious traffic by injecting dummy packets and adding
 Received 21 October 2024; revised 18 March 2025; accepted 6 April time delay into encrypted traffic, making the classifiers built
2025. Date of publication 15 April 2025; date of current version 25 April
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and based on the original features less effective. Thus, evasion
Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB2703800, in part by attacks bring new challenges for malicious traffic detection,
the NSFC Projects under Grant 62222201 and Grant U23A20304, and in part which requires the extracted features to be resilient to traffic
by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant M23020. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication obfuscation.
was Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Meng Shen.) In this paper, we propose SmartDetector, a robust malicious
 Meng Shen, Jinhe Wu, and Liehuang Zhu are with the School of
Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beitraffic detection method based on contrastive learning [12]
jing 100081, China (e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn; jinhewu@bit.edu.cn; to discover malicious traffic hidden in encrypted traffic. We
liehuangz@bit.edu.cn). propose a new traffic representation named Semantic Attribute
 Ke Ye is with the School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Matrix (SAM), which captures distinctive features between
Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: yek 1010@163.com).
 Ke Xu is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, benign and malicious traffic in a simple matrix. We take
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: xuke@tsinghua.edu.cn). SAM as the starting point and build a traffic classifier based
 Gang Xiong is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: xionggang@iie.ac.cn).
 on contrastive learning, which enables us to pre-train an
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3560560 encoder with a large volume of unlabeled traffic and then
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4229

quickly adapt the pre-training encoder to a new type of
attack with only a few labeled samples for model tuning. As
the unlabeled instances can be easily collected, not requiring the heavy cost of environment construction and traffic
labeling.
 To improve the robustness of SmartDetector, we propose
a data augmentation method tailored to the traffic obfuscation
strategies adopted by the attackers. We simulate the process by
which an attacker perturbs traffic features by adding random
noises [11], e.g., inserting dummy packets and adding random
time delay. Based on augmented traffic samples, SmartDetec-
 Fig. 1. The threat model for malicious traffic detection.
tor learns the correlation between the original and obfuscated
traffic, which makes it effectively resist evasion attacks.
 We summarize our contributions as follows. encryption protocols, which is more challenging for malicious
 • We propose a novel traffic representation named the traffic detection.
 Semantic Attribute Matrix (SAM). SAM is capable of 1) Capability of Attackers: We assume that the attacker can
 extracting distinct features that differentiate between manipulate packets within the traffic flow to evade detection
 benign and malicious traffic, and can maintain its effec- [10], such as inserting dummy packets or introducing delays.
 tiveness under different traffic obfuscation strategies. We However, we assume that attackers cannot fully replicate the
 provide a quantitative analysis to demonstrate that SAM traffic features of benign traffic (e.g., packet length, direction).
 is more effective than the three typical representations This is due to the fact that fully replicating the aforementioned
 employed by the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. features to imitate benign traffic would impose a significant
 • We propose SmartDetector, a robust malicious traffic burden on attackers and result in the failure of the attack [4],
 detection method based on contrastive learning. In the [11]. For example, in a Denial of Service (DoS) attack, if
 pre-training phase, we design a data augmentation method the attacker adjusts the sending intervals to be identical to
 tailored to the specifications of the network traffic. The those of benign traffic, they may not be able to overwhelm
 encoder in SmartDetector can be pre-trained with unla- the target system [13]. We further assume that the attacker
 beled traffic samples. During retraining, we only need a lacks the ability to manipulate ports within the target network,
 few labeled samples to train the traffic classifier to achieve specifically the inability to open widely recognized ports (such
 high accuracy in detecting new attacks. as port 80 for HTTP and port 443 for HTTPS), as this would
 • We conducted extensive experiments using five repre- necessitate system-level privileges [14].
 sentative public datasets to evaluate the performance 2) Capability of Network Administrator: The administrator
 of SmartDetector. The results show that SmartDetector possesses the capability to monitor encrypted traffic via the
 outperforms the SOTA methods [6], [7], [8], [9] in network gateway, however, they are unable to decrypt any
 all scenarios. In particular, in the scenario of detecting individual packets. The administrator can continuously collect
 obfuscated malicious traffic, SmartDetector achieves an traffic data to distinguish between malicious and benign traffic.
 F1 score and AUC that both exceed 90%, with an average However, they are unable to foresee the type of attack or
 improvement of 19.84% and 18.17% over the SOTA malware that an attacker might initiate, nor do they have
 method. any prior information regarding the specific traffic obfuscation
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We method employed by the attacker.
introduce the background and related work in Section II. Then,
we describe the design goals in Section III. We present SAM
 B. Related Work on Malicious Traffic Detection
and SmartDetector in Section IV and Section V. Next, we
conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of Smart- Traditional malicious traffic detection methods in the early
Detector in Section VI. Finally, we conclude this paper in stages typically rely on signature matching. These methods
Section VII. extract sequences of bytes from malicious traffic [4] and
 detect malicious activity by comparing the traffic against
 II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK known malicious signatures. However, the widespread adoption of encryption technologies has made packet contents
 In this section, we first describe the threat model of maliinaccessible, thereby rendering detection methods based on
cious traffic detection, and then review the existing methods.
 packet content scanning ineffective. To overcome this limitation, various detection methods specifically designed for
A. Threat Model malicious encrypted traffic have been proposed, as summarized
 There are usually two kinds of roles in the scenario of in Table I.
malicious traffic detection, i.e., the network administrator and 1) Methods Based on Unsupervised Learning: These meththe attacker, as shown in Fig. 1. The attacker launches remote ods detect malicious traffic by identifying patterns that deviate
attacks on devices located in a local area network (LAN). We from established benign traffic behaviors. Mirsky et al. [15]
assume that communication traffic is encrypted by network proposed Kitsune, a real-time plug-and-play framework that
4230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I new attack types. By leveraging prior experience, the model
 S UMMARY OF E XISTING M ALICIOUS E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC can rapidly adapt to new malicious traffic patterns, even
 D ETECTION M ETHODS with limited labeled samples. Several studies have applied
 this approach to malicious traffic detection. Xu et al. [9]
 proposed FC-Net, a malicious traffic detection framework
 based on meta-learning, which was leveraged to distinguish
 a pair of samples as a basic task of learning. TF [8] was also
 an encrypted traffic analysis method which was suitable for
 few-shot learning. It consisted of two parts, i.e., the feature
 extraction based on CNN and the classification network based
 on k-NN. Although FC-Net [9] and TF [8] can detect new
 attacks with few labeled samples, they still depend on a
 large, well-labeled traffic dataset during the pre-training phase.
 Furthermore, their traffic representations are not informative
 enough to effectively distinguish between benign and malicious traffic (see Section VI-B). To evade detection [11],
employs an ensemble of autoencoders to reconstruct statis- attackers may vary traffic features by employing traffic obfustical features for learning normal traffic patterns. Building cation, e.g., injecting dummy packets. Unfortunately, the above
on this foundation, Bovenzi et al. [16] introduced enhance- methods cannot cope with obfuscated malicious traffic.
ments including ensemble equalization and advanced distance
metrics (e.g., NAP), significantly improving adaptability and III. D ESIGN G OALS
detection performance in dynamic environments. Zhang et al. In this section, we describe the design goals of malicious
[17] leveraged isolation forests for anomaly detection and encrypted traffic detection.
proposed an adaptive evolution mechanism enabling real-time
malicious traffic identification. These methods do not require
 A. Efficient Model Training
labeled data during training. However, due to the lack of label
information, they are unable to directly learn specific features Model training requires substantial labeled traffic, which is
of attacks, which may lead to higher false positive/negative often challenging to collect. For instance, constructing the
rates [18]. CIC-IDS-2017 [24] dataset involved setting up a complex
 2) Methods Based on Supervised Learning: These meth- network with various systems to simulate attacks. However,
ods leverage labeled data to train models, enabling them to collecting unlabeled traffic at network gateways is more pracdifferentiate between benign and malicious traffic based on tical, as it allows capturing large volumes of data without
their unique features. Rahmat et al. [19] introduced a method needing prior classification.
grounded in ensemble learning, utilizing algorithms such as
XGBoost and AdaBoost to construct the model through tech- B. Transferable to New Attacks
niques like bagging and boosting. Sun et al. [20] observed To minimize economic losses, detection models must
that fraudulent devices could be detected through encrypted quickly adapt to new threats. Current methods require extentraffic analysis and developed EvilHunter for this purpose. sive retraining for novel attacks, which is time-consuming and
Fu et al. [6] proposed ST-Graph, which detects malware traffic often impractical due to limited attack samples. Therefore,
using graph-based network analysis. They employed graph there is a need for a malicious traffic detection approach that
representation learning to capture the spatial and temporal can easily transfer to new attack types.
features of network behaviors and utilized a random forest
to build the classifier. Feng et al. [21] presented a two-layer
 C. Robust to Obfuscated Traffic
deep learning approach for malware detection, combining
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and autoencoders. Attackers can evade detection by modifying traffic features,
Zeng et al. [7] introduced a deep learning framework for such as inserting dummy packets or altering packet rate, which
detecting malicious traffic, utilizing CNNs and Stacked Auto- can significantly change traffic’s statistical features [5], [11].
Encoders to extract features from raw traffic without manual Network administrators often lack information on whether and
feature engineering. These methods achieve high F1 scores how traffic is obfuscated. Therefore, detection methods need
when trained on an adequate number of labeled samples [6], to operate effectively with limited knowledge and be resilient
[7]. However, they rely on predefined parameters and, when against obfuscated traffic.
confronted with emerging attacks, require a significant number
of labeled samples for model retraining [4]. IV. T RAFFIC R EPRESENTATION
 3) Methods Based on Meta-Learning: Meta-learning [22], In this section, we present key observations regarding
[23] is a machine learning paradigm designed to improve the distinctions between benign and malicious traffic, and
model transferability. In the scenario of malicious traffic introduce a new traffic representation, the Semantic Attribute
detection, this enables the model to generalize knowledge Matrix (SAM), designed to capture these distinguishing
from known attack patterns (e.g., historical attack samples) to features.
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4231

 and DNS Tunneling attacks (see Table III for more details).
 Specifically, we randomly select 2,000 samples for each type
 of malicious traffic. For benign traffic, the number of samples
 is set to match that of the malicious traffic. We consider
 bidirectional flows to capture both upstream and downstream
 packet interactions. A bidirectional flow represents a traffic
 entity that includes all packets with the same 5-tuple (source
 and destination IP addresses, source and destination ports, and
 transport protocol). We plot the Kernel Density Estimation
 (KDE) curves of three features, as shown in Fig. 2.
 1) Packet Length: The packet length distribution of malicious traffic is more concentrated around specific values, while
 benign traffic exhibits a more dispersed distribution. This is
 because benign traffic consists of a variety of packet sizes due
 to diverse communication patterns and application behaviors.
 Malicious traffic tends to have a more structured packet length
 distribution, which may result from predefined attack payloads
 used in malicious activities [27]. For instance, the packets in
 SYN Flood attack are typically small, exhibiting a similar
 pattern in packet length [13].
 2) Down/Up Ratio: It represents the ratio of downstream to
 upstream packets for each traffic flow. Benign traffic typically
Fig. 2. The KDE of malicious and benign traffic across three features in three
datasets: CIC-IDS-2017 [24], CIC-DDoS-2019 [25], and DoHBrw-2020 [26]. exhibits a Down/Up Ratio close to 1:1, as the communication
The features include Packet Length, Down/Up Ratio, and IAT. between clients and servers is generally balanced in terms of
 data exchange. In contrast, malicious traffic often demonstrates
 TABLE II a more dispersed distribution of Down/Up Ratios, which can
 L IST OF N OTATIONS be either excessively high or significantly low. The DoHBrw-
 2020 dataset exhibits higher low Down/Up Ratio. This occurs
 because attackers send large volumes of data, such as malware
 payloads, to compromised devices, while the victims only
 transmit minimal responses (e.g., acknowledgments) [28].
 3) Inter-Arrival Time (IAT): The distribution of benign
 traffic tends to be relatively smooth, whereas the IAT of
 malicious traffic are often concentrated around specific peak
 values. For example, the CIC-DDoS-2019 dataset exhibits
 extremely small IAT, this is because DDoS attacks involve
 a massive number of packets being sent to the target in rapid
 succession [13]. In these attacks, attackers aim to overwhelm
 the target’s resources by flooding it with continuous traffic
 from multiple sources. We observe consistent distributional
 differences between benign and malicious traffic across all
 three datasets, despite their varying network environments
 and collection time periods. These consistent differences in
 features including packet length, Down/Up Ratio, and Inter-
 Arrival Time (IAT) suggest their generalizability to other cases
 and, consequently, their potential as crucial indicators for
A. Key Observation on Feature Distribution detecting malicious traffic.
 The key to inspecting encrypted malicious traffic lies in
identifying the differences between benign and malicious B. Semantic Attribute Matrix
traffic. To gain a profound understanding of these differences, Based on the above observations, we propose Semantic
we utilize three public datasets on malicious traffic to visualize Attribute Matrix (SAM) as a new traffic representation to
the disparities in distribution between benign and malicious capture distinguishing features between benign and malicious
traffic across three commonly used traffic features from prior traffic. The construction process of SAM is shown in Fig. 3,
studies [4], [6], [8], namely packet length, Down/Up Ratio, which consists of two steps, namely feature extraction and
and Inter-Arrival Time (IAT). feature embedding. The main notations used in this paper are
 The datasets are CIC-IDS-2017 [24], CIC-DDoS-2019 [25], summarized in Table II.
and DoHBrw-2020 [26], which contain various types of 1) Feature Extraction: Based on the above analysis, we
malicious traffic, such as DoS/DDoS, Brute Force, Portscan, extract three key features from the traffic flows: packet length,
4232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE III
 S UMMARY OF F IVE DATASETS W ITH T RAFFIC T YPES AND F LOW C OUNTS P ER C ATEGORY

Fig. 3. The construction process of SAM. For a given traffic flow, SAM extracts three features from the first K packets, including packet length, packet
direction and IAT. Then SAM employs feature embedding to capture contextual information.

packet direction, and inter-arrival time. These features can latter predicts the central word through the surrounding words.
effectively distinguish between benign and malicious traffic. In this paper, we use CBOW to translate features into a
To achieve a timely detection, we use only the first K packets vector. Before conducting word embedding, we should build
in each flow. Subsequently, we obtain the Per-Packet Feature an embedding dictionary. Hence, we collect 3,989,459 flows
Matrix M with dimensions of 3 × K. from the gateway of a campus network as background traffic.
 2) Feature Embedding: The Per-Packet Feature Matrix Taking the construction of packet length embedding dictionary
obtained is a series of numbers, which can be further enhanced as an example, we collect different attribute values of all
by feature embedding [29]. For example, the same type packet lengths and construct attribute value dictionary Dz =
of malicious traffic generate multiple packet sequences with {(S 1 , W1 ), (S 2 , W2 ), . . . , (S V , WV )}, where V represents the size
various lengths. This results in the Per-Packet Feature Matrix of the vocabulary.
being distant in the feature space, despite the different length The input layer is the one-hot representation of multiple
sequences having similar meanings in context and exhibiting context words {x1 , x2 , · · · , xC }, where xi represents the one-hot
the same malicious behavior. For instance, in a DoS attack, representation of the i-th context word and C represents the
attackers may use different User Agents to send numerous size of the context word window. The formula for calculating
HTTP requests [27]. The use of varying user agents creates the hidden layer is shown in Eq. (1):
variations in header size, which in turn affects the packet C
 !
 1 T X
length. h= W ∗ xi (1)
 Based on the above analysis, it is crucial to capture the C
 i=1
contextual information among multiple flows in the scenario
 where B is the dimension of the embedded feature, and W is
of malicious traffic detection. Recent study [29] utilizes a
 the matrix with dimensions V ∗ B. The obtained hidden layer
trainable embedding layer for feature embedding, primarily
 h is then passed through the output layer mapping matrix W 0
focusing on capturing inter-modality dependencies within a
 to get the output layer u, which is shown in Eq. (2):
single flow, which enhances the accuracy of mobile traffic
classification. Therefore, we use an alternative feature embed- u = W 0T ∗ h (2)
ding technique. Specifically, we integrate the features from
multiple flows into a set and employ Word2Vec [30] for feature where W 0 is the matrix with the dimension of B∗V. According
embedding. to the output layer, the probability of predicting the attribute
 Word2vec [30] is a commonly used method in word value of the packet to be S k is yk , which is calculated
embedding, which contains two algorithms, i.e., skip-gram in Eq. (3):
and Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW). The former predicts exp(uk )
 yk = PV (3)
the surrounding words through the central word while the j=1 exp(u j )
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4233

Algorithm 1 Feature Extraction and Embedding is directly tiled into a B-dimensional vector (lines 15-16),
 while packet length z and inter-arrival time a are mapped
 to B-dimensional embeddings via exact matches (lines 17-
 18) or nearest-neighbor approximation (lines 20–21) using
 pre-established embedding dictionaries Dz and Da . These
 embeddings are then concatenated across the three features,
 resulting in a 3 × K × B matrix R. We quantitatively evaluate
 the effectiveness of SAM in Section VI-B.

 V. T HE P ROPOSED S MART D ETECTOR
 A. System Overview
 Based on SAM, we present the design of SmartDetector.
 SmartDetector consists of two critical modules, i.e., Traffic
 Flow Augmentation and Traffic Classifier Construction. The
 overall framework of SmartDetector is depicted in Fig. 4.
 1) Traffic Flow Augmentation: This module initially simulates traffic obfuscation by generating augmented flows
 through the injection of dummy packets and random delay.
 The augmented flows are subsequently converted into SAM,
 yielding augmented traffic representations. These representations are used as input for the Traffic Classifier Construction
 module.
 2) Traffic Classifier Construction: This module trains an
 encoder to transform traffic representation to deep representation. By ensuring the similarity between an original traffic
 representation and the corresponding augmented traffic representations, the well-trained encoder can also maintain the
 similarity between the original and obfuscated traffic. Then
 it leverages the pre-training encoder and a few labeled traffic
 samples to train a fully connected layer. For malicious traffic
 detection, the test samples are input into the model and then
The attribute value with the highest probability is taken as the the detection results can be obtained.
output. To optimize the model parameters, we use the crossentropy loss function to measure the difference between the B. Traffic Flow Augmentation
predicted probability yk , and the true label. Assuming the true
 In the malicious traffic detection scenario, some attackers
label of the target attribute is a one-hot vector tk , the loss
 may employ various obfuscation strategies, such as inserting
function is defined as:
 dummy packets, altering packet rates, and injecting noise into
 V
 X each packet, etc., to evade detection [4]. These strategies
 L=− tk log(yk ) (4) significantly change the features of the original traffic, making
 k=1
 it difficult for existing detection systems to identify malicious
The gradients of the loss function with respect to the behavior. To enhance the robustness of detection systems
weight matrices W and W 0 are computed during backpropaga- against evasion attacks, we propose a data augmentation
tion. After several iterations, the weight matrix W becomes framework that simulates real-world obfuscation strategies.
the embedding matrix, where each row corresponds to the Unlike previous studies [23], [31] that focus on simulating
embedding vector of a specific attribute value. The embed- changes in network conditions, our framework specifically
ding vector of the m-th attribute value S m is denoted as targets the simulation of adversarial obfuscation strategies.
Wm . Finally, we obtain the embedding dictionary Dz = Obfuscation strategies used by attackers can generally be
{(S 1 , W1 ), (S 2 , W2 ), . . . , (S V , WV )}. For IAT, we repeat the same classified into two main categories: inserting dummy packets
process to obtain the embedding dictionary Da . and altering packet rates [10]. Based on this insight, we care-
 Based on the embedding dictionaries, we translate the Per- fully design a traffic flow augmentation method. Specifically,
Packet Feature Matrix into meaningful vectors. Considering we mimic the strategies used by attackers by either randomly
that there are only two values of direction, i.e., +1 for the inserting dummy packets into traffic flow or adding delay to
upstream and −1 for the downstream, we do not apply feature each packet. Note that this process is not completely random,
embedding on the direction sequence. The embedding process as an entirely random approach could destroy the semantic
in Algorithm 1 translates the per-packet feature matrix M into information of the traffic features, leading to deviations from
the semantic attribute matrix R by first processing each feature realistic conditions. For example, the size of packets transtype separately (lines 11–24): for direction d the binary value mitted in the network generally does not exceed 1500 bytes.
4234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 4. The overview of SmartDetector.

Algorithm 2 Traffic Flow Augmentation [12], the high-quality positive and negative pair construction
 is very important. For example, applying transformations like
 rotation, cropping, flipping, and adding Gaussian noise to an
 image generates positive samples, while other images in the
 batch serve as negative samples. The model is then trained to
 bring positive pairs closer and push negative pairs apart in the
 embedding space, using a metric such as cosine similarity. This
 trained model is utilized for feature embedding in downstream
 tasks like classification and prediction.
 In SmartDetector, the training process can be divided into
 two steps. In the first step, the contrastive learning model
 is trained using the unlabeled traffic samples. The model is
 constructed by the encoder and projection head. Deep representation is learned by the encoder, which is the input of the
 projection head. The outputs of the model are similar between
 the positive pairs and are different between the negative pairs.
 After we attain the deep representation, in the second step,
 labeled traffic samples are used to learn how to distinguish
 benign and malicious traffic. The input of the supervised model
 is the output of the encoder. Based on the previously learned
 deep representation, the supervised model can achieve high
 classification accuracy using only a few samples.
However, inserting the random dummy packets directly into 1) Contrastive Learning: To extract the traffic deep repthe traffic flow may result in packets exceeding this limit. resentation, we build the encoder based on the architecture
 The flow augmentation process is described in Algorithm 2. of ResNet, as the ResNet architecture has achieved excellent
For a given traffic flow T, we randomly insert dummy packets performance in a number of tasks, including image classificaand add time delay based on probabilities p and r. To better tion and semantic segmentation [32]. It employs two types of
simulate the behavior of attackers, we set both q and r to 0.5. residual blocks, the Conv block and Identity block, to improve
The augmented traffic flow T 0 is obtained after processing accuracy. The Identity block, unlike the Conv block, omits
all packets. Then the augmented traffic flow is transformed convolution and normalization. This architecture allows the
into SAM, and subsequently used as augmented samples. output of an earlier layer to directly influence a subsequent
This process mimics the way the attacker conducts traffic layer, enabling a partial linear contribution from previous
obfuscation, which enables the model to associate the original layers to the later ones.
feature with the disturbed feature, improving the capability of We calculate the similarity between the original and
detecting obfuscated malicious traffic. augmented feature matrix for each flow, which is defined
 in Eq. (5):
C. Traffic Classifier Construction sT s0
 sim(si , s0i ) = i i 0 (5)
 ksi kksi k
 To achieve malicious traffic detection, contrastive learning
is used to build the encoder. Contrastive learning [12] is where si and s0i represent the representations of the two
one of the unsupervised learning methods, which focuses on samples extracted by the encoder. The loss function of a flow
learning the common features between similar instances and sample is defined in Eq. (6):
differentiating the differences between non-similar instances.
 Contrastive learning is widely used in image recognition, exp(sim(si , s0i ))
 li = −log P2Q (k , i) (6)
treating each image as an individual class. As studied in k=1 exp(sim(si , sk ))
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4235

 • DFR [7] is an end-to-end malicious traffic detection
 framework based on Convolutional Neural Networks
 (CNN). It converts the raw traffic data to gray-scale image
 and utilizes CNN to extract features without manual
 intervention and private information.
 • FC-Net [9] is a deep neural network (DNN) based
 classifier for malicious traffic detection. It leverages the
 meta-learning framework to distinguish a pair of samples
 as a basic task of learning. Based on this framework, it
 enables the detection of new attacks with a few samples.
 • TF [8] is a triplet network based classifier for website
 fingerprinting (WF). It can achieve transferring tasks from
Fig. 5. Visualization of the original and obfuscated traffic features reduced one dataset to another using a few samples, which can
by T-SNE algorithm into 2 dimensions. For example, DoS and DoS-obf refer also be applied in the detection of new attacks.
to the original and the obfuscated DoS traffic features, respectively. • ST-Graph [6] is a graph-based framework for detecting
 malware traffic. It consists of a spatio-temporal feature
where Q is the total number of samples in a batch. The extraction network based on heterogeneous graph repreconvolutional neural network learns the feature extraction sentation learning and a multi-stream analysis framework.
parameters based on the iterative calculation automatically. 2) Dataset: We use five public datasets for evaluation.
The two encoders for original samples and augmented samples • CIC-IDS-2017 (D1 ) [24] is a intrusion detection dataset
share the same set of parameters. The deep representations si that that captures network traffic from hundreds of hosts.
and s0i are put into the projection heads, which also share the For a fair comparison, we select the same 5 types of
same set of parameters. malicious traffic as FC-Net to construct dataset, i.e., DoS,
 The encoder trained with contrastive learning aligns the FTP-Patator, Portscan, SSH-Patator and DDoS-LOIT.
outputs of a positive pair, which in SmartDetector refers to the • CIC-DDoS-2019 (D2 ) [25] is a comprehensive dataset
original traffic and its obfuscated version. The feature visual- that includes various types of Distributed Denial of Serization is shown in Fig. 5, with dimensionality reduction using vice (DDoS) attacks. We also select 5 typical types of
the t-SNE [33] algorithm and displayed on two-dimensional malicious traffic to construct dataset, i.e., DDoS-MSSQL,
axes. For instance, DoS represents original DoS traffic, while DDoS-NetBIOS, DDoS-UDP, UDPLag, SYN Flood.
DoS-obf refers to obfuscated DoS traffic. In Fig. 5(a), the • DoHBrw-2020 (D3 ) [26] contains malicious DNS-overtwo feature sets are dissimilar, indicating that noise changes HTTPS (DoH) encrypted traffic generated using three
the original features. However, in Fig. 5(b), the encoder brings tunneling tools: DNS2Tcp, DNSCat2, and Iodine.
the original and obfuscated features closer, demonstrating their • USTC-TFC (D4 ) [34] contains different types of malware
increased similarity. traffic, including Htbot, Neris, Miuref, and Virut.
 2) Supervised Learning: We use the deep representations • CIC-IoV-2024 (D5 ) [35] contains spoofing and DoS maliattained in the previous step combined with their labels to cious traffic targeting the Internet of Vehicles, including
train a model. The parameters of the encoder are frozen in Vul Scan, Os Scan, Publish Flood, and Connect Flood.
the process of supervised learning. For each type of traffic,
we randomly select N samples in the training set to train the The datasets are summarized in Table III. We analyze the
fully connected layers. As the deep representation of traffic is selected features using the D1 , D2 , and D3 datasets in Section
previously learned in contrastive learning, the fully connected IV-A. To further validate the generalizability of SmartDetector,
layer can be quickly trained using only a few samples, which we also evaluate its performance on the D4 and D5 datasets.
allows the detection model to quickly adapt to new types of 3) Validation: In order to evaluate few-shot learning, we
attacks. partition the dataset into known and new attacks. D1 serves as
 the baseline, where one attack is treated as new and the other
 VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION four as known; this process is repeated five times so that each
 attack is eventually considered new. For meta-learning-based
 In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
 methods (FC-Net [9], TF [8], SmartDetector), known attack
the effectiveness of SmartDetector. We first introduce the
 samples are used for pre-training, while new attack samples
experiment and parameter setting. Then, we thoroughly comare used for retraining and evaluation. In contrast, supervised
pare SmartDetector with the state-of-the-art methods in three
 methods (DFR [7], ST-Graph [6]) are directly trained and
typical scenarios, including few-shot learning, imbalanced
 tested on new attack samples.
dataset training, and obfuscated malicious traffic detection.
 For pre-training, we maintain 10,000 samples with a benignto-malicious ratio of 4:1 (8,000 benign and 500 per known
A. Experiment Setting attack type). Attacks in D2 , D3 , D4 and D5 are treated as
 1) Baseline Methods: To measure the improvements new attacks and are evaluated using the model pre-trained on
achieved by SmartDetector, we establish four baselines, among D1 . To mitigate the effects of sample selection randomness,
which two methods enable few-shot learning, i.e., FC-Net, TF. each experiment is repeated 100 times. For the new attack,
4236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE IV
 H YPERPARAMETERS FOR D IFFERENT R EPRESENTATIONS

 Fig. 6. The Euclidean distance between malicious and benign traffic with each
 traffic representation under different obfuscation strategies, including inserting
 dummy packets (IDP), inserting benign packets (IBP), altering packet rate
 TABLE V (APR), and inserting noise into each packet (INP).
 T HE E UCLIDEAN D ISTANCE B ETWEEN M ALICIOUS AND B ENIGN
 T RAFFIC U NDER D IFFERENT R EPRESENTATIONS

 the target FTP servers, resulting in a large number of packets
 in the same direction. For Portscan, traffic graph exhibits
 the largest distance, because the number of packets in a
 malicious flow for port scanning is quite small, resulting in
 much smaller graphs than those of benign flows. Color image
 has the smallest distance on average, indicating that the imagebased representation is less expressive.
 Evaluation on the Obfuscation Scenarios: In real-world
 scenarios, the attackers [11] might evade detection using traffic
we randomly select N samples from 2,000 samples to train obfuscation. We investigate four typical obfuscation strategies,
the fully connected layer while using the remaining samples i.e., inserting dummy packets (IDP), inserting benign packets
for evaluation; the final result is the average over 100 runs. (IBP), altering packet rate (APR), and inserting noise into each
 4) Performance Metrics: We select Recall, F1 score and packet (INP). Detailed descriptions of these strategies can be
the area under ROC curve (AUC) as the performance metrics found in Section VI-E. We evaluate the effectiveness of four
because they are most widely used in the literature [8], [9]. traffic representations under these obfuscation strategies and
 show the results in Fig. 6.
 Under the IDP and IBP strategies, the distance of all
B. Evaluation on Effectiveness of SAM traffic representations decreases. For Color Image, additional
 We use quantitative measures to evaluate the effectiveness bytes introduced by inserted packets change byte distributions,
of SAM as well as three typical representations employed by reducing distinguishability. In Direction Sequence, the inserthe SOTA methods, i.e., Color Image in FC-Net [9], Direction tion disrupts the original direction distribution. For Traffic
Sequence in TF [8] and Traffic Graph in ST-Graph [6]. Graph, coarse-grained statistical features used in node con-
 We choose five representative attacks from the dataset D1 . struction (e.g., Max/Min/Mean Packet Length, the Number
For benign traffic and each type of malicious traffic, we of Packets, the Number of Client Extensions, the Number
randomly select 2,000 traffic samples and transform them of Signature Algorithms) are altered, distorting the graph
into corresponding traffic representations. Then we use the node attributes. These coarse-grained statistical features can
euclidean distance to assess the dissimilarity between mali- be easily obfuscated as they aggregate high-dimensional timecious and benign traffic. A greater distance indicates a more series data (e.g., raw traffic sequences) into low-dimensional
effective capture of the distinguishing features between mali- representations through metrics like Mean Packet Length [11].
cious and benign traffic. To allow data to be scaled to fall This aggregation process results in the loss of fine-grained
within defined intervals without changing the original data contextual information, which is critical for distinguishing
source distribution and comparable, we take the average of between benign and malicious traffic patterns [27]. This is
all distances and use min-max normalization. why the distance for Traffic Graph decreases from 0.59 to 0.34
 As we previously mentioned, we use only the first K packets under the IBP strategy. For SAM, the added packets modify
in each flow. We analyze the lengths of all flows in the length, direction, and inter-arrival time sequences. As a result,
dataset and find that most of the flows are relatively short, the distance of SAM decreases from 0.65 to 0.59.
with an average packet count of 43. Therefore, to achieve Under the APR strategy, only the timing of packets is
timely detection, we set K = 40. To capture more information altered, leaving the distance of Direction Sequence unchanged.
while improving training efficiency [30], we set B to 100 However, for Color Image, modifying the packet timing also
in subsequent experiments. The selected hyperparameters for affects the byte distribution within the packets. For Traffic
different representations are shown in Table IV. Graph, this strategy alters statistical features related to timing.
 As shown in Table V, SAM exhibits the maximum dis- For SAM, only the timing features are modified, while the
tance on average in the five categories of malicious traffic, packet length and direction sequences remain unaffected. This
demonstrating its capability of distinguishing malicious traffic results in a SAM distance of 0.64 under this strategy, which
from benign traffic. For FTP-Patator, direction sequence has is higher than the 0.60 and 0.59 observed under the IDP and
the largest distance, since the attackers repeatedly try to login IBP strategies, respectively.
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4237

 TABLE VI
 T HE F EW-S HOT L EARNING R ESULTS OF DFR, FC-N ET, TF, ST-G RAPH AND S MART D ETECTOR U NDER VARIOUS T RAINING S AMPLES

 Under the INP strategy, the attacker introduces random
noise into each packet by modifying its byte content. This
directly impacts the Color Image, as the byte distribution
within the packets is altered. For Traffic Graph, the injected
noise perturbs certain coarse-grained statistical features, such
as the Number of Elliptic Curves. In the case of SAM, the
noise injection alters the packet length and inter-arrival time
sequences but does not impact the direction sequence. This
explains why the distance for SAM under this strategy is
greater than under INP and IBP, yet smaller than under APR.

C. Evaluation on Few-Shot Learning Fig. 7. Comparison of F1-Scores across different benign-to-malicious traffic
 We now evaluate the effectiveness of the methods in few- ratios.
shot learning. In this scenario, we keep the proportion of
 SmartDetector demonstrates stable detection performance
dataset unchanged (i.e., the baseline ratio of 4:1) and vary the
 across various training sample sizes. In this scenario, the
number of samples for retraining. To observe the detection
 standard deviation of SmartDetector’s F1 score is only 2.62,
performance of different methods as the number of samples
 compared to 5.94, 2.76 and 5.86 for FC-Net, TF and ST-Graph,
changes, we set the number of samples as N, i.e., 1, 3, 5 and
 respectively. This superior performance can be attributed to
10, which means N samples for each type are leveraged for
 SAM being more expressive, which enables a more precise
model retraining. The results are shown in Table VI.
 identification of abnormal patterns in malicious traffic.
 With only 3 samples per type, SmartDetector can achieve
an F1 score of 90.84% and an AUC of 94.91%, representing
improvements of 8.05% and 4.00% over ST-Graph (which D. Evaluation on Imbalanced Dataset
attains an F1 score of 82.79% and an AUC of 90.91%), In this section, we evaluate the ability of different methods
respectively. Note that DFR has merely an F1 score of 54.25%, to deal with imbalanced datasets. Considering that DFR has
which basically has no ability to classify malicious traffic. This a limited ability in dealing with few-shot learning (as shown
is because DFR is based on supervised deep learning and needs in Table VI), it will not be involved in the subsequent expersufficient samples to achieve better detection performance. iments. We conduct experiments on five datasets and observe
Furthermore, it leverages images as the traffic representation, similar results. Due to space limitations, we only present the
which is shown to be less expressive in Section VI-B. Since results of D1 in the subsequent experiments.
FC-Net and TF are based on meta-learning, they are expected We keep the number of samples used for retraining
to outperform supervised learning-based methods in few-shot unchanged (i.e., 5 samples per type) while varying the ratio of
scenarios. However, their detection performance is comparable benign traffic to malicious traffic samples during pre-training.
to that of ST-Graph, which is based on supervised machine Following previous work [36], we denote this ratio by β and set
learning. This is because the traffic representation used by ST- three typical values, namely β = 4:1, β = 24:1 and β = 49:1.
Graph is more expressive than that of FC-Net and TF. The results are shown in Fig. 7.
4238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 8. ROC curves under four different obfuscation strategies.

 TABLE VII
 T HE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT O BFUSCATION S TRATEGIES , I NCLUDING I NSERTING D UMMY PACKETS (IDP), I NSERTING
 B ENIGN PACKETS (IBP), A LTERING PACKET R ATE (APR), AND I NSERTING N OISE I NTO E ACH PACKET (INP)

 SmartDetector achieves the best detection performance model retraining as 10 and β = 4 : 1. The results under the four
under each ratio setting. Even in highly imbalanced dataset obfuscation strategies can be found in Table VII and Fig. 8.
scenario (49:1), SmartDetector still has an F1 score of 96.16%, 1) Strategy 1: Inserting Dummy Packets: We assume that
which is 19.02% and 16.62% higher than TF and ST-Graph, the attacker can add a random dummy packet before each
respectively. In this scenario, the F1 score of FC-Net is only packet with a probability pd . Following the experimental
43.51%. This is because it converts traffic packets into color setting of previous work [10], we set the probability pd as
images, which is not an expressive traffic representation as 10%, 20% and 30%. Note that dummy packets are only
demonstrated in Section VI-B. This limitation becomes partic- added for malicious traffic. For the benign traffic, we retain
ularly pronounced in highly imbalanced scenarios, where the its original features.
classifier fails to effectively learn how to distinguish between The experiment results are shown in Table VII. We can
benign and malicious traffic during the pre-training phase. observe that SmartDetector outperforms other methods in
 SmartDetector has the most stable detection performance detecting obfuscated malicious traffic. Even with a 30% probunder each ratio setting. When β enlarges from 4:1 to 49:1, ability of adding dummy packets, SmartDetector can still
the F1 score of SmartDetector reduces by 1.74%, while that of achieve an F1 score of 94.11% and an AUC of 99.10%.
TF and ST-Graph decreases by 7.85% and 9.74%, respectively. Compared to the scenario without dummy packet insertion,
This is because SAM can capture more discriminative features the F1 score of SmartDetector decreases by only 4.53%,
between malicious and benign traffic than Direction Sequence while its AUC drops by a mere 0.56%. This is due to the
and Traffic Graph. It allows SmartDetector to accurately flow augmentation strategy simulates the process by which
identify abnormal behavior of malicious traffic, even in the an attacker adds dummy packets, allowing the encoder to
highly imbalanced dataset scenario. effectively learn unmasked features during pre-training.
 FC-Net,TF and ST-Graph all experience a significant performance degradation when dealing with this type of obfuscated
E. Evaluation on Obfuscated Malicious Traffic malicious traffic. Compared to the scenario without dummy
 To evaluate the robustness of SmartDetector, we assume packet insertion, their F1 scores drop by 19.82%, 26.99%,
that the sophisticated attackers are aware of the deployment and 29.80%, respectively. ST-Graph exhibits the greatest perof malicious traffic detection systems. Thus, they can launch formance degradation. This is due to the traffic representation
evasion attacks by traffic obfuscation to change the patterns of Traffic Graph used by ST-Graph is more easily obfuscated
the original malicious traffic. Following the literature [5], we in this scenario, as shown in Section VI-E. Specifically, STassume that the attackers can select four obfuscation strategies, Graph transforms the traffic flow into a graph where the node
including inserting dummy packets, inserting benign packets, attributes are based on the statistical features of the traffic
altering packet rate, and inserting noise into each packet. In flow. However, inserting dummy packets can easily obfuscate
the following experiments, we set the number of samples for coarse-grained statistical features [5].
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4239

 TABLE VIII
 T HE A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS OF W / O E NCODER , W / O E MBEDDING ,
 S MART D ETECTOR -T, S MART D ETECTOR -V I T AND S MART D ETECTOR W ITH N = 1, 3, 5, 10

 2) Strategy 2: Inserting Benign Traffic Packets: In this TABLE IX
scenario, we assume that the attackers insert a sequence of T RAINING T IME OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS
benign traffic packets into the malicious traffic to mislead the
detection systems. We define the insertion probability pb as
the ratio of the number of inserted benign packets to the
total number of packets in the resulting traffic flow. Note
that inserting more benign packets may lead to the failure
of attacks [10]. Thus, we set the insertion probability as 10%,
30% and 50%. TABLE X
 As shown in Table VII and Fig. 8(b), we observe that the T EST T IME OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS
evasion attacks with a higher insertion probability can easily
evade detection. The performance of FC-Net, TF and ST-
Graph all experience a significant degradation in this scenario.
Specifically, the average F1 scores and AUC of these methods
decrease by over 20%. However, SmartDetector exhibits at
most a 5.20% reduction in F1 score under various insertion
probabilities, with its AUC decreasing by no more than 3.02%. best detection performance in this scenario, achieving an F1
 score of 97.37% an AUC of 99.63%.
 3) Strategy 3: Altering Packet Rate: The packet rate dis- 5) Summary: Under different obfuscation strategies, Smarttribution of malicious traffic is more sparse (as shown in Detector achieves an F1 score and AUC both exceeding
Fig. 2(c)). In practice, attackers may alter the packet rate of 93%, with an average improvement of 19.84% and 18.17%
malicious traffic to evade detection [10]. For each traffic flow, over the SOTA method. This success is attributed to SAM,
we randomly adjust the IAT of each packet by either increasing which captures the discriminative features of malicious and
or decreasing the delay by up to 50%. Note that we do not benign traffic. The augmentation strategy also contributes to
introduce more delay as this could result in the failure of the the encoder’s ability to learn more robust traffic features.
attack [5]. The results are shown in Table VII.
 Since TF relies solely on the direction sequence, altering
 F. Evaluation on Time Cost
the packet rate does not impact its detection performance.
However, the F1 score of SmartDetector is still 7.20% higher In this section, we evaluate the training time and test time
than that of TF. In this scenario, the F1 scores of FC-Net and of all methods. Generally, the training process can be broadly
ST-Graph fall below 90%. In particular, FC-Net has only an divided into two parts: feature extraction time (FET) and
F1 score of 71.28% in this scenario. The poorest performance classifier training time (CTT). For methods based on metais due to FC-Net directly transforming packet bytes into color learning, pre-training time (PTT) is also included. The test
images. Altering packet rate changes the packet timestamps, time refers to the time spent on classifying an unknown traffic
resulting in changes in the packet bytes. by a well-trained classifier. We set the number of samples for
 model retraining as N = 10. We conduct experiments on the
 4) Strategy 4: Inserting Noise Into Each Packet: In this D1 dataset and repeat the process 20 times, using the average
scenario, some sophisticated attackers can manipulate per- value as the final result. The results are shown in Table IX
packet features to evade detection. Therefore, we assume and Table X.
that attackers insert random noise into each packet with a 1) Training Time: For methods based on meta-learning
probability of 50%. The attackers append a random byte (i.e., FC-Net, TF, and SmartDetector), pre-training the model
sequence to each packet, while ensuring that the length of is a necessary step. Notably, the pre-trained model only needs
the padded packets mimics the distribution of benign traffic. to be trained once. When new attack types emerge, only the
 The detection performance of FC-Net experiences sig- classifier needs to be re-trained, which involves only the FET
nificant degradation in this scenario due to its process of and CTT. The retraining phase of SmartDetector takes 377.63s,
converting packet bytes into images. The insertion of random which is less than the 511.09s required by the SOTA method
bytes into each packet results in substantial changes to the ST-Graph. Since raw traffic is directly converted into a color
image, leading to degradation. SmartDetector still exhibits the image, FC-Net has the shortest FET. However, the results in
4240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 9. The T-SNE visualization of feature vectors for different traffic types under various pre-training backbones.

Section VI-C demonstrate that the F1 score of SmartDetector Transformer and a Vision Transformer (ViT) [38]. These two
is 21.88% higher than that of FC-Net on average. variations are named SmartDetector-T and SmartDetector-ViT.
 2) Test Time: The test process is online, during which a The detection performance of various pre-training backlabel is predicted for an unknown traffic sample. SmartDe- bones is shown in Table VIII. SmartDetector-T has the lowest
tector has a shorter test time compared to the SOTA method AUC at 52.72% when N =10, as its transformer encoder
ST-Graph, as ST-Graph requires additional time to convert raw focuses on global dependencies but lacks the ability to extract
traffic into a traffic graph. Compared to TF, SmartDetector local features, which are crucial in SAM. SmartDetector-ViT
takes slightly longer for testing. This is because SmartDetector performs better by dividing the matrix into patches, improving
extracts more features, including packet length, direction, and its ability to capture local features.
IAT, while TF only extracts packet direction. The results in The T-SNE feature space visualization, as shown in Fig. 9,
Section VI-C demonstrate that the F1 score of SmartDetector demonstrates the distinct clustering abilities of different
is 18.19% higher than that of TF on average. pre-training backbones. Among the three models, the original SmartDetector exhibits the best class separation and
G. Ablation Experiment intra-class compactness compared to SmartDetector-T and
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the pre-training encoder SmartDetector-ViT. This indicates that ResNet-50 provides
model and the feature embedding in SmartDetector, the abla- more effective feature extraction for our detection tasks.
tion experiments are carried out. In this section, we conduct In conclusion, ResNet-50 is more suitable for our detection
few-shot evaluation for classifier without pre-training, which task compared to the Transformer and ViT, mainly due to
is named as w/o Encoder, and without the feature embedding, its better ability to extract local features [32]. This is also
which is named as w/o Embedding. For w/o Encoder, the demonstrated in Fig. 9. This advantage enables ResNet-50
network structure of encoder is preserved but the parameters to capture fine-grained details more effectively, resulting in
of it are initialized randomly. For w/o Embedding, the traffic greater robustness and higher detection accuracy, especially on
features are not transformed to vector, i.e., the Per-Packet smaller datasets (10,000 samples in the pre-training phase).
Feature Matrix is regarded as the traffic representation. 2) Evaluation on Different Features and Augmentation
 In the few-shot evaluation experiment, we leverage 1, Strategies: To evaluate the impact of the three features of
3, 5, 10 samples per type to train w/o Encoder and w/o SAM on overall performance, we remove packet length (PL),
Embedding. The results in Table VIII show that the model Inter-Arrival Time (IAT), and direction (Dir) individually,
without the Encoder has limited capability in detecting mali- resulting in three variants: w/o PL, w/o IAT, and w/o Dir. To
cious traffic. Since w/o Encoder classifies all samples as evaluate the effect of data augmentation strategies on overall
negative under each sample number setting, there are no performance, we construct two variants: w/o Packet Insertion
true positives (TP) and false positives (FP), resulting in a and w/o Packet Delay. w/o Packet Insertion refers to the
precision of 0. Consequently, we cannot calculate the F1 score. variant where no dummy packets are inserted during the data
The results show that insufficient sample has a significant augmentation process, while w/o Packet Delay indicates that
impact on the effectiveness of the supervised learning model, no delay is applied to the packets. The experimental setup is
indicating the importance of the encoder. Feature embedding the same as described in Section VI-E.
improves the performance of the model greatly. Specifically, As shown in Table XI, the results show that removing any
the F1 score and AUC of SmartDetector is more than 20% one of the three features leads to a decrease in detection
higher than that of w/o Embedding. performance, with w/o IAT showing the most significant
 1) Evaluation of Different Pre-Training Backbones: When decrease. Under different obfuscation strategies, the average
designing the SmartDetector, we select ResNet-50 as the F1 score of w/o IAT decreases by 9.62% compared to the
backbone during the pre-training phase. However, the trans- original SAM. This is because the IAT reflects the temporal
former model has also demonstrated outstanding performance information of the traffic. In many attacks, malicious traffic
in diverse domains, such as natural language processing often exhibits timing patterns that differ from benign traffic
and image classification [37]. Since SAM is structured as a (see Section IV-A).
120 × 100 matrix, the transformer encoder can also directly Removing either of the two data augmentation stratebe used as the pre-training backbone [38]. To evaluate whether gies also leads to a decrease in detection performance,
the Transformer encoder improves SmartDetector’s perfor- especially when dealing with different obfuscation stratemance, we replace the ResNet-50 backbone with a standard gies. When dummy packets are not inserted during data
SHEN et al.: ROBUST DETECTION OF MALICIOUS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC VIA CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 4241

 TABLE XI [4] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
T HE A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS (F1 S CORES ) OF D IFFERENT F EA - analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 TURES AND AUGMENTATION S TRATEGIES . F OR THE F EATURES , W E vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
 C ONSTRUCT T HREE VARIANTS : W / O PACKET L ENGTH (PL), W / O [5] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 D IRECTION (D IR ) AND W / O I NTER -A RRIVAL T IME (IAT). F OR detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 THE DATA AUGMENTATION S TRATEGIES , W E C ONSTRUCT Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 T WO VARIANTS : W / O PACKET I NSERTION AND W / O [6] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
 PACKET D ELAY network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def.,
 2022, pp. 495–509.
 [7] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “Deep-full-range: A deep
 learning based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190,
 2019.
 [8] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet
 fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with
 N-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 Nov. 2019, pp. 1131–1148.
 [9] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 [10] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network trafaugmentation, the detection performance of SmartDetector fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
significantly decreases in response to IDP and IBP, with the F1 pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
score averaging a reduction of 11.12%. Similarly, when packet [11] Y. Sharon, D. Berend, Y. Liu, A. Shabtai, and Y. Elovici,
delay is not applied during data augmentation, SmartDetector “TANTRA: Timing-based adversarial network traffic reshaping
 attack,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3225–3237,
performance decreases significantly in response to APR, with 2022.
the F1 score falling by 10.68%. This indicates that data [12] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
augmentation strategies significantly improve the robustness for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, pp. 1597–1607.
of SmartDetector against different obfuscation strategies.
 [13] A. D. Lopez, A. P. Mohan, and S. Nair, “Network traffic behavioral
 analytics for detection of DDoS attacks,” SMU Data Sci. Rev., vol. 2,
 VII. C ONCLUSION no. 1, p. 14, Jan. 2019.
 [14] E. Billoir, R. Laborde, A. S. Wazan, Y. Rütschlé, and A. Benzekri,
 In this paper, we proposed SmartDetector, a malicious traffic “Implementing the principle of least administrative privilege on operatdetection method based on contrastive learning. We extracted ing systems: Challenges and perspectives,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 79,
packet length, direction, IAT from each packet. Through nos. 11–12, pp. 857–880, Dec. 2024.
 [15] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
feature embedding, the raw sequences were transformed into ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018,
meaningful vectors. The flow augmentation was proposed to arXiv:1802.09089.
generate augmented samples. Based on these augmented sam- [16] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments
ples, a feature extraction model can be trained on unlabeled via deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,”
traffic, and then leveraging only a few labeled traffic samples, Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167.
it can achieve robust malicious traffic detection. The exper- [17] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online
 isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
imental results show that SmartDetector is effective for new vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023.
attack detection and obfuscated malicious traffic detection. [18] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ML-based
 We discuss potential research directions from two per- malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023,
spectives. First, we propose SAM to represent traffic flows pp. 1005–1019.
in malicious traffic detection. Given that malicious traffic [19] S. Rahmat, Q. Niyaz, A. Mathur, W. Sun, and A. Y. Javaid, “Network
detection fundamentally aligns with traffic classification prob- traffic-based hybrid malware detection for smartphone and traditional networked systems,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Annu. Ubiquitous
lems, we will investigate whether SAM can be generalized to Comput., Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), Oct. 2019,
other traffic classification problems, such as traditional mobile pp. 0322–0328.
application classification and website fingerprinting. Second, [20] S. Sun et al., “Understanding and detecting mobile ad fraud through the
 lens of invalid traffic,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
we evaluate the robustness of several methods under various Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 287–303, doi: 10.1145/3460120.3484547.
obfuscation strategies in this paper. The results demonstrate [21] J. Feng, L. Shen, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, and H. Li, “A two-layer deep
that certain obfuscation strategies can degrade the performance learning method for Android malware detection using network traffic,”
of malicious traffic detection methods. However, the preser- IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 125786–125796, 2020.
 [22] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-learning
vation of attack effectiveness in obfuscated malicious traffic in neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
remains unverified. We leave this question for future work. vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 5149–5169, Sep. 2021.
 [23] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification in diverse network environments with TCP-aware traffic
 R EFERENCES augmentation,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 625–642.
[1] (2022). Cyber Attacks Trends: Mid-Year Report. [Online]. Available: [24] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 https://pages.checkpoint.com/cyber-attack-2022-trends.html a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
[2] E. Rescorla, SSL and TLS: Designing and Building Secure Systems, in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 vol. 1. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2001. [25] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
[3] (2023). WatchGuard’s Threat Lab Analyzes the Latest Malware and “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
 Internet Attacks. Accessed: May 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Security Technol. (ICCST),
 www.watchguard.com/wgrd-resource-center/security-report-q3-2023 2019, pp. 1–8.
4242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[26] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari, Ke Ye received the B.Eng. degree in software engi-
 “Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of neering from Shandong University, Weihai, China, in
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton. 2020, and the master’s degree from the Department
 Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf. of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technol-
 Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr. ogy, Beijing, China, in 2023. Her research interests
 (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Apr. 2020, pp. 63–70. include anonymity networks and traffic analysis.
[27] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
 of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
 Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Dec. 2019.
[28] T. Zebin, S. Rezvy, and Y. Luo, “An explainable AI-based intrusion
 detection system for DNS over HTTPS (DoH) attacks,” IEEE Trans.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2339–2349, 2022.
[29] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[30] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
 word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781.
[31] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website
 fingerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Ke Xu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023, pp. 1035–1049. from the Department of Computer Science and Tech-
[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for nology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He is
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. currently a Full Professor with Tsinghua University.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. He has published more than 200 technical articles
[33] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” and holds 11 U.S. patents in the research areas
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008. of next-generation internet, blockchain systems, the
[34] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic Internet of Things, and network security. He is a
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation member of ACM. He served as the Steering Comlearning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717. mittee Chair for IEEE/ACM IWQoS. He is an Editor
[35] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches of IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL. He has
 against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, guest edited several special issues in IEEE and Springer journals.
 vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209.
[36] Z. Chen et al., “Machine learning based mobile malware detection
 using highly imbalanced network traffic,” Inf. Sci., vols. 433–434,
 pp. 346–364, Apr. 2018.
[37] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, Jun. 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[38] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.

 Gang Xiong (Member, IEEE) is a Full Professor
 and the Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Infor-
 Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. mation Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in Beijing, China. He has authored more than 110
 2009, and the Ph.D. degree from Tsinghua Uni- papers in refereed journals and conference proceedversity, Beijing, China, in 2014, both in computer ings. His research interests include cyber security,
 science. He is a Professor with Beijing Institute of network measurement, network traffic analysis, and
 Technology, Beijing. He has authored over 50 papers network forensics.
 in top-level journals and conferences, such as ACM
 SIGCOMM, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS
 IN C OMMUNICATIONS , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY . His
 research interests include data privacy and security,
blockchain applications, and encrypted traffic classification. He received the
Best Paper Runner-Up Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014 and IEEE/ACM IWQoS
2020. He was selected by Beijing Nova Program 2020. He was the winner of
the ACM SIGCOMM China Rising Star Award in 2019. He has guest edited
special issues on emerging technologies for data security and privacy in IEEE
Network and IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.
 Liehuang Zhu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Beijing
 Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2004.
 He is currently a Professor and the Dean with
 the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology,
 Jinhe Wu received the B.S. degree in information Beijing Institute of Technology. He has published
 security from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in more than 150 peer-reviewed journals and confer-
 2022. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree ence papers. His research interests include security
 with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technol- protocol analysis and design, wireless sensor netogy. His current research interests include website works, and cloud computing. He has been granted
 fingerprinting and traffic classification. several IEEE Best Paper Awards, including IWQoS
 2017 and TrustCom 2018. He currently serves as an Area Editor, an Associate
 Editor, and an Academic Editor of multiple SCI-index journals, such as IEEE
 C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY .