11942 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Robust Intrusion Detection System for Vehicular
 Networks: A Federated Learning Approach Based
 on Representative Client Selection
 Chunyang Fan , Jie Cui , Senior Member, IEEE, Hulin Jin , Hong Zhong , Irina Bolodurina ,
 and Debiao He , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The rapid development of network technology has I. INTRODUCTION
allowed numerous vehicular applications to be deployed in vehi-
 EHICULAR networks have seen rapid growth with the
cles, thereby enriching the driving experience of users. However,
the openness of vehicular networks enables attackers to launch
network attacks on vehicles through network ports, leading to the
 V large-scale deployment of the 5G infrastructure. 5G networks guarantee low-latency, high-bandwidth communication
destruction of vehicular networks. To develop an intrusion detec- for vehicles, which has led to the widespread emergence of
tion system suitable for distributed vehicular networks, researchers
have utilized federated learning to train detection models. Never- numerous vehicular safety/entertainment applications and a
theless, most federated learning-based vehicular intrusion detec- significant enhancement in the driving experience of vehicle
tion systems seldom consider rapidly updating the detection model users [1], [2]. Operating vehicular applications requires vehicles
and fail to detect unknown attacks effectively. In this study, we to open external ports to receive downlink data from roadside
propose a federated learning-based vehicular intrusion detection units (RSUs) or base stations [3], [4]. However, because of
system that fully considers the traffic characteristics of multiple
network regions and selects representative clients to participate the open nature of wireless networks, malicious attackers can
in model aggregation, thereby accelerating the convergence of launch network attacks on moving vehicles, leading to severe
the global model. Furthermore, to enhance the robustness of the traffic accidents [5]. Therefore, it is extremely important to
detection system, we utilize extreme value theory and multilayer develop a reliable and efficient intrusion detection system to
activation vectors to construct an unknown attack discriminator secure vehicular networks.
that can determine whether a network flow is an unknown attack.
Comprehensive experiments on three open datasets demonstrate To improve the security of vehicular networks, many rethat the proposed intrusion detection system can quickly update searchers have proposed centralized vehicular intrusion detecand effectively identify known/unknown attacks in open vehicular tion systems for detecting possible network attacks [6]. These
networks. schemes train a centralized detection model using cloud servers
 Index Terms—Extreme value theory, federated learning, and deploy the model on each vehicle and RSU to defend
intrusion detection system, unknown attack, vehicular networks. against network attacks. However, vehicular networks are large
 distributed networks with multiple vehicles and RSUs, and each
 region exhibits certain differences in network traffic characteristics [7]. Therefore, training a centralized detection system using
 cloud servers is difficult to apply to all network regions, and is
 Received 23 September 2024; revised 9 May 2025; accepted 17 June 2025.
Date of publication 23 June 2025; date of current version 3 October 2025. prone to the biased-flow problem [8] (i.e., the detection system
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation is more likely to identify attack traffic in a certain region and
of China under Grant U23A20308, Grant 62202008 and Grant 62325209, in has difficulty identifying attack traffic in other regions).
part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant 2042023KF0203, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui To address the problems with centralized intrusion detection
Province, China under Grant 2408085JX010, and in part by the University systems, researchers considered using federated learning to train
Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2022-049. collaborative intrusion detection systems [9], [10]. Federated
Recommended for acceptance by A. A. Nayak. (Corresponding author: Jie Cui.)
 Chunyang Fan, Jie Cui, Hulin Jin, and Hong Zhong are with the Key learning allows multiple vehicles and RSUs to train detection
Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of models locally and then upload the model parameters/gradients
Education, School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, rather than data to a cloud server for model aggregation.
Hefei 230039, China, and also with the Anhui Engineering Laboratory of
IoT Security Technologies, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China (e-mail: This approach improves the accuracy and generalization of
cuijie@mail.ustc.edu.cn). the detection models while ensuring data privacy. Moreover,
 Irina Bolodurina is with the Faculty of Mathematics and Information the continuous updating and learning capabilities of federated
Technologies, Orenburg State University, 460018 Orenburg, Russia (e-mail:
prmat@mail.osu.ru). learning enable intrusion detection systems to adapt to changes
 Debiao He is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan in vehicular networks continuously [11], [12]. However, most
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the Shanghai Key Laboratory federated learning-based vehicular intrusion detection systems
of Privacy-Preserving Computation, MatrixElements Technologies, Shanghai
201204, China (e-mail: hedebiao@163.com). select clients for model aggregation based on sample quantity.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2025.3582237 This may lead to the fixation of clients participating in model

 1536-1233 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11943

aggregation and hinder the rapid update of the detection model. r Comprehensive experiments on three open datasets show
Particularly, in dynamically changing vehicular networks, fast that the proposed intrusion detection system for vehicular
updating of the detection model enables more timely adaptation networks can effectively identify known/unknown attacks
to network changes. and can quickly update the detection system. Moreover, the
 Furthermore, vehicular networks are open scenarios where comparison experiments show that the proposed detection
attackers may continuously launch new types of network attacks system outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms
on vehicles or RSUs [13]. Because intrusion detection systems of precision rate, recall rate, and F1-Score.
have not learned the data features of these novel attacks, it is The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
difficult for vehicles to effectively defend against these novel describes related works. Section III presents the preliminaries.
unknown attacks [14]. In particular, most vehicular intrusion de- In Section IV, we introduce the proposed intrusion detection
tection systems use softmax as the final layer of the model output, system for vehicular networks. In Section V, we evaluate the
resulting in the detection category being fixed in a predefined overall performance of the proposed system. In Section VI, we
range, while unknown attacks do not belong. Consequently, it is discuss the deployment of detection systems and privacy issues.
difficult for these systems to guarantee robust detection. Finally, we summarize our work in Section VII.
 To realize the ability of the detection system to quickly update and effectively identify unknown attacks in the distributed II. RELATED WORK
vehicular network, we first design a federated learning algorithm based on representative client selection. The algorithm In recent years, researchers have designed a large number
uses gradient information to cluster clients and obtains multiple of intrusion detection systems to secure networks. In this secclient clusters. As the clients within the clusters are extremely tion, we classify existing intrusion detection systems into three
similar, a representative client from each cluster can be selected categories: 1) centralized training-based systems, 2) distributed
to participate in the global model aggregation, thereby ensur- training-based systems, and 3) systems that can recognize uning the effectiveness of each aggregation and accelerating the known attacks.
model update. Secondly, to overcome the limitation of softmax and efficiently recognize unknown attacks, we design an A. Intrusion Detection System Based on Centralized Training
unknown attack discriminator based on extreme value theory With the successful application of deep learning in image
and multilayer activation vectors. The extreme value theory recognition and natural language processing, many researchers
can detect unknown classes because it focuses intensely on have utilized deep learning to build intrusion detection systems.
the tail characteristics of statistical distributions. In general To defend against network attacks from outside the vehicle,
classification tasks, known classes often occupy the main portion Anbalagan et al. [16] designed an intelligent intrusion detection
of the distribution, whereas unknown classes typically appear system based on convolutional neural networks that improve
in the tail regions [15]. Therefore, we can obtain an unknown detection accuracy by converting traffic data in text form into
attack discriminator by feeding the multilayer activation vectors image form. Wang et al. [17] proposed an intrusion detecof normal traffic/known attacks into the extreme value theory. tion system integrating temporal and spatial dimensions, which
Moreover, to enable the activation vectors at each layer to better constructs a vehicle state matrix to characterize the potential
represent the features of their respective classes, we reconstruct correlation of data between each sensor and other sensors, thus
the original input using the activation vectors and then com- enabling defense against multiple attacks. Almutlaq et al. [18]
pare the reconstructed vector with the original input vector proposed a two-phase intrusion detection system based on a deep
to obtain the reconstruction error. By continuously reducing neural network rule extraction method, which first distinguishes
the reconstruction error loss, the reconstructed vectors and the between normal traffic and abnormal traffic. If the traffic is
original input vectors become progressively more similar, and found to be malicious, the type of attack traffic is detected in
the activation vectors produced by the detection system become the second phase. To quickly detect and localize attacks, Deng
more representational. In summary, our contribution can be et al. [19] proposed an intrusion detection system based on
summarized as follows: voltage signals, which establishes voltage fingerprints for each
 r We propose a federated learning algorithm based on rep- control LAN identifier and uses these fingerprints to quickly
 resentative client selection for vehicular networks, which localize attacks. Xun et al. [20] designed an intrusion detection
 uses gradient information to cluster clients at each iter- system called FeatureBagging-CNN, which identifies the unique
 ation and selects representative clients from each cluster voltage signal of each ECU by recognizing its unique voltage
 to participate in model aggregation, thereby significantly signal characteristics to detect attacks from external or internal
 reducing the number of training iterations and accelerating sources. These centralized training-based detection systems can
 model updates. effectively detect network attack traffic. However, vehicular netr To improve the robustness of the detection system, we works are distributed networks, and detection systems obtained
 design an unknown attack discriminator based on mul- using centralized training methods are difficult to install quickly
 tilayer activation vectors and extreme value theory that on vehicles and RSUs. In addition, centralized training requires
 can effectively identify unknown attacks in vehicular uploading data to a cloud server, which can lead to particularly
 networks. high model update overhead.
11944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

B. Intrusion Detection System Based on Distributed
Collaborative Training
 To enable joint training of intrusion detection systems, Abdel-
Basset et al. [21] proposed a federated learning-based intrusion
detection learning framework that collaboratively trains the detection system by offloading the learning task to distributed edge
nodes to improve the detection range. Considering the limited
computing power of vehicles, Houda et al. [22] proposed a federated learning-based collaborative intrusion detection mechanism that offloads the training model onto roadside units to reduce the vehicle computational load. In addition, the mechanism
uses blockchain to store and share the training models to secure
the aggregated models. Cui et al. [23] proposed a collaborative
intrusion detection system based on software-defined networks
and federated learning, which utilizes vehicular network traffic
monitored by multiple SDNs to jointly train the intrusion detection system, thus improving the scalability of the detection
system. Qu et al. [24] proposed a collaborative intrusion de- Fig. 1. Network model.
tection system based on the improved residual network, which
introduces an attention mechanism into the residual network to
efficiently capture key features of the traffic data, thus improving
 In summary, researchers have designed many excellent intruthe accuracy of the detection system. The above schemes can
 sion detection systems to secure vehicular networks. However,
effectively accomplish the task of training and installing the
 these schemes have some limitations. The centralized trainingdetection model in the vehicular networks. However, due to
 based detection system requires RSUs to continuously upload
the dynamic and open nature of vehicular networks, intrusion
 new samples to the cloud server when updating, resulting in a
detection systems need to be quickly updated and have the ability
 large update overhead. The detection system based on distributed
to detect unknown attacks, while the above detection systems
 training can greatly reduce the update overhead, but it is difficult
have difficulty meeting these requirements.
 to achieve fast updates to the detection model and identify
 unknown attacks. Meanwhile, some researchers have proposed
 intrusion detection systems that can detect unknown attacks.
C. Intrusion Detection Systems for Recognizing Unknown Still, these systems either can only detect anomalous traffic or
Attacks the detection model is too complex, resulting in a large detection
 In recent years, a large number of researchers have explored overhead. Considering these limitations, we propose a robust
the detection of unknown attacks to improve the robustness intrusion detection system for vehicular networks, which can
of intrusion detection systems. Verkerken et al. [25] proposed quickly update the detection model and efficiently recognize
a novel multi-stage hierarchical intrusion detection method to unknown attacks.
detect unknown zero-day attacks, which first distinguishes the
presence of anomalies in the network traffic and then further III. PRELIMINARY
categorizes the anomalous traffic. Zhang et al. [26] proposed
 A. Network Model
an intrusion detection system that can identify anomalous traffic, which utilizes k-means and isolated forests to construct a The proposed network model mainly consists of a cloud
boundary that distinguishes normal traffic from abnormal traffic. server, RSUs, vehicles, and intrusion detection systems. It is
Using this boundary, the detection system can detect anomalous worth mentioning that the intrusion detection system contains
network traffic that contains unknown attacks, but the system an attack classifier and an unknown attack discriminator. The
cannot further classify the anomalous traffic. Fan et al. [27] pro- detailed network model is shown in Fig. 1.
posed an auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular 1) Cloud Server: The cloud server is the server in the fednetworks, which utilizes a two-layer filter to detect potential erated learning mechanism, which is mainly responsible for
unknown attacks and updates the attack classifier with the data performing the parameter aggregation task of the global model.
of the detected unknown attacks. To improve the efficiency The updated model parameters will also be sent to each RSU by
of detecting unknown attacks, Verma et al. [28] proposed an the cloud server.
intrusion detection system for 5G IoT scenarios, which utilizes 2) RSU: RSU is the client in the federated learning mechaan autoencoder and one-class support vector machines to achieve nism that trains a detection model by utilizing the local dataset.
the identification of known/unknown attack traffic. Although There are two reasons why RSU is chosen as the client: 1)
the above schemes achieve detection of unknown attacks, these The network data uploaded or downloaded by the vehicle is
schemes either only detect anomalous traffic or have a large forwarded through the RSU, so the RSU can obtain real-time
detection overhead. network traffic to form a local dataset. 2) The RSU has a
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11945

more powerful computation and storage capacity compared to (Q), key (K) and value (V):
the vehicle, which can better realize the training of the attack ⎧
 ⎨Qi = C res · WQi
classifier.
 Ki = C res · WKi (2)
 3) Vehicle: The trained Intrusion detection systems are ⎩
 Vi = C res · WV i
mainly installed in vehicles to defend against potential network
attacks. where WQi is the query weight matrix, WKi is the key weight
 4) Intrusion Detection System: The proposed intrusion de- matrix and WV i is the value weight matrix.
tection system consists of an attack classifier and an unknown According to the query matrix Qi and the key matrix Ki , we
attack discriminator. It is worth mentioning that the generation of can obtain the attention matrix Ai :
an unknown attack discriminator depends on the attack classifier.
 Qi · KiT
Therefore, in the federated learning mechanism, we first train Ai = Sof tmax √ (3)
an excellent attack classifier and then generate the unknown dk
attack discriminator based on the classifier and extreme value where Sof tmax is an activation function and dk is the dimentheory. sion of the Ki matrix. It is worth mentioning that the matrix
 Ai contains the relationships between any two elements in the
 convolution result C res . Then, we utilize the attention matrix Ai
B. Components of Attack Classifier
 to extract key information from matrix Vi , generating a sequence
 To attain accurate detection of malicious network traffic, the Oi that reflects the relationships between elements. The value
proposed attack classifier is constructed using 1D-CNN and a of Oi is calculated as follows:
multi-head attention mechanism. 1D-CNN is used to extract
key features of the network flow, and the multi-head attention Oi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = Ai · Vi (4)
mechanism then computes the correlation of these key features
with each other to form a global feature representation of the Note that Oi will pay too much attention to one part of the
network flow. The detailed construction process of the attack sequence C res , leading it to neglect other important information.
classifier is as follows: Therefore, we need to perform a merge operation for the H heads
 1) 1D-CNN: A classical convolutional neural network con- to prevent the loss of important sequence features. The specific
sists of convolution operation and pooling operation [29], [30]. merge operation is shown below:
The convolution operation is used to extract the key features
 O = (O1 ⊕ O2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ OH ) · W O (5)
of the network traffic, and the specific convolution process is
shown below: where O is the output of the multi-head attention mechanism
 ⎛ ⎞ and W O is a trainable weight matrix. Then, we obtain O
 m
 c
 −1
 by flattening O and obtain an activation vector y by a linear
 hi = σ ⎝ wjc xi+j + b⎠ (1) transformation for O . The specific process is shown in (6).
 j=0
 y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yR , yR+1 ] = (W T · O ) + bf (6)
 c
where m is the size of the convolution kernel, wjc is the value where R + 1 is the number of classification results (i.e. normal
of the j-th weight of the convolution kernel, b is the offset, σ traffic and R known attacks), W T is the weight matrix of
is the activation function, xi+j is the (i + j)-th element of the the linear transformation, and bf is the offset. Generally, the
input sequence, and hi is the i-th element of the output of the probability that a network flow belongs to each class can be
convolution operation. It is worth mentioning that hi is the output obtained by processing y using the softmax function:
of a convolution operation. For an input sequence x of length l,
the result C res = {h0 , h1 , h2 , · · · hs } is obtained after multiple exp(yj )
 pj = (7)
convolution operations, where s = l − mc + 1. R+1
 i=1 exp(yi )
 Typically, convolutional neural networks utilize pooling laywhere pj is the probability that the network flow belongs to the jers to reduce the risk of overfitting. However, using pooling
 th class and yj is the j-th element of y. Hence, the attack classifier
operations may result in the loss of important information due
 enables the classification of normal traffic and known attacks.
to the small number of network traffic features. Therefore, to
 Note that the attack classifier is the base model in federated
ensure that the key features are not lost, we refrain from pooling
 learning, and each client (i.e. RSU) uses local data to train the
operation on the resulting output sequence C res .
 classifier.
 2) Multi-Head Attention: Compared to the single-head attention mechanism, multi-head attention allows multiple heads
to learn different concerns in parallel, which helps to extract IV. THE PROPOSED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR
 VEHICULAR NETWORKS
important features and improve the accuracy of the model [31].
Therefore, we use the multi-head attention mechanism to capture In this section, we first introduce traditional federated learning
the correlation between elements of the output sequence C res . and discuss its limitations, next describe the proposed represen-
Assuming H is the number of attention heads, for the i-th tative client-based federated learning approach, then present the
attention head, we have three linear transformations for query construction process of the unknown attack discriminator, and
11946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Algorithm 1: Select Representative Clients. trains the attack classifier using the local dataset. After completing the trained attack classifier model, the server selects some
 clients for global model aggregation. Specifically, we assume
 that there are N clients participating in the model aggregation,
 with ni samples per client and M total samples. Then, the
 parameters of the global model can be calculated as follows:

 
 N
 ni
 θgt = θit (8)
 i=1
 M

 where θgt is the global model parameters at time t and θit is the
 model parameters of the i-th client. Commonly, clients need
 to go through multiple model aggregations to make the global
 model optimal. The training process of federated learning can
 be divided into the following three steps:
 1) Local Model Training: The aggregated global model parameters θgt are sent to each client (i.e. RSU), which uses θgt to
 update the parameters of the local model. Then, the client will
 train the model again using the local dataset to get new model
 parameters θit+1 .
 2) Parameters Aggregation: To increase the model generalization ability and avoid the bias flow problem, the cloud server
 needs to select some clients’ model parameters for aggregation.
 There are two methods for client selection in traditional federated learning 1) randomly selecting clients and 2) selecting
 clients to participate in parameters aggregation by client‘s sample size. The cloud server generates global model parameters
 θgt+1 by aggregating the model parameters of these clients.
 3) Local Model Parameters Update: After completing the
 aggregation, the cloud server sends the global model parameters
 θgt+1 to each client, which uses θgt+1 to update the local model.
 Steps 1-3 are one round of the federated learning process.
 After multiple training rounds, the global model will gradually
 converge, and the process of federated learning ends. Note that
 the client selection in step 2 affects the speed of model convergence. In dynamic vehicular networks, fast convergence of the
 detection model is beneficial for better adapting to changes in
 the network environment. Nevertheless, in traditional federated
 learning, the client selection method based on the number of
 samples faces the problem of repeated client selection, while
 the random-based selection method suffers from the problem of
 unstable training efficiency. Therefore, the clients participating
 in model aggregation need to be selected based on the model
 training effect, i.e., selecting representative clients in each iteration.

 B. Select Representative Clients
finally introduce the training process of the overall detection To realize fast convergence of the global model, we need to
system. select representative clients to participate in model aggregation.
 The flowchart of our proposed federated learning algorithm
 based on representative client selection is shown in Fig. 2.
A. Traditional Federal Learning Process
 Several studies have shown that comparing client’s representa-
 In the initial phase of federal learning, the cloud server needs tive gradients can measure the similarity between models [32],
to send down the proposed attack classifier to each RSU, which [33]. The representative gradient is the difference between the
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11947

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the proposed federated learning algorithm.

updated client model parameters and the global model param- follows:
eters. Therefore, we can obtain a set of representative gradients G = {∇L(θ1 ), ∇L(θ2 ), . . . , ∇L(θn )}. Then, we do cosine
 dist(Cn , Co ) = M in(dist(Ci , Co ), dist(Cj , Co )) (10)
similarity calculation on these representative gradients as shown
below:
 ∇L(θi ) · ∇L(θj ) where dist is the Euclidean distance function, Co is the other
 E i,j = (9) clusters, and dist(Ci , Co) denotes the distance from Ci to Co .
 ∇L(θi )∇L(θj )
 Through constant repetition of steps 1 and 2, we can obtain m
where E i,j is the similarity between client i and client j. It is clusters with the number of clients in each cluster C num ≥ 1.
worth noting that the similarity computation is done in pairs, Assuming we have to select k clients to participate in model
so we get a matrix M sim that records the similarity between aggregation, m ≥ k (i.e., the number of clusters to be clustered
clients, as follows: should be greater than the number of clients participating in
 ⎛ 11 ⎞ model aggregation).
 E E 12 E 13 . . . E 1n To improve the probability that representative clients are se-
 ⎜ E 21 E 22 E 23 . . . E 2n ⎟ lected, we process the obtained m clusters. The specific process-
 ⎜ ⎟
 ⎜ 31 32 33 3n ⎟ ing is shown in Algorithm 1. The core idea of Algorithm 1 is to
 M sim
 =⎜ ⎜ E E E . . . E ⎟
 ⎟ preferentially assign weights to the clients of the representative k
 ⎜ .. .. .. .. .. ⎟
 ⎝ . . . . . ⎠ clusters and form k probability distributions. Then, the clients of
 E n1 E n2 E n3 ... E nn the remaining m-k clusters are assigned weights and sequentially
 filled into these k probability distributions to form the final prob-
Note that the matrix M sim is a symmetric matrix, i.e., E i,j ability distribution Dbk . By utilizing k probability distributions
equals E j,i and E i,i equals 0. To show the distance characteris- Dbk , we can sample k times and obtain k clients participating
tics between different clients, we perform the inverse cosine in model aggregation. Note that since we preferentially assign
process to generate M dis for M sim . In M dis , the distance weights to the clients of the most representative k clusters, the
values between similar clients are small, and the distance values clients of these k clusters have a greater probability of being
between dissimilar clients are large. Then, we utilize a hier- selected. It is worth mentioning that the clients in the remaining
archical clustering algorithm to perform a clustering operation m-k clusters also have the probability of being selected for model
on M dis so that select representative clients participate in model aggregation. Thus, the proposed method considers the diversity
aggregation. Specifically, the hierarchical clustering process can of clients.
be divided into two steps: Through multiple local training and model aggregation, we
 1) Neighbor Cluster Merging: According to the distance can finally obtain an optimal attack classifier model F r that can
matrix M dis , we can find the two closest clusters Ci and Cj . effectively detect known attacks and normal traffic present in
Then, these two clusters are merged to generate a new cluster the vehicular network. In conclusion, our proposed federated
Cn . learning algorithm based on representative client selection can
 2) Updated Distance Matrix M dis : After neighbor clusters provide a positive effect on the training of the detection system.
are merged, we need to update the distance matrix M dis to record Specifically, the proposed vehicular network intrusion detection
the distance from the new cluster Cn to each cluster. The distance system can be continuously updated by leveraging the designed
from the new cluster Cn to the other clusters is calculated as federated learning algorithm, thereby adapting to the rapidly
11948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. The construction process of unknown attack discriminator.

changing network environment. In addition, our designed un- The dataset Dt and label set Lt are fed into the classifier F r
known attack discriminator relies on the activation vector of the for processing to obtain R + 1 sets of classification results.
attack classifier. By utilizing the designed federated learning Then, we select the correctly predicted samples and compute
algorithm, the activation layer feature information of the attack their activation vectors for each layer. In this paper, we use
classifier can be enriched. As a result, the classifier obtained from a three-layer convolutional neural network and a multi-head
federation learning-based training can provide richer and more attention mechanism so that for a sample x, its activation
diverse feature information for the unknown attack discrimi- vector is AV = {av1 , av2 , av3 , av4 , logits}. Similarly, for all
nator, which improves the detection performance of unknown correctly predicted samples, we can obtain the set of activation
attacks. Finally, the detection bias problem caused by centralized vectors for each class. Let SAVi = {AV1 , AV2 , · · · } be the set
training is avoided because data features of representative clients of activation vectors of the i-th class, and all correctly predicted
from different regions are considered in the federated learning activation vectors can be denoted as R+1 i SAVi . Note that
process. the activation vector AV implies the main characteristics of a
 network flow, and the SAVi can reflect the main features of
 the i-th class of network flows. Therefore, SAV can be used
C. Unknown Attack Discriminator
 to construct multiple boundaries to detect unknown network
 The proposed intrusion detection system for vehicular net- attacks. However, since SAV is difficult to describe in the
works consists of an attack classifier and an unknown attack relationship between AVs, we need to transform SAV into the
discriminator, where the training of the unknown attack dis- corresponding distance set DIS AV . DIS AV can define clear
criminator relies on the attack classifier. It is worth mention- decision boundaries and simplify the computational complexity.
ing that the input of the unknown attack discriminator is the The process of conversion from SAV to DIS AV can be divided
output of each layer of the classifier neural network, i.e., the into the following two steps:
activation vectors. The reason for using activation vectors as 1) Calculate the Mean Activation Vector: Since distance is
input is that activation vectors contain rich feature information a relative concept, we need to determine a fixed point as a
that can directly reflect the characterization of normal or attack reference. The best fixation point is the mean activation vector
traffic. Another reason for using multiple activation vectors is the (MAV) of the SAV . For SAVi , its M AVi is calculated as
small number of vehicular network traffic features. It is difficult follows:
to construct boundaries between each known class using only
 1 
 av
 N
the activation vectors of the last layer of the neural network. M AVi = AVj (11)
Therefore, the attack classifier inputs each layer’s activation N av j=1
vectors into the unknown attack discriminator for processing,
and the unknown attack discriminator returns R+2 probability where N av is the number of AV s in SAVi .
values, where R is the number of known attacks and 2 represents 2) Calculate the Distance Between AVs and MAV: For SAVi ,
normal traffic and unknown attacks. It is important to note we take M AVi as a fixed point and calculate the distance from
that the core idea of an unknown attack discriminator is to each AV to M AVi as follows:
isolate unknown attacks from multiple boundaries by utilizing 
information about the characteristics of known attacks and nor- d(AVj , M AVi ) = (AVj − M AVi )2 (12)
mal traffic to construct decision boundaries. The construction
process of the discriminator is shown in Fig. 3. Assume that we where d(AVj , M AVi ) is the distance from the j-th AV to
have a set of network flow data Dt = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn } M AVi . By using (12), we can obtain the final distance set
and its corresponding labeled set Lt = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yi , . . . , yn }, DISiAV . Then, we input the distance set DIS AV into the
where yi is the label of network flow sample xi . Let Cla = Weibull model of extreme value theory to fit multiple decision
{c1 , c2 , . . . , cR , cR+1 } be the label space of Dt , i.e., Dt contains boundaries. It is important to note that the Weibull model is
R + 1 categories (normal traffic and R known network attacks). a distribution function and fitting the Weibull model using
With federated learning, we obtain a final attack classifier F r . DIS AV is a process of determining the values of the parameters.
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11949

 Then, we performed Sof tmax on this set of predicted
 scores and obtained a set of probability values P  =
 {p1 , p2 , . . . , pR+1 , pu }, where pu is the probability of
 unknown attacks. We determine that X is an unknown
 attack when M ax(P  ) = pu and M ax(P  ) is greater than
 a threshold τ . The reason for adding the condition of
 M ax(P  ) > τ is that when the value of M ax(P  ) is
 low, the difference in prediction scores between normal
 flows/known attacks and unknown attacks is relatively
 small, which leads to an increase in the false positive rate
 of the unknown attack discriminator. Therefore, to reduce
 the false alarm rate, we combine the classifier’s output
 to determine the final class of M ax(P  ) < τ samples.
Fig. 4. Classifier and discriminator collaborative detection flowchart.
 More specifically, when the classifier gives a leptokurtic
 distribution (i.e., there exists a probability value that is
 much larger than the others), we choose the output of the
The equation to calculate the Weibull model is as follows: classifier as the detection result. Otherwise, we choose the
 a−1
 output of the discriminator as the detection result.
 a d−γ d−γ a
 f (d; a, λ, γ) = e−( λ ) (13)
 γ λ D. Training Process for Attack Classifier and Unknown Attack
where a is the shape parameter, λ is the scale parameter, γ is Discriminator
the location parameter, and d is the distance. Using (13), we
 Since the construction of an unknown attack discriminator
can obtain R + 1 Weibull models (i.e., each known class has a
 relies on an attack classifier, we need to train an attack classifier
corresponding Weibull model).
 first using federated learning. Then, we use the generated optimal
 During the detection phase, the workflow of collaborative
 global model to train the unknown attack discriminator. The
detection between the classifier and the discriminator is shown
 training process of the attack classifier and unknown attack
in Fig. 4, and the specific process is described as follows:
 discriminator is shown below:
 1) Input a sample X into the attack classifier F r to obtain
 1) Initialize the global model (i.e., attack classifier) and send
 the activation vector AVX and classification results P =
 the model to each client. In the first round of training,
 {p1 , p2 , . . . , pR+1 }.
 the client uses local data for training and uploads the
 2) Calculate the distance from the AVX to each M AV to
 trained model parameters to the cloud server for model
 obtain a distance set DX = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dR+1 }.
 aggregation.
 3) The distances in DX are input into the corresponding
 2) Since we do not have an updated global model in the first
 Weibull model to obtain a set of probability values P X =
 round of training, we cannot calculate the representative
 {px1 , px2 , . . . , pxi , . . . , pxR+1 }, where pxi is the probability
 gradient. Starting from the second round of training, we
 that X does not belong to class i, so p̂i = 1 − pxi is the
 use the representative client selection algorithm to select
 probability that X belongs to class i.
 specific clients to participate in model aggregation.
 4) The unknown attack is not recognized due to the fact
 3) During local training, we use AVs to reconstruct the origithat the original predicted probability of normal traffic
 nal input samples to improve the feature representation of
 and known attack traffic sums to 1. Therefore, we need to
 AVs. Suppose the input sample is X and the reconstructed
 revise the prediction scores for normal traffic and known
 sample is X̂, then the reconstruction loss can be calculated
 attack traffic so that unknown attacks have a probability of
 as follows:
 being recognized. For normal traffic and known attacks,
 the new prediction score can be calculated as follows:
 LossR = (X − X̂)2 (16)
 Scorei = logitsi × p̂i (14)
 In addition, to realize the accurate identification of norwhere Scorei is the new prediction score for class i, mal traffic and known attacks, we need to calculate the
 and logitsi is the initial prediction score for class i. For classification loss with the following loss function:
 unknown attacks, the prediction score can be calculated
 1 
 as follows: n R+1
 Loss = −
 C
 yic log(pic ) (17)
 
 R+1 n i=1 c=1
 Score = u
 (logitsi × pxi ) (15)
 i=1 where n is the number of samples, R + 1 is the number
 where Scoreu is the prediction score for the unknown of categories, yic is the true label of the i-th sample in
 attack. Thus, we can obtain a new set of predic- category c, and pic is the predicted probability that sample
 tion scores {Score1 , Score2 , . . . , ScoreR+1 , Scoreu }. i belongs to category c. The overall loss during local
11950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 training is calculated as follows: datasets is shown in Table I. It is worth mentioning that this
 method of simulating unknown attack scenarios is referenced
 Loss = LossR + LossC (18) from Yang et al. [37].

 4) After multiple rounds of local training and model aggre- B. Experimental Settings
 gation, the loss of the model will no longer decrease, and
 we will obtain an optimal global model F r . The local 1) Experimental Environment: All training tasks run on an
 client can get the AVs that predict the correct samples by AND EPYC 7763 server with 240G RAM and NVIDIA A100
 utilizing F r . These AVs are uploaded to the cloud server, GPUs. In our experiments, we simulate that there are thirty RSUs
 and the cloud service can generate the unknown attack participating in the federated learning training, and the training
 discriminator by utilizing the steps described in subsection data is divided into 30 parts. Note that each RSU does not have
 C. an equal number of samples. We select 6 representative clients
 5) Note that since the unknown attack discriminator is com- in each training iteration to participate in model aggregation.
 posed of multiple probability density distribution func- In addition, we use the Pytorch 2.0.0 algorithm library and
 tions, the discriminator occupies less storage space and Libmr algorithm library to build the proposed vehicular intrusion
 has low computational overhead. detection system.
 2) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
 V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS proposed vehicular intrusion detection system in recognizing
 known or unknown network attacks, we calculated the number
 In this section, we will describe the open-source dataset of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN),
used for the experiments, introduce the experimental setup, and and false negatives (FN) predicted by the detection system.
analyze the performance of the proposed vehicular intrusion According to these definitions, we can calculate the precision,
detection system. Specifically, we will discuss the following five recall, and F1 score using Eq. (19), Eq. (20), and Eq. (21),
research questions: respectively.
 r Q1: How is the overall performance of the proposed vehicular intrusion detection system? TP
 r Q2: What is the increase in convergence speed of the P recision = (19)
 TP + FP
 proposed federated learning training method compared to TP
 other methods? Recall = (20)
 TP + FN
 r Q3: Compared to other methods, does the proposed feder-
 P recision · Recall
 ated learning training method consume less time to update F 1 − score = 2 · (21)
 the system? P recision + Recall
 r Q4: Is the constructed detection system better for identify-
 C. Overall Performance of the Proposed Detection System
 ing network attacks compared to other methods?
 r Q5: What is the detection performance of intrusion de- (Q1)
 tection systems for known/unknown attacks at different To answer Q1, we use the confusion matrix to evaluate the
 thresholds? overall performance of the proposed scheme. The confusion
 matrix of the proposed scheme in three datasets is shown in
A. Datasets Fig. 5. We can clearly observe that the proposed scheme mostly
 exceeds 90% detection accuracy for known attacks and normal
 In the experiments, we use the open-source datasets CI- traffic, and exceeds 80% detection accuracy for unknown at-
CIOV [34], ToN-IoT [35], and EDGE-IIOT [36] to train an tacks. The reason for being able to achieve a high detection
vehicular network intrusion detection system. The CICIOV accuracy is that we perform secondary detection on samples
dataset is an attack dataset for vehicular network communica- with low confidence values, thus reducing the probability of the
tion that collects attacks such as DoS, False Speed, and False samples being misidentified. In addition, the accuracy of the
Steering. ToN-IoT and EDGE-IIOT have been commonly used proposed scheme in detecting normal traffic is close to 100%,
training datasets for intrusion detection systems in recent years. and unknown attacks are mostly not misidentified as normal
The ToN-IoT dataset is a multi-attack type IoT dataset, which traffic. The reason for this phenomenon is that the number of
contains attacks such as DoS, DDoS, and data injections. EDGE- samples in normal flows is much higher than that of attack
IIOT is a large-scale dataset that contains millions of network flows. Therefore, the proposed intrusion detection system is able
traffic with attacks such as SQL injection, port scanning, and to fully understand the data features of normal flows, thereby
DDoS. Note that to simulate unknown attacks that exist in real achieving close to 100% detection accuracy for normal flows.
scenarios, we further divide each dataset into a known attack part
and an unknown attack part, and the training dataset of the attack
classifier does not contain unknown attacks. During the testing D. Loss Variation of Our Proposed Method on Three Datasets
 Compared to Other Methods (Q2)
phase, we combined the test set samples with unknown attack
samples to evaluate the performance of the proposed vehicular It is well known that the loss value variation can reflect the
intrusion detection system. The specific division of the three speed of model convergence. Usually, as the training progresses,
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11951

 TABLE I
 DIVIDE KNOWN CLASSES AND UNKNOWN ATTACKS FROM THREE DATASETS

Fig. 5. Overall performance of the proposed detection system on three datasets.

Fig. 6. Comparison of loss variation during training.

the loss value will gradually decrease to a fixed value, which aggregation. However, the proposed method reduces the number
means that the model training is completed. To demonstrate that of model iterations by selecting representative clients for model
the proposed collaborative intrusion detection system can be aggregation during each iteration of the federated learning trainupdated quickly, we use loss variation to evaluate the conver- ing process.
gence speed of the system. Meanwhile, we compare the proposed
scheme with the Fedavg algorithm and randomly selected client
algorithm, and the specific results are shown in Fig. 6. We E. Comparison of System Update Time Consumption(Q3)
can observe clearly that our proposed method leads to a rapid To demonstrate that the proposed federated learning training
decrease in the value of the loss. The reason for this phenomenon method can update the detection system quickly, we measured
is that the Fedavg algorithm selects participants for model aggre- the time consumption required by different methods to update
gation based on the sample size of clients, which leads to almost the model once, and the experimental results are shown in
the same clients participating in model aggregation each time Fig. 7. It is worth mentioning that federated learning mechaand makes it difficult to achieve effective model aggregation. nisms typically include 1) client local training, 2) model pa-
Although the algorithm based on randomly selecting clients rameter/gradient uploading and offloading, and 3) global model
can avoid selecting the same set of clients multiple times, the aggregation. Therefore, the time overhead of model updating
clients selected to participate in model aggregation may have also depends on these steps. In particular, since we introduced
very similar model parameters, resulting in ineffective model the representative client selection algorithm, which needs to do
11952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Then, the Isolation Forest algorithm is utilized to compute
 the isolation score of the unlabeled samples and to compute
 the similarity scores between the unlabeled samples and
 each of the clusters in order to detect the type of attack
 on the unlabeled samples. However, although the scheme
 can achieve the detection of malicious attacks with a small
 amount of labeled data, it is difficult to guarantee the
 accuracy of detecting attacks using unsupervised learning
 methods.
 r ZDG [28]: To detect possible zero-day attacks in the network, the scheme builds an intrusion detection system using autoencoders and OCSVM, which first uses federated
 learning to train two autoencoders for detecting normal
 and anomalous traffic, respectively. Then, each edge base
Fig. 7. Comparison of update system time consuming for different methods station trains two OCSVM classifiers based on local normal
on three datasets. data and attack data. The final classification result is jointly
 determined by these four classifiers. Since OCSVM can
 recognize all anomalous traffic except normal traffic, the
clustering operations on the gradients of multiple local models, detection system also enables the detection of zero-day
it leads to our scheme having a higher time consumption in one attacks. However, the simple integration of multiple classitraining iteration. However, because the proposed scheme se- fiers does not always improve the accuracy of the detection
lects representative clients in each iteration, the model converges system, and the joint detection of multiple classifiers can
faster than the other schemes (the Loss variation in Fig. 6 shows seriously reduce the detection efficiency.
that the proposed scheme converges much faster than the other The performance comparison results of the proposed scheme
schemes). Therefore, the proposed scheme can utilize less time with the existing methods are shown in Table II. We can clearly
to complete the updating of the model under the comprehensive observe that the proposed scheme obtains better detection results
measurements. on the three datasets, and the detection precision and recall of
 the proposed scheme are higher than the other schemes. The
 reason for this phenomenon is that these systems use some
F. Comparison With Other Methods (Q4) unsupervised or semi-supervised learning algorithms to achieve
 To answer Q4, we compare the proposed vehicular intrusion the detection of unknown attacks, which leads to a decrease in
detection system with existing schemes. The main features of the accuracy of the detection system. However, the proposed
the compared schemes are described below: classifier based on 1D-CNN and a multi-attention mechanism is
 r NMAH [25]: To enable more comprehensive detection obtained based on fully supervised learning, which can identify
 of possible malicious attacks in the network, the scheme known attacks accurately. In addition, we utilize reconstruction
 proposes a multi-stage-based intrusion detection sys- errors to enhance the quality of the activation vectors so that the
 tem, which utilizes a one-class support vector machine multiple decision boundaries constructed based on the activation
 (OCSVM) algorithm in the first stage to identify whether vectors can effectively isolate unknown attacks. Therefore, the
 the network traffic is malicious or not. If anomalous traffic designed unknown attack discriminator can efficiently recognize
 is detected, the traffic is detected a second time using unknown attacks.
 random forests and neural networks to determine the class To compare the computational resource overhead of the proof the attack. In addition, if the anomalous traffic does not posed system with other systems, we deployed the detection
 get a high prediction value in the secondary detection, a systems trained using the three datasets on an Intel(R) Core
 third detection is triggered to prevent the traffic from being i9-11900 K 3.5 GHz computer equipped with 64 GB of RAM
 misidentified. It is worth mentioning that there exists a and measured the CPU usage of each detection system for 60
 threshold value for each detection stage, and the authors seconds continuously. The results of the computational resource
 utilize these three thresholds to achieve effective detection overhead comparison are shown in Fig. 8(a)–(c). We can clearly
 for network attacks. However, designing too many thresh- observe that the CPU overhead sorted from low to high is
 olds can affect the accuracy of the detection system, and it ADPOAT, our proposed system, NMAH, and ZDG.
 is challenging to design these three thresholds to optimize By analyzing the architecture of the detection system, we
 the system capability. found that the main CPU overhead of ADPOAT lies in the
 r ADPOAT [26]: To achieve the detection of network at- use of the lightweight Kmeans clustering and Isolated Fortacks with a small number of labeled samples, the scheme est algorithms, thus obtaining a low computational overhead.
 proposes an intrusion detection system based on Kmeans However, the unsupervised learning property of Kmeans gives
 clustering, which first performs a clustering operation on ADPOAT the worst detection performance. Moreover, the first
 all labeled anomalous traffic to obtain multiple clusters of reason for the high CPU overhead of NMAH and ZDG is the
 samples (each cluster corresponds to a network attack). use of the OCSVM algorithm for malicious traffic detection. In
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11953

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON WITH OTHER METHODS

Fig. 8. Compare the CPU resource usage of different detection systems.

Fig. 9. Impact of threshold τ changes on detection accuracy in three datasets.

large-scale datasets, the computational overhead of OCSVM’s system is able to achieve the best detection performance while
kernel function computation and optimization process grows using less CPU resources.
rapidly with the number of samples. The second reason is that
both NMAH and ZDG use multiple models to detect malicious
traffic collaboratively. NMAH uses the OCSVM model, random G. Impact of Threshold τ Variation on Detection Accuracy
forest model, and multilayer perceptron model to achieve col- (Q5)
laborative detection of malicious traffic. ZDG uses two OCSVM In this subsection, we analyze the effect of different thresholds
models and two autoencoders to detect malicious traffic. There- τ on the detection accuracy. It is worth mentioning that the
fore, the computational overhead of NMAH and ZDG is higher threshold τ is a hyperparameter mentioned in Section IV-C. The
than that of other systems. The computational overhead of our results of the analysis are shown in Fig. 9. We can observe that
proposed detection model is much lower than that of NMAH and the better thresholds τ for CICIOV, TON-IOT, and EDGE-IIOT
ZDG. This is because the main computational overhead of our are 0.25, 0.15, and 0.20, respectively. The overall accuracy of
system is incurred by the attack classifier, but the computational the detection system is lower when the threshold is less than
overhead of the attack classifier does not increase with the num- the better thresholds. This is because thresholds designed to be
ber of samples. In a comprehensive comparison, our proposed smaller will result in more false alarms and mis-alarms in the
11954 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

detection system, leading to a decrease in overall accuracy. When anti-traceability of the private data, and 4) adding noise to local
the threshold is larger than the better thresholds, the unknown model using differential privacy. First, to ensure that the devices
attack detection accuracy does not change much, while the de- participating in the training are trustworthy, it is necessary
tection accuracy of non-unknown attacks decreases slightly. The to develop authentication algorithms to verify the legitimacy
reason for this is that an increase in the threshold value indicates of the devices. Second, to ensure the secure transmission of
that a large number of samples use the detection results of the model parameters, encryption algorithms (e.g., AES) should be
attack classifier as output. However, the attack classifier is unable employed to encrypt and decrypt the transmitted parameters,
to detect unknown attacks, which results in a large number of thereby preventing eavesdropping and tampering. Then, when
unknown attacks being incorrectly detected as non-unknown preprocessing vehicle traffic, the RSU needs to remove identiattacks and causes a decrease in accuracy. fying information from the network traffic (such as vehicle ID,
 IP address, port number, etc.) to avoid identity inference attacks.
 VI. DISCUSSION Finally, differential privacy techniques are used to introduce
 controlled noise during local model updates, thus preventing
A. Discuss Assumptions and Limits attackers from inferring the sensitive data through gradients or
 1) System Assumptions: We propose a number of system parameters.
assumptions to enable the system to be applied in a real vehicular
network. First, the vehicles possess sufficient computing and C. Discussion of Broader Applications
storage capabilities to run the intrusion detection system, and the Our approach is designed with a focus on fast updating and
system’s operation does not interfere with the normal function- robust detection of vehicular intrusion detection systems. In
ing of the vehicles. Second, RSUs have sufficient computing and other networks (e.g., IoT or cloud computing) there may also be a
storage capacity to train local intrusion detection systems. Then, need for detection system fast updating and robustness detection,
all RSUs participating in the federated training are trusted, and so our approach can be extended to other networks under certain
no parameter poisoning occurs. Finally, cloud servers involved conditions. In IoT, end devices usually have weak computing
in federated training do not maliciously corrupt received model power and high communication costs. Therefore, when applying
parameters. our approach to IoT, we need to design a more lightweight
 2) Possible Limitations: In this study, we focus on addressing attack classifier for end devices and use edge computing nodes
the issues of fast update and unknown attack detection for ve- as parameter aggregation centers in federated learning. In cloud
hicular intrusion detection systems. However, our approach may computing, nodes have more adequate computing resources, but
have some potential limitations. The rapid movement of vehicles there are differences in network bandwidth, latency, and stability
can lead to rapid changes in the network conditions, and the load because nodes may be distributed in different geographic locachanges on the RSUs are especially noticeable. When RSUs tions. Therefore, when applying our approach to cloud computface higher vehicle densities or sudden data uploads, RSUs ing, additional network state-awareness algorithms need to be
may be subject to higher computational and communication designed to solve the problems caused by network performance
loads, which can reduce the efficiency of local training and even heterogeneity.
degrade the efficiency of global model aggregation. In our future
work, to address the above issues, we consider introducing a VII. CONCLUSION
network state-aware training scheduling mechanism to dynamically adjust the number of local training rounds. Meanwhile, we In this study, we propose an intrusion detection system for
design hierarchical aggregation algorithms to help alleviate the vehicular networks that consists of an attack classifier and an
computational and communication burden of RSUs and improve unknown attack discriminator. To enable the proposed intrusion
aggregation efficiency. detection system to fully consider the network traffic characteristics of different regions, we design a federated learning algorithm
 based on representative client selection. The algorithm selects
B. A Discussion of Privacy and Security Issues in Federal
 representative clients for model aggregation at each training
Learning iteration, thereby increasing the generalization ability of the
 In this subsection, we discuss privacy and security issues detection system and accelerating detection system updates.
related to federated learning and explore methods to prevent Moreover, to address the threat of unknown attacks that may
sensitive data from being exposed. During the federated learning exist in open vehicular networks, we design an unknown attack
process, although the raw data does not leave the local device, discriminator based on extreme value theory and multilayer acthere are still multiple privacy and security threats, mainly tivation vectors. The multilayer activation vectors are generated
including 1) gradient leakage, 2) model inversion attack, 3) by the classifier and input into the discriminator, which then
identity inference attack, 4) parameter poisoning attack, and 5) analyzes whether the network flow is an unknown attack. Comparameter eavesdropping attack, etc. prehensive experiments on three open datasets demonstrated that
 To enhance the security of federal learning, we discuss how the proposed intrusion detection system can effectively detect
to prevent sensitive data exposure from four perspectives: 1) both known and unknown attacks in vehicular networks and
ensuring the trustworthiness of the entities involved in the outperform state-of-the-art methods in terms of precision, recall,
training, 2) establishing secure communication channels, 3) the and F1 score.
FAN et al.: ROBUST INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORKS 11955

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS [22] Z. Abou El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchainenabled federated learning for enhanced collaborative intrusion detection
 The authors are very grateful to the anonymous referees for in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
their detailed comments and suggestions regarding this paper. no. 7, pp. 7661–7672, Jul. 2024.
 [23] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
 fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
 REFERENCES Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
 [1] B. Fong, H. Kim, A. C. M. Fong, G. Y. Hong, and K. F. Tsang, “Reli- [24] Z. Qu and Z. Cai, “FEDSA-ResnetV2: An efficient intrusion detecability optimization in the design and implementation of 6G vehicle-to- tion system for vehicle road cooperation based on federated learninfrastructure systems for emergency management in a smart city environ- ing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 18, pp. 29852–29863,
 ment,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 148–153, Aug. 2023. Sep. 2024.
 [2] H.-W. Kao and E. H.-K. Wu, “QoE sustainability on 5G and beyond 5G [25] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical innetworks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 118–125, Feb. 2023. trusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3,
 [3] M. Ahmed et al., “Vehicular communication network enabled CAV data pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023.
 offloading: A review,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, [26] W. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Li, and W. Li, “Anomaly detection with partially
 pp. 7869–7897, Aug. 2023. observed anomaly types,” in Proc. 2021 2nd Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
 [4] J. Kim, H. Chung, I. Kim, and G. Noh, “Integration of 5G mmWave- Netw. Secur., 2021, pp. 98–107.
 enabled V2I and V2V: Experimental evaluation,” IEEE Commun. Mag., [27] C. Fan, J. Cui, H. Jin, H. Zhong, I. Bolodurina, and D. He, “Auto-updating
 vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 104–110, Jan. 2024. intrusion detection system for vehicular network: A deep learning ap-
 [5] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “A survey on machine learning-based proach based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond vehicular networks,” Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15372–15384, Oct. 2024.
 IEEE Commun. Surveys. Tut., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1128–1172, Secondquarter [28] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and D. Gupta,
 2023. “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated learning framework
 [6] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain: for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys. Tut., vol. 25, no. 4, Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866, Feb. 2024.
 pp. 2356–2426, Fourthquarter 2023. [29] S. Mohine, B. S. Bansod, R. Bhalla, and A. Basra, “Acoustic modality
 [7] V. P. Chellapandi, L. Yuan, C. G. Brinton, S. H. Żak, and Z. Wang, based hybrid deep 1D CNN-BILSTM algorithm for moving vehicle classi-
 “Federated learning for connected and automated vehicles: A survey of fication,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16206–16216,
 existing approaches and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 9, no. 1, Sep. 2022.
 pp. 119–137, Jan. 2024. [30] A. Cura, H. Kusuk, E. Ergen, and B. Öksüzoğlu, “Driver profiling using
 [8] J. Shu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Collaborative intrusion long short term memory (LSTM) and convolutional neural network (CNN)
 detection for VANETs: A deep learning-based distributed SDN approach,” methods,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 6572–6582,
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4519–4530, Jul. 2021. Oct. 2021.
 [9] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intrusion [31] Y. Duan, N. Chen, S. Shen, P. Zhang, Y. Qu, and S. Yu, “FDSA-STG:
 detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, Fully dynamic self-attention spatio-temporal graph networks for intellino. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021. gent traffic flow prediction,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 9,
[10] C. He, T. H. Luan, N. Cheng, G. Wei, Z. Su, and Y. Liu, “Federated learning pp. 9250–9260, Sep. 2022.
 based vehicular threat sharing: A multi-dimensional contract incentive [32] S. U. Stich, “Local SGD converges fast and communicates little,” in Proc.
 approach,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE 98th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–5. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
[11] S. I. Popoola, G. Gui, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, and H. Gacanin, “Fed- //openreview.net/forum?id=S1g2JnRcFX
 erated deep learning for collaborative intrusion detection in heterogeneous [33] J. Zhang et al., “FED-CBS: A heterogeneity-aware client sampling mechnetworks,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6. anism for federated learning via class-imbalance reduction,” in Proc. Int.
[12] H. Sedjelmaci, N. Kaaniche, A. Boudguiga, and N. Ansari, “Secure attack Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 41354–41381.
 detection framework for hierarchical 6G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” [34] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2633–2642, Feb. 2024. against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, vol. 26,
[13] A. A. korba, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Zero-X: A 2024, Art. no. 101209. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 blockchain-enabled open-set federated learning framework for zero-day com/science/article/pii/S2542660524001501
 attack detection in IoV,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, [35] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. den Hartog,
 pp. 12399–12414, Sep. 2024. “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,” IEEE Internet
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2021.
 J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. [36] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “Edge-
[15] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in Proc. IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of IoT and
 2016 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 1563–1572. IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE Access,
[16] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development [37] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational
 in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning approach
 pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023. for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE
[17] L. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Li, and H. Liu, “Multi-sensors space and time Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, 2021.
 dimension based intrusion detection system in automated vehicles,” IEEE
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 200–215, Jan. 2024.
[18] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage intrusion
 detection system in intelligent transportation systems using rule extraction
 methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023. Chunyang Fan is currently working toward the PhD
[19] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltage- degree with the School of Computer Science and
 based intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. His re-
 Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024. search focuses on the vehicular network intrusion
[20] Y. Xun, Z. Deng, J. Liu, and Y. Zhao, “Side channel analysis: A novel detection and mobility management of the software
 intrusion detection system based on vehicle voltage signals,” IEEE Trans. defined vehicular networks.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 7240–7250, Jun. 2023.
[21] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, and
 O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based smart
 transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3,
 pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
11956 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

 Jie Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in Henan Irina Bolodurina received the PhD degree from
 Province, China, in 1980. He received the PhD de- South Ural State University. She is currently a profesgree with University of Science and Technology of sor and head of Department of Applied Mathematics,
 China, in 2012. He is currently a professor and with the Orenburg State University. She has more than
 PhD supervisor with the School of Computer Sci- 60 scientific publications in academic journals and inence and Technology, Anhui University. He has more ternational conferences which indexing in Scopus and
 than 150 scientific publications in reputable journals WoS. Her current research interests include theory of
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE optimal control, mathematical modeling, information
 COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION analysis software, control of social and economic
 FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE JOURNAL ON SE- systems, decision support systems, data integration,
 LECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANS- and processing. She has participated in more than 20
ACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND scientific projects supported by the RFBR and other Russian scientific programs.
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLI-
GENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND
SERVICE MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
CLOUD COMPUTING and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, academic
books and international conferences. His current research interests include
applied cryptography, IoT security, vehicular ad hoc network, cloud computing Debiao He (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
security and software-defined networking (SDN). in applied mathematics from the School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
 China in 2009. He is currently a professor with the
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
 Hulin Jin was born in Jilin Province, China, in 1977. University, Wuhan and the Shanghai Key Laboratory
 He received the PhD degree with Sejong Univerof Privacy Preserving Computation, MatrixElements
 sity of Korea in 2013. He is currently a professor
 Technologies, Shanghai, China. He has authored or
 and PhD supervisor with the School of Big Data,
 coauthored more than 100 research papers in refer-
 Anhui University. He has more than 100 scientific eed international journals and conferences, such as
 publications. His current research interests include
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE
 Big Data, computer vision, cloud networks and cloud
 COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION SECURITY AND FORENSIC,
 computing.
 and Usenix Security Symposium. His main research interests include cryptography and information security, in particular, cryptographic protocols. He is
 the recipient of the 2018 IEEE Sysems Journal Best Paper Award and 2019
 IET Information Security Best Paper Award. His work has been cited more
 Hong Zhong was born in Anhui Province, China, in than 10000 times with Google Scholar. He is in the editorial board of several
 1965. She received the PhD degree in computer sci- international journals, such as Journal of Information Security and Applications,
 ence from the University of Science and Technology Frontiers of Computer Science, and Human-centric Computing & Information
 of China, in 2005. She is currently a professor and Sciences.
 PhD supervisor with the School of Computer Science
 and Technology, Anhui University. She has more
 than 200 scientific publications in reputable journals
 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNI-
 CATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND
 DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DE-
PENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION
FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANS-
PORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, IEEE TRANSAC-
TIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND
SERVICE MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING,IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IN-
DUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, academic
books and international conferences. Her research interests include applied
cryptography, IoT security, vehicular ad hoc network, cloud computing security,
and software-defined networking.