10588 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Robustness Matters: Pre-Training Can Enhance the
 Performance of Encrypted Traffic Analysis
 Luming Yang , Lin Liu , Jun-Jie Huang , Member, IEEE, Jiangyong Shi , Shaojing Fu , Yongjun Wang,
 and Jinshu Su , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Models with large-scale parameters and pre-training I. I NTRODUCTION
have been leveraged for encrypted traffic analysis. However,
existing researches primarily focused on accuracy, often overlooking the role of large-scale pre-trained parameters in enhancing
robustness. While machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
 W ITH the widespread adoption of encryption protocols
 such as TLS/SSL, the proportion of encrypted traffic
 is gradually increasing. Encryption is a double-edged sword:
models trained from scratch can achieve high accuracy, they while it effectively protects user privacy, it poses significant
exhibit limited robustness. When subjected to network noise in challenges to network monitoring and supervision. Due to the
real-world, their identification results can fluctuate significantly, ineffectiveness of port filtering and deep packet inspection
which is unacceptable. Unfortunately, current robustness evalua- (DPI), artificial intelligence (AI) driven analysis is now the
tion methods neglect samples diversity and employ unreasonable
noise settings. This field still lacks a reasonable quantitative
 mainstream of encrypted traffic analysis. Traditional machine
description of models robustness. In this paper, we propose learning (ML) methods [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]
the PA-curve to display the distribution of sample’s correct- rely on expert knowledge, while deep learning (DL) methods
decision stability, which can simultaneously reflect the model’s [9], [10], [11], [12] apply representation learning to extract
accuracy and robustness. By calculating the area under the PA- features automatically. In recent years, our community has also
curve, called PA-area, we enable the quantitative assessment proposed several pre-trained models [13], [14], [15], [16], [17],
of robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. Furthermore, we
design a pre-trained model based on packet length sequence, [18] for network traffic analysis. They undergo self-supervised
and pre-trained it on TB-scale traffic. By fine-tuning on limited pre-training on large amounts of unlabeled data to learn
labeled training data, it can achieve downstream analysis tasks. general knowledge, and then utilize a small amount of labeled
We conduct experiments on five encrypted traffic datasets with data to learn task-specific knowledge by supervised fine-tuning
different tasks. Besides accuracy, we analyzed the robustness (SFT). This approach can achieve high accuracy with limited
of the pre-trained model and existing methods under common training data. Researchers have been introducing more and
network disturbances, including packet loss, retransmission, and
disorder. Experimental results demonstrated that, compared to more learnable parameters to enhance models’ capabilities,
ML-based and DL-based models trained from scratch, the pre- thereby further improving encrypted traffic analysis accuracy.
trained model can not only achieve high accuracy, but also exhibit Encrypted traffic analysis encompasses various tasks,
greater resilience to network noise. The source code is available including application identification, website fingerprinting, and
at https://github.com/Shangshu-LAB/BERT-ps malware detection, each varying in difficulty. Models with
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic analysis (ETA), robustness, large-scale parameters often yield higher accuracy for more
pre-trained model, network noise. challenging tasks. However, ML-based, DL-based, and pretrained models all yield satisfactory results in many cases.
 From an accuracy perspective, more complex pre-trained models may not be necessary.
 Besides accuracy, model robustness is also critical yet often
 Received 3 March 2025; revised 15 August 2025; accepted 7 September
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version overlooked for encrypted traffic analysis. Network environ-
9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural ment may undergo complex changes due to the joint effect
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62472431, Grant 62201600, and of various factors [19], such as traffic burst [20], [21], traffic
Grant 62372462; and in part by the Science Research Plan Program through
the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT) under Grant ZK22- engineering [22], [23], partial network failures [24], [25], and
50 and Grant ZK22-56. The associate editor coordinating the review of this network updates [26], [27]. Some methods can achieve high
article and approving it for publication was Dr. Yue Zhang. (Corresponding accuracy in specific network environments, but are not robust.
author: Lin Liu.)
 Luming Yang is with the Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091, As illustrated in Table I, when subjected to different levels
China, and also with the National University of Defense Technology, of network noise, their identification results exhibit significant
Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: yang lm108@nudt.edu.cn). deterioration, which is unacceptable. We desire models that not
 Lin Liu, Jun-Jie Huang, Jiangyong Shi, Shaojing Fu, and Yongjun
Wang are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, National
 only possess high accuracy, but also exhibit strong robustness
University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: to ensure consistent performance in diverse and noisy network
liulin16@nudt.edu.cn; jjhuang@nudt.edu.cn; shijiangyong@nudt.edu.cn; environments.
fusj nudt@163.com; wwyyjj1971@126.com). In encrypted traffic analysis, some studies [28], [29],
 Jinshu Su is with the Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091, China
(e-mail: sjs@nudt.edu.cn). [30], [31], [32] only evaluate their model’s robustness using
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3613970 accuracy under noise, and others [19], [33], [34], [35], [36],
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10589

 TABLE I identification probability difference within the sample space,
 T HE I DENTIFICATION ACCURACY U NDER PACKET L OSS thus providing a more comprehensive quantification of the
 model’s robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. Specifically,
 for the PA-curve, the more right-side, the more robust; the
 more up-side, the more accurate. In addition, we also design a
 pre-trained model BERT-ps based on packet length sequence,
 and pre-trained it on TB-scale traffic. By fine-tuning on limited
 labeled training data, BERT-ps can achieve specific encrypted
 traffic analysis tasks, effectively. Experimental results demonstrate that BERT-ps not only achieves higher accuracy but
 also stronger resilience to network noise compared to MLbased models and DL-based models trained from scratch.
 These findings highlight the practical significance of exploring
 pre-trained models with large-scale learnable parameters for
 encrypted traffic analysis.
 The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
 1) For robustness analysis, we propose a new robustness
 evaluation metric called PA-curve. We can apply the PAcurve to show the local robustness distribution in the
 sample space with certain noise disturbances, and then
 calculate the area under the PA-curve named PA-area as
Fig. 1. The local robustness of samples varies depending on the location
 an indicator to measure both the model’s accuracy and
in the sample space. The model partitions the space into distinct decision its robustness.
regions, which are represented by different colors. For x1 , which lies far from 2) To analyze the pre-training impact on robustness,
decision boundaries, its neighborhood remains entirely within one decision we design a pre-trained model based on packetregion (cA ), resulting in greater resistance to perturbations. For x2 , which is
close to decision boundaries, its neighborhood spans multiple decision regions length sequences for encrypted traffic analysis, named
(cA , cB , etc.), making the output more sensitive to perturbations. BERT-ps . By pre-training on massive unlabeled data,
 BERT-ps can learn relevant knowledge of network
 traffic, and achieve superior performances on specific
[37] focus on improving model’s robustness through tech- analysis tasks through supervised fine-tuning.
niques such as data augmentation. Unfortunately, they still 3) We conduct extensive experiments on five public
lacks a reasonable quantitative description of model’s robust- datasets. Compared to existing methods, BERT-ps with
ness. Specifically, there are the following issues: pre-trained parameters can not only achieve higher accu-
 • Neglecting Sample’s Diversity. Existing approaches racy, but also have stronger robustness under network
 [19], [31], [32], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43] typically noise.
 use the accuracy under noise to measure the model’s The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
 robustness, without considering the differences across give a review of related work in Section II. In Section III, we
 samples. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1, samples far introduce three perturbations and a novel metric for robustness.
 from decision boundaries exhibit stronger robustness than In section IV, we introduce the design details of BERT-ps .
 those near the boundary. The model’s robustness should Then, we describes experimental setting in Section V and
 reflect the overall distribution of local robustness, which evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches in seccannot be only measured by the accuracy under noise. tion VI. Discussions are presented in Section VII. Finally, we
 • Unreasonable Noise Settings. Some existing works [28], concludes this paper in Section VIII.
 [29], [30], [33], [34], [35], [36], [44], [45] only introduce perturbations in the feature space rather than the II. R ELATED W ORK
 raw data during robustness evaluation. Different features
 are typically not distributed independently but exhibit As the development of encryption, there are many
 correlations. Consequently, noise added to the feature approaches for encrypted traffic analysis, which are mainly
 space may not accurately reflect real-world perturbations based on machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL).
 of network flows. Artificial noise fails to accurately
 mimic perturbations in network flows, leading to unrea- A. ML-Based Methods
 sonable robustness evaluations that do not generalize to These methods rely on expert knowledge to select artificial
 real-world. features and apply ML algorithms. Taylor et al. [2], [3]
Moreover, robustness evaluation metrics should also account presented AppScanner, which only applies side-channel data
for accuracy, as robustness without accuracy is meaningless. to build fingerprints for Android apps. FlowLens [5] proposed
 In this paper, we propose a new robustness evaluation by Barradas et al. collects features of packet distributions
metric, called PA-curve, to display the distribution of sample’s at line speed and classifies flows directly on the switches.
correct-decision stability and then calculated the PA-area Xu et al. [8] introduced path signature into encrypted traffic
value. They can capture the relationship between accuracy and classification based on packet-length information. Anderson
10590 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

and McGrew [1], [4] developed supervised machine learning Several studies have evaluated model’s performance in
models that take advantage of a unique and diverse set of different network environments. In robustness testing, Zhao
encrypted network flow features including TLS handshake et al. [31], [32] introduced packet loss, retransmission, and
metadata, DNS contextual flows and HTTP contextual flows. disordering, while [43] incorporates transmission delay. More-
 As for TLS/SSL encrypted traffic, TLS/SSL message over, [39], [40], [41], [42] assess analytical performance under
sequence is also widely applied for identification [46], [47], varying traffic replay rates. After investigating real diverse
[48], [49], [50]. Korczynski and Duda [46] first proposed network environments, Rosetta [19] leverages TCP-aware traf-
Markov chain fingerprints for application traffic flows based fic augmentation mechanisms and self-supervised learning to
on TLS/SSL message. On this basis, Shen et al. [47], [48] understand implicit TCP semantics, and hence extracts robust
observed that the application attribute bigram contributes to features of TLS flows. These studies primarily use accuracy
application discrimination, and proposed an attribute-aware under network noise as the metric, which does not account for
encrypted traffic classification method based on the second- local robustness difference in sample space.
order Markov Chains. Pan et al. [49] proposed an HTTPS Additionally, other research explores robustness in network
application classification method using weighted ensemble traffic analysis concerning concept drift [32], [33], [51], [52],
learning, named WECN. Liu et al. [50] proposed the MaMPF adversarial samples [28], [34], [35], [36], [45], and label
for encrypted traffic classification which makes use of length noise [53].
block sequence (LBS) from the power-law division of packetlength sequence and the relative probability of all applications.
 III. R EVISITING ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION
But these methods cannot analyze other types of encrypted
traffic except TLS/SSL. In this section, we first introduce three common types
 of network disturbances subjected to network flows, and
B. DL-Based Methods then introduce new comprehensive metrics, PA-curve and
 PA-area, for measuring model’s robustness.
 These methods automatically extract features from raw We define a network flow with n packets as x =
network traffic by representation learning. Liu et al. [9] hP1 , P2 , · · · , Pn i, where Pi is the i-th packet. The identification
designed an RNN-based end-to-end Flow Sequence Network model for encrypted traffic analysis can be defined as a
(FS-Net), which jointly learns the representative features from function f : X 7→ Y where X is the sample space and
the raw flow sequences and classifies them together. Shen Y = {c1 , c2 , · · · , cm } is the label space.
et al. [10] constructed Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) as an
representation based on the packet-length and packet direction.
 To leverage large-scale unlabeled data for traffic represen- A. Noise Impact on Network Flows
tations, several pre-trained models [13], [14], [15], [16], [17],
 Network environment may undergo complex changes due to
[18] have been proposed in recent years. PERT proposed
 the joint effect of various factors [19], such as traffic burst [20],
by He et al. [13] and ET-BERT proposed by Lin et al.
 [21], traffic engineering [22], [23], partial network failures
[14] learn deep contextual datagram-level representations from
 [24], [25], and network updates [26], [27], etc. Network noise
unlabeled traffic data by masked language modeling. Inspired
 is ubiquitous in real-world network environments, particularly
by computer vision, Flow-MAE [16] and YaTC [15] utilized
 under conditions of complex network topologies and high
the masked auto-encoder (MAE) pre-training approach to
 traffic loads. Encrypted traffic analysis is typically deployed
encode network flows from byte matrices Zhou et al. [18]
 in real-world network environments, making it essential to
proposed TrafficFormer, which introduces a fine-grained multiaccount for the impact of noise on analysis results. We define
classification task to enhance its representation capabilities
 ε is a specific perturbation from the network noise Υ(σ) with
in the pre-training stage. Instead of Transformer, NetMamba
 noise parameter σ, i.e. ε ∼ Υ(σ). For a network flow x and a
[17] applied Mamba architecture for comprehensive traffic
 perturbation ε, the disturbed sample is expressed as x̃ = x ⊕ ε
representation to address efficiency issues.
 where ⊕ indicates the perturbation addition operations.
 The transmission patterns of network flows are susceptible
C. Robustness of Traffic Analysis to network noise, which can result in packet loss, retransmis-
 Beyond accuracy, robustness has become an increasingly sion, and disorder. These phenomena introduce perturbations
important consideration in network traffic analysis. A common to the network flow data (such as packet-length sequences). In
approach for robustness testing involves introducing random detail, there are three common impacts of network noise on
perturbations in the feature space, such as Gaussian noise network flows, which are defined as follows:
[30] or Laplacian noise [29]. Similarly, studies on adversar- • Packet Loss: Due to the performance limitations of netial robustness [34], [35], [36] often focus on perturbations work device, some packets may not be captured, leading
within the feature space. Wang et al. [44] proposed BARS, a to missing packets in the collected network flow. For
general robustness certification framework for deep-learning- packet loss perturbations, we assume that each packet is
based traffic analysis systems based on boundary-adaptive lost with a probability of σ. We defined the perturbation
randomized smoothing. RBLJAN [37] assesses robustness by of packet loss as Υloss (σ).
randomly inserting bytes into packets. However, such artifi- • Packet Retransmission: There are many types of error
cial noise differs significantly from real-world perturbations, during TCP transmission, such as corrupted packets, timepotentially misleading robustness evaluations. out, etc. If the sender does not receive an acknowledgment
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10591

 (ACK) from the receiver before the re-transmission time- As long as pA > pB , it indicates that perturbations within
 out, it will re-transmit the packet to ensure reliable the neighborhood can produce the correct output. In addition,
 transmission. For packet re-transmission perturbations, the greater the difference between pA and pB , the more stable
 we assume that each packet is re-transmitted with a the output will be. Therefore, the robustness of the sample can
 probability of σ. We defined the perturbation of packet be measured by ∆p = pA − pB .
 re-transmission as Υretrans (σ). However, it is impossible to exactly evaluate the region
 • Packet Disordering: Due to network environment fluc- boundaries of sample space or to exactly compute pA and pB
 tuations, the order in which packets are sent and received for a neural-network-based classifier [55]. Instead, we estimate
 may be inconsistent. The packets of captured network ∆p based on Monte-Carlo method, which is guaranteed to
 flows may be out of order. For packet disorder pertur- succeed with arbitrarily high probability. To ensure the reliabations, we assume that each packet has a probability bility, in practice, we apply the binomial proportion confidence
 of σ swapping with the next packet. We defined the interval [56] to calculate the lower bound of pA and the upper
 perturbations of packet disorder as Υdisorder (σ). bound of pB , i.e., pA and pB .
 Due to the error correction and check mechanisms inherent We apply Clopper-Pearson method [57] to estimate the
in network protocols, network noise typically does not affect proportion confidence interval. When only the experiment
the content of the packets. Therefore, this study focuses solely number n and the success number k are known, we estimate
on the perturbation introduced by network noise to packet the lower and upper bound (p and p) of a success probability
transmission patterns in network flows. p = nk as follows:
 In addition, packet loss, retransmission, and disorder are α   α 
three common impacts of network noise on packet-length Fβ−1 ; n − k + 1, k ≤ p ≤ Fβ−1 1 − ; k + 1, n − k (2)
 2 2
sequences. They are widely employed as network noise settings for robustness evaluations in existing studies [19], [31], where Fβ−1 (·) is the inverse cumulative distribution function
[43]. Our work aims to establish a quantitative and systematic (ICDF) of the beta distribution. More detail about the prinrobustness evaluation metric for encrypted traffic analysis. As ciple of the binomial proportion confidence interval base on
a result, it requires relatively standardized and interpretable Clopper-Pearson method is illustrated in Appendix A.
noise settings.
 Algorithm 1 Calculation of ∆ p̂ Based on Monte Carlo Method
B. Local Robustness in Sample Space Require: The sample x and the network noise Υ(σ);
 Robustness should reflects the ability of a system to resist The Monte Carlo sample number N;
environment change without adapting its initial configuration The confidence coefficient 1 − α;
[54]. As for traffic analysis, the robustness refers to whether Ensure: ∆ p̂
the analysis model can stably output correct results when counts = {c : 0|c ∈ Y};
the network flow sample is perturbed by network noise. In for i = 1toN do
addition, we consider the robustness of the model only if c0 ← f (x ⊕ ε) where ε ∼ Υ(σ);
it can achieve acceptable accuracy. If the model has a poor counts[c0 ]++;
identification performance, the robustness is meaningless. end for
 Essentially, the analysis model divides the sample space into cA , cB ← top two index in counts;
different regions, each corresponding to a class. For a trained nA , nB ← counts[cA ], counts[cB ];
model, the spatial structure of these regions is typically com- pA ← LowerConfBound(nA , N, 1 − α);
plex. For network flow samples, some are far from the region pB ← UpperConfBound(nB , N, 1 − α); return pA − pB
boundaries, while others are closer. Samples that are farther
from region boundaries tend to be more robust. Robustness can Therefore, we use ∆ p̂ = pA − pB to measure the local
be reflected by the probability that the model can stably output robustness of samples, which is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
correctly in the sample’s neighborhood. Therefore, inspired by
certified robustness [55], we can measure the robustness of a
sample by analyzing the distribution of different classes within C. PA-Curve and PA-Area
its neighborhood, i.e., the probability distribution of perturbed Since the robustness varies among different samples, the
samples falling into different class regions. global robustness of the model should be based on the distri-
 For a network flow x ∈ X with class c ∈ Y, the model bution of local robustness. It makes no sense to consider the
judges within its neighborhood to be a category yi with the local robustness of samples that are incorrectly predicted by
confidence probability pi . Among them, we set the classes the model, so the models robustness should also take accuracy
with the highest and second-highest confidence probabilities into account.
as cA and cB corresponding to pA and pB , respectively. As for 1) PA-Curve: It is designed to show the distribution of the
x with the perturbation Υ(σ), cA and cB can be expressed as local robustness on the sample space under a certain network
follows: noise perturbation. For the encrypted traffic analysis model,
 PA-curve can reflect the relationship between identification
 cA = arg max P{ f (x ⊕ ε) = c|ε ∼ Υ(σ)},
 c∈Y Probability differences and Accuracy within the sample space.
 cB = arg max P{ f (x ⊕ ε) = c|ε ∼ Υ(σ)}. (1) Specifically, a point (x, y) on the PA-curve represents the
 c∈Y\{cA } proportion of samples that can be correctly predicted by the
10592 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. Within the region defined by the neighborhood of x under perturbation Υ(σ), the classes with the highest and second-highest confidence probabilities
are cA and cB , respectively. (This figure is just a schematic, and x is not in Euclidean space.) The confidence probabilities can be respectively estimated as
p̂A (pA ) and p̂B (pB ) using Monte Carlo method. For a test set, the PA-curve is the distribution of ∆ p̂ within different accuracy. PA-area is the area under the
PA-curve.

 Z 1 N
model when the identification probability difference is at least 1X n   o
 = lim I c(i) (i) (i)
 A = c ∧ pA − p B ≥ x|ε ∼ Υ(σ) dx
 (i)
x. The equation of PA-curve can be mathematically expressed 0 N i=1 σ→0
as follows: Z 1 X N
 1
 N
 1 X n (i)   o = I{c(i)
 A = c ∧ „ƒ‚…
 (i)
 1 ≥ x }dx
 I cA = c(i) ∧ p(i) 0 N
 (i)
 y= A − pB ≥x , (3) i=1 True
 N
 i=1 N
 1 X
where I(·) is the indicator function, c(i) is the label of the i-th = I{c(i)
 A = c } = Acc
 (i)
 N
sample x(i) in the test set {x(1) , x(2) , · · · , x(N) }. As illustrated in i=1

Fig. 2, for the PA-curve, the more right-side, the more robust;
 IV. D ESIGN D ETAILS OF BERT-P S
the more up-side, the more accurate. Therefore, PA-curve can
measure both accuracy and robustness. Packet-length sequences are widely used in encrypted traffic
 Note: As illustrated in Eq. 3, for the PA-curve, a higher analysis due to their universality and low cost, but susceptible
position indicates that more samples identified by the model to network noise. To demonstrate that pre-training can enhance
correctly (c(i)
 A = c ) under the same constraints on iden-
 (i) the model’s robustness, it is essential to compare pre-trained
tification probability differences (∆ p̂(i) = p(i) (i) models with traditional ML-based and DL-based models.
 A − p B ≥ x),
 Nevertheless, no pre-trained model based on packet-length
indicating higher accuracy. Additionally, a rightward shift
 sequences has been proposed for encrypted traffic analysis.
indicates that the model exhibits a larger identification prob-
 Therefore, we design a pre-trained packet-length sequence
ability difference (∆ p̂(i) ) of samples with a certain accuracy
 PN (i) model named BERT-ps , which is illustrated in Fig. 3.
(Acc = N i=1 I{cA = c(i) }), indicating greater robustness.
 1

 2) PA-Area: The area under the PA-curve, called PA-area,
can serve as a comprehensive metric for measuring both A. Tokenization
robustness and accuracy. As shown in Fig. 2, the upper and In this module, we convert network flows into token
more right PA-curve lead to the higher PA-area. PA-area can sequences of packet length sequences. It transforms netbe calculated as follows: work flows into a format that can be directly fed into the
 Z 1 PN−1
 (xi+1 − xi )(yi+1 + yi ) model.
 PA-area = ydx = i=1 , (4) First, we record the captured network flows in the form
 0 2(N − 1) of a packet-length sequences. A network flow is defined
where (xi , yi ) is the i-th point of PA-curve corresponding to by a five-tuple (srcIP, srcport, dstIP, dstport, and protocol),
the sample x(i) in the test set. (0 ≤ x1 ≤ · · · ≤ xN ≤ 1, i.e., a collection of bidirectional packets between the client
1 ≥ y1 ≥ · · · ≥ yN ≥ 0.) Consequently, PA-area is a reasonable (srcIP, srcPort) and the server (dstIP, dstPort). To avoid
quantitative description of model’s robustness for network the influence of functional packets (e.g., SYN packets and
traffic analysis. ACK packets) within the network flow, we ignore packets
 Note: As the perturbation parameter σ approaches zero, without transport layer payload. The absolute value of the
the neighborhood of a sample point corresponds to a single packet-length is the packet transport layer load length, while
label, meaning pA → 1 and pB → 0. In this case, the PA-area the sign of the packet length indicates the direction of the
reduces to the accuracy. The detailed proof is as follows: packet.
 Z 1 We apply packet length sequence to represent the transmis-
 PA-area = lim y (x; ε ∼ Υ(σ)) dx sion pattern of network flows. To mitigate the adverse impact
 0 σ→0 of functional packets (e.g., SYN packets and ACK packets),
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10593

 Fig. 3. The overview of BERT-ps for encrypted traffic analysis.

packets without transport layer payload are excluded in the traffic analysis prioritizes the understanding of network flows
packet length sequence. For the packet length, its absolute rather than generation, BERT [58] (Encoder-Only architecture)
value is the length of the transport layer payload, while its is more suitable rather than Decoder-Only models (such as
sign indicates the direction of the packet in the network flow. GPT [59]). In addition, the output vector corresponding to
We define that the uplink packet length is positive, while [CLS] is regarded as the representation of the network flow.
the downlink packet length is negative. For the tokenization 3) Classification Head: It is the module within BERT-ps
of packet length sequences, we utilize packet lengths with that maps the learned feature representations to class predicdirection directly as tokens. tions for specific downstream tasks. The classification head
 We introduce 5 special tokens ([CLS], [SEP], [PAD], consists of a fully-connected layer followed by a Softmax
[MASK], and [UNK]). [CLS] and [SEP] are prefixed to indi- layer. We input the representation into the classification head to
cate the beginning and the end of the sequence, respectively. produce the identification result, which is expressed as follows:
For fixed-length input, sequences with insufficient length are
padded with [PAD], which are subsequently masked within p = Softmax (W x + b) , (6)
the model to prevent them from affecting the representation of where p = pc c∈Y is the probability vector that indicates the
  
overall sequence. [MASK] and [UNK] are applied for replacing network flow belongs to different categories in Y. W and b are
masked tokens and unknown tokens. the weight and bias of the fully connected layer, respectively.

B. Model Structure C. Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning
 There are 3 modules in BERT-ps , including packet length The BERT-ps is pre-trained on packet length sequences of
embedding, transformer encoder, and classification head. TB-scale traffic. After supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on limited
 1) Packet-Length Embeddin: Each packet-length token is labeled training data, it can achieve downstream analysis tasks.
map into Euclidean space to represent the semantic informa- 1) Pre-Training: The goal of pre-training on large-scale
tion as a fixed-length vector. The packet-length embedding is unlabeled packet-length sequences is to capture the underlying
composed of token embedding and position embedding. structure and common patterns by self-supervised learning,
 The vocabulary includes packet-lengths ranging from 1 to thus acquiring a general and meaningful representation of
1500 with 2 directions and 5 special tokens. For network network flows. We utilize Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
flows, tokens with same packet length have different semantic for pre-training. The core idea is to mask certain tokens
meanings depending on its position. So we apply the position ([MASK]), and then predict their original values based on
encoding to each token. Both token and position embedding the surrounding unmasked tokens within the context. The
are achieved by embedding layers, and then combined before Language Model (LM) head consists of a fully-connected layer
being fed into BERT-ps . Consequently, the embedding result with softmax, which is applied to predict masked tokens.
of the packet-length token at position i is expressed as follows: For the input sequence X with k masked tokens, the loss
 Eibyte = Epl + Eipos , (5) function of the pre-training process is defined as follows:
 k
where its packet length embedding and positional encoding X
 LMLM = − log P{MASKi = tokeni |X̃; Θ}, (7)
are represented as epl and eipos , respectively.
 i=1
 2) Transformer Encoder: BERT-ps is developed based on
Bi-directional Transformer Encoder to represent packet length where Θ is the model’s parameters, X̃ is the masked input data
sequences of encrypted network flows. Given that encrypted and MASKi is the masked token at the i-th position.
10594 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 During pre-training, 15% tokens in the input sequence are TABLE II
masked, which is similar to the pre-training of BERT [58]. T HE H YPER -PARAMETER S ETTING OF BERT- PS
For masked 15% tokens, three operations are applied: 80%
are directly replaced with [MASK], 10% are replaced with new
tokens, and the other 10% remain unchanged.
 2) Fine-Tuning: Although the pre-trained model can generate the versatile and meaningful representations of packetlength sequences, it cannot solve the problem end-to-end.
Specifically, the output of the pre-trained model serves as the
representation vectors for the packet-length sequence, rather
than the final classification result. In order to enable end-toend analysis, it is required to append a classification head on
the pre-trained model and pass representation results to the
classification head to produce the final decision. During the
training process, the pre-trained parameters will be fine-tuned
to better adapt the model to specific downstream tasks. In experiments, all network traffic data were split and parsed
 During the fine-tuning process, the loss function is set to based on Zeek.1 We developed a Zeek plugin to record the
cross entropy loss, which is defined as follows: packet-length sequences for each network flow. Considering
 N
 that “mouse flows” are too short to provide meaningful infor-
 1 X X (i) mation on packet-length sequences, we discarded flows with
 Lcls = − c ,
 yc log p(i) (8)
 N fewer than 5 packets with non-zero transport layer payload.
 i=1 c∈Y

where y(i) (i)
 c is the ground truth label, and pc is the predicted
 C. Datasets
probability that the i-th sample belongs to class c.
 After pre-training, the model’s parameters generally reach To evaluate the performance of BERT-ps and existing
a stable state. But the parameters in the classification head baselines, we conduct experiments on five public datasets
are without training. Fine-tuning all model’s parameters on with different tasks for encrypted traffic analysis, including
a small-scale training set could cause unintended changes DataCon2020 [61], DataCon2021-p1 [62], DataCon2021-p2
to stable pre-trained parameters due to updates of untrained [62], EBSNN-dataset [11], and CSTNET-TLS1.3 [63].
parameters, potentially leading to over-fitting. Therefore, we • DataCon2020: [61] It is a malware encrypted traffic
warm-up the gradients of the classification head with all dataset collected by QI-ANXIN Technology Research
the pre-trained parameters frozen before full-parameter fine- Institute. This dataset is derived from the TLS/SSL
tuning, enabling the model to achieve improved performance. encrypted traffic generated by malware and normal software (both are exe types) in the Tianqiong sandbox.
 V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS • DataCon2021-p1: [62] It is an encrypted proxy traffic
 classification dataset, which is generated by accessing a
 In this section, we describe implementation, pre-training
 list of websites using Selenium automatically. After data
data, dataset, and baselines in detail.
 cleaning, the dataset contains encrypted network flows
 from 6 different proxy software.
A. Implementation • DataCon2021-p2: [62] It is an encrypted-proxy-based
 Our experiments are performed on a server, which is website traffic identification dataset. The traffic was
equipped with the following configuration: AMD EPYC(TM) generated by accessing different websites through the
7542 CPU @ 2.90GHz, 8× NVIDA GeForce RTX 6000 Ada, same encryption proxy software. After data cleaning,
512GB of RAM. In following experiments, all the neural net- the dataset contains network flows generated from 22
work structures are implemented by PyTorch (version 2.2.1). websites.
 We adopt the hyper-parameter settings of BERT-base [58] • EBSNN-dataset: [11] It includes network traffic genas a reference for BERT-ps , which is illustrated in Table II. erated from using applications and accessing websites.
 As for the evaluation of model’s robustness (Algorithm 1), After data cleaning, the dataset contains 22 categories.
we set the Monte Carlo sample number N as 1000, and set • CSTNET-TLS1.3: [63] This traffic dataset are acquired
the confidence coefficient as 0.999, i.e., α = 0.001. from Alexa Top-5000 deployed with TLS 1.3, which is
 collected on CSTNET by [14]. After data cleaning, we
 select 80 application from the original dataset.
B. Pre-Training Data All these datasets were public after 2020, and better aligned
 We collected a large amount of network traffic (correspond- with the current network environment. Raw network traffic
ing about 12.1TB pcap files) at a network gateway within a data are parsed by Zeek plugins we developed as well. We
week. After data processing, a total of 76.11M packet-length also remove any flows containing fewer than 5 packets with
sequences were generated (about 2.96B tokens). Referring to payload, followed by removing any classes with fewer flows.
the pre-training data amount of BERT [58], this amount of
data is enough to support the pre-training of BERT-ps . 1 https://zeek.org
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10595

D. Baselines 7% and 5% higher accuracy compared to the current
 We use five existing packet-length-sequence-based works as state-of-the-art(SOTA) methods on DataCon2021-p2 and
baselines, including AppScanner [3], ETC-PS [8], FlowLens CSNET-TLS1.3, respectively. Furthermore, on DataCon2020
[5], FS-Net [9], and GraphDApp [10]. The basic algorithms and EBSNN-dataset, BERT-ps performance is only
of these baselines they applied include machine learning marginally lower, by approximately 1.2% and 2.5%, than the
and deep learning. In detail, these existing works are as best pre-trained models. Experimental results substantiate the
follows: adaptability of BERT-ps to diverse encrypted traffic analysis
 • AppScanner: [3] It is a ML-based method based on tasks.
 Random Forest to identify smartphone applications from 2) Pre-Training Enhance Accuracy: As shown in Table III,
 encrypted traffic. It extracts statistical features from the model with pre-trained parameters and supervised fineuplink flow, downlink flow, and complete flow as the tuning (SFT) performs consistently better than the model
 feature set, where each flow provides several statisti- trained from scratch (TFS) across all encrypted traffic analysis
 cal features (i.e., minimum, maximum, mean, standard tasks in terms of accuracy. This suggests that the pre-trained
 deviation, etc). parameters can effectively enhance the model’s performance.
 • ETC-PS: [8] It is a ML-based encrypted traffic clas- However, the impact of pre-training on model performance
 sification method with path signature. The multi-scale varies across different tasks. For DataCon2021-p2, which
 path signature of packet-length-sequence-based traffic contains 22 classes, the accuracy and F1 scores are both
 path is computed as the distinctive feature to train the improved about 2.8%. In contrast, for the binary classification
 traditional machine learning classifier, such as Random task of DataCon2020, the improvement is less than 0.8%.
 Forest. 3) Packet-Length Sequence Is More General: Existing pre-
 • FlowLens: [5] It uses sampled packet-length distribution trained models are primarily based on raw byte streams.
 of network flows as features to train the identification As shown in Table III, we also compare BERT-ps with
 model by supervised learning, i.e., Random Forest. We these pre-training-based approaches. While existing preuse the hyperparameter setting with the best accuracy trained models can achieve slightly higher accuracy than
 used in the paper to retrain the model. BERT-ps on DataCon2020 and EBSNN-dataset, their per-
 • FS-Net: [9] It is a DL-based encrypted traffic analysis formance is noticeably weaker on the other three tasks.
 method, which use packet-length sequence information On the website identification task under encrypted tunnels
 for supervised learning. It leveraged reconstruction loss (DataCon2021-p2), existing pre-trained models completely
 to ensure that the extracted features by Bi-GRU contain fail, whereas BERT-ps still achieves an accuracy of 90%.
 all the information of the flow sequences. On the encrypted proxy classification task (DataCon2021-p1),
 • GraphDApp: [10] It is a DL-based method based on packet-length-sequence-based methods significantly outper-
 Graph Neural Network (GNN). It constructed Traffic form pre-trained models. Compared to DataCon2020 and
 Interaction Graph (TIG) to represent network flows based EBSNN-dataset, which only contain encrypted traffic with
 on the packet-length and packet direction, and then outdated TLS versions, BERT-ps demonstrates a clear
 applied GNN-based supervised learning. advantage on the TLS 1.3 website identification task
 In addition, we also applied four pre-trained models, (CSTNET-TLS1.3), achieving an accuracy of 97.5%. Experiincluding ET-BERT [14], YaTC [15], NetMamba [17], and mental results indicate that the available byte-pattern in packet
Trafficformer [18] as baselines for accuracy analysis. The input content diminish as the encryption degree increases, leading
to these pre-trained models is payload byte streams rather than to the failure of approaches based on raw byte streams.
packet length sequences. Due to possible training biases about Consequently, methods based on packet sequence length are
network settings, packet headers are excluded from the input. more general for encrypted traffic analysis.

 VI. E VALUATION
 B. Robustness Analysis
 In this section, we conduct a set of experiments to evaluate
the performance of the pre-trained BERT-ps and existing We then conduct a detailed analysis of model’s robustness
baselines, including accuracy and robustness. using this dataset as a case study. We applied PA-curve and
 PA-area as metrics for robustness analysis. Specifically, we
 evaluate the impact of three common types of perturbation:
A. Identification Accuracy Analysis packet loss, packet re-transmission, and packet disorder. These
 The accuracy serves as the primary performance metric perturbations affect packet-length sequences but not packet
for network traffic analysis. We evaluated the accuracy of content due to the checksum and error correction in protocols.
BERT-ps on five public datasets and compared it with various Existing pre-trained models [14], [15], [17], [18] are not
baselines. Metrics about accuracy we applied are detailed in suitable for the robustness analysis in this subsection. As
Appendix B. Experimental results are presented in Table III. a result, we only compare BERT-ps with packet-length-
 1) Higher Accuracy Than Baselines: Although the task sequence-based methods, including AppScanner [3], ETC-PS
and complexity of datasets vary, Table III demonstrates [8], FlowLens [5], FS-Net [9], and GraphDApp [10].
that BERT-ps outperforms packet-length-sequence-based On DataCon2020, both BERT-ps and existing baselines
baselines on all datasets, and surpasses all existing base- can achieve relatively high accuracy. Figure 4 illustrates the
lines on three datasets. Notably, it achieves approximately PA-curve of the model under varying perturbation parameters.
10596 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE III
 T HE I DENTIFICATION R ESULTS OF BERT- PS AND BASELINES ON F IVE P UBLIC DATASET

Fig. 4. The PA-curve of BERT-ps and baselines under different types and intensities of network noise on DataCon2020. Each row in the figure corresponds
to a type of network noise, i.e., packet loss, packet retransmission, and packet disorder.

 TABLE IV
 T HE PA-A REA R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT I NTENSITIES OF N ETWORK N OISE ON DATAC ON 2020ETA

Furthermore, Fig. 5 also presents variations in the PA-area network noise. It indicates that our approach not only achieves
metric across 3 types of network perturbation for all datasets. higher accuracy but also exhibits stronger robustness. Most
 1) Stronger Robustness Than Baselines: As can be seen network flows are still correctly identified after perturbation.
from Figure 4, the PA-curve of BERT-ps is farther to the right As illustrated in Table IV, the PA-area value of our approach
and higher than baselines under various types and levels of decreases slower than existing methods as the network noise
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10597

 Fig. 5. The PA-area under different types and intensities of network noise on five public datasets.

increases. This phenomenon can also be observed across all model can learn generalizable patterns that remain robust
other datasets. Experimental results suggest that BERT-ps under diverse network noise conditions. This enables the
is more resilient to network noise. Existing methods are proposed method to maintain a relatively stable PA-area
typically trained on labeled datasets, which tend to exhibit under different network noises.
lower levels of noise compared to network traffic in real-world 3) Robustness to Different Network Perturbation: We then
environments. As a result, models trained solely on clean analyze the impact of the three types of network noise on
labeled data often perform poorly when exposed to network the model performance in more detail. As the packet loss
traffic with noise. BERT-ps demonstrates stronger robustness rate increases (Fig. 5a), the model’s performance gradually
because it is pre-trained on large-scale real-world network declines. However, the performance degradation of BERT-ps
traffic with noise and obtains a stable and robust general is notably less pronounced than without pre-training and other
knowledge of network traffic. existing methods. Compared with packet re-transmission and
 2) Pre-Training Can Enhance Robustness: On disorder, packet loss has a stronger impact on the model’s
DataCon2020, although the fine-tuned model with pre- performance. For packet-length sequences, the high packet
trained parameters and the model trained from scratch can loss rate leads to a decrease in tokens, which will reduce
achieve similar accuracy, they exhibit significant differences in the amount of information contained. Especially for “mouse
robustness. As shown in Figure 4, the PA-curve of BERT-ps flows” with fewer packets, packet loss will interfere with the
with SFT is shifted more to the right and upward compared to identification results more severely. As illustrated in Fig. 5b,
that of the TFS model. It indicates that the pre-trained model packet re-transmission has virtually no effect on our method,
can increase the ∆p of the sample’s identification result but it significantly degrades the performance of ETC-PS and
during evaluation. Additionally, as demonstrated in Table IV, GraphDApp. For this perturbation, some packet-length tokens
pre-training leads to a PA-area improvement up to 10% will repeat consecutively but without disorder. Therefore,
under common network noise. Besides DataCon2020, this methods with less sensitivity to token duplication can better
phenomenon is also observed across all other datasets, which withstand packet re-transmission. Packet disorder also has a
is illustrated in Fig. 5. Experimental results demonstrate little impact on our approach. As shown in Table IV, the
that pre-training can enhance the model’s robustness against PA-area value of our approach is reduced by less than 2%
network noises. The traffic data used for pre-training is with perturbation rates from 0.1 to 0.6. The features based
collected from real-world network environments with various on path signatures in ETC-PS are sensitive to the packet
forms of network noise. During the pre-training process, the order information. Similarly, the RNN-based packet-length
10598 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 6. The PA-aera under different types and intensities of network noise on 5 public datasets. The plot of baselines in the figure corresponds to the
PA-area of the optimal baseline methods.

 TABLE V middle, small, mini, and tiny, with their hyper-parameters
 T HE H YPER -PARAMETER S ETTING OF BERT- PS shown in Table V. Fig. 6 illustrates PA-area variations of pretrained BERT-ps with different scales across five datasets
 under network noise. We also plotted the highest PA-area of
 baselines as a reference for comparison.
 4) Larger Parameter Scales Enhance Robustness: As
 depicted in Fig. 6, the pre-trained model with larger
 scale exhibits stronger robustness compared to that of
 smaller-scale models. In general, as the size of model’s
 parameters increases, the corresponding PA-area tends to
 be higher, especially on DataCon2021-p2, EBSNN-dataset,
 and CSTNET-TLS1.3. Notably, the tiny-scale pre-trained
representations employed in FS-Net also exhibit strong depen- models typically demonstrate PA-area values lower than
dence on packet order. As for BERT-ps, the self-attention existing methods. It indicates that the advantages of premechanism in the transformer encoder enables it to mitigate training become are evident only when model’s parameters
the impact of out-of-order noise, offering improved robustness reach a certain scale. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 6, the
to sequence irregularities. However, the performance of other pre-trained BERT-ps typically exhibit superior robustness
methods (except for Appscanner and FlowLens) degrades compared to baselines when the parameter scale is larger than
more noticeably, which is also demonstrated in Fig. 5b. BERT-small.
Additionally, it is worth noting that the features extracted 5) Pre-Training Is Better Than Data Augmentation: In
by Appscanner and FlowLens are statistical features that are encrypted traffic analysis tasks, data augmentation is a comindependent of packet order, making them unaffected by this mon approach to enhance the model’s robustness [19], [64],
perturbation. Consequently, as illustrated in Fig. 4, their PA- [65], [66], [67]. We compare the robustness improvement
curves remain flat under packet disorder. performance of two training strategies, data augmentation
 To analyze the impact of the pre-trained model’s parameter (DA) and pre-training with supervised fine-tuning (SFT). For
scale on its robustness, we conducted tests on BERT-ps data augmentation, we add network noise to the training data
models with varying scales. We used the PA-area as the during supervised learning, including Υloss (0.2), Υretrans (0.2),
evaluation metric. The evaluated configurations include base, and Υdisorder (0.3).
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10599

Fig. 7. The PA-area under different types and intensities of network noise on five public datasets using different training strategy for robustness improvement,
including data augmentation (DA) and pre-training with supervised fine-tuning (SFT).

 The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7, in which we TABLE VI
also add the model trained from scratch (TFS) and the optimal T HE A NALYSIS L ATENCY OF BASELINES AND BERT- PS W ITH
baseline as a reference. As can be seen from the figure, the data D IFFERENT PARAMETER S IZE
augmentation strategy can improve the ability of the model to
reduce noise to a certain extent under the three perturbations.
However, its robustness is still weaker than that using the
pre-training strategy. It indicates that data augmentation alone
cannot substitute for the general knowledge learned from
real-world network traffic data during pre-training, which illustrates the effectiveness of the pre-training on the improving
model’s robustness. While data augmentation can enhance
model robustness by expanding the training distribution, it also
significantly increases the computational overhead of model
training due to the enlarged training set. In contrast, the pretraining strategy is more efficient and robust for improving
model robustness, as it leverages prior knowledge by loading
pre-trained parameters without increasing the training cost.
 from Table VI, the model analysis delay increases with the
 number of BERT-ps parameters increases.
C. Time Efficiency
 In addition, the analysis process comprises two components:
 To assess real-world applicability, we evaluate the analysis feature extraction (FE) and model inference (MI). As illuslatency of BERT-ps and existing methods, which is illustrated trated in Table VI, their relative proportion varies significantly
in Table VI. Experimental results indicate that BERT-ps can across models. For AppScanner, ETC-PS, and GraphDApp,
process approximately 1,000 network flows in 0.59 seconds. It feature extraction dominates the total latency, accounting for
shows that the latency of BERT-ps is higher than that of most over 95% of the overall analysis time. In contrast, BERTexisting baselines. This higher latency is primarily attributed ps exhibits significantly lower feature extraction time (about
to the model’s large number of parameters. As can be seen 0.07s/K), representing only 12% of its total analysis time.
10600 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 model for encrypted traffic analysis, including both MLbased and DL-based models.
 Through comprehensive robustness evaluations against traditional ML-based and DL-based approaches, we demonstrate
 that models with large-scale pre-trained parameters not only
 achieve high accuracy but also exhibit stronger robustness.
 Generally, the model’s robustness improves with increasing scale of learnable parameters. Furthermore, pre-training
 enhances robustness compared to models trained from scratch.
 The pre-trained parameters have stabilized and exhibit strong
 robustness. The fine-tuning process usually does not sig-
Fig. 8. The precision and efficiency of the model’s decision probability nificantly adjust pre-trained parameters, which ensures the
estimation under different Monte Carlo sampling size (n). model’s robustness to downstream tasks.
 However, there are still some limitations to be addressed.
 It is critical to acknowledge computational overhead as a
 Since the PA-curve is constructed based on the Monte Carlo primary limitation of the robustness metric. In PA-curve and
method, we tested the precision and efficiency of the model’s PA-area, the computation of sample’s identification probabildecision probability estimation under different sampling sizes ity differences is implemented using Monte Carlo methods.
(n). The target model we analyze is BERT-ps we proposed. We While increasing the number of samples can enhance the
randomly selected a network flow sample with pA = 0.8384 precision of probability estimation, it concurrently incurs
and pB = 0.1616 for testing. significant computational cost with complexity O(n). Con-
 As shown in Fig. 8, the increasing samples can improve sequently, future work may explore optimization techniques
estimation precision but introduce a linear growth in time such as adaptive sampling, variance reduction, or quasi-Monte
consumption. Notably, the estimation result of the Monte Carlo Carlo methods to improve computational efficiency while
method begins to stabilize when the sample size exceeds 200. preserving estimation reliability. Additionally, although pre-
It suggests that the computational cost incurred by larger trained models can bring high accuracy with strong robustness,
sample sizes does not scale proportionally with the gains in they usually have large-scale parameters. The model size,
estimation accuracy. Therefore, an excessively large Monte inference latency, energy consumption, and dependence on
Carlo sampling is not necessary for the construction of PA- dedicated GPU hardware limit their deployment in the realcurve. In practice, we set the Monte Carlo sample size to 1000, world, especially on resource-constrained edge devices. Model
which not only ensures the estimation precision of the model’s compression techniques are expected to maintain robustness
decision probability but also makes the estimation process an while improving deployment feasibility, including knowledge
acceptable time delay (about 0.53s/sample). For large-scale distillation, pruning, and quantization.
datasets, down-sampling can be employed to further reduce While our experiments focused on three common impacts of
computational overhead. Additionally, we also compute con- network noise (packet loss, retransmission, and disorder), we
fidence intervals during the estimation process, which ensures acknowledge that real-world network conditions may involve
the predicted probability differences ∆ p̂ are not overestimated additional complexities such as mixed and non-uniform perrelative to the true values. As a result, the evaluation results turbations. Extending the robustness evaluation framework to
of the model’s robustness have a high confidence level. accommodate these real-world scenarios is a promising direction for future work. Moreover, future research should explore
 VII. D ISCUSSION architectural innovations to enhance the model’s robustness,
 The PA-curve and PA-area are reasonable quantification of which BERT-ps does not consider. While larger pre-trained
model’s robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. We discuss models generally exhibit stronger robustness, their pre-training
their advantages as follows: process becomes increasingly challenging. Pre-training models
 • The model’s robustness only makes sense when it with large-scale learnable parameters require not only vast
 accompanied by an acceptable accuracy. The PA-curve amounts of training data and computational resources, but
 simultaneously captures both the accuracy and robustness also appropriate optimization techniques to make pre-training
 of models, while the PA-area provides a quantitative loss converge. Consequently, the efficient pre-training of largedescription of the PA-curve. A model can achieve a higher scale models for encrypted traffic analysis is also crucial for
 PA-area value only when it exhibits both high accuracy future work.
 and strong robustness.
 • The PA-curve and PA-area depict model’s robustness VIII. C ONCLUSION
 based on the distribution of sample’s identification prob- Considering the lack of reasonable robustness metrics for
 ability differences, providing a nuanced understanding of encrypted traffic analysis, in this paper, we design the PA-curve
 robustness. They account for difference robustness across based on identification probability differences to illustrate
 samples, thereby measuring model’s robustness based on the distribution of sample’s decision stability. PA-curve can
 the overall distribution of local robustness. reflects model’s accuracy and robustness, simultaneously. By
 • The PA-curve and PA-area are model-agnostic and can computing the area under this curve, termed PA-area, we
 be applied to assess the robustness of any identification enable a quantitative assessment of model’s robustness. Addi-
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10601

tionally, we propose a pre-trained packet-length sequence Finally, we estimate the lower and upper bound (p and p) of
model based on the BERT architecture for encrypted traffic a success probability as follows:
analysis and compare its performance with traditional ML- α   α 
based and DL-based models trained from scratch. Besides p = 1 − Fβ−1 ; n − k, k + 1 = Fβ−1 1 − ; k + 1, n − k
 2 α 2
 α
accuracy, we analyzed the robustness of the pre-trained model
  
 p = 1 − Fβ−1 1 − ; k, n − k + 1 = Fβ−1 ; n − k + 1, k
and existing methods under three common network noise 2 2
conditions. Experimental results demonstrate that the pre- (15)
trained model with large-scale parameters not only achieve
higher accuracy, but also exhibit superior resilience to network B. Metrics About Accuracy
noise compared to traditional ML-based and DL-based models The fundamental goal of encrypted traffic analysis is to
trained from scratch. Therefore, investigating models with identify network flows correctly and avoiding misidentificalarge-scale parameters for encrypted traffic analysis holds tion. Metrics about accuracy include accuracy and macro-F1 .
significant practical relevance. The accuracy is the proportion of correctly identified samples to total samples, which can be expressed as follows:
 A PPENDIX N
 1 X (i)
A. Clopper-Pearson Interval Acc = I(cA = c(i) ) (16)
 N
 i=1
 The binomial proportion confidence interval is calculated
from the outcome of a series of Bernoulli trials. When only the where n is the total number of samples, c(i) and c(i) A are
experiment number n and the success number k are known, we respectively the true label and the prediction label of the
apply Clopper-Pearson method [57] to estimate the lower and i-th sample, and I(·) is the indicator function.
upper bound of a success probability p. The  Clopper-Pearson In the binary case, there are four basic concepts: true
interval can be written as inf S ≤ , sup S ≥ with positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN) and
 n αo n αo false negatives (FN). F1 score is defined as:
 S ≤ ≡ p|P{X ≤ k} ≤ , S ≥ ≡ p|P{X ≤ k} ≥ (9) P·R
 2 2 F1 = 2 · . (17)
where 0 ≤ k ≤ n is the number of successes observed in the P+R
sample and X is the binomial random variable with n trials where P = T P+FPTP
 is the precision and R = T P+FN
 TP
 is the
and probability of success p. The confidence level is 1 − α. recall rate. To generalize the binary case to multi-class, we
 For binomial distribution X ∼ Bin(n, p), its cumulative can adopt the macro-F1 assuming we have several one-vs-all
distribution function is defined as follows: (OvA) classifier of each individual class. Therefore, the macrok
 ! F1 is the average of the F1 scores of these classifier, which is
 X n i
 Fbin (k; n, p) = p (1 − p)n−i . (10) defined as follow:
 i 1 X (c)
 i=0
 macro-F1 = F1 (18)
For beta distribution X ∼ B(n, p), its cumulative distribution |Y|
 c∈Y
function is defined as follows:
 where F1(c) is the F1 -score of the classifier for c and Y is the
 Γ(a + b) x a−1
 Z
 Fβ (x; a, b) = t (1 − t)b−1 dt (11) label space of network flows.
 Γ(a)Γ(b) 0
where Γ(·) is the gamma function. The beta distribution is R EFERENCES
the conjugate prior probability distribution for the binomial [1] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic
distribution. Thus, the cumulative distribution function of a with contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
 Oct. 2016, pp. 35–46.
beta distribution can be expressed in terms of the binomial [2] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
distribution with Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
 Fbin (k; n, p) = Fβ (x = 1 − p; a = n − k, b = k + 1). (12) pp. 439–454.
 [3] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart-
 We can apply binomial distribution to estimate the lower phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
bound p and the upper bound p of the success probability Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
 [4] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
p = nk . Moreover, they can also be presented in an alternate TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
format that uses quantiles from the beta distribution, which is no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018.
expressed as follows: [5] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
 and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
 α ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 Fbin (k; n, p) = Fβ (1 − p; n − k, k + 1) = , Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 2
  α [6] L. Yang et al., “Packet-sequence and byte-distribution is enough
 Fbin (n − k; n, p) = Fβ 1 − p; k, n − k + 1 = 1 − . (13) for real-time identification of application traffic,” in Proc. IEEE
 2 Intl Conf Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big Data Cloud
 −1 Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Social Comput. Netw.
 We define Fbeta (·) is the inverse cumulative distribution (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), Sep. 2021, pp. 1126–1134.
function (ICDF) of the beta distribution and [7] L. Yang, S. Fu, Y. Wang, K. Liang, F. Mo, and B. Liu, “DEV-ETA:
 An interpretable detection framework for encrypted malicious traffic,”
 Fβ−1 (x; a, b) = 1 − Fβ−1 (1 − x; b, a). (14) Comput. J., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1213–1227, May 2023.
10602 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[8] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic [30] Z. Song et al., “I 2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neupaths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE ral network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022. Secure Comput., pp. 1–14, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134.
[9] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10056861
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- [31] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detecput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. tion towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
[10] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- Secure Comput., pp. 1–18, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10036003
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, [32] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univerpp. 2367–2380, 2021. sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
[11] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
 “EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic [33] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, L. Cavallaro, “INSOMNIA: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
 pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022. intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
[12] L. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Liu, J. Huang, and S. Fu, “ExpMD: An explainable N. Carlini, A. Demontis, and Y. Chen, Eds., New York, NY, USA: ACM,
 framework for traffic identification based on multi-domain features,” in Nov. 2021, pp. 111–122.
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 32nd Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2024, [34] Y. Li, B. Liang, and A. Tizghadam, “Robust online learning against
 pp. 1–10. malicious manipulation with application to network flow classification,”
[13] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2021,
 representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in pp. 1–10.
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Industry-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU [35] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MANDA: On
 K), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8. adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,” in
[14] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2021, pp. 1–10.
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers [36] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, “MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network intrusion
 pp. 633–642. detection system,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
[15] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, Mar. 2023.
 based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. [37] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427. network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
[16] Z. Hang, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Flow-MAE: Leveraging vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May 2025.
 masked AutoEncoder for accurate, efficient and robust malicious traf- [38] S. Feghhi and D. J. Leith, “A web traffic analysis attack using only
 fic classification,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions timing information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 8,
 Defenses, Oct. 2023, pp. 297–314. pp. 1747–1759, Aug. 2016.
[17] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba: [39] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 2024, pp. 1–12.
 [40] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
[18] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
 robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1–15.
 [41] J. Li et al., “Packet-level open-world app fingerprinting on wireless
[19] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic clastraffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–18.
 sification in diverse network environments with TCP-aware traffic
 augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf. (China), [42] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
 Jul. 2023, pp. 131–132. in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[20] D. Shan, F. Ren, P. Cheng, R. Shu, and C. Guo, “Observing and
 mitigating micro-burst traffic in data center networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. [43] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
 Netw., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Feb. 2020. for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
[21] A. Yu, H. Yang, K. K. Nguyen, J. Zhang, and M. Cheriet, “Burst traffic Security), 2023, pp. 589–606.
 scheduling for hybrid E/O switching DCN: An error feedback spiking [44] K. Wang et al., “BARS: Local robustness certification for deep learning
 neural network approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, based traffic analysis systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 no. 1, pp. 882–893, Mar. 2021. 2023, pp. 1–18.
[22] N. Geng, T. Lan, V. Aggarwal, Y. Yang, and M. Xu, “A multi-agent [45] F. Wei, H. Li, Z. Zhao, and H. Hu, “xNIDS: Explaining deep
 reinforcement learning perspective on distributed traffic engineering,” in learning-based network intrusion detection systems for active intrusion
 Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–11. responses,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security),
[23] Y. Tian et al., “Traffic engineering in partially deployed segment routing 2023, pp. 4337–4354.
 over IPv6 network with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE/ACM Trans. [46] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 Netw., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1573–1586, Aug. 2020. encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
[24] M. Alfatafta, B. Alkhatib, A. Alquraan, and S. Al-Kiswany, “Toward Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 a generic fault tolerance technique for partial network partitioning,” in [47] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
 Proc. 14th USENIX Symp. Operating Syst. Design Implement. (OSDI encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
 20), 2020, pp. 351–368. Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
[25] Y. Yu et al., “Fault management in software-defined networking: A pp. 1–10.
 survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 349–392, 1st [48] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
 Quart., 2019. encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
[26] M. Reitblatt, N. Foster, J. Rexford, C. Schlesinger, and D. Walker, attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 “Abstractions for network update,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
 Rev., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 323–334, Sep. 2012. [49] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic
[27] N. Christensen, M. Glavind, S. Schmid, and J. Srba, “Latte: Improving classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in
 the latency of transiently consistent network update schedules,” ACM Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, Aug. 2017, pp. 50–57.
 SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 14–26, Mar. 2021. [50] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
[28] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probamachine learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021. (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[29] M. Seo et al., “Heimdallr: Fingerprinting SD-WAN control-plane archi- [51] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples
 tecture via encrypted control traffic,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Vancou-
 Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 949–963. ver, BC, Canada, 2021, pp. 2327–2344.
YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA 10603

[52] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level Jun-Jie Huang (Member, IEEE) received the
 relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, Nov. B.Eng. degree (Hons.) in electronic engineering and
 2022, Art. no. 109309. the M.Phil. degree in electronic and information
[53] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic Uninetwork analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions versity, Hong Kong, China, in 2013 and 2015,
 Defenses, Oct. 2022, pp. 495–509. respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Imperial
[54] A. Wieland and C. M. Wallenburg, “Dealing with supply chain risks: College London (ICL), London, U.K., in 2019. From
 Linking risk management practices and strategies to performance,” Int. 2019 to 2021, he was a Post-Doctoral Researcher
 J. Phys. Distribution Logistics Manage., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 887–905, with the Communications and Signal Processing
 Nov. 2012. (CSP) Group, Electrical and Electronic Engineer-
[55] J. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and Z. Kolter, “Certified adversarial robustness ing Department, ICL. He is currently an Associate
 via randomized smoothing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, Professor with the College of Computer Science and Technology, National
 pp. 1310–1320. University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China. His research
[56] L. D. Brown, T. T. Cai, and A. DasGupta, “Interval estimation for a interests include the areas of model-based deep learning, computer vision, and
 binomial proportion,” Stat. Sci., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 101–133, May 2001. signal processing.
[57] C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson, “The use of confidence or fiducial
 limits illustrated in the case of the binomial,” Biometrika, vol. 26, no. 4,
 pp. 404–413, Dec. 1934.
[58] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
 arXiv:1810.04805.
[59] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, Jiangyong Shi was born in 1990. He received the
 “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training,” Ph.D. degree. He is currently an Associate Professor.
 2018. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/ His research interests include networks and system
 languageunsupervised/language understanding paper.pdf security.
[60] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
 2017, arXiv:1711.05101.
[61] DataCon-Community. (2020). Datacon2020–Encrypted Malicious Traffic Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://datacon.qianxin.com/opendata/
 openpage?resourcesId=6
[62] DataCon-Community. (2021). Datacon2021–Encrypted Proxy Traffic Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://datacon.qianxin.com/opendata/
 openpage?resourcesId=10
[63] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu. (2022). CSTNet-TLS
 1.3 Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
 1BUo5TMRuXNvTqNYy0RLeHk4l4Q3BuzS%k
[64] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classifi- Shaojing Fu received the Ph.D. degree in applied
 cation with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet mathematics from the National University of
 Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022, pp. 647–654. Defense Technology in 2010. He is currently a
[65] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website Professor with the College of Computer Science and
 fingerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Technology, National University of Defense Tech-
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023, pp. 1035–1049. nology. His research interests include cryptography
[66] X. Zhao et al., “Towards fine-grained webpage fingerprinting at scale,” theory and information security.
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024,
 pp. 423–436.
[67] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
 of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.

 Yongjun Wang received the Ph.D. degree in com-
 Luming Yang received the Ph.D. degree in puter architecture from the National University of
 cyberspace security from the National University of Defense Technology in 1998. He is currently a
 Defense Technology in 2025. He is currently an Professor with the College of Computer Science
 Assistant Researcher with the Academy of Military and Technology, National University of Defense
 Science. His research interests include encrypted Technology. His research interests include network
 traffic analysis, intrusion detection, network security, security and system security.
 and machine learning.

 Lin Liu received the Ph.D. degree in computer Jinshu Su (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 science from the National University of Defense B.S. degree in mathematics from Nankai University,
 Technology, Changsha, China, in 2020. Currently, Tianjin, in 1985, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 he is an Associate Professor with the College of in computer science from the National University of
 Computer Science and Technology, National Univer- Defense Technology, Changsha, in 1988 and 2000,
 sity of Defense Technology. His research interests respectively. He is currently a Professor with the
 include applied cryptography, privacy-preserving Academy of Military Science. His research interests
 machine learning, and encrypted network traffic include internet architecture, network security, and
 detection. AI for networking.