Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Journal of Network and Computer Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

SAT-Net: A staggered attention network using graph neural networks for
encrypted traffic classification
Zhiyuan Li , Hongyi Zhao , Jingyu Zhao , Yuqi Jiang , Fanliang Bu *
School of Information Network Security, People’s Public Security University of China, Beijing, 100045, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Handling editor: M. Atiquzzaman With the increasing complexity of network protocol traffic in the modern network environment, the task of traffic
 classification is facing significant challenges. Existing methods lack research on the characteristics of traffic byte
Keywords: data and suffer from insufficient model generalization, leading to decreased classification accuracy. In response,
Deep learning we propose a method for encrypted traffic classification based on a Staggered Attention Network using Graph
Encrypted traffic classification
 Neural Networks (SAT-Net), which takes into consideration both computer network topology and user interac­
Graph neural networks
 tion processes. Firstly, we design a Packet Byte Graph (PBG) to efficiently capture the byte features of flow and
Attention mechanism
 their relationships, thereby transforming the encrypted traffic classification problem into a graph classification
 problem. Secondly, we meticulously construct a GNN-based PBG learner, where the feature remapping layer and
 staggered attention layer are respectively used for feature propagation and fusion, enhancing the robustness of
 the model. Experiments on multiple different types of encrypted traffic datasets demonstrate that SAT-Net
 outperforms various advanced methods in identifying VPN traffic, Tor traffic, and malicious traffic, showing
 strong generalization capability.

1. Introduction (NAT), and The Onion Routing (Tor). This directly results in a significant
 decrease in the accuracy of traditional methods based on port and deep
 With the rapid development of computer communication and packet/flow inspection (Yaxuan et al., 2009) (Tomasz et al., 2015)
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, the demand for data security and (Michael et al., 2014). The reasons for this are as follows: (1) Many
privacy protection has reached a new level. According to the Google applications no longer have queryable port numbers (because of the use
Transparency Report (Google) (the portion of HTTPS encryption on the of dynamic port numbers) (Michelle et al., 2011) and employ port
web), as of February 11, 2024, 96% of all Google products and services obfuscation techniques to bypass firewall detection. (2) The proportion
have implemented encryption. Therefore, in the unstoppable trend of of encrypted fields in packet continues to increase, making the use of
network traffic encryption, effectively classifying encrypted traffic into payload unreliable. As the proportion of encrypted traffic gradually in­
specific categories is a key issue for achieving high-quality network se­ creases, machine learning and deep learning-based methods for network
curity management and optimizing network resources (e.g., QoS con­ traffic analysis have become mainstream. Researchers have found that
trol, traffic billing, and intrusion detection) (Tao et al., 2023). The encrypted traffic of different types (e.g., protocol type, service type, and
process of network traffic classification typically involves capturing application type) exhibits different statistical characteristics. Thus, they
traffic data from monitored network nodes and then labeling them ac­ attempt to combine machine learning algorithms (e.g., C4.5 decision
cording to user requirements (protocols, service types). However, as tree, SVM, RF) with manually designed statistical features (e.g.,
traffic encryption technologies continue to evolve (such as IPsec, TLS, time-related features) for encrypted traffic classification (Gerard et al.,
SSL, and SRTP), achieving fine-grained encrypted traffic classification 2016) (Arash Habibi et al., 2017). However, this approach has certain
faces many unprecedented challenges. drawbacks. On the one hand, it is difficult to ensure that the selected
 Due to concerns about user privacy and security, numerous tech­ traffic statistical features are stable and reliable. For example, the sta­
nologies have emerged for secure communication and remote access, tistical characteristics of Elephant flows and Mice flows are significantly
such as Virtual Private Networks (VPN), Network Address Translation different in their respective communication patterns (Theophilus et al.,

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: bufanliang@sina.com (F. Bu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2024.104069
Received 21 March 2024; Received in revised form 21 October 2024; Accepted 13 November 2024
Available online 15 November 2024
1084-8045/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

2010). On the other hand, this method heavily relies on expert experi­ with detailed graph construction and model design presented in Sec­
ence and consumes a considerable amount of manual effort during the tion4. Firstly, SAT-Net addresses the challenge of converting traffic
feature engineering stage. flows into graph. Specifically, we transform the original byte sequence
 To address the aforementioned challenges, researchers have turned of data packets into an undirected graph structure, namely the Packet
their attention to deep learning methods. By simply inputting raw Byte Graph (PBG), where bytes serve as vertices in the graph, and the
network traffic data into a well-designed neural network model, the associations between bytes are represented by edges. This graph struc­
model can automatically extract features for traffic classification (Wei ture allows for capturing the complex relationships between bytes,
et al., 2017a; Haipeng et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2019; Xinjie et al., 2022; laying the foundation for subsequent feature learning. Next, we perform
Peng et al., 2023; Giuseppe et al., 2021; Xin et al., 2020). Due to its embedding learning on the PBG through the GraphSAGE algorithm,
linear features such as translation invariance and compositionality, CNN obtaining vector representations in the feature space. Subsequently,
is naturally suitable for deep computation and inference of Euclidean these vectors are subjected to feature remapping by a carefully designed
data, such as natural language processing and image processing tasks MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron), thereby extracting richer and more
(Ma et al., 2022). Therefore, we believe that the potential reason for the expressive feature representations. In particular, we introduce a multieffectiveness of deep learning methods in encrypted traffic classification head attention mechanism in the Staggered Attention Layer, which
lies in the representation of traffic flow data (Chang et al., 2019) (Xin fuses parallel PBG feature vectors to capture global context and key
et al., 2020) (Chang et al., 2018), which inevitably brings network traffic features, thereby highlighting important information in the packet byte
into Euclidean space. However, this approach has two drawbacks: first, graph of encrypted traffic. Ultimately, these fused features are input into
it cannot fully explore the nonlinear implicit features of network traffic, the classification layer, generating the final classification labels. With
and second, training deep neural network models consumes a significant this architecture, SAT-Net effectively captures key patterns and features
amount of time. in encrypted traffic, significantly improving the accuracy and robustness
 Recently, researchers have become increasingly interested in non- of classification. Especially through the combination of PBG and the
Euclidean data, which is widely present in many fields (Zonghan Staggered Attention Layer, SAT-Net demonstrates strong performance
et al., 2021) (such as social networks, chemical molecular structures, advantages in encrypted traffic classification tasks.
and neuroscience), and have attempted to model and analyze network In summary, the main contributions of our paper are summarized as
traffic according to non-Euclidean structures (Chang et al., 2018; Chen follows:
et al., 2020; Ting-Li et al., 2021, 2023; Minghao et al., 2022; Bo et al.,
2021; Meng et al., 2021). Therefore, starting from the topology of • We propose a GNN-based encrypted traffic classification method,
computer networks, we observe that the features of network traffic data named SAT-Net, which transforms the network traffic classification
naturally reside in the non-Euclidean domain. Representing network problem into a graph classification problem. It handles graph feature
encrypted traffic data as graph data can express its potential hidden vectors in a multi-task learning manner, enabling high-precision
patterns. As shown in Fig. 1, the arrangement of elements in the two data packet-level encrypted traffic classification.
domains exhibits significant differences. Specifically, treating byte­ • To achieve fine-grained feature extraction, we design a dynamic
s/packets/session flows in encrypted traffic as nodes in the graph and sliding window size selection strategy to obtain optimal represen­
constructing edges using relationships between corresponding entities, tations of packet byte graph of traffic flow, thereby improving the
embedding the traffic graph into a model based on graph neural net­ model’s generalization.
works, and then completing downstream tasks according to user re­ • To obtain vector representations of entire packets, we propose a
quirements. Existing GNN-based methods primarily use packets as graph feature fusion method based on staggered attention, allowing it to
nodes to extract flow-level feature information for encrypted traffic capture important features from different graphs and enhance the
classification. In summary, we believe that focusing on the intrinsic model’s performance.
characteristics of traffic flows and achieving fine-grained feature • We evaluate the performance of our proposed model through a series
extraction can, to some extent, alleviate the issue of feature instability of experiments on four public datasets and a self-collected dataset.
caused by fluctuations in the network environment. Therefore, selecting Experimental results demonstrate that, compared to baselines, SATa suitable, stable, and reliable representation method for encrypted Net can accurately identify encrypted traffic generated by different
traffic is a crucial step towards efficient encrypted traffic classification apps with high precision.
and enhancing the generalization capability of the model.
 Inspired by the observations of geometric deep learning, in this The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present
paper, we propose SAT-Net (Staggered Attention Network), a novel an overview of the related research on encrypted traffic classification
GNN-based method for encrypted traffic classification. Specifically, according to various methodologies. Section 3 serves as a preliminary
SAT-Net comprises four modules: Graph Embedding Layer, Feature section, setting the stage for the subsequent discussion. Section 4 pro­
Remapping Layer, Staggered Attention Layer, and classification layer, vides a detailed description of our proposed SAT-Net. The focus of

 Fig. 1. Two types of data fields.

 2
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Section 5 is on the experimental setup and the evaluation of the SAT-Net, 2021) combined pre-training and fine-tuning methods, utilizing
and we discuss the practical application in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 multi-modal traffic representation information as input and achieving
concludes the paper with a summary of the findings and discussions. automatic feature extraction through multi-task learning. Most deep
 learning-based methods utilize the raw bytes of flows and carefully
2. Related work designed flow or packet features. For instance, Wang et al. proposed
 App-Net (Xin et al., 2020), an end-to-end hybrid neural network that
 Handling the encrypted traffic classification problem can be roughly combines LSTM and CNN to respectively learn the sequence of packet
divided into two stages. The first stage is traffic representation, followed lengths and the raw packets of TLS flows. Some studies have achieved
by the design of suitable deep learning model classifiers. It can be said promising results solely using the distribution of packet lengths (Chang
that the traffic representation method directly affects the selection of et al., 2019) (Chang et al., 2018) (Chen et al., 2020). Their rationale is
neural network classifiers. We review relevant work based on these two that the sequence of packet lengths contains temporal characteristics of
aspects and finally discuss the differences between our work and existing flows. In general, the stability of traffic features extracted by these
methods. Table 1 provides a summary of the two types of related work. methods is susceptible to fluctuations due to differences in network
 environments, system architectures of applications, and types of ser­
2.1. Deep learning-based method vices. Additionally, these methods lack focus on the bytes of traffic
 themselves, hence these features are unstable.
 With the continuous enhancement of GPU computing power, many
fields requiring large-scale training data, such as speech recognition, 2.2. GNN-based method
machine translation, and computer vision, have achieved substantial
breakthroughs (Michael et al., 2017). In the field of encrypted traffic In recent years, methods based on graph neural networks, which
classification, Wang et al. (Wei et al., 2017a) first proposed using deep analyze data from the perspective of non-Euclidean space, have gained
learning models to address the problem of encrypted traffic classifica­ widespread attention. Huoh et al. (Ting-Li et al., 2021) first proposed
tion. They utilized the first 784 bytes of packets to learn the nonlinear using graph neural networks for traffic classification by considering the
relationship between input and output through a 1D-CNN (Convolu­ relationship between raw bytes of packets from the perspective of
tional Neural Networks). By extracting 10 packets from each flow, each non-Euclidean distance space. In subsequent work (Ting-Li et al., 2023),
containing 1500 bytes, they obtained the optimal representation of they enhanced graph neural networks by supplementing graph-level
traffic. Yao et al. (Haipeng et al., 2022) achieved VPN traffic type attributes. To obtain more accurate traffic graph representations,
recognition using an LSTM model based on attention mechanisms. Liu Jiang et al. (Minghao et al., 2022) proposed using a Flow Relationship
et al. (Chang et al., 2019) introduced the Flow Sequence Network Graph to characterize encrypted traffic by defining two types of
(FS-Net), which employs an encoder to map flows to a feature space and flow-level relationships. Pang et al. (Bo et al., 2021) characterized
then uses a reconstruction mechanism to recover the input sequence. In network traffic based on packet semantics and causal relationships of
addition, the method of using a large amount of unlabeled traffic data network behavior, proposing a Chain Graph as the basis for graph neural
for pre-training has also achieved good performance as expected. Lin network classification. Shen et al. (Meng et al., 2021) found significant
et al. proposed an encrypted traffic classification model ET-BERT (Xinjie differences in the behavior of packets within a single burst and across
et al., 2022) based on the pre-training method, which first performs different bursts, which can serve as the basis for learning features of
pre-training on a large-scale unlabeled dataset, and then fine-tunes with encrypted traffic by classifiers. Zhang et al. introduced TFE-GNN
a small amount of task-specific dataset. Similarly, using the pre-training (Haozhen et al., 2023), a time-fused encoder based on graph neural
method, Lin et al. (Peng et al., 2023) trained a deep learning model networks, which learns byte-level traffic graphs of packet headers and
based on the self-attention mechanism with the original traffic bytes and payloads through dual embedding and then obtains vector representa­
packet length sequences, deeply exploring the multimodal relationships tions of entire packets. Pham et al. (Thai-Dien et al., 2021) learned po­
between ‘bytes-packets-bidirectional flow’. Aceto et al. (Giuseppe et al., tential patterns of mobile application traffic using communication

Table 1
Summary of related work on encrypted traffic classification.
 Category Refs. Year Model/Algorithm Traffic features Goal

 Deep Learning- Wei et al. (2017a) 2017 1D-CNN Original traffic byte data in each packet VPN encrypted traffic
 based Chang et al. (2019) 2019 FS-Net Packet length sequence characteristics Application Fingerprint
 Xin et al. (2020) 2020 App-Net Original network traffic flow Application Fingerprint
 Chen et al. (2020) 2020 Capsule Neural Packet length sequence characteristics VPN and non-VPN encrypted
 Network traffic
 Giuseppe et al. 2021 DISTILLER Traffic Object Segmentations VPN and non-VPN encrypted
 (2021) traffic
 Haipeng et al. 2022 LSTM & HAN Original network traffic flow VPN and non-VPN encrypted
 (2022) traffic
 Xinjie et al. (2022) 2022 ET-BERT Traffic raw bytes are used for pre-training Traffic type and Application
 Peng et al. (2023) 2023 PEAN Traffic raw bytes are used for pre-training Traffic type and Application
 GNN-based Bo et al. (2021) 2021 CGNN Chained graph of the chained compositional sequence Traffic type and Application
 Meng et al. (2021) 2021 GraphDApp Constructed Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) DApp Traffic type and
 Application
 Thai-Dien et al. 2021 MAppGraph A communication graph defined by tuples of IP address and port Mobile-App Classification
 (2021) of the services
 Minghao et al. 2022 FG-Net Constructed Flow Relationship Graph (FRG) Traffic type and Application
 (2022)
 Ting-Li et al. (2023) 2023 GNNs Account packet raw bytes, metadata and packet relations VPN encrypted traffic
 Haozhen et al. 2023 TFE-GNN PMI is used to construct byte-level traffic graph Traffic type and Application
 (2023)
 Tiru et al. (2023) 2023 BehavSniffer Constructed Traffic Burst Graph (TBG) Social Network User Behavior
 Ours SAT-Net A Packet Byte Graph (PBG) according to the payload and header Traffic type and Application
 of the packet

 3
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

behavior represented as graphs with node features and edge weights, 3. Preliminary
proposing the DGCNN model. It is worth mentioning that in the past two
years, research on traffic behavior has also become active in this 3.1. Graph based representation of network encrypted traffic
research community, as identifying traffic behavior is a key research
hotspot in the field of encrypted traffic analysis and serves as an Existing neural networks are well-suited for processing Euclidean
important means for network security management and monitoring data with translational invariance and for uncovering hidden patterns
(Xiaodong et al., 2023). BehavSniffer (Tiru et al., 2023) enhances the (Bentian et al., 2021). However, a vast amount of data cannot be dis­
relationship between unidirectional flows by using an additional cussed within the Euclidean space, such as the structure of chemical
designed burst-bt edge on the basis of GraphDApp (Meng et al., 2021). In molecules, user behavior in social networks, and so on. Therefore, re­
(Tiru et al., 2023), the authors focus on the combination of high-order searchers have turned their attention to graph-structured data, which
and low-order relationships of flows, and achieve feature fusion using are complex and can encapsulate rich information (Ting-Li et al., 2021)
DNN and kernel principal component analysis, ultimately realizing the (Ting-Li et al., 2023). Below, we will describe the general form of rep­
recognition of user behavior in social media. These methods all resenting traffic data using graph-structured data.
 { }n
construct graphs based on flow or packet features, without dis­ Given a collection of bidirectional flows S = f i , where each
tinguishing between communication control behavior and data trans­ { }n i=1

mission behavior. Therefore, they exhibit weak robustness against noise flow corresponds to a label L = l i
 . A packet is the basic unit of a
 i=1
in traffic.
 single bidirectional flow. Therefore, each flow f i in S can be represented
 In summary, here are the differences between our method and { }m
existing works: as f i = pj , where each packet pj consists of several bytes: pj =
 j=1
 {bk }ok=1 . Encrypted traffic classification aims to categorize an unknown
a) We observe that a session can be divided into two processes: hand­ flow or packet into the correct protocol, service type, or application.
 shake and teardown phases, and data transmission phase. As shown Therefore, based on the structure of the graph:
 in Fig. 2, we use a workflow of a TCP session to illustrate the above
 process. We construct packet byte graphs for the header byte portion G = {V, E, X}
 (including IP header, TCP header) and payload portion (including
 data fields) separately, enabling feature extraction at the network where V represents the set of nodes, E represents the set of edges, X ∈
 packet level. It is worth noting that the applicability of the encrypted R|V|×D is the feature matrix of the graph, where D is the dimensionality of
 { }T
 traffic classification method proposed in this paper is not limited to node features. N(nv ) = ntv t=1 represents the set of neighbors of node v,
 the TCP protocol. The reason is that we consider the network to­ and the graph’s label is denoted as y. The adjacency matrix of the graph
 pology and the communication process between the client and the
 is represented as A ∈ {0, 1}|V|×|V| . Where, for any element aij in A, if aij =
 server, and regardless of the protocol used, it will include data
 1, it indicates that there is an edge between node i and node j. Thus, A is
 transmission behavior and communication control behavior (for
 a symmetric matrix, and all elements on the diagonal are 1.
 example, the QUIC (UDP-based) and the UDP (connectionless) also
 Clearly, for the task of flow-level encrypted traffic classification, we
 have these two modes).
 can treat individual packets or packets within the same burst as nodes,
b) We employ a dynamic sliding window mechanism to construct
 with the relationships between these packets serving as edges (Minghao
 packet byte graphs, capturing long-term dependencies between bytes
 et al., 2022) (Meng et al., 2021), thereby modeling at the flow granu­
 and obtaining richer, more accurate representations of traffic graphs.
 larity. For packet-level classification tasks, we can utilize the bytes of
c) In terms of classifier design, we utilize a multi-head attention
 each packet as nodes and the relationships between bytes as edges to
 mechanism during the feature fusion stage to integrate information
 capture byte-level features (Haozhen et al., 2023).
 about both session control behavior and data transmission behavior.
 We also validate the generalization of the proposed model on various
 3.2. Graph SAmple and aggregate (GraphSAGE)
 types of network traffic datasets.
 GraphSAGE (William et al., 2017) does not learn embeddings for
 individual nodes but learns an aggregation function. This function is
 used to generate new embedding representations from the local neigh­
 borhood of nodes, addressing the inefficiency in training large-scale
 graph neural networks. Therefore, it is well-suited for handling
 encrypted traffic. GraphSAGE has three aggregation functions:

 (1) Mean Aggregation (MEAN): Similar to the convolution propaga­
 tion rule in the GCN framework, it directly calculates the mean of
 neighboring nodes. The calculation is as follows (Equation (1)):
 ( ({ } { })
 pkv = σ W • mean pk−v 1 ∪ pk−n 1 (1)

 where, ∀n ∈ N, pkv represents the feature vector of node v at step k, and N
 represents the set of neighbors.

 (2) Long Short-Term Memory Aggregation (LSTM): LSTM aggrega­
 tion is suitable for scenarios where neighboring nodes are
 randomly arranged. We demonstrated in experiments that LSTM
 aggregation yields the best performance for encrypted traffic
 classification, attributed to its ability to capture temporal infor­
 mation in traffic.

 Fig. 2. A TCP session.

 4
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 (3) Pooling Aggregation (POOL): The isomorphic max pooling Edge: The edges in the PBG are used to represent relationships be­
 operation of the pooling aggregation achieves aggregation of tween vertices. Since the connections between vertices reflect the
 information across neighbors. The calculation is as follows structural characteristics of the graph data, we adopt the Pointwise
 (Equation (2)): Mutual Information (PMI) (Liang et al., 2018) commonly used in NLP
 ({ ( ) }) tasks to measure the relationships between bytes. To avoid the occur­
Aggregatepool
 k = max σ Wpool pkn + b , ∀n ∈ N (2) rence of negative infinity in PMI, we calculate the Positive Pointwise
 As shown in Fig. 3, the general steps of node sampling and aggre­ Mutual Information (PPMI), which is computed as follows in Equation
gation in the GraphSAGE algorithm are as follows: (1) Sample the kth- (3):
order neighboring nodes of the center node. (2) Utilize the aggrega­ (
 P(b1 , b2 )
 )
tion function to obtain local neighborhood features. (3) Predict the PPMI(b1 , b2 ) = MAX log2 ,0 (3)
 P(b1 )P(b2 )
center node based on the feature information. Due to the ability of the
aggregation function to learn new subgraph embedding representations, where, P(b) denotes the probability of a byte occurring in all windows.
GraphSAGE is also suitable for learning node representations in graphs For example, if there are a total of 6 windows and byte b appears in 4 of
with dynamic changes. them, then P(b) = 23. Additionally, P(b1 , b2 ) represents the probability of
 bytes b1 and b2 occurring together in a window, that is, out of a total of 6
4. Methodology windows, bytes b1 and b2 appear together in 2 of them, thus P(b1 , b2 ) =
 1
 3. We only construct an edge between two nodes when PPMI(b1 ,b2 ) > 0.
4.1. The design of packet byte graph and construction
 It’s worth noting that PPMI(b1 , b2 ) = PPMI(b2 , b1 ), making PBG an un­
 directed graph.
 Network packets are the most common data units in communication
 Dynamic Window Setting: Since we handle the header and payload
networks and represent the smallest data element in packet-switched
 parts of the data packet separately, we dynamically define the window
networks (PSDN), consisting of control information (such as port
 size using a strategy similar to exponential smoothing.
numbers, checksums, service types, and protocols) and payload data
 Below, we illustrate the method of setting up a dynamic window
(Leslie, 2020). Due to the different information carried by the packet
 using an example. Let’s assume a byte sequence {12, f3, 03, 97, 12, 0f,
header and payload, the former conveys control semantic information
 f2, 30}, when the sliding window size is set to w = 3 (taking only pos­
about the communication process and the content of the packet, while
 itive integers), we can calculate that P(12) = 23, P(97) = 12, P(03) = 12,
the latter contains the specific data content of the communication pro­
cess. Based on this observation, to obtain the global semantics of the P(03, 97) = 13, PPMI(97, 03) = log2 43. We also observe that there may be
packet, we process both the header and payload parts of the packet significant differences between the features of the header and payload,
separately and use the packet byte sequence to construct the Packet Byte hence a flexible approach is required to set the window size, in order to
Graph (PBG), enabling packet-level encrypted traffic classification. In accommodate different packets. Due to the fixed length of the packet
this graph, nodes represent bytes in the packet, and edges denote the header byte sequence, but not for the payload part, we set different
spatial relationships between bytes. The following is a detailed sliding window sizes for these two parts when constructing PBG. Spe­
description of our PBG construction process. cifically, we set the size of the packet header byte sequence as wh , and
 the window size for the payload part is calculated as follows according to
4.1.1. Packet byte graph construction equation (4):
 Before constructing the Packet Byte Graph (PBG), we need to pre­ (
 Lenpayload
 )
process the dataset (the original.pcap files). Firstly, we use the open- wp = α*MAX , wh + (1 − α)2wh (4)
 Lenheader
source tool, named Splitcap, to extract bidirectional flows based on
the packet’s five-tuple information. Secondly, we remove packets The dynamic window size can adaptively capture the dependency
without payload content. Lastly, we discard the Ethernet header of the relationship between bytes in sequences of different lengths. By
packets and anonymize the source and destination IP addresses as well adjusting α and the window size, we can better adapt to the relationships
as the port numbers since this information is irrelevant for traffic between bytes in sequences of different lengths. For instance, when the
classification. payload length of a packet is much greater than the header length, the
 Vertex: The vertices of the PBG are the bytes in the packets. Bytes window size will be increased accordingly to capture richer byte de­
with different values are considered as different vertices, thus limiting pendencies. Through a series of experiments, we found that the best
the size of the entire graph to within 256 nodes. Each node has two performance is achieved when wh = 5 and α = 0.4. Algorithm 1
attributes: byte size and count.

 ( )T
 Fig. 3. The GraphSAGE algorithm. Here, the sampled node features are represented as y1 , y2 , …, ym , which can be used for prediction tasks.

 5
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

describes the construction process of PBG. PBG-payload using a multi-head attention mechanism to capture
 Algorithm 1 Construction of Packet Byte Graph important features of the entire packet. Finally, the fused representation
 Input: The byte sequence of the packet: p = {b1 , b2 , …, bn }
 is input into a classification layer to obtain the final label.
 Output: The Header Byte Graph Gh = {V, E} and the Payload Byte Graph Gp = {V,E}
 1: Initialize Gh = {V, E} and Gp = {V, E} as empty sets 4.2.1. Graph embedding layer
 2: Separate the sequence p into header and payload Having constructed the PBG, we have obtained a graph-structured
 3: for bi ∈ p do
 representation of the encrypted traffic, where nodes represent bytes in
 4: if i ≤ length(header) then
 5: Add vertices in VGh according to ascending order of byte value packets and edges denote the relationships between bytes. The core
 6: if ∀vr , vs ∈ VGh then objective of the graph embedding layer is to encode the Packet Byte
 7: if PPMI(vr , vs ) > 0 then Graph (PBG) into high-dimensional feature vectors to capture the
 8: Add an edge between vr , vs in EGh complex relationships and patterns between packet bytes. In SAT-Net,
 9: else
 we utilize the GraphSAGE algorithm as the basis for graph convolu­
 10: Add vertices in VGp according to ascending order of byte value
 11: if ∀vk , vl ∈ VGp then
 tion operations, owing to its unique sampling and aggregation strategy
 12: if PPMI(vk , vl ) > 0 then that efficiently handles large-scale graph data, particularly suitable for
 13: Add an edge between vk , vl in EGp complex graph structures in encrypted traffic analysis. The GraphSAGE
 14: return Gh and Gp algorithm is an inductive learning method, offering several significant
 advantages over traditional full-graph convolution methods. Firstly,
4.1.2. A PBG sample of SAT-Net GraphSAGE effectively limits the neighborhood size required for each
 In this subsection, we visualize the construction process of a PBG computation through its fixed-interval node sampling strategy, thereby
through an example. As depicted in Fig. 4, the process begins by accelerating feature propagation and significantly improving computa­
calculating the frequency of each byte (same value) within all sliding tional efficiency. This is especially critical in scenarios such as encrypted
windows of the byte sequence (steps 1-n). Subsequently, bytes are traffic analysis, where the data volume is large and highly diverse.
mapped to vertices in the graph, and relationships between vertices are Secondly, GraphSAGE’s aggregation operation effectively captures
determined by computing Positive Pointwise Mutual Information hidden features between nodes by representing the features of a node
(PPMI). This results in the formation of the PBG. For convenience, we and its neighbors in a joint embedding space. Particularly in our
arrange the byte values in sequence; however, such a logical order may encrypted traffic analysis task, GraphSAGE iteratively aggregates the
not exist in the actual graph. Then, we differentiate the graph into PBG- feature representations of nodes and their neighbors, integrating local
header and PBG-payload based on the header and payload in the byte features of the traffic byte graph (PBG) into global features. This itera­
sequence. tive aggregation process starts with the sampled nodes and their
 neighbors, calculating the feature vectors of these nodes and aggre­
 gating them into a specific neighborhood. Then, the current represen­
4.2. SAT-Net
 tation of the node is concatenated with the aggregated neighborhood
 vector and input into a nonlinear activation function (such as PReLU),
 Prior to this section, we have addressed the conversion of network
 generating the final embedding vector of the node. This embedding
traffic data into graph data, transforming packet raw byte sequences into
 vector better captures both local and global features within the packet,
undirected Packet Byte Graphs (PBGs), where each byte in a packet
 thereby providing strong support for subsequent feature remapping and
constitutes a vertex in the graph, and the connections between vertices
 classification.
represent the associations between bytes. Additionally, we have utilized
 The input of the graph embedding layer is defined as G = {V, E} ,
a window-based optimization method to obtain a more accurate repre­
 where the number of nodes in the graph is n, V represents the set of
sentation of the packet byte graph. Following this, we present the spe­
 nodes, and E is the set of edges. Node features are denoted as {xv ,
cific design concept of SAT-Net, Fig. 5 provides an overall framework of
 ∀v ∈ V}. To further learn the deep relationships between graph nodes,
SAT-Net.
 we stack two GraphSAGE convolutional layers in the graph embedding
 Specifically, SAT-Net comprises four modules: a graph embedding
layer, feature remapping layer, Staggered Attention layer, and classifi­ layer. The output of the first layer is passed as the hidden state H ̃ 1 to the
 t
cation layer, which are interconnected to form an end-to-end network. ̃ 2 from the second layer for
 next layer. Finally, the output layer uses the H t
Initially, we employ GraphSAGE to embed PBG-header and PBG- batch normalization and regularization to compute the final feature
payload in parallel, obtaining the vector representation of PBG in the vector v. The computation process is as follows in Equations (5) and (6):
feature space. Then, each embedding is remapped through an MLP to
 ( )
obtain more semantic information about the PBG. Subsequently, stag­ H
 ̃ (k) = SAGEConv H(k)
 t t ,1 < t<n (5)
gered attention layer fuses the vector representations of PBG-header and
 ( ( (1) (2) ))
 v = σ Wo ⋅ CONCAT H
 ̃ ,H
 t
 ̃
 t (6)

 where σ is the activation function, Wo represents the weight matrix for a
 linear transformation, which can be used to change the output dimen­
 sion. We use average pooling to obtain the feature vector of PBG. It is
 worth noting that our SAT-Net adopts a parallel embedding approach,
 where the parameters of the model are independent for PBG-header and
 PBG-payload during the embedding learning process.

 4.2.2. Feature remapping layer
 Inspired by the graph isomorphism problem (Jin-yi et al., 1992), we
 designed an MLP in this layer to learn the representation vector of the
 PBG for feature enhancement. It comprises two linear layers, a batch
 normalization layer, and a parameterized PReLU activation function,
 with each linear layer acting as a recursive neighbor aggregation strat­
 Fig. 4. Visualization of the construction process of the PBG. egy, performing deep processing and feature enhancement on node

 6
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 Fig. 5. Overall network architecture of the proposed SAT-Net.

features. Here is our design approach for the MLP: where, hv is the input node feature vector, W1 ∈ Rm×n and b1 ∈ Rm are
 Within the MLP, the input data first undergoes a linear trans­ the weight matrix and bias vector of the linear layer, respectively, and h1
formation through the first linear layer, mapping node features to a is the output of the linear layer.
hidden feature space. This step expands the original feature information
to a higher-dimensional representation through linear transformation, (2) For each feature dimension i of h1 , compute the mean μi and
thereby preserving and enhancing the initial information of the node
 variance σ 2i .
and its neighborhood. After the linear transformation, the batch
normalization layer normalizes the features by adjusting their mean and 1∑ B

variance, ensuring that the hidden layer features have zero mean and μi = h1,k,i (8)
 B k=1
unit variance. This operation not only accelerates the training process of
the network but also significantly improves the stability and conver­ B
 1∑ ( )2
gence speed of the model, avoiding issues such as vanishing or exploding σ 2i = h1,k,i − μi (9)
 B k=1
gradients, thus maintaining the consistency and robustness of the
feature representation. Subsequently, the batch normalization layer
 where B represents the batch size. Then, after normalization, we obtain
normalizes the output of the linear layer. Normalization aids in accel­
 h2 :
erating the training process and improving the stability and convergence
speed of the model. Unlike traditional ReLU, PReLU enhances the net­ h1 − μ
 h2 = √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⋅γ + β (10)
work’s ability to handle nonlinear problems by adaptively adjusting the σ2 + ϵ
output of negative input values. This is particularly effective when the
distribution of input data is uneven, as PReLU can better capture po­ where γ ∈ Rm and β ∈ Rm are learned scaling and shifting parameters,
tential feature relationships. After passing through the second linear respectively. The purpose of ϵ is to avoid division by zero.
layer and the activation function, the output layer of the MLP maps these
nonlinearly transformed features to the final output space. This recur­ (3) PReLU activation function
sive neighbor aggregation strategy ensures that the model can effec­
 h3 = max(0, h2 ) + a*min(0, h2 ) (11)
tively integrate multi-level information from nodes and their
neighborhoods, strengthening the model’s ability to recognize key fea­
tures. Formally, the computational formula for the above process is (4) output:
given by (7)-(12):
 y = W2 ⋅h3 + b2 (12)
 (1) Linear Transformation: Transform h3 through the weight matrix W2 and bias b2 for the sec­
 ond linear transformation to obtain the final output y.
h1 = W1 hv + b1 (7)
 Through the above steps, the Feature Remapping Layer enhances the

 7
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

feature representation while maintaining the integrity of the original ( )
information. It is able to capture global and local features in the PBG yp = MultiHean Attn yp , yh , yh
 ̃ (16)
more effectively, ultimately resulting in the remapped feature vector y.
 ( )
Since we perform parallel embeddings, we distinguish between the z = CONCAT ̃yh , ̃
 yp (17)
feature vectors of PBG-header and PBG-payload, for subsequent de­
scriptions, denoted as yh and yp respectively. In conclusion, the Staggered Attention Layer effectively enhances the
 model’s feature representation capability through the context-
4.2.3. Staggered attention layer awareness of the multi-head attention mechanism, multi-perspective
 Now that we have obtained the rich vector representation of the PBG, feature representation, refined feature fusion, and information capture
we use the Staggered Attention Layer to capture traffic feature infor­ across semantic spaces. This ensures that key features can be accurately
mation in multiple semantic spaces through the multi-head attention captured and integrated in complex encrypted traffic classification tasks.
mechanism. The aim is to address the issue of information loss in
traditional feature concatenation methods and to enhance the model’s 4.2.4. Classification layer
ability to express complex features. The benefits of this approach are as The classification layer consists of two fully connected layers. The
follows: first fully connected layer accepts the output z from the staggered
 attention layer as input and employs the PReLU activation function,
 (1) Context-aware Feature Fusion: The core advantage of the atten­ which adaptively adjusts the shape of the activation function to enhance
 tion mechanism lies in its ability to provide contextual informa­ the model’s non-linear expressive capabilities. The second fully con­
 tion for each feature vector, allowing the fusion of features to nected layer is a linear layer that takes the output of the first fully
 consider the global dependencies within the Packet Byte Graph connected layer as input, and its output feature dimension corresponds
 (PBG). Through a weighted approach, the attention mechanism to the number of categories in the classification task. This layer serves to
 automatically assigns higher weights to important features while map the output features of the previous layer to the final classification
 diminishing the impact of irrelevant or redundant features. results.
 (2) Multi-perspective Feature Representation with Multi-head The output o of the entire classification layer is the output of the
 Attention: The multi-head attention mechanism processes mul­ second fully connected layer, representing the model’s predictions for
 tiple attention heads in parallel, enabling the model to learn the input data classification. In this way, the model can make classifi­
 feature representations in multiple subspaces. Each attention cation decisions based on the input data features.
 head focuses on different types of feature relationships within a Loss function. Considering that traffic data in real-world traffic
 distinct representation subspace, capturing the diversity and environments is often imbalanced, the use of standard cross-entropy
 complexity of traffic features. For example, one attention head loss, commonly employed in classification problems, may lead to
 may concentrate on specific patterns in header information, biased estimates. Some research has utilized Generative Adversarial
 while another may focus on detailed features in the payload. This Networks (GAN) (Wajdi and Wonjun, 2020) to generate traffic samples
 multi-perspective feature representation allows the model to to address the issue of sample data imbalance. However, these generated
 more comprehensively capture rich information in encrypted samples often do not align with real samples and can increase the
 traffic, enhancing classification accuracy and robustness. training cost. Therefore, we employ Focal Loss as the loss function.
 (3) Avoiding Information Loss and Refined Feature Fusion: Directly Formally, it is represented by Equation (18):
 concatenating header and payload feature vectors can lead to )
 information loss due to dimensional discrepancies or uneven FLsoftmax (gt ) = − αt (1 − gt )γ log (gt ) (18)
 weight distribution. Our Staggered Attention Layer refines the
 weighted fusion of these features through the multi-head atten­ where gt represents the SoftMax prediction for class αt is the weight for
 tion mechanism, ensuring a more rational weight allocation be­ class t, and γ is the tuning factor.
 tween different features in the model. This weighted fusion not In this paper, we sum up the losses for all classes, then average them
 only effectively retains the original information of each feature to obtain the final loss value. The calculation process is as follows:
 )
 vector but also further strengthens the inter-feature correlations. ∑C ( )γ ( )
 Loss = − αt 1 − gi,t log gi,t (19)
 Assuming the number of attention heads is h, the output of the Headi t− 1

can be represented as equation (13):
 where, C represents the number of classes, gi,t denotes the probability
 ( )
 Q ⋅KT predicted by the softmax function for sample i to belong to class t.
AttnHeadi (Q, K, V) = softmax √̅̅̅̅̅ ⋅V (13)
 dk
 5. Experiment and evaluation
where dk is the dimensionality of the Key vectors. The output of the
multi-head attention mechanism is represented as equation (14): In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of SAT-Net on the task
 of encrypted traffic classification through a series of experiments.
MultiHeadAttn(Q,K,V) = Concat(AttnHead1 , …, AttnHeadh )⋅WO (14)
 Initially, we introduce the datasets and comparison baselines used, fol­
 lowed by an overall performance assessment via comparative experi­
where WO is the weight matrix of the output layer.
 ments with state-of-the-art methods (Section 5.2 Comparison
 Then, we compute two attention outputs separately: one using the
 Experiments). Subsequently, we analyze the necessity of each compo­
PBG-header feature vectors yh as Query and the PBG-payload feature
 nent within SAT-Net (Section 5.3 Ablation Study). We then conduct a
vectors yp as Key and Value; the other using the PBG-payload feature
 sensitivity analysis by varying different hyperparameters of the model
vectors yp as Query and the PBG-header feature vectors yh as Key and
 (Section 5.4 Sensitivity Analysis), and finally, we study the balance
Value. Then, we concatenate these two outputs as the final output z, and
 between the model’s training and testing costs and its performance
the computation process is as follows in equations (15)–(17):
 (Section 5.5 Tradeoff Study for Cost and Performance).
 ( )
yh = MultiHead Attn yh , yp , yp
̃ (15)

 8
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

5.1. Experiment setup specific information. It is worth noting that although we strive to
 eliminate useless traffic flows, some irrelevant traffic may still remain;
5.1.1. Datasets however, this noise does not significantly affect the training and eval­
 The following paragraphs introduce the four public datasets and one uation of our model. Notably, since we are conducting packet-level
self-collected dataset used to evaluate the performance of SAT-Net. classification tasks, we select the first 10 packets of each traffic flow
 as the input for the model. This amount of information has been proven
 (1) ISCX VPN-nonVPN (Gerard et al., 2016): This dataset, provided to be sufficient in numerous studies on encrypted traffic classification
 by the Information Security Center of Excellence (ISCX), is spe­ (Wei et al., 2017a) (Peng et al., 2023). Table 2 provides statistical in­
 cifically designed for research on the classification of VPN (Vir­ formation for these datasets after preprocessing.
 tual Private Network) and non-VPN traffic. It encompasses a
 variety of traffic types and applications, (such as Chat: Skype, 5.1.2. Baselines
 ICQ; VoIP: Facebook, Hangout), among others. The ISCX We selected six advanced models as comparison baselines, which can
 VPN-nonVPN dataset is generated by simulating the activities of be categorized into two groups: deep learning-based methods (FS-Net
 users Alice and Bob in different network environments. Although (Chang et al., 2019), DeepPacket (Mohammad et al., 2019), FlowPic (Tal
 it covers a variety of traffic types and applications, these simu­ and Yuval, 2021)), and GNN-based methods (GraphDApp (Meng et al.,
 lated environments may differ from real-world network condi­ 2021), FG-Net (Minghao et al., 2022), EC-GCN (Zulong et al., 2023)). It
 tions, potentially leading to data that is not comprehensive or is worth noting that these methods can also be divided into three
 representative in certain aspects. different traffic representation approaches: based on raw byte sequences
 (2) ISCX Tor-nonTor (Arash Habibi et al., 2017): Similar to ISCX (DeepPacket, FS-Net), converting encrypted traffic into images
 VPN-nonVPN, this dataset, also provided by ISCX, is dedicated to (FlowPic), and transforming encrypted traffic into graph classification
 the classification of Tor (The Onion Router) and non-Tor traffic. problems (GraphDApp, FG-Net, EC-GCN), all of which are exemplary
 Due to the unique traffic characteristics of the Tor network, representatives among these methods. Below is a brief introduction to
 which are often employed for privacy and anonymous commu­ these models:
 nication, this dataset is particularly relevant for studies that aim
 to differentiate between legal and illicit activities. However, in (1) FS-Net: This method learns features from raw flows and employs
 this dataset, encrypted traffic predominantly uses the Tor proto­ a multi-layer encoder-decoder structure for feature enhancement
 col, which somewhat limits the dataset’s applicability and through reconstruction.
 effectiveness in handling other encryption protocols such as VPN (2) DeepPacket: Utilizing autoencoders and convolutional neural
 and IPSec. networks for processing network traffic, this approach can
 (3) USTC-TFC2016 (Wei et al., 2017b): Developed by USTC (Uni­ simultaneously differentiate between application types and ser­
 versity of Science and Technology of China), this dataset includes vice types.
 both malicious and benign traffic for research on traffic classifi­ (3) FlowPic: This method leverages temporal and size features of
 cation. It comprises network traffic from a multitude of applica­ flows, converting traffic data into images without utilizing
 tions, ranging from web browsing and social media to email and payload data to form a traffic images.
 various online services. Although the USTC-TFC2016 dataset (4) GraphDApp: Building a Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and
 contains network traffic data from a variety of applications, its combining it with a GNN-based classifier specifically designed for the
 scale and diversity may still not be sufficient to cover all types of identification of Decentralized Applications.
 traffic found in actual network environments, which could (5) FG-Net: This model uses information-enhanced graph structures
 potentially limit the model’s generalization ability in practical to design a GNN-based traffic fingerprint learning model.
 applications. (6) EC-GCN: A temporal-spatial (multi-subgraph) classification ar­
 (4) CIC IoT (2023) (Euclides Carlos Pinto et al., 2023): This dataset, chitecture that utilizes graphical layers and graph learning layers
 provided by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), fo­ to extract features from encrypted traffic.
 cuses on research related to Internet of Things (IoT) devices and
 associated security threats. It includes network traffic collected 5.1.3. Metrics
 from various IoT devices and services, encompassing both normal To evaluate the performance of SAT-Net, we utilize four metrics
 operations and potential attack traffic, such as DDoS attacks and commonly employed in classification problems: Accuracy, Precision,
 malware distribution. However, the variety, quantity, and con­ Recall, and the F1 Score. Accuracy serves as an overall measure of the
 figurations of devices in actual IoT environments may be more model’s performance. Precision and Recall are utilized to assess the
 complex, which could potentially impact the model’s general­ model’s efficiency for each traffic category. The F1 Score, calculated as
 ization capability in practical applications. the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, provides an integrated
 (5) HTTPS-D: We collected 14 web traffic deployments with TLS 1.3 measure of the model’s performance across all categories. The calcula­
 from different types and services of applications using open- tion methods for these metrics are presented in Equations (20)–(23):
 source tools Wireshark and tcpdump on a dedicated server. The
 dataset encompasses services such as news websites, social
 media, video platforms, and more. Due to the deployment of Table 2
 collection devices at the campus network gateway, with the Statistics of experimental datasets. *In the USTC-TFC2016, both malware and
 server location relatively centralized, it may not reflect the user benign have 10 categories each; due to the vast size of the entire CIC IoT (2023)
 experience and network conditions in different geographical dataset, we selected a portion of representative encrypted traffic from attacks for
 locations. the experiment, including DDoS-ICMP_Flood, DoS-SYN_Flood, Recon, Mirai-
 Arpspoofing, MITM, VulnerabilityScan, and SqlInjection.
 Dataset Preprocessing. Before using the aforementioned datasets, we Dataset Number of Types Total number of biflows Dataset size
need to perform a series of preprocessing operations to meet the re­ ISCX VPN-nonVPN 14 79315 16.3 GB
quirements for training in SAT-Net. First, we use Splitcap to segment the ISCX Tor-nonTor 7 50613 14.2 GB
raw PCAP files for each category of traffic and delete empty flows and USTC-TFC2016 10/10 172048 3.2 GB
short flows. Next, we utilize the Scapy library in Python to anonymize CIC IoT (2023) 7 132971 20.3 GB
 HTTPS-D 14 11594 4.3 GB
the packets within the flows, preventing the model from being biased by

 9
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 TP + TN traffic identification. Therefore, the packet-level classification
ACC = (20)
 TP + FP + FN + TN performed by SAT-Net and DeepPacket helps mitigate the issue of
 dataset imbalance. Moreover, FG-Net achieves the second-best
 TP performance on non-VPN traffic, indicating the superiority of
PR = (21)
 TP + FP GNN-based methods.
 (2) ISCX Tor-nonTor. Due to the use of onion routing technology, Tor
 TP
RC = (22) traffic is encrypted layer by layer, making it more difficult to
 TP + FN
 identify. As shown in Table 4, SAT-Net still maintains a high
 precision*recall accuracy rate. For Tor traffic identification, it outperforms the
F1 = 2* (23) second-best FG-Net by 4.81% in accuracy and by 2.03% in F1-
 precision + recall
 score, indicating that the use of graph-structured data can accu­
 ACC refers to the proportion of correctly classified samples out of the rately represent Tor encrypted traffic. Notably, the FS-Net, with
total number of samples. TP and FN represent true positives and true its complex reconstruction mechanism, performs almost identi­
negatives, respectively, while FP and FN denote false positives and false cally to FG-Net in Tor traffic identification.
negatives, respectively. A higher PR value indicates that the model has a (3) USTC-TFC2016. This dataset contains both malicious software
higher capability to discriminate traffic of that category, while a larger traffic and benign traffic. From Table 5, it can be seen that the
RC value suggests that the model has a lower false positive rate for traffic accuracy of all models is less than 90%, with SAT-Net’s accuracy
of that category. The F1 score is defined as the arithmetic mean of PR being only 89.03%, indicating that the behavior patterns of ma­
and RC, and we utilize the F1 score to evaluate the model’s overall licious software traffic are similar, making identification difficult.
balanced classification performance. Notably, GraphDApp performs poorly on this dataset, suggesting
 that the interaction patterns of decentralized Applications are
5.1.4. Implementations quite different from those of malware.
 Our experimental environment consists of an Ubuntu 18.04 oper­ (4) CIC IoT (2023). As shown in Table 6, similar to Tor traffic, the
ating system, an Intel® Xeon® Platinum 8255C CPU @2.50 GHz with performance of all models on this dataset is not satisfactory. Our
43 GB of memory, and an RTX 3090 (24 GB) GPU. The model con­ SAT-Net achieved the best result, with an accuracy of only
struction was completed using the Python 3.8 within the PyTorch1.10 83.41%, followed by FlowPic at 81.38%. We observed that
environment. The processed dataset was randomly divided into training, network traffic attacks in IoT have fixed patterns, so the approach
validation, and testing sets in a ratio of 8:1:1. Additionally, 10-fold of modeling traffic as images in FlowPic to construct traffic fin­
cross-validation was employed during training to reduce randomness gerprints can also yield good results.
and mitigate the limitations associated with fixed dataset splits, thereby (5) HTTPS-D. This dataset is characterized by a large number of
enhancing the model’s generalization capabilities. During the training samples and a diverse range of traffic types. As shown in Table 6,
process, the AdamW optimizer was utilized to optimize all parameters, our model achieved the top performance with an accuracy of
with the learning rate set to 1e-4, batch size fixed at 32, and dropout rate 99.59% and an F1 score of 99.79%. Methods based on GNN all
at 0.1. SAT-Net introduces early stopping mechanisms and a learning achieved accuracies above 90%, with the exception of Graph­
rate scheduler to dynamically adjust the learning rate during training, DApp. Due to its integration of both communication control
preventing overfitting and enhancing the model’s convergence speed behavior and data transmission behavior from bidirectional
and stability. Additionally, all experimental settings have undergone flows, SAT-Net exhibits strong resistance to interference. Conse­
strict consistency checks to ensure that the same configuration is quently, when the dataset is sufficiently large, SAT-Net can
maintained across all cross-validation folds, eliminating potential effectively mine the implicit patterns within encrypted traffic
experimental biases and inconsistencies, thereby increasing the reli­ using PBG without being swayed by irrelevant traffic. This sug­
ability and reproducibility of the results. gests that SAT-Net is capable of adapting to concept drift.

5.2. Overall performance evaluation via comparison experiment
 5.3. Ablation study
 To validate the performance of our proposed SAT-Net, we compared
it with six baseline models on five datasets, with all baseline models In this section, we validate the influence of each component within
reproduced according to the original content’s network structure and SAT-Net by conducting ablation studies on the HTTPS-D dataset. The
parameter settings. Our SAT-Net achieved the best performance on all results of these experiments are presented in Fig. 6. SAT-L2 denotes the
datasets, and the following are the model’s performances in each model without the feature remapping layer (L2), while SAT-L3 signifies
dataset: the model without the multi-head attention layer (L3). Additionally, we
 substituted SAGEConv with either a Graph Convolutional Network
 (1) ISCX VPN-nonVPN. Table 3 shows that SAT-Net outperforms the (GCN) to produce SAT-GCN or a Graph Attention Network (GAT) to
 second-best model (DeepPacket) by 8.72% in accuracy and by produce SAT-GAT, thereby assessing the efficacy of SAGEConv within
 10.31% in F1-score on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset for VPN SAT-Net. From these ablation studies, we can draw the following

Table 3
Experimental results on ISCX VPN-nonVPN.
 Method ISCX-VPN ISCX-nonVPN

 ACC PR RC F1-score ACC PR RC F1-score

 FS-Net 0.8621 0.9773 0.8607 0.9149 0.7079 0.9196 0.7465 0.7586
 DeepPacket 0.8713 0.855 0.8748 0.8647 0.7701 0.7742 0.9603 0.8571
 FlowPic 0.8538 0.9363 0.7917 0.8566 0.6944 0.7073 0.7310 0.7131
 GraphDApp 0.4212 0.4531 0.4852 0.4641 0.4087 0.4119 0.5971 0.5897
 FG-Net 0.8592 0.8313 0.8519 0.8466 0.8077 0.8519 0.9545 0.8753
 EC-GCN 0.7338 0.7214 0.7401 0.7291 0.6572 0.7509 0.7121 0.7211
 SAT-Net 0.9605 0.9616 0.9725 0.9678 0.9500 0.9523 0.9408 0.9494

 10
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Table 4
Experimental results on ISCX Tor-nonTor.
 Method ISCX-Tor ISCX-nonTor

 ACC PR RC F1-score ACC PR RC F1-score

 FS-Net 0.8911 0.9029 0.9042 0.9031 0.9153 0.9153 0.9141 0.9104
 DeepPacket 0.7071 0.7417 0.6209 0.7313 0.8741 0.8653 0.7792 0.8167
 FlowPic 0.7199 0.7311 0.7801 0.7484 0.5243 0.5593 0.6074 0.5653
 GraphDApp 0.6686 0.5349 0.4799 0.5097 0,8605 0.7743 0.7193 0.7627
 FG-Net 0.8914 0.9253 0.9615 0.9434 0.7895 0.6714 0.6615 0.6613
 EC-GCN 0.4971 0.4915 0,4376 0.4811 0.4103 0.4253 0,3752 0.3951
 SAT-Net 0.9532 0.9599 0.9652 0.9637 0.9272 0.9182 0.9746 0.9621

Table 5
Experimental results on USTC-TFC2016.
 Method USTC-TFC2016-malware USTC-TFC2016-benign

 ACC PR RC F1-score ACC PR RC F1-score

 FS-Net 0.6889 0.6679 0.6815 0.6722 0.6576 0.6594 0.6465 0.6486
 DeepPacket 0.8713 0.8851 0.8248 0.8747 0.7451 0.7178 0.7354 0.7187
 FlowPic 0.5538 0.5951 0.5917 0.5567 0.5942 0.54973 0.5313 0.5136
 GraphDApp 0.1231 0.1341 0.1456 0.1403 0.1731 0.1354 0.1597 0.1373
 FG-Net 0.7129 0.8077 0.8109 0.8027 0.6667 0.6532 0.6664 0.6567
 EC-GCN 0.8863 0.8824 0.8404 0.8591 0.8347 0.8591 0.8112 0.8225
 SAT-Net 0.8903 0.9403 0.9152 0.9201 0.9323 0.9597 0.9147 0.9234

Table 6
Experimental results on CIC IoT (2023) and HTTPS-D.
 Method CIC IoT (2023) HTTPS-D

 ACC PR RC F1-score ACC PR RC F1-score

 FS-Net 0.4289 0.8179 0.8215 0.8122 0.8576 0.8594 0.8365 0.8483
 DeepPacket 0.5692 0.5052 0.5513 0.5502 0.7551 0.7478 0.7354 0.7387
 FlowPic 0.8138 0.7843 0.8228 0.7916 0.8847 0.9346 0.9036 0.9131
 GraphDApp 0.1331 0.1901 0.1582 0.1599 0.7901 0.7882 0.7438 0.7773
 FG-Net 0.7129 0.7003 0.7409 0.7123 0.9592 0.9637 0.9435 0.9551
 EC-GCN 0.7363 0.7224 0.7504 0.7231 0.9394 0.9725 0.9641 0.9652
 SAT-Net 0.8341 0.8213 0.8016 0.8141 0.9959 0.9909 0.9921 0.9979

 information from PBG-header and PBG-payload, underscoring
Table 7
 the pivotal role of L3 over L2.
Experimental results of ablation study on HTTPS-D.
 (2) Analysis of Table 7 reveals that when the model employs GCN or
 Method HTTPS-D GAT for convolutional operations, there is a significant drop in
 ACC PR ACC F1-score performance, as indicated by ACC and F1-score. Specifically, ACC
 SAT-L2 0.7331 0.7421 0.7318 0.7378 decreases by 25% and 17.32%, respectively, and the F1-score
 SAT-L3 0.5328 0.5704 0.5317 0.5591 decreases by 24.92% and 14.11%, respectively. This decline is
 SAT-GCN 0.7459 0.7502 0.7417 0.7487 attributed to the fact that GCN does not utilize an adjacency
 SAT-GAT 0.8227 0.8617 0.8383 0.8568 matrix that includes neighbor nodes, whereas the construction
 SAT-Net 0.9959 0.9909 0.9921 0.9979
 process of PBG emphasizes the role of node neighbors. Interest­
 ingly, there is also a performance degradation when SAGEConv is
conclusions: replaced with GAT. GAT relies on the weights of neighbor nodes
 to update the information of the central node, and we have also
 (1) We initiated by examining the performance fluctuations induced employed attention mechanisms at L3. This suggests that SATby the alteration of L2 and L3. Table 7 illustrates that the removal GAT experiences overfitting.
 of either L2 or L3 results in substantial decrements in model
 performance, as measured by ACC and F1-score. Specifically, 5.4. Sensitivity analysis
 ACC decreases by 26.28% and 46.31%, respectively, and the F1-
 score decreases by 26.01% and 43.88% respectively. This evi­ In this section, we selected several hyperparameters to study their
 dence suggests that both L2 and L3 contribute significantly to the impact on model performance. The choice of these hyperparameters for
 model’s performance. L2, implemented as a multi-layer percep­ analysis is based on their significant influence on the core mechanisms
 tron (MLP), functions to project the PBG into different vector and performance of the model, while other hyperparameters are rela­
 spaces, analogous to feature propagation. When the PBG’s rep­ tively less important or contribute less to the model’s performance. The
 resentation capacity suffices, the model can, in the absence of L2, experiments were conducted on the HTTPS-D dataset and the USTCutilize the multi-head attention mechanism within L3 to fuse TFC2016(benign) dataset with the largest number of sample flows. We
 features and elicit rich semantic representations. In particular, chose ACC as the evaluation metric, where ACC-1 represents the
 the model’s optimal performance is contingent upon the fusion of experimental results on HTTPS-D, and ACC-2 represents the results
 under USTC-TFC2016-benign.

 11
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 Fig. 6. Results of ablation experiments on the HTTPS-D dataset.

 (1) Sliding Window Size Index (α): This hyperparameter primarily 5.5. Tradeoff study for cost and performance
 affects the structure of the PBG. As α approaches 0, the PBG tends
 to be constructed from sliding windows of a fixed size; as α ap­ In practical applications, striking a balance between training costs
 proaches 1, the sliding window size is more influenced by the and model performance is of paramount importance. Overzealous pur­
 length of the packet payload. The results shown in Fig. 7(a) suit of higher accuracy often leads to resource wastage. Therefore, in this
 indicate that, since the HTTPS-D dataset consists of web traffic, section, we analyze the trade-off between model performance and
 the packet length distribution across different website services training costs. The experiments were conducted on the HTTPS-D dataset
 possesses learnable characteristics (Ziqing et al., 2019). This and USTC-TFC2016(benign), and the following is a detailed analysis.
 suggests that the window size should be more closely related to
 the correlation of the packet length distribution. Similarly, such a (1) Epoch. It is well-known that during an epoch, the model un­
 pattern is also observed in USTC-TFC2016-benign, indicating that dergoes both forward computation and backpropagation.
 the PBGs constructed by us are more inclined to describe the Consequently, an increase in epochs leads to an increase in
 recognizable patterns of traffic bytes from the distribution regu­ training time. To investigate the balance between epochs and
 larities of packet lengths. accuracy, we conducted a set of experiments, the results of which
 (2) Learning rate: A learning rate that is too large can make it diffi­ are shown in Fig. 8. Evidently, for the HTTPS-D dataset, as the
 cult for the model to converge, while too small a learning rate can number of epochs increases, so does accuracy. Within 5 epochs,
 increase the convergence time of the model. Fig. 7(b) represents the accuracy reaches 0.8912, with a significant growth rate,
 the relationship between the learning rate and the model’s ac­ peaking at the 21st epoch. However, after 8 epochs, the benefits
 curacy. For the HTTPS-D dataset, the epoch size is set to 21; for of increased epochs slow down, and accuracy begins to decline
 the USTC-TFC2016-benign dataset, the epoch size is set to 14. after the 22nd epoch. Similarly, for the USTC-TFC2016(benign)
 The results show that a learning rate of 1e-4 achieves the highest dataset, SAT-Net achieves its best performance at the 14th
 accuracy, and a learning rate lower than this cannot achieve the epoch, with significant gains in the first 7 epochs. Therefore, in
 expected effect within the same time. practical applications, to achieve the optimal balance between
 (3) SAGEConv Layer Numbers: SAT-Net performs graph convolution cost and performance, the number of epochs should be selected
 operations by stacking multiple SAGEConv layers. Fig. 7(c) il­ between 11 and 15.
 lustrates the impact of different numbers of SAGEConv layers on (2) Dataset Size. The size of the dataset influences the quantity and
 the model’s accuracy. It is evident that when only one layer is quality of the features of Packet Byte Graphs (PBGs) that the
 used, the model lacks learning capacity and exhibits a lower ac­ model learns. Consequently, we varied the dataset size, and Fig. 9
 curacy. When the number of layers exceeds two, the model’s presents the trend in the accuracy of the SAT-Net model under
 accuracy begins to decline, which is indicative of overfitting. different sizes of the HTTPS-D dataset. For the HTTPS-D dataset,
 (4) Head Numbers of the Multi-Head Attention: The number of heads we randomly selected 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% of the traffic
 in the multi-head attention mechanism determines how many samples from the original dataset. Even when using a dataset that
 semantic spaces the model employs to learn the features of is only 20% of the original size, the model’s accuracy remains
 encrypted traffic. As shown in Fig. 7(d), when the number of above 90%, which suggests that the PBGs we constructed are a
 heads is too few, the model’s accuracy decreases by more than stable and reliable representation of encrypted traffic. As the
 12%. The highest accuracy is achieved when the number of heads dataset size increases, the improvement in model performance is
 is 8. When the head count is increased to 16 or 32, the accuracy not pronounced, indicating that SAT-Net has a certain degree of
 drops, indicating that 8 heads are sufficient to fully leverage the resistance to interference. The experimental results on USTCexpressive power of PBG. TFC2016(benign) also demonstrate this point. Since capturing
 traffic data is relatively straightforward, yet subject to significant
 concept drift, we prefer to use a dataset that is relatively larger.

 12
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

 Fig. 9. Impact of dataset size on SAT-Net performance.

 information-rich PBGs requires complex computations (such as setting
 dynamic sliding window sizes and calculating PPMI values). For
 instance, when dealing with video traffic (where the average number of
 bytes per packet is often large), constructing PBGs can be timeconsuming. However, our strategy in such cases is to reduce the num­
 ber of packets used per flow. Additionally, while it is relatively easy to
 obtain a large amount of network encrypted traffic data, most of it
 cannot be directly used by deep learning models after preprocessing. In
 future work, we could further explore using the raw bytes of unlabeled
 traffic flows as input for pretraining GNNs models, as this approach may
 contribute to a reduction in the consumption of continuous computa­
 tional resources.
 Moreover, the computational time required for the construction of
 PBGs can significantly impact the system’s ability to perform in realtime. Specifically, the calculation of PPMI values and the adjustment
 of dynamic sliding window sizes demand considerable computational
 resources, particularly when dealing with large-scale traffic data, espe­
 cially in a cloud computing environment. For instance, when con­
 structing the PBG using the HTTPS-D dataset (4.3 GB), we observed an
 average processing time of 0.18 seconds per sample flow, with a cor­
 responding total memory consumption of 6144 MB. To enhance realtime performance, it is advisable to consider these factors during the
 system design phase and to investigate potential optimization strategies,
 such as the implementation of more efficient algorithms or the utiliza­
 tion of hardware acceleration techniques.
 Fig. 7. Experimental results of sensitivity analyses on the HTTPS-D dataset. The second issue concerns the application of SAT-Net in real-world
 networks. Since our SAT-Net experiments were conducted on closed
 datasets, when deployed in the core part of a network (such as routers),
 the phenomenon of concept drift in network traffic can pose challenges
 for SAT-Net in open-set recognition (recognizing unseen traffic pat­
 terns). It is worth noting that at the edge of the network, such as servers
 in data centers, traffic types are relatively stable. Therefore, in such
 scenarios, SAT-Net can achieve the expected results in identifying
 abnormal traffic types.

 7. Conclusion

 Considering the network’s topological structure and the advantages
 of geometric deep learning, we propose an encrypted traffic classifica­
 tion method based on Staggered Attention Networks (SAT-Net). SAT-Net
 can utilize bidirectional flow control information and data transmission
 information for encrypted traffic identification. SAT-Net represents the
 original encrypted traffic through Packet Byte Graph (PBG), where the
 Fig. 8. Effect of training epoch on the performance of SAT-Net.
 vertices of the graph store byte features, and the edges represent the
 relationships between bytes. We employ the GraphSAGE algorithm to
6. Limitations obtain the vector representation of the PBG, and then extract the rich
 information of PBG through a feature remapping layer. Subsequently,
 The experiments conducted in Section 5 have demonstrated the ad­ we utilize the Staggered Attention layer for feature fusion, in which the
vantageous properties of SAT-Net. Next, we discuss its limitations. The multi-head attention mechanism can capture traffic flow feature infor­
first issue is that our SAT-Net takes PBGs as input, but constructing mation from different semantic spaces. Finally, we conduct

 13
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

comprehensive experiments on four public datasets and one self- Haozhen, Z., Le, Y., Xi, X., Qing, L., Francesco, M., Xiapu, L., Qixu, L., 2023. TFE-GNN: a
 temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks for fine-grained encrypted
collected dataset (HPPTS-D) to evaluate the generalization and effec­
 traffic classification. The Web Conference 16713, 2066–2075. https://doi.org/
tiveness of SAT-Net. Comparative experiments with state-of-the-art 10.1145/3543507.3583227 abs/2307.
methods demonstrate that SAT-Net outperforms SOTAs on all datasets. Jin-yi, C., Martin, F., Neil, I., 1992. An optimal lower bound on the number of variables
Ablation study results indicate that both the feature remapping layer for graph identification. 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
 Science 12 (4), 389–410. https://doi.org/10.1109/sfcs.1989.63543.
and the Staggered Attention layer contribute to performance improve­ Leslie, F.S., 2020. Packet analysis for network forensics: a comprehensive survey.
ment. Furthermore, we find that SAT-Net is suitable for real-world Forensic Sci. Int.: Digit. Invest. 32, 200892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
network environments in terms of the balance between cost and fsidi.2019.200892.
 Liang, Y., Chengsheng, M., Yuan, L., 2018. Graph convolutional networks for text
benefit. In future research, we aim to address concept drift by obtaining classification, AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI
a universal representation of encrypted traffic through the study of the Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-First Innovative Applications of
encrypted traffic itself. Artificial Intelligence Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational
 Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7370–7377. https://doi.org/10.48550/
 arXiv.1809.05679 abs/1809.05679.
CRediT authorship contribution statement Ma, S., Liu, J., Zuo, X., 2022. Survey on graph neural network. J. Comput. Res. Dev. 59
 (1), 47–80. https://doi.org/10.7544/issn1000-1239.20201055.
 Meng, S., Jinpeng, Z., Liehuang, Z., Ke, X., Xiaojiang, D., 2021. Accurate decentralized
 Zhiyuan Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural networks.
Methodology. Hongyi Zhao: Investigation, Data curation. Jingyu IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16, 2367–2380. https://doi.org/10.1109/
Zhao: Visualization, Conceptualization. Yuqi Jiang: Visualization, tifs.2021.3050608.
 Michael, F., Chris, R., Eduardo, R., Jean-Alexander, M., Klaus, H., 2014. A survey of
Software. Fanliang Bu: Validation, Supervision. payload-based traffic classification approaches. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 16 (2),
 1135–1156. https://doi.org/10.1109/surv.2013.100613.00161.
 Michael, M.B., Joan, B., Yann, L., Arthur, S., Pierre, V., 2017. Geometric deep learning:
Declaration of competing interest going beyond Euclidean data. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 34 (4), 18–42. https://doi.
 org/10.1109/msp.2017.2693418.
 Michelle, C., Lars, E., Joe, T., Magnus, W., Stuart, C., 2011. Internet Assigned Numbers
 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Authority (IANA) Procedures for the Management of the Service Name and
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence Transport Protocol Port Number Registry, vol. 6335. Request for Comments,
the work reported in this paper. pp. 1–33. https://doi.org/10.17487/rfc6335.
 Minghao, J., Zhen, L., Peipei, F., Wei, C., Mingxin, C., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., 2022.
 Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level relationship with graph neural
Acknowledgment networks. Comput. Network. 217, 109309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
 comnet.2022.109309.
 Mohammad, L., Mahdi Jafari, S., Ramin Shirali Hossein, Z., Mohammdsadegh, S., 2019.
 This work was partially supported by the Double First-Class Inno­ Deep packet: a novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
vation Research Project of People’s Public Security University of China: learning. Comput. Res. Repos. 24 (3), 1999–2012. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-
No.2023SYL08. 019-04030-2.
 Peng, L., Kejiang, Y., Yishen, H., Yanying, L., Cheng-Zhong, X., 2023. A novel multimodal
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.
Data availability 31 (3), 1369–1384. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnet.2022.3215507.
 Tal, S., Yuval, S., 2021. FlowPic: a generic representation for encrypted traffic
 classification and applications identification. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18 (2),
 Data will be made available on request.
 1218–1232. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2021.3071441.
 Tao, Y., Xingshu, C., Yi, Z., Weijing, G., Zhenhui, H., 2023. Review on the application of
References deep learning in network attack detection. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 212, 1–15.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2022.103580.
 Thai-Dien, P., Thien-Lac, H., Tram, T., Tien-Dung, C., Hong Linh, T., 2021. MAppGraph -
Arash Habibi, L., Gerard, D., Mohammad Saiful Islam, M., Ali, A.G., 2017.
 mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic using deep graph convolution
 Characterization of tor traffic using time based features. International Conference on
 neural networks. Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
 Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 253–262. https://doi.org/10.5220/
 pp. 1025–1038. https://doi.org/10.1145/3485832.3485925.
 0006105602530262.
 Theophilus, B., Aditya, A., David, A.M., 2010. Network traffic characteristics of data
Bentian, L., Dechang, P., Yunxia, L., Lin, C., 2021. DNC: a deep neural network-based
 centers in the wild. IMC 267–280. https://doi.org/10.1145/1879141.1879175.
 clustering-oriented network embedding algorithm. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 173,
 Ting-Li, H., Yan, L., Tong, Z., 2021. Encrypted network traffic classification using a
 102854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102854.
 geometric learning model. IFIP/IEEE Symp. Integr. Netw. Manag. 376–383.
Bo, P., Yongquan, F., Siyuan, R., Ye, W., Qing, L., Yan, J., 2021. CGNN: traffic
 Ting-Li, H., Yan, L., Peilong, L., Tong, Z., 2023. Flow-based encrypted network traffic
 classification with graph neural network. CoRR, 09726. https://doi.org/10.48550/
 classification with graph neural networks. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 20 (2),
 arXiv.2110.09726 abs/2110.
 1224–1237. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2022.3227500.
Chang, L., Zigang, C., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., Siu-Ming, Y., Longtao, H., 2018. MaMPF:
 Tiru, W., Xi, X., Qing, L., Qixu, L., Guangwu, H., Xiapu, L., Yong, J., 2023. BehavSniffer:
 Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on Multi-Attribute Markov Probability
 sniff user behaviors from the encrypted traffic by traffic burst graphs. 2023 20th
 Fingerprints. IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Quality of Service, pp. 1–10.
 Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking,
 https://doi.org/10.1109/iwqos.2018.8624124.
 SECON, pp. 456–464. https://doi.org/10.1109/secon58729.2023.10287511.
Chang, L., He, L., Gang, X., Zigang, C., Zhen, L., 2019. FS-net: a flow sequence network
 Tomasz, B., Valentín, C., Pere, B., 2015. Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for
 for encrypted traffic classification. IEEE International Conference Computer and
 traffic classification. Comput. Network. 76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
 Communications, pp. 1171–1179. https://doi.org/10.1109/infocom.2019.8737507.
 comnet.2014.11.001. C: 75.0-89.0.
Chen, Z., Cheng, G., Jiang, B., Tang, S., Guo, S., Zhou, Y., 2020. Length matters: fast
 Wajdi, B., Wonjun, L., 2020. Detecting malign encrypted network traffic using Perlin
 Internet encrypted traffic service classification based on multi-PDU lengths. 2020
 noise and convolutional neural network, computing and communication: 0200-
 16th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN),
 0206. https://doi.org/10.1109/ccwc47524.2020.9031116.
 pp. 531–538. https://doi.org/10.1109/msn50589.2020.00089.
 Wei, W., Ming, Z., Jinlin, W., Xuewen, Z., Zhongzhen, Y., 2017a. End-to-end encrypted
Euclides Carlos Pinto, N., Sajjad, D., Raphael, F., Alireza, Z., Rongxing, L., Ali A, G.,
 traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks. Intelligence
 2023. CICIoT2023: a real-time dataset and benchmark for large-scale attacks in IoT
 and Security Informatics, pp. 43–48. https://doi.org/10.1109/isi.2017.8004872.
 environment. Sensors 23 (13), 5941. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23135941, 5941.
 Wei, W., Ming, Z., Xuewen, Z., Xiaozhou, Y., Yiqiang, S., 2017b. Malware traffic
Gerard, D., Arash Habibi, L., Mohammad Saiful Islam, M., Ali, A.G., 2016.
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning.
 Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features.
 International Conference on Information Networking, pp. 712–717. https://doi.org/
 International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 407–414.
 10.1109/icoin.2017.7899588.
 https://doi.org/10.5220/0005740704070414.
 William, L.H., Rex, Y., Jure, L., 2017. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
Giuseppe, A., Domenico, C., Antonio, M., Antonio, P., 2021. DISTILLER: encrypted traffic
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30, 1024–1034. https://doi.org/10.48550/
 classification via multimodal multitask deep learning. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
 arXiv.1706.02216.
 183–184, 102985. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2021.102985.
 Xiaodong, Z., Jian, G., Maoli, W., Peng, G., Guowei, Z., 2023. IP traffic behavior
Google. HTTPS on the Web-Google Transparency Report. https://transparencyreport.
 characterization via semantic mining. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 213, 103603. https://
 google.com/https/overview(accessed 11 February 2024).
 doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4250125, 103603.
Haipeng, Y., Chong, L., Peiying, Z., Sheng, W., Chunxiao, J., Shui, Y., 2022. Identification
 Xin, W., Shuhui, C., Jinshu, S., 2020. App-net: a hybrid neural network for encrypted
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term memory.
 mobile traffic classification. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. 424–429. https://doi.
 IEEE Trans. Big Data 8 (1), 241–252. https://doi.org/10.1109/
 org/10.1109/infocomwkshps50562.2020.9162891.
 tbdata.2019.2940675.

 14
Z. Li et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Xinjie, L., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., Zhen, L., Junzheng, S., Jing, Y., 2022. ET-BERT: a –Hongyi Zhao obtained his Bachelor’s degree in Cybersecurity and Law Enforcement from
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted the People’s Public Security University of China in 2022 and is currently pursuing a
 traffic classification. The Web Conference, pp. 633–642. https://doi.org/10.1145/ Master’s degree in Security Prevention Engineering. He has been studying at the People’s
 3485447.3512217. Public Security University of China since 2018. His research interests include network
Yaxuan, Q., Lianghong, X., Baohua, Y., Yibo, X., Jun, L., 2009. Packet classification traffic analysis and natural language processing.
 algorithms: from theory to practice. IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
 p. 648. https://doi.org/10.1109/infcom.2009.5061972.
 – Jingyu Zhao received the B.S. degree in Automation from Northeastern University
Ziqing, Z., Cuicui, K., Gang, X., Zhen, L., 2019. Deep forest with LRRS feature for fine-
 (China) in 2021, and is currently pursuing the M.S. degree (in the direction of security
 grained website fingerprinting with encrypted SSL/TLS. International Conference on
 prevention engineering), and has been studying at the People’s Public Security University
 Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 851–860. https://doi.org/10.1145/
 of China (PPSUC) since 2022, where his research interests include cybersecurity preven­
 3357384.3357993.
 tion and control, and information transmission.
Zonghan, W., Shirui, P., Fengwen, C., Guodong, L., Chengqi, Z., Philip S, Y., 2021.
 A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Transact. Neural Networks
 Learn. Syst. 32 (1), 4–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2020.2978386. – Yuqi Jiang received a Bachelor’s degree in Cybersecurity and Law Enforcement from the
Zulong, D., Gaogang, X., Xin, W., Rui, R., Xuying, M., Guangxing, Z., Kun, X., Mingyu, Q., People’s Public Security University of China in 2021. Since 2022, she has been pursuing a
 2023. EC-GCN: a encrypted traffic classification framework based on multi-scale Master’s degree in the field of Cyberspace Security Law Enforcement Technology at the
 graph convolution networks. Comput. Network. 224, 109614. https://doi.org/ same university. Her research interests include natural language processing, imbalanced
 10.1016/j.comnet.2023.109614, 109614. data processing, text classification, and related areas.

–Zhiyuan Li received the B.S. degree in Cyber Security in Law Enforcement from Jiangxi –Fanliang Bu is a Doctor of Engineering from the School of Electronics and Information
Police College in 2021. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree (in the direction of big Engineering at Xi’an Jiaotong University, and a Postdoctoral Fellow in Acoustics at the
data technology) and has been studying at the People’s Public Security University of China Institute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is currently a professor at the
(PPSUC) since 2022, where his research interests include network traffic analysis and deep School of Information and Network Security, People’s Public Security University of China,
learning. with research interests in intelligent social governance and security protection
 engineering.

 15